I Do appoint FRANCIS TYTON and THOMAS BASSET to Print the Arraignment and Plea
of EDWARD FITZ-HARRIS, with the Arguments and Proceedings thereupon, and that
no others Presume to Print the same.

Fr. Pemberton.

THE ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEA OF Edw. Fitz-Harris Esquire; WITH ALL THE ARGUMENTS IN
LAW, AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURT OF King's Bench Thereupon, in EASTER TERM 1681.

LONDON, Printed for Fr. Tyton, at the Three Daggers, and Tho. Basset, at the
George in Fleet Street. 1681.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Court of King's Bench IN THE CASE OF Edward Fitz-Harris,
Esquire; In Easter-Term, 1681.
Easter-Term, xxxiij. Car. Secundi Regis in Banco Regis.
ON Wednesday, April 27. 1681. the Grand Juries for the County of Middlesex
were sworn, and after the Charge delivered by Mr. Justice Jones, His Majesty's
Attorney General desired, That some of that Grand Jury which served for the
Hundreds of Edmonton and Gore (that for Oswolston Hundred, being immediately
adjourned for a Week) might be present at the swearing of the Witnesses, upon
an Indictment for High Treason, to be preferred against Edward Fitz-Harris
Prisoner in the Tower of London, which was granted; but the Grand Jury being
under some scruples against receiving of the Bill, desired the Opinion of the
Court therein, which Mr. Justice Jones, alone, thought not fit to give, but
ordered them to attend next day when the Court was full.

And accordingly on Thursday, April 28. the said Grand Jury came to the Bar,
and Mr. Michael Godfrey (Brother to Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey) who was their
Foreman, addressed himself thus to the Court.

Mr. Godfrey. My Lord, I have an humble request to make to the Court on the
behalf of my self, and another on the behalf of the Grand Jury for the County
of Middlesex, of which I am Foreman; This Gentleman, Mr. Ward, I did beg of,
when I was Sworn, to choose another man that was fitter for the service, as
being more experienced, but he would not; and I beg your pardon if I should
commit any failure for want of experience: But I do desire before we proceed
upon this Indictment before us, that this same Fitz-Harris may be examined
about my Brothers Death, of which I suppose he may know much, because in the
Printed Narrative he does speak of one De Puy, who was a very active man about
that Murder; and how ill a man soever he has been, we do hope he has so much
Truth in him, as to tell what he knows of that horrid Murder: Therefore I pray
your Lordship, that you would grant an Habeas Corpus to fetch him before your
Lordship, to be examined upon that point, before we do proceed; that is all as
to my self. My Lord, as to the Jury, we do all of us humbly present this Paper,
and desire it may be Read in Court.


L. C. Justice. What is it? a Petition?


Cl. of Crown. It is not subscribed by any body.


Jurors. But we do all own it, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. What is it? Read it.


Cl. of Cr. We Michael Godfry, etc. being Sworn to serve in the Grand Inquest,
the Hundreds of Edmonton and Gore, in this County of Middlesex, etc. and being
yesterday sent for into the Court of King's Bench, by a Messenger from the said
Court, to be present at the Swearing of several Witnesses produced on the
behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, to prove the truth of some Indictments,
then in the hands of the Clerk of the Crown; and observing that Sir William
Waller, Smith, and others were Sworn to give Evidence against Edward
Fitz-Harris, now Prisoner in the Tower, who in the late Parliament at Oxford
was Impeached by the Honorable House of Commons in the name of themselves and
of all the Commons of England; of which, we the said Michael Godfrey, etc. are
part, and as Jurymen, be his Judges also.

We therefore Humbly desire the opinion of this Honorable Court, whether it be
lawful and safe for us, the said Godfrey, etc. (in case an Indictment of the
said Fitz-Harris should be brought before us) to proceed to Examine any
Witnesses in reference to the said Indictment? or any way to meddle with it, or
proceed upon it, notwithstanding the said Impeachment, and Votes pursuant to it
by the said Honorable House of Commons? And this being a great point in Law,
and of so great consequence, for us to undertake, in a point of Right, not
settled by Conference, and remaining yet undetermined in the High Court of
Parliament?

We therefore humbly desire the opinion of this Court upon the whole matter,
whether legally and safely, we may proceed upon, to find the Indictment of
Fitz-Harris, or no?


Mr. Godfrey. My Lord, We do humbly desire the Resolution of the Court in this
matter, as a thing of weight; for we are between Two Millstones as we apprehend
it, and shall be Ground between them.


L. C. Justice. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, We do not apprehend so.


Mr. At. General. My Lord, Be pleased to spare me one word: This Indictment
was tendered to this Grand Jury yesterday, and this Gentleman was against
accepting the Bill till he had your Judgment, and so were two more; but for
all that, the body of them carried it (all but these three) to hear the
Evidence, whereupon Mr. Solicitor and my self did go on upon the Evidence, and
spent sometime in opening it to them, and it was all given to them; and truly,
the Gentlemen did seem to be abundantly satisfied what an horrid Villainy it
was, and we did think they would have found the Bill; but it seems they have
prevailed to put these scruples into the others Heads.


L. C. Justice. Look you, Mr. Attorney, We will not now inquire into that.
Gentlemen of the Jury, you seem dissatisfied in this matter, and desire the
opinion of the Court in it, whether you may lawfully proceed to find this
Indictment or not? We did hear yesterday of some scruples you made to my
Brother Jones when you were Sworn, and he sat in Court to give you the Charge,
which he thought not fit then to Answer, but left it till to day; truly we
would have all things fairly and clearly done, that we may understand how we go
all along in this matter: Your scruple is this; Here was, you say, an
Impeachment offered against Fitz-Harris by the Commons to the Lords, and that
Impeachment was of High Treason, which was not received, and thereupon there
was a Vote of the House of Commons that he should not be tried by any other
Inferior Court: You desire now to know whether you may inquire concerning this
Treason, notwithstanding these things that have passed thus?


Mr. Godfrey. Yes, My Lord.


L. C. Justice. We are very ready and willing to satisfy any of the King s
Subjects in any matters in Judgment before us, that they may see there shall be
nothing but fair proceedings in all Cases; We do tell you it is our Opinions,
that notwithstanding any thing of this matter that you suggest in the Case
before you, it is fit for you to enquire upon the Indictment, and you are bound
to enquire by virtue of your Oaths, if an Indictment be exhibited to you; you
cannot, nor ought to take any notice of any such Impeachment offered to the
Lords, nor of any such Votes of the House of Commons afterward, if any such
there were, for they will not excuse you (who are Sworn to Inquire of the
matters given you in Charge) in case you do not your duty; and therefore if you
have Evidence enough given you, to satisfy you that the Indictment is true, you
are to find it: And likewise we ought to proceed according to Justice in Cases
that are brought before us. Neither you nor we can take notice of these things,
in case there be any such as you suggest, nor will they excuse us before God or
man for the breach of our Oaths, if we should do the contrary; And this we
declare to you, not only as our Opinions, but as the Opinion of all the Judges
of England: For when we did hear there was a scruple made by you the Gentlemen
of the Jury; because we would make the way fair and clear, all the Judges did
assemble to debate the matter for your satisfaction; not that we were
dissatisfied at all in it our selves, but that it might appear to you and the
Kingdom, That there is nothing but fairness used in this Case, as in all
others; and all the Judges, Nemine contradicente, were all of Opinion, that you
are not to take notice of any of these things; but if the Indictment be
exhibited, and you have Evidence enough, you ought to find it. This we have
endeavored for your satisfaction to make your way clear.


Jurors. We humbly thank your Lordship.


Then the Jury went away, and afterward found the Bill.
On Friday, April 29. 1681. Sir Tho. Stringer, the Kings Sergeant at Law, moved
for an Habeas Corpus, to bring up the Body of Edward Fitz-Harris, to be
examined by the Court about the death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey; The Court
granted the Writ, and said, he should be Arraigned upon the Indictment against
him, and then they would Examine him.

Saturday, April 30. Edward Fitz-Harris was brought with a strong Guard to the
King's Bench Court.

Mr. Serj. Stringer. Your Lordship has been pleased to grant an Habeas Corpus
for Fitz-Harris, and he is brought up and attends here.


L. C. Justice. We will send for Mr. Attorney, Brother.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. I beg this of your Lordship, That you will be pleased to
stay a little, I know not how he comes to be brought up here, Mr. Attorney it
seems, says, he knows nothing of it.


L. C. Justice. Well, well, send for Mr. Attorney, Brother, and hear what he
says.


Which being done, and Mr. Attorney come in, the Prisoner was brought to the
Bar.
Mr. Serj. Stringer. My Lord, I would humbly move he may be brought into Court
to be Examined, before he be Arraigned.


L. C. Justice. Why so?


Mr. Serj. Stringer. My Lord, We would have him Examined concerning Sir
Edmund-bury Godfry's Death.


L. C. Justice. What matters it? That may be done after as well as before.


Cl. of Crown. Edward Fitz-Harris, Hold up thy Hand.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I have been a close Prisoner these ten Weeks, and
have not had the Liberty to see any one in the world: I desire I may have
Liberty to see my Friends, and speak with them, before I do answer to any thing.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. My Dear, Plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court; here s a
Plea drawn by Council for you.


L. C. Justice. You had best consider well what you have to do.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire this Paper may be read by the Clerks.


Mr. Just. Jones No, no, that cannot be till you have answered to your
Indictment.


Cl. of Crown. Pull off your Glove, and Hold up your Hand.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire leave to Plead to the Jurisdiction of the
Court.


L. C. Justice. You shall have it.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I desire this Plea may be allowed.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Hear your Indictment first, and Plead afterward.


L. C. Justice. Look you, Mr. Fitz-Harris, Let us thus far direct you; Your
holding up of your Hand, and hearing the Indictment read, will not hinder you
from any manner of Plea, which you may have to make afterward; but you can
Plead nothing before.


Cl. of Crown. Pull off your Glove, and hold up your Hand. (which he did.) And
then the Clerk of the Crown read the substance of his Indictment to him in
English. And then speaking to him, said, How say thou, Edward Fitz-Harris,
Art thou Guilty of this High Treason whereof thou stand Indicted, and have
been now Arraigned, or Not Guilty?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I offer this Plea to be read first, before I answer.


L. C. Justice. That Plea? Take his Plea: Let us see what it is. We take it to
read it now.


Mr. Just. Jones. Not to allow it.


L. C. Justice. Only to see what it is.


Cl. of Cr. Reads. ET praed. Edwardus Fitz-Harris in propria persona sua venit
and dic. quod ipse ad Indictament. praed modo versus eum per Jurator. praed. in
forma praed. compert. respondere compelli non debet, quia dicit quod ante
Indictament. praed. per Jurator. praed. in forma praed. compert. scil. ad
Parliam. Dom. Regis nunc inchoat. and tent. apud Oxon. in Com. Oxon. 21 die
Martii, Anno Reg. Dom. Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Angliae, etc. Tricesimo
Tertio, ipse idem Edwardus Fitz-Harris per Milites, Cives, and Burgens. ad
idem. Parliament. ad tunc and ibid. convocat. and assemblat. de and pro praed.
Prodition. Criminibus and Offens. unde ipse idem Edwardus Fitz-Harris per
Indictament. praed. modo indictat. existit secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Parliamenti accusat. and impetit. suit coram Magnatibus and Proceribus hujus
Regni Angliae in eodem Parliamento per Summonition ipsius Dom. Regis ad tunc
and ibid. Assemblat. Quodque impetitio praed. in plenis suis robore and effectu
adhuc remanet, sicut per Record. inde in Cur. Parliament. praed. remanen.
before liquet and apparet. Et idem Edwardus Fitz-Harris ulterius dicit, quod
si quis in aliquo Parliamento Dom Regis hujus Regni Angliae de aliquibus
Proditionibus, Criminibus, and Offensis, per Milites, Cives, and Burgens. ad
hujusmodi Parliament. convocat. and assemblat. in hujusmodi Parliament.
accusat. and impetit. suit coram Magnatibus and Proceribus hujus Regni Angliae
in eodem Parliament. per Summonit ipsius Dom. Regis assemblat. tune hujusmodi
Prodition. crimina and offensa de and pro quibus hujusmodi persona in hujusmodi
Parliament. accusat and impetit. suit in Parliament. Dom Reg hujus Regni
Angliae Audiri, Triari, and Terminari deleant, and semper hactenus
consueverunt. and de jure debuerunt, and non alibi in aliqua Curia Infer. quam
in Parliament. Et hoc idem Edwardus Fitz-harris parat. est verificare, unde non
intendit quod Dominus Rex nunc velit in Cur. nunc hic de and pro Prodition.
Criminibus, and Offens. praed. responderi, and petit Judic. si ipse ad
Indictament. praed per Jurator. praed. in forma praed. compert. ulterius
respondere compel^i debeat, etc. Cum hoc quod praed. Edwardus Fitz-harris
verificare vult. quod Proditio, Crimina and Offens. praed. in Indictament.
praed. per Jurator. praed. in forma praed. compert. specificat. and mentionat.
and pro quibus ipse idem Edwardus Fitz-harris per Indictament. ill. modo
indictat. existit, and Proditio. Crimina and offens. pro quibus ipse praed.
Edwardus Fitz-harris in Parliament. praed. in forma praed. accusat. and
impetit. fuit, and existit, sunt unum and eadem proditio crimina, and offens.
and non al. neque diversa. quodque impetio praed. adhuc in plenis suis robore,
vigore, and effectu remanet.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Fitz-Harris, As for this Pleading here, We use not to
receive such Pleading as this without a Counsel's Hand to it.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I desire your Lordship to assign me Council.


L. C. Justice. Who would you have assigned Council?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Sir Will. Jones, Sir Francis Winnington, Sir George Treby,
Mr. Williams, Mr. Pollexfen, Mr. Wallop, and Mr. Smith.


L. C. Justice. Here are a great many you name; we will not enjoin any Counsel
to serve you further than they are willing themselves. As for Sir William
Jones, one of them you desire, he does not practice now in Westminster Hall,
and therefore we cannot Assign you him, unless he please.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Then I desire Sir Francis Winnington, Mr. Williams, Mr.
Pollexsen, Mr. Wallop.


L. C. Justice. Let them be Assigned of Council for him. We do Assign you them
for Council. And now, Look you Sir, You had best consider how you Plead this
matter. You will do well to think of it, lest it be more fatal to you than you
expect; Therefore we will give you time to Plead the matter you rest upon, let
it be what it will: Weell give you time to have advice upon it, and you shall
be brought hither again on Tuesday-morning by Rule. And in the mean time things
shall stand as they do. Mr. Attorney will consider upon the putting in of your
Plea, what is fit to be done upon it.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I humbly desire the Liberty to see my Wife and
Friends in the mean time.


L. C. Justice. Mr. Attorney, Why may not he see his Wife, so it be done in the
presence of some person entrusted by the Lieutenant, to see that nothing be
done that is prejudicial to the King?


Mr. At. General. I cannot oppose it, my Lord.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I desire my Counsel may come to me.


L. C. J. Mr. Fitz-Harris, We will admit Counsel to come to you, or else it
will do you no good to asign them; All we can do shall be done.


Mr. At. General. My Lord, with submission, I conceive, you will not allow any
body to come to him, to be alone with him; that would be the way to prevent the
discovery of the practices he is accused of: I hope, if your Lordship show him
favor, you will do the King Justice.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I beg that any of those that have been named may
come to me.


L. C. J. Yes these four. And Mr. Attorney, they are Gentlemen of fair Credit
and Reputation in the world, we have no Suspicion that they will do any thing
unfairly; what we can reasonably do for any man in his Condition we must do.


Mr. At. General. My Lord, I am not against that, but I would have all done
safely and securely for the King.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I have one thing more to beg, the time your
Lordships have set is so soon, that they cannot come to me perhaps.


L. C. J. It Is long enough, Mr Fitz-Harris.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. If I cannot get them to come to me in that time, what shall I
do?


L. C. J. You must do what you can, we cannot enjoin them to come to you.


Mr. At. General. This Motion of his I fear is designed to put off his Trial.


L. C. J. It shall not, Mr. Attorney. It is true, it is a busy time the middle
of the Term; but they will sure find time to dispatch this business within the
time we have allotted. On the otherside, some time they must have to consider
of it: I do therefore tell him it may be fatal and Peremptory to him, for ought
I konw. Indeed if we would insist upon it, we might compel him to be ready
presently, but that we will not do in this Case.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Pray my Lord, give me till Thursday if you please.


L. C. J. I know it is time enough for Counsel to draw up a Plea between this
and Tuesday.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. To morrow is Sunday my Lord, and they cannot come to me then,
so I shall have but one day.


L. C. J. Mr. Fitz-Harris, It Is time enough; we must not waste the Term, For as
we would show you all the favor we can, in Equity and Justice, so we must not
deny the King Justice neither. And you hear Mr Attorney say, that these things
(if they should delay the business too long) would be prejudicial to much of
the King's business. It may be, that this Delatory Plea, may spend so much time
of the Term, that we cannot try it; and therefore if we do give you a just
Favor, you must not grow upon us.


Mr. At. General. Mr. Fitz-Harris knows this Plea has been well advised on:
There went a whole Club to the making of it.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. How should I know? I never saw nor heard of it till now. I
have had the severest measure in the world. I have had no body suffered to come
to me.


L. C. J. Do not complain of Severity Mr. Fitz-Harris. I do not believe any
such thing has been used toward you.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Pray my Lord; give me a little longer time.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, what if we do this? He giving you the Plea upon
Tuesday, he may come up upon Wednesday-Morning to put it in.


Mr. At. General. I cannot oppose it, if your Lordship think fit so to order
it.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It Is fit you should have it to see it, Mr. Attorney,
beforehand.


Mr. Justice Jones. And have some reasonable Time for Consideration what to do
upon it.


L. C. J. Well, Delivering of the Plea on Tuesday-Morning to Mr. Attorney, we
do give you till Wednesday to bring it hither, and then you shall come by Rule
again.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I hope I shall have the Liberty to see my Wife this
Day.


L. C. J. Yes, at seasonable Hours, when there may be some body by, to see that
nothing be done to the Kings prejudice. And your Wife must do this, she must
submit to be searched, that she carry nothing with her that may be prejudicial.
And with these Cautions we will admit her to come to you.


Lient. of the Tower. Will your Lordship please to give us a Rule, to let his
Wife and Conusel come to him?


L. C. J. We do make such a Rule.


Cler. of the Crown. My Lord, we will make it part of the Rule.


Lieut. of the Tower. We desire such a Rule for our discharge.


L. C. J. Sir, This is our Rule, and we have declared it to this purpose: Then
as to your matter, Brother Stringer, this we will do; Let the Lieutenant of the
Tower keep Mr. Fitz-Harris safely till we return out of the Exchequer, and then
we will examine him.


Mr. Serj. Stringer. My Lord, We think it will be a short business and soon
over, if you please to do it first.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I may see my Wife in the mean time, I hope.


L. C. J. Do you insist Brother, that we should examine him presently?


Mr. Serj. Stringer. My Lord, Mr. Godfrey desires it.


L. C. J. Then we will presently.


Lieut. of the Tower. Must his Lady speak with him?


L. C. J. Yes, after he is Examined; Lieutenant of the Tower, bring Mr.
Fitz-Harris into our little Room, where we will take a Clerk and examine him.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. To her Husdand, (the Court being just risen.) My Dear, Do
not Confess any thing about the Death of Sir Edmund-bury Godfry, nor the Plot,
for you will be betrayed; Speak only to little things.


Then the Prisoner was carried away to be Examined, and after that to the
Tower.
On Monday, the Second of May, Sir Francis Winnington and the other three
Gentlemen assigned of Council for Mr. Fitz-Harris came to the Bar, and Moved
the Court for an Explanation of the Rule concerning themselves, and the
Business they were assigned for.

Mr. Williams. My Lord, I am to move your Lordship in a Case, wherein I am with
three others of the Gentlemen that attend this Bar, assigned of Counsel for Mr.
Fitz-Harris; and that which I would beg for my self and them is this, There is
one thing we desire may be explained a little in the Rule. I humbly apprehend
your Lordship gave leave to the Counsel, who you so assigned, to come to Mr.
Fitz-Harris, and entrusted them with the Liberty of speaking with him alone;
but by the penning of the Rule, we apprehend that the same Restraint is put
upon them, that is upon other persons, to have some body at their being with
him.


L. C. J. The Lieutenant sent to me on Saturday about it, and I told him, it
did not extend to you.


Sir Fran. Winnington. We think it may have a Construction either way; but we
desire it may be made plain, as you meant it.


L. C. J. We tell you, It is plain, and it was so intended.


Sir Fran. Winnington. Therefore we taking it that your Lordship pronounced and
meant it so, do desire it may be so expressed. We are satisfied that it was
your Lordships intention; we desire the Clerk may make it plain and
intelligible in words. And there is this further in it, My Lord --


L. C. J. We declare it now to you, it was so meant and intended.


Sir Fran. Winnington. My Lord, There is this further in it, We four have met,
and we desire as much as may be to expedite this matter, as far as we can, for
our own Reputation, and doing our Duty to the person we are assigned of Counsel
for. But truly so soon, as is appointed by your Lordship, it is impossible for
us to prepare things so, as to be ready by Wednesday-Morning. The Plea I never
saw, nor did I ever hear of it, till it was brought and read here; but since
that, I have not seen it till this time. The Rules were brought but last Night
to our Chambers, there is no Soliicitor in the Cause that may attend us. The
Indictment I have not seen that we are to Plead to, and truly I think the
Course is to have a Copy of the Indictment.


L. C. J. We deny that, Sir Fran. Winnington.


Mr. Williams. It is impossible for us then to get ready in this time. I humbly
Move you will Assign some convenient time. I know your Lordship will not put an
hardship upon us, that are of Counsel, to plead such a matter so quickly. It Is a
matter of difficulty, and there are not many Presidents in it. And therefore it
will require more care than ordinary.


Sir Fran. Winnington. My Lord, We ought to present things to the Court as they
are in Fact, that we may not lie under any reflection from the Court, nor any
body else. You made a Rule on Saturday, that I should be of Council for him,
(which I submit to) but I knew not of this till afterward. I never saw the
Plea, nor any Paper in this Cause as yet: The Rule was left at my Chamber this
last Night, and when I saw it, Mr. Williams and we got together in the Hall
this Morning; We could not do it till just now, and we come now to wait upon
the Court, to acquaint them how the matter stands. I was not in Court, when you
gave your Directions about this matter; but when I find what the Nature of the
Case is, I shall be ready to do my Duty to the Court, and to him who is upon
his Life It is a mighty Cause, it is a Cause that may-be, if we do not acquit
our selves as we ought, have reflection upon our Posterity, if we do not do it
as well as we can. Therefore we desire some reasonable Time that we may have
Copies of the Papers and things concerned in this Cause, as the Court shall
direct. And we are assured your Lordship is so well acquainted with the usual
Method in such Cases, that you will give us all the favor in it you can.


Mr. Wallop. For my part, My Lord, the Notice I had was but very lately; I was
by, indeed, when this person Fitz-Harris did desire Connsel, and your Lordship
assigned me amongst the rest; but nothing of the Order was brought to me till
this Morning; So that I know nothing of the matter less or more, than what I
heard upon the reading of the Paper here on Saturday. I do not desire Time, for
Time-sake or for Delay; but we think the nature of the thing is such, as will
aequire great Consideration, and we desire convenient Time to prepare it for
the Court.


L. C. J. Look you, Sir Francis Winnington, You must consider here the Nature
of your Case; This is an Indictment of High Treason, and there is nothing I
see, that is so greatly considerable in the Case, but the height of the Crime.
It Is an extraordinary Crime indeed, if he be Guilty of it, (for I speak not to
prejudice your Client, but of the thing it self.) It Is a Treason of a very high
Nature: And then what have we to consider in this Case? We might have taken
your Client at advantage here, and it had been no Injustice if we had made him
to plead immediately, as he would stand by it: And we are not to consult your
leisure, but your Clients Cause; he has pitched upon you for his Counsel; We
have given him three days time to Plead as he will stand by it, Saturday,
Monday and Tuesday, and he is to come with his Plea upon Wednesday. We have
appointed for Convenience sake, that you should give a Copy of the Plea to
Morrow Morning to Mr. Attorney; But we do not tie you so peremptorily to that
Copy, that you may not vary in Words from that Form. Give him but the substance
of the Plea, and we will not tie you to the particular Formal Words.
Peradventure Mr. Fitz-Harris could not have expected three days time, in course
of Law, upon such a Crime, to put in such a Plea; when he tells us, He will
plead specially to the Jurisdiction of the Court. But we have done it in this
Case, to show, that all the fairness that can possibly be used, shall be used.
On the other side, we must not spend all our time so, as to let the Term slip,
for his neglect of waiting upon you. Therefore if he will delay to send to
advise with you, he must suffer for it. Suppose he did not come to you till to
Morrow, what can we help it?


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. There is no Solicitor, my Lord, to go to the Counsel.


L. C. J. Well, we must not spin out the Term to please him: He must take more
care: I believe he would by Delatorys be glad to put it off all the Term. If
Mr. Attorney gives Consent for more time, well and good.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. I hope your Lordship will give leave for a Solicitor,
without your Lordships leave none will dare to venture. And I had the Rule so
very late --


Cler. of the Crown. They had it at 3 of the Clock in the Afternoon, as soon as
it could be drawn up.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. That Copy was brought to the Licut. of. the Tower, and he
sent it away immediately.


Cler. of the Crown. Another Copy they had from me that Evening.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. I never saw my Husband in the Tower till Yesterday in the
Afternoon, and I am an Ignorant Person, and know not what to do in it without a
Solicitor. As Soon as I could get Copies of the Rule writ out, I carried them
to these Gentlemen.


Mr. Pollexfen. My Lord, I think it will be very hard upon us that are of
Counsel to be so straightned in point of Time; for my part, the Rule was left
under my Door the last Night, and I had it not till this Morning: It will be a
mighty hard matter for us to get the Plea ready without a sight of the
Indictment. Things must be averred to be the same, which we cannot, unless we
see what is there alleged. This man has been kept close Prisoner, and nobody
suffered to come at him to instruct him; and we have not so much as Copies of
any thing that we must make use of. We have no concernment, my Lord, in this
matter, but what is assigned us by the Court; and we do not know by any Papers,
if there be any, how we should put it into Form, and that is it, my Lord, which
may lie heavy upon us: If this man's business should miscarry for want of
putting it into due Form, the blame will be upon us, who are assigned his
Counsel: Therefore if your Lordship please, under these Considerations, to give
us Time and Leave to see the Indictment we are to Plead to, we may be the
better enabled to do our Duty.


Sir Fran. Winnington. Really, my Lord, I ought to deal clearly with the Court;
without a Copy of the Indictment, I know not how we shall be able to Plead as
we should do.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I do really move, not in favor of Fitz-Harris, but for
my own Reputation; I cannot put my hand to a Plea of this Consequence, without
time to consider very well of it; and unless, in truth, I can see the
Indictment, and compare the Plea with it, to put it into Form fit for the
judgment of the Court. And if these things cannot be granted, I desire to be
excused.


L. C. J. Why Gentlemen, See what you ask, Where do you find any President of a
man Indicted for High Treason, that would Plead to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, that had more time given him than is in this Case?


Sir Fran. Winnington. We do not know what his Plea will be, my Lord, till we
have seen it and considered it.


L. C. J. Your Clyent told us all, and we know all of us very well, That it is
to the Jurisdiction of the Court, and can be no otherwise.


Mr. Justice Jones. Any thing else you may give in Evidence upon, Not Guilty.
And it would be considered on your Trial.


Sr. Fran. Winnington. My Lord, it may happen to be not so properly pleadable
to the Jurisdiction of the Court; We know not what it will be till we have seen
the things necessary to draw it into Form. It is true consequentially, it is
the Concern of our Clyent; but the ground of our Motion at this time is for our
selves. I did apprehend by the Rule, his Special Plea was to be admitted, if he
tendered one, let it be what it will; We must consider many things in a Case of
this Nature; And at last, whether it will be to the Jurisdiction, or what it is,
we cannot tell as yet. And till we have seen the Nature of the thing, and what
is necessary to prepare it for the Court, I cannot venture to give it its
proper Term. But our time is so short, if your Lordship will afford us no
longer, that we know not how to be ready for it. Your Lordship does speak of
Mr. Attorney's being attended with the Substance of the Plea, not tying us to
the Form in the Copy delivered to him. Mr. Attorney was here upon Saturday,
when this matter was first started, and he knew the Substance then: We know not
what it is more than by Report. It is a Plea that so rarely happens, that we
must be cautious in what Form we put it. It Is as your Lordship has been pleased
to say, an horrible Treason, that in the Indictment is specifyed. We must not
speak, nor do not mitigate the hainousness of the Crime; nor do we speak it
because it is Term-time, and may hinder our other business: We shall all of us,
I am sure, not at all consider our own time, or loss in the matter; but it
being of so great weight, we desire reasonable time to do our duties: we name
no time, nor dare do it; we submit that to the Court. But, My Lord, under
favor, for the Copy of the Indictment, we do conceive it is necessary that we
should see a Copy of it; and when the Court is pleased to admit the party to
give in a Special Plea to the matter he is accused of, and assign him Counsel
to Plead it, I take it to be very rational and consonant to Law, that he have a
Copy of the Charge.


L. C. J. Sir Fran. Winnington, For you to come and say these things here,
methinks is very strange, I think you can show us no President, that ever so
long time was given to any man to Plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court, nor
that ever a Copy of the Indictment was granted in High Treason; and for you,
because of the greatness of the Treason, therefore to go about to make us
believe, that it is more reasonable that a Copy of the Indictment should be
granted in this Case than in another; that the greatness of the Crime should be
meritorious, and deserve a Favor of the Court, not granted in other Cases, is
a thing extraordinary.


Sir Fran. Winnington. I do not press it that way, I pray I may be understood
aright; upon what appeared the other day, upon the nature of the Plea, I
present it to your Consideration, Whether or no, when you have been pleased to
admit a Special Plea, You will not let us see that which we are to Plead to?


L. C. J. No, it was never thought of surely.


Mr. Just. Dolben. No, it has been constantly denied in Cases of Felony and
Treason, and so you will find the practice to have always been. But I Will tell
you what has been done sometimes, They have granted some Heads out of the
Indictment, that should enable the Party to fit his Plea to the Charge, and
that was done in Wittypooles Case, upon a Plea of Auter forti acquit. They gave
him the Times, and some other Circumstances to fit his Plea to his Case; but
never was there a Copy of the Indictment granted.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord Coke, in his Preface to the 3d Report, declares, That it
was the Ancient Law of England, and so declared by Act of Parliament in Edward
the Thirds time, That any Subject may, for his necessary Use, have access to
Records and Copies of them, be they for the King or against the King, and that
the practice to the contrary is an Abusion.


L. C. J. So then, Mr. Wallop, you take it, that we are bound when any man is
Indicted of Felony, or Treason, or any Capital Crime, if he say he must have a
Copy of the Record, we must grant him a Copy of the Indictment; If you think
so, the Court and you are not of the same Opinion.


Mr. Wallop. I inform the Court what I have read and seen, and where it is to be
found.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, It may be necessary, for ought we know, for him to
Plead over to the Fact laid in the Indictment, Not Guilty, as sometimes it is
requisite for the Party to do. Now if we should mistake for want of having what
is necessary, and thereby preclude him of the Advantages he might have had if
the Plea had been rightly drawn, for ought I know, it will lie upon me for
ever. My Lord, I do it merely out of Caution, and for my own Reputation sake:
If any Legal Advantage should be lost by my unwariness, it will be a perpetual
Reflection upon me; And therefore I am so earnest in this Case. And, my Lord, I
can tell you what was done in a Case wherein I was of Counsel; It was not a
Case of Treason indeed, but it was Murder, the next Crime to it; it was the
Case of King and Thomas: Thomas was Indicted of Murder in one County, and found
Guilty of Manslaughter; and afterward was Indicted for the same Murder in
another County, and being to plead this matter, I did insist upon it, that we
ought to have a Copy of the Indictment; There was some Debate about it, but at
last we had a Copy, and we alleged there, as here, it was impossible to plead
without it; and the Cause was removed hither into this Court for Judgment.


Mr. Just. Dolben. The first Indictment you might have a Copy of, for you were
to plead the whole Record.


Mr. Williams. Nay, we had a Copy of that to which we pleaded.


L. C. J. Mr. Williams, You tell us, you may peradventure have occasion to
plead over when you know it is High Treason that you are Indicted of, in framing
and publishing a Treasonable Paper? Cant you direct your Client to plead over
without a Copy? Certainly what you allege in that, for a Copy of the
Indictment, is Non Causa pro Causa.


Mr. Just. Jones. What prejudice will it be to your Client to plead over?


Sir Fran. Win. My Lord, We only offer these things for our selves, and we hope
we shall not be pressed to do such a thing as this, without having reasonable
Time to consider and deliberate of it, and without having what is necessary in
order to it.


Then Mr. Attorney being sent for, came into the Court.
L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Attorney, These Gentlemen that were assigned of Council
for Fitz-Harris, do move the Court here, and say, they would have longer Time
to draw up his Plea, for they must make use of several Copies of Papers, and
they cannot so soon obtain them, nor find out those Records they must use, or
other things as ingredients to this Plea, in so short a time; and they say
likewise, that they desire a Copy of the Indictment. Now, in truth, they ought
to have given you notice of this, that you might have been here likewise to
hear what they say: If you do consent to give them longer time, we shall be
ready to do it; but without it, we shall not be willing to delay it.


Mr. At. General. I think your Lordship and the Court gave them a very just
and reasonable time, when you allowed them four Days; and these Gentlemen are
mistaken, if they think they are assigned as Counsel to all Events. They are
only to draw up a Plea upon that matter that is alleged by the Prisoner, and
to the Jurisdiction of the Court.


Sir Fran. Win. No, My Lord, I beg your Lordships pardon: The Rule is to plead
the special matter without more saying.


Mr. At. General. My Lord, Under favor, It is as I say, and so is the course
of Law; For the Prisoner ought to acquaint you with the Points he desires his
Counsel to be heard to: And in this Case, Fitz-Harris did acquaint the Court
before he would Plead, that he had some thing to object to the Jurisdiction of
the Court; and so his Wife directed him when she gave him the Paper. I suppose
she had other advise upon it; for she could not draw it up in that Form it was,
her self; and he did acquaint the Court, he had matter to Plead to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and concluded so in the Paper that was read. And
thereupon, according to his Prayer he had Council assign^d him, these
Gentlemen: I consented to it, as it was just I should; but that they should
think, that they are to advise him in other matters than that particular upon
which they are assigned, I know they know their Duty better than to offer at
any such thing. Now since then there is but one single point, the Jurisdiction
of the Court and nothing else, for they are not to advise in other matters: I
think it was more than strict Justice, nay it was a very great Favor, for all
men ought to be ready to plead such Pleas immediately.


L. C. J. Yes, in strictness, we might have required him to Plead as he would
stand by it presently.


Mr. At. General. The Law is, that he must have all ready, in Poigne, to make
it appear that what he avers in his Plea is so; Therefore you needed not to
have given him any longer Time: But because all the World might see the Court
and King's Counsel dealt fairly in this matter, and did not mean to take
advantage of any thing that looked like a Surprise, I consented to that time
that your Lordship was pleased to set: And as for the Copy of the Indictment, I
know not any reason they have to desire it; for they are not to advise in that,
what Defense he shall make; but only upon this matter he has alleged.


L. C. J. Look you, Gentlemen, what Mr. Attorney tells you, is so, and we do
expect that you should conform your selves to it: We have given you three Days
time, which is sufficient for such a thing as this. And Mr. Attorney, we told
them thus, When we did direct them, that they should deliver you a Copy of the
Plea to Morrow-morning. We are not so critical with them, as that we will not
receive their Plea, if it be variant in Form from that which they deliver to
you. That that we intend by it is this, That they should deliver you a Plea,
the same in substance as that which they do plead here: If they would alter it
in the Form, we can give them leave to do that without any prejudice.


Mr. At. Genesis We will never pinch them in form, I think I have matter enough.


L. C. J. I tell you truly, I do believe some Friends of his had counsel to
draw up this Plea for him.


Mr. At. Genesis A great Cabal, no doubt of it, my Lord!


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I desire that Council may be assigned in my place.


L. C. J. We assigned him those that he required, excepting Sir William Jones*
and we did not deny to put in Sir William Jones his Name because we would not
assign him, but because he has declined the Bar, and does not practice here.


Mr. Williams. We do not draw in the Name of Sir William Jones, or decline him:
we submit to your order about our selves; but we desire that person that did
draw this Plea, may be added to us.


L. C. J. If his Wife desire it, and will name him, it shall be so.


Mr. Williams. I desire to be put out, and he put in.


L. C. J. Sir, he understands what he would have, sure! and we cannot discharge
you upon any such account.


Mr. Wallop. Here are many Particulars and many Averments, which cannot so
suddenly be set right, as the time allotted.


Mrs. Fitzharris. My Lord, there is not half those Gentlemen assigned that I
writ to my Husband to ask for: I directed him Eight.


L. C. J. Who else would you have?


Mrs. Fitzharris. There was in the Paper Sir William Jones his Majesty's late
Attorney General, Sir Francis Winnington, Mr. Williams late Speaker of the
House of Commons, Sir George Treby Recorder of London


Mr. Pollexfen. Your Lordship may easily perceive by this Gentlewoman's
carriage, how we are like to be instructed in this Cause, when nobody follows
it but she.


L. C. J. Do you desire Sir George Treby should be added?


Mrs. Fitzharris. Yes, I do.


L. C. J. Let it be so then.


Mrs. Fitzharris. And Sir William Jones; I will do what I can to get him to
come.


L. C. J. We will not enjoin him; but if he pleases, we leave him to his
liberty.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Why, Mistress, you are got into the hands of Gentlemen that
are as learned and able in their Profession, as you can have; you need no more.


L. C. J. Do you desire Mr. Smith?


Mrs. Fitzharris. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Then add him.


Mr. Pollexfen. We desire that there may be leave for a Solicitor, one that
may carry Papers in the presence of the Lieutenant.


L. C. J. We have confidence in you, but not in other persons; therefore we
must consider of that: But what think you of it, Brothers? We may permit, I
think, one to come from the Counsel to him, with that Caution.


Judges. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Let the Papers then be inspected before by the Lieutenant of the
Tower, and be from one of the Counsel; and so they have liberty to do it.


Mr. At. Genesis There is no need of any Papers, my Lord --


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, do not oppose that: Let them have liberty to carry any
Papers that any of their Counsel, these Gentlemen we have assigned, shall send
to him, or any from him to them; so as the Lieutenant may have first the sight
and perusal of them.


Mr. At. Genesis There is no great harm in that, though I see not that they will
need any Papers.


L. C. J. Yes, their Plea to the Jurisdiction must arise upon Fact, which may
be out of some Papers.


Mr. At. Genesis You are assigned, Gentlemen, but to one point, the Jurisdiction
of the Court, remember that.


Mr. Pollexfen. Your Lordship is pleased to say, That we may vary in form from
what we delivered to the Attorney General; and Mr. Attorney is pleased to say,
He will not pinch us as to form: How shall we be secure no advantage shall be
taken of the form?


L. C. J. It Is only as to that particular. You shall not be tied up to the
form you deliver to him. What advantages there may be concerning the form of
the Plea you bring hither, we will see shall not be taken.


Sir Fr. Win. Will you Lordship please to afford us no longer time?


L. C. J. When you are to plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court in a Case of
High Treason, and such a Treason as this is, what reason is there that so much
time as is granted already, should be given you?


Sir Fr. Win. Shall not we have a Copy of the Indictment neither?


L. C. J. You will offer things that are not to to be granted to you, ad
captandum populum, that you may say you are hardly used, and mightily
straightned in this Case.


Sir Fr. Win. No, my Lord, we do not offer it for any such end.


Mr. At. Genesis Gentlemen, remember you have not liberty to plead any thing but
to the Jurisdiction of the Court.


Sir Fr. Win. We must submit to what your Lordship orders in it.


Upon Wednesday the 4th of May 1681. Edward Fitzharris was brought from the
Tower to the Kings-bench-bar.
Cl. of Crown. Edward Fitzharris, hold up thy hand. (which he did) Thou have
been indicted and arraigned for High Treason; How say thou, art thou guilty
of the High Treason whereof thou stand indicted, and have been arraigned, or
not guilty?


Mr. Fitzharris. I have made a Plea, my Lord, which I desire may be received
and allowed.


Mr. Wallop. May it please your Lordship, I desire to be heard a few words.


L. C. J. Would you not have the Plea read?


Mr. Wallop. I have but a few words to say before it be read, if your Lordship
please, for our selves, or at least for my self. According to the best
Instructions we have had, we have drawn up this Plea, and I pray it may be
entered so. But, my Lord, I humbly conceive we have not had, or for my own part
I have not had those Instructions that were fit to direct me in this Case. It
is a special Plea, and of a matter that rarely happens; and the nature of this
special Plea is, that the matter contained in the Indictment and in the
Impeachment, is one and the same matter. Now I have not yet seen, nor could I
come at a sight, though I desired it, of the Impeachment, nor of the
Indictment: But I humbly conceive, that by the Law, as this Case is upon a
special Plea, the Prisoner ought to have a Copy of the Indictment. And I do not
say that every one may demand a Copy of his Indictment, to find faults; but
upon a special Plea, and particularly upon this, I humbly conceive he ought to
have a sight and a Copy of his Indictment.


L. C. J. What, would you not have your Plea received?


Mr. Wallop. Thus, my Lord: if we can have no further Instructions, nor can by
any other means come to a sight of these things, then it is the best Plea we
can make in such a Case, and I avow the Plea; but if any thing should fall out
amiss to the Prisoner for want of such a sight, I pray it may not lie upon me.


L. C. J. Read the Plea.


Cl. of Crown. Et predictus Edwardus Fitzharris in propria persona sua ven. and
dic. quod ipse ad Indictament. predict. respondere compelli non debet, quia
dic. quod ante Indictament. pred. per Jur. pred. in forma pred. compert. scil.
ad Parl. Dom. Reg. nunc inchoat. and tent. apud Oxon. in Com. Oxon. vicesimo
primo die Martii anno Regni dict. Dom. Reg. nunc tricesimo tertio, ipse idem
Edw. Fitzharris per Milites Cives and Burgenses in eodem Parl. assemblat.
nomine ipsor. and omnium Com. Angliae, secundum legem and cons. Parl. de alta
proditione coram Magnat. and Procerib. hujus Regni Angl. in eodem Parl.
assemblat. impetit fuit; quae quidem impetitio in plenis suis robore and
effect. adhuc remanet and existit, prout per Record. inde inter Recorda
Parliamenti remanens before liquet and apparet. Et pred. Edw. Fitzharris
ulterius dic. quod alta Proditio in Indictamento pred. per Jur. pred. in forma
pred. compert. specificat and mentionat. and alta Proditio unde ipse predict.
Edw. Fitzharris in Parl. pred. modo ut prefert. impetit. fuit and existit, sunt
una and eadem alta Proditio, and non alia neque diversa; and quod ipse pred.
Edw. Fitzharris in Indictamento pred. nominat. and pred. Edw. Fitzharris in
Impetitione pred. nominat. est una and eadem persona, and non alia neque
diversa: and hoc parat est verificare, etc. Vnde ipse pred. Edw. Fitzharris
petit. Judicium si Cur. Dom. Reg. hic super Indicamentum pred. versus ipsum
ulterius procedere vult. etc.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, we humbly pray, being assigned of Counsel for this
Gentleman Mr. Fitzharris, that this plea may be received.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, have you been attended, according to the rule of Court,
with this Plea?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord.


L. C. J. What is the reason of that?


Mr. At. Genesis Here is no more in effect, than what was offered four days ago,
when Counsel was allowed him. I sent last night late to them for a Copy of the
Plea: Indeed yesterday at noon they sent me this Note, That Fitzharris intends
to stand upon his Plea, that he stands impeached in the House of Peers. I sent
to know of them whether they would plead this to the Jurisdiction, or in
Abatement, or in Bar: They declared, they would not plead to the Jurisdiction,
but now I see it is to the Jurisdiction.


L. C. J. It is so; and that he proposed to plead at first.


Mr. At. Genesis It is true too, my Lord: But thus they sent me word.


L. C. J. And as a Plea to the Jurisdiction, so it concludes.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, we have done all that is possible for us to do in this
Case. The Court directed us to attend Mr. Attorney with the substance, and so
we have done; but the form, we had liberty to do as we pleased in.


L. C. J. You need not go about to excuse it that you have not done it; we
charge you with nothing.


Mr. Williams. I don't go about to excuse it; we don't take it as a Charge upon
us.


L. C. J. All we say is this: If Mr. Attorney had had it, peradventure he might
have considered of a Replication by this time, or what he would do concerning
it; but if he has not had time, we cannot expect it from him.


Sir Fr. Win. My Lord, I only beg one word as to matter of Fact, and it is
material as to our selves to urge it. We did sent several Messengers to get, if
it were possible to be obtained, a Copy of the Impeachment in Parliament. We
sent to the House of Lords Clerk to get it, but they that went down, tell us
the Clerk is not in Town; or else we had sent Mr. Attorney the whole Plea at
that time.


L. C. J. I only ask the Question, to see whether Mr. Attorney has had time
to think of it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I think I need not any time in this Case.


L. C. J. Pray go on, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I do pray your Judgment upon it; for it is a Plea that
is insufficient: nay, it is no Plea to bar you of your Jurisdiction. First, I
observe, that whosoever will plead a Plea to the Jurisdiction, if he have any
Record to plead, must have it in poigne, must produce it in the Court, or at
least must produce a Copy sworn, that the Court may see there is nothing
dilatory in the Case. And for this matter it will appear upon Examination to be
a plain frivolous Plea; for there is no such matter depending as this Plea
alleadges. But I speak of it as a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court; and
such an one as will plead such a Plea, he must have the Record ready, to show
it to the Court, and by the Course of Law, ought to have it ready to assert to
the Court, that they have not Jurisdiction: So then it is certainly naught. That
is the first thing. Another thing is this, with submission, I say, They have
pleaded no Record at all, nor any Impeachment at all, as this Case is; for the
Notes that I have taken, my Lord, are, They say he was impeached by the Commons
de alta Proditione; but that is naught: He ought in his Plea to have set forth
his Impeachment, and for what Crime particularly; for either an Indictment or
an Impeachment de alta Proditione, or Felony, or any other Crime, is naught,
the Law allows it not. He ought to set forth, and must not aver upon a Record,
but set it forth in haec verba, or in the substance of it; and so ought to
plead the Record entire as it is. And for those necessary Averments that cannot
otherwise be made, the Law allows of them. But in this Case he cannot come and
aver upon this Record; for he has set forth the Impeachment not as it was, but
only barely de alta Proditione in general, which the Record must show, so as
the Court may judge of it, and it must not be intended. But as they have set it
forth, in this Case there is nothing of Treason specified in the Record
averred, that can intend this to be the same; and, my Lord, so are all the
Presidents. Whosoever pleads a private Act of Parliament, must plead it as it
is, not in general that it is for the same matter; for I take it then it is
naught: and we are in your judgment, that this is no Plea to the Jurisdiction
upon that point.


L. C. J. Mr Attorney, Do you think it prudent to argue it this time, or will
you take a day? Pray consider of that a little.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I think delay is very dangerous and mischievous in this
Case.


L. C. J. We can give you as short a day as you please.


Mr. At. Genesis But to satisfy the Court, the Clerk will be ready with the
Journals, to show that the Fact is not as they plead it.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Attorney, we must go on in a legal and formal way, when
we have a Plea put in: Therefore whether you will not take time for a day or
two to consider of this Plea: you had the substance of it, but nothing
concerning the manner of the pleading; they would not tell you whether they
would plead it in Abatement, or in Bar, or how: Therefore whether you will not
take time to consider of this pleading for a day or two, pray consider with
your self.


Then the Kings Counsel consulted one with another.
Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, Not only for what I have already offered, but for many
other reasons, we can see this can be no way a Plea to the Jurisdiction of this
Court; for upon any Impeachment or Indictment, the King has Election to
proceed upon which he will: and if there were ten Indictments for one and the
same thing, if none of them are come to a Judgment, the King may proceed upon
which he pleases, as in that Case of Ireland yesterday; though the party were
arraigned and ready to be tried in Ireland, yet the King might, if he pleased,
try him here, and the King has ordered it so to be. But, my Lord, I take it,
that this is not only apparently a false Plea, but a frivolous Plea in it
self, being to the Jurisdiction of this Court: For there was never any thing of
a Crime so great, but this Court of King's Bench, which has a Sovereign
Jurisdiction for Commonors especially, could take Cognizance of it; and I put
it upon that, my Lord. Never was such a Plea pleaded to your Jurisdiction; and
therefore we pray your Judgment upon it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, before we come to that which is the Question, if there
were such a Plea pleaded to the Jurisdiction as they would have this to be, we
humbly pray the Judgment of the Court, whether this be any such Plea at all as
can bear any Debate: For it will not be a Question now, how far an Impeachment
depending is a Bar to your Jurisdiction, but the Question is, first, whether
this be such a Plea? For, my Lord, I do take it, No Man can plead any Record in
another Court, any Indictment or Acquittal upon it, by pleading it in this Form
as this is pleaded, by saying generally, that such a time in such a Court he
was indicted for the same Offense and was acquitted: yet thus this Plea is and
no more. But he that will plead auter foitz acquit, must plead that such a time
he was indicted in such a Court, and set forth the Indictment and all the
proceedings of that Court upon that Record, and then it is proper for Judgment;
such a Plea is Formal and requires an Answer, and it will be proper for us to
give it an Answer; and when such a Plea is put in, we shall either Demur to it,
or give it the Answer that it requires, of null tiel Record. But this does not
require any particular Answer, because it sets forth no Record at all that we
can answer to: for it is not sufficient to say in general, that he was Indicted
and Acquitted, or Impeached, and then aver that it was for the same Offense,
but he ought to show forth the Impeachment, and set forth in the Plea the
Record, that upon it you may pass a certain Judgment. Therefore we hope you
will set this aside, as not being at all Formal, or requiring any Answer to it.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, If you please to consider in this Case what is the
Question; and what not. At present it is not the Question whether if a Man be
Impeached of High Treason by the Commons before the Lords, and this Impeachment
stands unreversed in the Court of Parliament: I say, it is not the Question
whether this Court have Jurisdiction over this Man for that Offense, but the
Question is, Whether he has put in such a Plea before you as will put that in
Question? Under Favor, it is not sufficient for him that will Plead a
particular Record, in Bar or other way, and make use of it, that he plead it in
general Terms, but he must set forth that Record as it is, he must not give you
the Title only, or say, he was Indicted for such a thing generally, but he must
so set it forth to the Court, that if Issue be taken, the Court may by
comparing the Record with the Plea, judge whether it be the same Matter or no.
Now when he pleads he was Impeached for the same Treason, he must set forth
what that was, that it may appear it was for the same Treason; and if that be
particularly set forth as it ought, upon null tiel Record, the Question will
be, Is there such a Record or not? Now if he comes and says he was Indicted or
Impeached, and not for what in particular, the two things that upon the Issue
are to be compared, are not made so fit for your Judgment. In our Law, my Lord,
if a Man will plead, he need not set forth a general Act of Parliament, but if
he will plead a particular Act, he must set forth the Matter of it, to bring
his Case under the Judgment of the Court; And whether this be so pleaded or no,
we submit it to you.


L. Chapter J. Pray let me speak two or three Words to you, Do you speak it against
our receiving of the Plea?


Mr. Attor. Genesis Yes, my Lord, We hope you will not admit such a Plea.


L. Chapter J. That will be hard. Pray then consider with your self, whether if it
be an insufficient Plea (for we'll say nothing at present to that

and if the Plea be such that no Issue can be taken upon it (admitting it were
so) whether you should not demur to it, before you demand our Judgment, that we
may have somewhat upon the whole before us to judge upon? And I speak it to you,
Mr. Attorney, to this purpose, that you may consider, whether you shall think
fit to demur to this Plea, or whether you shall think convenient to take Issue
upon it, or to Reply to it: That it may come judicially for our Opinion: for in
a regular way, if a Plea be admitted, it must be either demurred to, or replied
to. Pray consider of it in this Case, and we will give you time to consider if
you please.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Under favor My Lord, If a Plea be apparently vicious when
it is upon Record, we need not demur to it nor take Issue; for else the
mischief will be, we shall admit all that is well pleaded to be true.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. My Lord, If your Lordship please, I do confess that
according to the usual Course and Practice, if there be a doubt upon a Plea
that is read, whereon any Point in Law may arise, you do put the Party to demur
or take Issue, but according to the common Course of this Court in common
Cases, and much more in extraordinary Cases, and especially in Capital Cases,
and most of all in a Case of High Treason, such as this if it do appear to the
Court and your Lordship: That the Plea is in its Nature a frivolous Plea, you
do usually refuse to admit such a Plea, and give Judgment upon it: Now we would
acquaint your Lordship with our Apprehensions in this Case, and we would pray
you to consider what the danger may be upon us to demur, if this Plea be
frivolous as it appears to be; For whether an Indictment in this Court, or an
Indictment in another Court be for one and the same Offense, and so a Bar to
the Jurisdiction, we are not so much as admitted into the Question of that as
this Plea is; Whereas according to the Course in other Pleas, we pray you would
be pleased to see the inconvenience, if we should be put to demur to it, for
then we do admit by this Demurrer, that this Impeachment is for one and the
same thing, and we humbly conceive my Lord, that is a little dangerous. How
then will it be possible for you ever to judge, That the Impeachment (which in
Fact is otherwise) and the Indictment is for the same thing, unless you will
put them to pursue the common Methods, how it was in the House of Lords, by
showing forth the Record, and what can we do otherwise (it being apparently
against the common Form of Pleas, and manifestly for delay only) then Pray the
Judgment of the Court, which we hope will be to reject this Plea.


Lord Chief Justice. Brother Jefferies, You need not be afraid, that you shall
be concluded by this Demurrer, that there is such an Impeachment in the Lords
House for the same Offense. There will be no color for it. And Brother
Maynard, Formerly I confess, when they pleaded Pleas Ore tenus, and took their
Exceptions Ore tenus too, they would demand Judgment of a Plea presently, and
so it was in the Bishop of Winchester's Case, 3 Edw. 3. where there was an
Indictment against the Bishop here in this Court, for going away from the
Parliament at Shrewsbury, without the leave of the Lords; There Shard comes in,
and Pleads Ore tenus this Matter, and says, This is a thing that concerns the
Lords in Parliament, of which they have Cognizance only, and so prays the
Judgment of the Court presently, Whether they have Jurisdiction of the Cause or
no, and he pleads it in abatement. There they overruled him presently without
any more to do, because their Pleadings were not as now they are, now they are
grown into a formal Way, all entered upon Record, or at least written in Paper,
and what should be the Reason, why you should not do according to the common
course of the Court, I leave it to you to consider of it.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. It is very true, my Lord, anciently the Course was so, my
Lord, and the Law was so too, to plead Ore tenus, but pleading in Paper is the
same thing, and the Course of the Court has been, when they saw it in Paper to
be a frivolous Plea to give Judgment presently, and you have the same Privilege
upon this account, as they had when Pleas were by Word of Mouth. If there be a
Demurrer, it may hang longer than is convenient this Cause should do.


Lord Chapter Just. Do not speak of that, Brother Maynard, as to delay, you shall
take as short a day as you will.


Mr. Attor. General. I have looked upon all the Precedents, and could never
meet with one Demurrer where the Plea was to the Jurisdiction; but I pray your
Judgment upon the first Matter, Whether whosoever pleads to the Jurisdiction
ought not to have the Record in poigne to justify his Plea? In a Plea in Bar
indeed it may come in by Mittimus, but in a Plea in Abatement, the Party ought
always to be ready with those Matters, that are to out the Court of their
Jurisdiction; and besides the Court is to maintain their own Jurisdiction, the
King's Counsel have nothing to do to assert that, but they ought to avoid all
things that may be to the Kings Prejudice, and therefore it ought to be by the
Judgment of the Court in this Case set aside. But I do think you will never
find a Demurrer that was to a Plea to the Jurisdiction.


L. Chapter J. Pray consider of that.


Mr. Attor. Genesis But if it appear to be a frivolous Plea in the Form or in the
Matter, you will not put us sure to Demur.


L. Chapter J. If you do insist upon it, that you will not demur, nor do nothing, we
will give Judgment, but we will take time to consider it, if you will not Demur,
nor take Issue, or Reply.


Sir Fra. Withins. Will your Lordship please to spare me one Word. As it has
been observed to your Lordship, This is a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the
Court; and if they do plead a Plea of that Nature, the Court always expects the
Plea should be substantially good, otherwise it is not to be received, now it
is not substantially good here; For it says, that Fitz-Harris was impeached of
High Treason: now such an Impeachment is naught, for no body can be impeached
of High Treason generally. It ought to come and set forth the particular Acts
that make up the Treason: for the calling of a thing so, does not make it so:
Therefore they that would plead this Plea, must come and show that there is an
Impeachment that has such Matter in it as does amount to Treason, so that then
it being a naughty Plea in the Substance of it, and the end of it to put this
Court out of a Jurisdiction, we hope for that Reason you will not receive it.


Mr. Sanders. One Word further, if your Lordship please, on the same side for
the King. As for this Plea that he has pleaded here, if it had had substantial
Matter in Law, whereupon to ground a Debate, we should not press your Lordship
not to receive it, but we must get off of it as well as we could; but when it
is manifestly pleaded merely for delay, and it so appears to your Lordship upon
the reading of it, and that there is nothing of Substance in it, then we hope
you will not receive it, nor put Mr. Attorney to Demur to it, or take Issue
upon it. Now for the Plea, the Case is thus, Here is an Indictment for Treason
against Mr. Fitz-Harris, for conspiring the Death of the King, compassing of
it, and declaring such his Intention by a venomous Libel. Now he comes and
Pleads to out this Court of their Jurisdiction, and what does he Plead? He says
he was formerly Impeached of High Treason in the Parliament, that is all he
says concerning the Impeachment; then he does come and make an Averment without
showing more that this High Treason, and that for which he was Impeached, is
the same, and takes upon himself to judge, whether the Court will or not, and
will not submit it to the Court, which certainly is not the right way of
Pleading. If Mr. Fitz-Harris should come and Plead auter foitz acquit, That he
had been tried at another time for the same Offense and acquitted, he should
not have said generally he had been formerly indicted and acquitted, and this
for the same thing. But he must have showed the Record, and then averred upon
the Record, that it was for one and the same Crime. For suppose in this Case,
which would have appeared perhaps to be so, if he had done as he should have
done, shown that there was such an Impeachment, whereby he was Impeached of
High Treason, and which Impeachment did charge him with Treason for levying War
against the King, and then have made a Conclusion as he does now, with an
Averment, that the Impeachment and the Indictment was for one and the same
Offense: Under favor, notwithstanding his Averment, the Court would have
adjudged them not to be the same. For if so be the Treason do not appear upon
the Record to be the same, his Averment will signify nothing; why then his
Pleading now thus insufficiently for want of the Record, will be better for him
than if he had pleaded it sufficiently. Why then if he had now pleaded, that
there is a Record of the former Impeachment, and set forth the Record, and then
averred this was for the same, Mr. Attorney might take Issue either there was
no such Record, or said it was another Treason, and traversed it that it was
not for the same, and so there would either have been one Trial by the Record,
or the other upon the Fact by the Country. But now as he has made it, this
Trial both upon the Record, and upon the Fact, is only tryable by the Country,
not by the Record. For if Mr. Attorney take Issue that there is no such Record,
then all the Record is, that he was Impeached for High Treason, and then a
Record of Impeachment for any High Treason would serve the turn, which if it be
not for the same, it ought not: so then the Issue of null tiel Record could not
be taken; Why then now, my Lord, as to the Fact; If Mr. Attorney take Issue,
that it was not the same Treason, then the Record must be tried, that is,
whether there was such a Record that does contain an Impeachment for the same
Treason for which he stands indicted; this I say, must be tried by the Country.
And if he have pleaded it so, that matter of Record upon Issue must be tried by
the Country, for that reason his Plea is naught; and if that be so, then the
Court may be satisfied, that it is apparently pleaded only for delay, because he
would not come to the principal Matter, and plead Guilty or Not Guilty, which
is the matter of Fact most proper for the Country. I rather hope he is not
Guilty than that he is: but if he be Guilty, it is the most horrid venomous
Treason as ever was spread abroad in any Age. And for that reason your Lordship
will not give Countenance to any delay. And therefore we pray the Plea may be
rejejected, and he may answer over.


Mr. Attor. Genesis He has not Pleaded prout patet per Record.


L. Chapter J. Yes it is prout patet in Rotulis Parliamenti. He does say that he was
Impeached of High Treason by the Commons, before the Lords, as appears by the
Records thereof amongst the Records of Parliament.


Mr. Attor. Genesis I did not truly remember that, but I beg your Pardon if it be
so, for I had not a view of the Plea till now; But I am ready thus far to
satisfy the Court, it is a pure false and frivolous Plea. And then with
Submission I offer it to your Consideration, whether you will give any time, or
presently reject it.


L. Chapter J. We will give them no time, that is sure. But the Question is,
whether time should not be taken, not in Favor of the Prisoner, but of the
King and of the Court?


Mr. Attor. Genesis I am ready to make out, if it were necessary, that there is
nothing of all this true, it is all Fiction that is pleaded, and nothing in the
Record to warrant it; I have a Copy of the whole Journal, and of the
Transactions in the House of Lords, the Book is close by and ready to be shown;
but when it is a frivolous Plea, I hope there will be no need of that trouble.


L. Chapter J. But Mr. Attorney, Whether we can take notice of the Journal Book,
now you had best consider as this Case stands.


Mr. Attor. Genesis They ought to have it here ready, they ought to have it here
in poigne.


Mr. Just. Jones. There have been very many good Arguments urged by you, upon
which perhaps the Plea will be judged insufficient: but the Question is,
whether you are now in any such Form as we can pass Judgment upon this Plea or
no? Therefore it being offered to you to consider of it, what you will do in
it, sure it is reasonable you should consider of it, and when you are agreed,
then you may ask our Judgment.


L. Chapter J. We cannot put you to it to give a final Answer to bind the King,
therefore let it stand as it is, we will consider of it.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Then my Lord I Will Demur immediately.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And we pray they may join in Demurrer immediately.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. If they do not mean it for delay, now Mr. Attorney has
demurred, I suppose they will join in Demurrer immediately.


Then the Clerk of the Crown drew up a general Demurrer, which Mr. Attorney
Signed, and it was read in the Court by the Clerk of the Crown.
Mr. Attor. Genesis We pray they may join in Demurrer.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, We that are assigned of Counsel for this Gentleman, the
Prisoner at the Bar, (that your Lordship may be satisfied, and all that hear
us, that we do not design or desire to delay one Minute in this Cause) do
declare that we will join in Demurrer with them immediately.


Then the Clerk drew up the Joynder in Demurrer, which being Signed by the four
Gentlemen of Counsel with Mr. Fitz-Harris, was also read in Court.
Mr. Attor. Genesis MY Lord, I pray your Judgment, here is an Indictment for
framing a Treasonable Libel. --


Mr. Williams. My Lord, we hope we shall not be put --


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray Sir, hear what I pray. My Lord, I desire your Judgment,
that the Plea may stand overruled for a plain fatal Error in it; This is a
particular Indictment for the framing a most pernicious scandalous Libel
against the King, and the Government, for Treason in that particular. And I
think there is no Person does doubt, but that this is a Matter within the
Jurisdiction of this Court to try: There is no difficulty in that. What do they
do to out this Jurisdiction? They come and Plead that Fitz-Harris was Impeached
de alta proditione, that is all they plead of High Treason in general, to out
the Court of a Jurisdiction, of a particular Treason, for framing a malicious
traiterous Libel: And this is a particular Treason upon the Statute of the 13
th of this King. Now they have pleaded no particular Treason upon that Statute
they were Impeached for, nor upon the Statute of the 25 th of Edw. the 3 d,
which has a general Clause of a Declaratory Power, and it may be he was
Impeached upon that, and we shall not intend it otherwise, that being the
general Law, the other but a particular Law for this Kings Life. Now in all
Pleas to the Jurisdiction, they ought to be the strictest and most certain of
any Pleas whatsoever. And as I offered before to you, so I do now again, they
ought to be ready with the Record to justify their Plea; but this in short I
insist upon, that to out a Court of its Jurisdiction, for a particular Treason,
it is not a good Plea, by saying he was Impeached or Indicted generally of High
Treason, and no Averment can possibly help it. For it appears by the
Impeachment it is not for the same, and it is rather to be intended that it was
not, but the Impeachment being general, that they went upon a Declaratory
Power, in the Statute of the 25 th of Edw. the 3 d, which reserves to them the
Power of declaring Treason at large, and not upon that which may be tried here
in an Inferior Court upon a particular Statute. I say, my Lord, they ought to
have pleaded it certainly, which they having not done, it is Fatal; and I pray
your Judgment upon it, and I hope they are ready to make good their Plea.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, That that we do say to it, is, That this Plea is
neither good in Matter nor Form, and if it had been pleaded never so formally,
perhaps we would have demurred to it: But as now it is pleaded, it is not
Formal, and therefore we pray it may be overruled. The Exception we take to it
in point of Form, we think is Fatal; for there is no Man that pleads an
Indictment or an Impeachment in another Court, but must set forth the
Indictment in the Plea, which is not done in this Case, and we take that to be
fatal to it. For a Man that will plead auter foitz acquit, must set forth the
Indictment and all the Proceedings of the Court upon that Indictment, this is
the constant pleading in all Cases, and particularly in Vaux's Case, the 4 th
Report; who ever will plead auter foitz acquit, must set forth the Record,
before it will require an Answer to be given to it.


L. Chapter J. What do you say to it Gentlemen, for the maintaining of your Plea?


Mr. Williams. This is that we say, my Lord, We hope your Lordship, and the
Court in this Case, will not tie us up presently to come and argue this Matter.
One thing I would mention, because it has been said, there was never such a
Precedent, I think to this Purpose; the Precedent of Elliot's Case is very full
in it, Mr. Attorney is pleased to say, he never found that any Plea to the
Jurisdiction did require a Demurrer, but was overruled or allowed by the Court
presently; But that Case is plain to the contrary upon that very Matter. It was
an Indictment brought against Elliot for some Misdemeanors committed by him in
the House of Commons, this being pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, the
Attorney General at that time said it was not to be received, that was the
Matter he insisted on then, that should be rejected; but the Court did then, as
you do now, overruled the Attorney in it, and put him to demur.


L. Chapter J. We have done the same for you.


Mr. Williams. Then, my Lord, here is a Precedent that Mr. Attorney has not
seen: Now for time, the Court in that Case did not tie the Counsel up to argue
the Plea presently, but gave them time till the next Term. We ask not so hard a
thing of the Court, as so long a time in this Case, only here is a Man's Life
in Question; it is indeed for Treason, and so it is of Consequence to the King,
and there is also the Privilege of Parliament consequently concerned in it:
What time your Lordship, and the Court shall think reasonable for us to be
ready in, we leave it to your Lordship; we design not to delay at all, only we
desire a reasonable time. Your Lordship did in the Case of Plunket, give him
time for his Trial till next Term, which is as high a Treason as this I am sure.


L. Chapter J. You would have People think you have strange measure in this Case,
that you have not the same time given to you that was given to Plunket; Pray
consider, you object these things as tho the Court were hard upon you, to tie
you up in point of time. Is your Case like Plunket's? pray give us leave to
clear our Accounts as we go along; he is brought from Ireland hither, is
Indicted for what he did in another Kingdom, and it is by Law he is so Indicted
indeed, but he being kept close Prisoner, and not knowing what time he should
be brought to a Trial, he desires time to send for his Witnesses, who are to be
brought over to clear him of the Treason: Could we in Justice deny it him, or
could there be a shorter time than next Term given him, when his Witnesses are
in another Kingdom, and it would be a fortnight or three Weeks before,
possibly, he could have his Witnesses here? This I mention, because you will
needs make use of such a Case, that is no more like yours than any thing that
is the farthest different from it, yet you will have the Case to measure with
your Case.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I know it is in the Discretion of the Court, and as
your Lordship did what was just for Plunket, to you will to this Person, I know
you will do what is right to every Body. We are Counsel assigned by your
Lordship, and we doubt not but your Lordship will be just to us, and give us a
reasonable time to argue it.


L. Chapter J. Look you by the way, Mr. Williams, I must tell you, when we assigned
Counsel to Mr. Fitz Harris, we expected that Counsel should consider the Plea,
so as to be able to maintain it, when they come to plead it here; for that
reason we gave him time to plead it, so as he would stand by it. What needed we
else to have assigned him so much Counsel in such a Case as this is, but that
he should be ready? and why you should now hope that we will give you a longer
time for Argument in such a Case, I see not. Consider, whether in Discretion
you think longer time ought to be expected upon such a Plea as this is.


Sir Fra. Win. My Lord, we will not take upon us to prescribe, nor to mention
any time in particular, we leave that to the Discretion and Judgment of the
Court, but this I think, we may pray according to the Duty we owe to our
Client, upon your Lordship's assigning us of Counsel. We could not foresee till
to day, what the King's Counsel would do, whether Mr. Attorney would take Issue
upon us of null tiel Record, or upon any of our Averments. We could not
foresee, whether he would demur to us or not. I know your Lordship will be as
favorable to us as you can, not having those Papers or sight of those Records
that were necessary, and would have expedited this Matter, our time was all
spent in forming of the Plea; and we could not prepare particular Matter in Law
to defend it. We are as ready as can be expected, and we have been as
industrious to prevent any delay, as any Persons could be in our Condition:
Therefore it may be, we have had a general Consideration of the Plea, but now
we see where the doubts do lie upon it: It Is a Matter of Law pleaded to the
Jurisdiction of the Court. I do not indeed love to cite Precedents upon what is
plain, but withal, I do not love to say things upon a sudden are plain, without
Consideration: But this I will say, as it is now upon this Demurrer joined, it
is a Case well worth our taking care of, and yours too, I must say it with your
Lordships leave. Therefore, if in the Case of my Lord Hollis, which was but
upon an Information, and that but for a Misdemeanour, and tho it was a Plea
directly to the Jurisdiction of the Court, and certainly they came prepared,
for they were all at Liberty, and had resort to all Papers and Books before the
Plea pleaded, which we could not have, yet the Court was pleased to assign them
time, and give them a large time, I hope we shall have some reasonable time. I
do not speak it that we should have so long time; but I humbly beseech your
Lordship, that we may do our Duty to the Court and to our Client, that we may
have a little time. It is true it is a great and a horrid Treason, but it is as
true here is the Life of a Man concerned in it; we do not affect delay at all,
but hope you will not deny us what time is reasonable.


L. Chapter J. Look you, I Will tell you, you might if you had pleased, have
entitled your selves better to have had time, to speak to the Plea, if you had
pleaded over to the Treason, then we could have given you time to have spoken
to it, and not delayed the King at all; but you have thought fit not to plead
over. I must confess, I did expect you would have pleaded over, as you might
have done, and I thought you would. Therefore having not done it, it is in our
Consideration, whether we will give you time, and what time we will give you.


Mr. Wallop. It is under your Lordships Favor, according to the usual course
of modern Practice. I have been an unprofitable Attendant here near forty
years, and for my part, I did never yet see so swift a Proceeding as this is
now, it is as swift as Lightning: It is a very extraordinary thing, we might
well conceive, that nothing more should be expected from us, than what is
usual, and that we should not be put out of the ordinary Proceedings; anciently
indeed, as your Lordship did observe the other day, they pleaded Ore tenus, and
then the Proceedings were very quick; now indeed it is otherwise, modern, and
what we may call ancient Practice too, has made an Alteration from that
Method: And we humbly pray, we may not proceed, but according to the rate of
modern Practice. My Lord, whereas they are pleased to call it a frivolous Plea,
I believe it is a Plea of the greatest Import that ever these Gentlemen came
here about, whatsoever they are pleased to say. But your Lordship knows, the
Life of a Man is the greatest Favorite in Law, and that to be a most ancient
and wise Rule, de morte hominis nulla est cunctatio longa. And since we could
not reasonably expect to be thought to come provided in this Case; we humbly
pray, that your Lordship will allot us such a reasonable time, as your Lordship
shall think fit.


L. Chapter J. Come let me propose this to you, will you plead over?


Mr. Pollexfen. My Lord, I will give you an Answer to that, we cannot do it.
When we were together, we did consider, whether if we should plead over, it
would not destroy the Plea, and we were of Opinion that it would destroy the
Plea; we cannot plead over but we give up the Jurisdiction. It is as
indifferent and light to me as any Body, to be forced to argue it now; but as
to the Matter of it, I believe, no Body can say, they ever saw many Instances
of the like Nature: Therefore, pray my Lord, let us not go on so hastily with
it, for we could not foresee, what since we know, how it would be with us. I
did not think they would have demurred, but now it is come to that we must make
the best of it. We have pleaded this Plea; if you will not be pleased to give
us leave and time to be prepared to argue it, you must take it as we are able,
since we cannot have time to make our selves able.


L. Chapter J. Certainly, Mr. Pollexfen, in favorem Vitae, it would not hurt the
Plea to plead over.


Mr. Attor. Genesis My Lord, If your Lordship please to favor me a Word in this
Case, I hear several things urged, particularly instancing in modern Practice.
If that Gentlemen will show that in any Case the King and the Court were so
Indulgent to give four days to plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court, then he
will show me some thing of modern Practice which I know not, but if that
Gentlemen will remember modern Practice in a great Nobleman's Case, for whom he
was of Counsel; it was told him, If he would debate the Point of Law, he must
do it presently: They never would give him time to prepare for his Argument,
there was no such modern Practice then. I would desire him to give me one
Instance, that when Gentlemen are assigned of Counsel to plead a Matter to the
Jurisdiction, and deal so with the King's Counsel as they have dealt with us,
not to let us see the Plea till now, the modern Practice has been to give them
any time. For them to say that they could not foresee what we would be at:
Could they not foresee the Points of Law? Could they not foresee a plain Case?
But they do not take off the great Matter that he that does plead to the
Jurisdiction, ought to have the Record ready in his Hand; but my Lord, we lay
our Thumb upon that which is our Exception, they have pleaded no Impeachment of
any Crime, that can appear to be the same with that for which they are
indicted, that is the Point. Is there such difficulty? did not these learned
Gentlemen think. Could they not foresee that we should look into their Plea,
that it should be legal, therefore I did and do pray your Judgment? If they had
pleaded and set forth the Record truly, as it is and as it ought to be set
forth, in case they would have any benefit by it, we would have given them
another Answer; but if it be done purposely, as it is done with Artifice, I am
bold to say, for these Gentlemen know how to plead a Record as it ought to be,
and how this ought to be pleaded to, ^o out the Court of a Jurisdiction of a
particular Crime. they say, the Life of a Man is concerned, and so is the Peace
of the Kingdom concerned too in the Life of as great a Traitor as ever was
tried in Westminster Hall. For if his Treason had taken effect, certainly the
Kingdom had been very near embroyled in civil Wars by this time. Therefore the
whole Peace of the Kingdom depends upon his Life, and it depends upon the
clearing of the whole Matter. And I challenge them again, if they can show me
any Instance of the like Nature. That of Elliot's Case that was mentioned, it
was an Information; and to Pleas upon Informations there have been Demurrers,
but to Indictments found by twelve Men, we do not meet with any Demurrer any
where to a Plea to the Jurisdiction. But I pray your Judgment, that he may
plead in Chief, for it is but a Respondes ouster, and if these Gentlemen desire
to take time, I hope you will not delay the King by giving Countenance to such
a plain imperfect Plea, and for those high Matters they talk of, that will be
the Consequence they can never come in question upon this Plea.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I have but one short word to that which is now in
question. Our Exceptions to the Plea we offered and opened before: the Question
is now, whether they shall have time to argue this Plea; And the Arguments they
use for longer time, is, the Life of a Man, and they could not be prepared on a
sudden; because they knew not what we would do. For the hasty proceedings that
have been in this Case, which they clamor of, I think they have little reason
to speak so, since that has been done in this Case, that never was done in any
other. He has had three days time to consider, whether he will plead to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, which never was done to any, and so great a Favor,
that he is scarce entitled to any farther Favor: Does any Man believe that
they are not prepared? Do not Gentlemen when they consider of a Plea, consider
upon what Grounds they Plead? And does not that let them into the whole Matter
where the weak parts of the Plea are, and what may be objected against it. I am
sure that these Gentlemen are of that Consideration, that no Man does believe
they would put in this or any Plea, without having considered beforehand what
to do. And then, when they have put in a Plea upon great Consideration, no Man
is to think that they are unready to maintain it. Our Exception is short, and
they do but talk in general Terms that they are unprepared, and they have no
reason to expect this Kindness from the Court; especially since they used Mr.
Attorney at this rate, they gave him not the Plea, but only a Note, to tell him
they would do that which they said four days before, and no more; if they had
done regularly, they should have brought Mr. Attorney the Plea, and left a Copy
with him, and desired him to consider of it. But we do not pretend we are
surprised for all this Usage, we see the Plea here, and we see the Faults of
it, and we have demurred to it, and tell them our Exception, sure they are
better prepared than it is possible for the King to be, yet we are ready; and we
hope you will grant them no longer time.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Will your Lordship be pleased to spare me one Word, I
wonder at what Mr. Wallop seems now to urge, concerning the Life of a Man that
is concerned in this Case; it is true the Life of a Man is concerned, which is a
dear thing to the Law; but certainly the Life of the Government is more dear to
the Government, and all Courts of Justice, than the Life of any one single
Person. And I am sure, this one Person has done as much as in him lies, to
strike at the Life of the Government, in case this be true, that is laid to his
Charge. Now to make this Case like to Plunket's the other day, is strange, I
think your Lordship has given an account of that. For has he pleaded to the
Fact, Not Guilty, as Plunket did? We that are of the King's Counsel, would in
common Charity hope, that he is not Guilty; but I am sure, if he be Guilty, no
English Man can think that he deserves to live; why then should we be so fond
of a Man's Life, that has been Guilty of such a Fact as this? For Example
sake, surely, if that be the thing in question, we ought to have speedy Justice
executed upon a Man that deserves no Mercy. Your Lordship was pleased to take
notice of another Circumstance in the Case of Plunket: He was Indicted, he was
Arraigned, and was to have had his Trial in Ireland, and was to fetch his
Witnesses from thence; all these things were in that Case. He desired time to
consider what he should plead, but your Lordship finding an Indictment found
against him, according to the Rules of Justice, overruled that matter he
suggested, and made him plead Not Guily before ever you admitted him to debate
any thing of that Fact. And then it appearing to your Lordship to be in another
Kingdom, and that it was impossible, in regard of the hazards of the Winds, and
Seas, to get over his Witnesses in a little time; your Lordship gave him time,
but you gave him as strait a time, as could be consistent with the Rules of
Justice, and as his Case would bear. Now, my Lord, this being offered in a Case
of that expectation, which the Case before you seems to have; We desire the
dispatch of it, as much as we can. In case the Man be Innocent, God forbid but
he should be acquitted; but if he be Guilty, God forbid he should live a Minute.


L. Chapter J. Surely you don't take the Case, Gentlemen, to be a Case of so much
Difficulty, as to deserve long Consideration; we did expect truly, that you
would have been ready to have maitained your Plea.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, we do not desire any long time, be pleased to give us a
day or two or three, as you please.


L. Chapter J. It Is said, it is in a Case wherein the Life of a Man is concerned,
it is true here is the Life a Man, of whom till he be found Guilty, we ought to
have Consideration, as we would of any other whatsoever. For we have no reason
to conclude him Guilty, till we hear him, and we are to be indifferent till we
hear the Evidence, therefore notwithstanding the Indictment, we ought to weigh
his Life as we would another Man's, till he be found Guilty. We in our selves,
do not see there is any so great matter of Necessity, for time to consider of
this Case, yet I must tell you, since they pray it, Mr. Attorney, we are
inclineable to give them a day or two's time to consider of it, and see what
they can say to maintain this Plea. But then, Gentlemen, if we do so, you must
take notice, we will call you to plead presently after our Judgment upon the
Plea.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, we have nothing to do with the Fact of this Case, we
are only to speak to the Plea.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Pray how then is your Life in question upon the decision of
this Plea?


L. Chapter J. Brother, they do not speak as to this Plea, that it hazards his
Life, but the subjecta materiae, upon the decision of it, supposing Judgment be
against the Plea. Therefore, Mr. Attorney, we do think fit to give him till
Friday Morning, and he shall be brought hither then again by the Lieutenant of
the Tower; then we will hear these Gentlemen: and if they do not show us any
considerable Matter to maintain the Plea, they must expect Judgment presently.


Mr. Attor. Genesis That certainly will be too long a time, pray, my Lord, they
ought to have been ready now; if they will be pleased to be ready to Morrow
Morning, I pray it may go off to no further time.


Mr. Just: Jones. There is a necessity, my Lord, I think that it should be so,
for there is a long Trial at the Bar here on Friday.


Mr. Williams. That is a very short time indeed.


Mr. Just. Jones. You must be ready to Morrow Morning.


Mr. Williams. Unless, my Lord, you will give us a little more time, you had as
good give us no time.


L. Chapter J. It seems the business of the Court is such, on Friday Morning you
cannot be heard.


Mr. Just. Jones. Either it must be to Morrow Morning or Saturday, and that is
Exchequer-Chamber day.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I believe they are not in haste.


L. Chapter J. Mr. Attorney, We would give them a reasonable time, but yet we would
do nothing that might make unnecessary delays in this Case.


Mr. Attor. Genesis I pray, my Lord, let it be no longer than till to Morrow, and
that is more than ever was given in such a Case. I know it was denied in my
Lord Stafford's Case, they would not give the Counsel any time, but would make
them argue presently.


L. Chapter J. As to that, Mr. Attorney, every Case stands upon its own Bottom.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. My Lord, we have your direction for to Morrow Morning.


Sir Fra. Win. No, No, my Lord, we hope not so.


L. Chapter J. Look you Gentlemen, to accommodate you, the Court does think fit
thus to do; we will be here on Saturday by seven a Clock in the Morning; on
Friday we can do nothing, for there is a long Trial at Bar, that will take up
our time: But on Saturday we will be here by eight a Clock sitting, and expect
you to be here by that time, and we cannot afford you then long time to argue
in; because it is an Exchequer Chamber day.


Mr. Attor. Genesis If Judgment be against the Plea, they must plead presently
then, that we may not lose the Term for a Trial.


L. Chapter J. You must take notice of that, by the Rules of the Court, they must
do it, Mr. Attorney. If our Judgment be against them, the course of the Court
is so, we cannot rule it one way or another.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. But then, they ought not to pretend they have no notice,
their Witnesses are out of the way, and so hinder the Trial.


Mr. Just. Jones. No, No.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire, I may have these Lords come to me, my Lord
of Essex, my Lord Salisbury, my Lord Mayor, your Lordship, and Sir Robert
Clayton, to perfect my Discovery. I have something to discover to your Lordship
and them.


L. Chapter J. Your Discovery of what do you mean?


Mr. Fitz Harris. Of the Plot, and of the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.


L. Chapter J. We did examine you about the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Your Lordship went away in haste, before I had told all I
could say.


L. Chapter J. We asked you ten times, whether you had any more to say, and you
said No.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I was in Confusion and Consternation, I scarce knew
what your Lordship said to me.


L. Chapter J. We were not in haste, we asked you often that Question.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. It was haste to me, because I was not provided of the
Questions you asked me.


Mr. Just. Dolben. To some of the Questions we asked you, you answered readily
and freely, but to some we could not get a positive Answer by any means.


Mr. Attor. Genesis My Lord, he told me he was not in England then, and that he
knew no more than what he had discovered.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Did I say so, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Attor. Genesis Yes, you are the Man.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I can bring twenty Witnesses, I did not tell you so, and I
can bring 500 Witnesses, that I was in Town then.


L. Chapter J. Lieutenant of the Tower, take your Prisoner, and be here before
eight a Clock on Saturday Morning.


Sir Fra. Win. My Lord, now I desire we may have a Copy of the whole Record.


L. Chapter J. Not of the Indictment, but of the Plea and Demurrer, you may.


Sir Fra. Win. But, my Lord, I hope you will let the Indictment be read upon
Saturday, because Mr. Attorney has fixed his Exception upon part of the
Indictment, which is the Libel that he calls the particular Treason, and I
desire it may be in Court.


L. Chapter J. It shall be, and if you have any occasion of Reference to it, we
will look upon it, we are all upon our Oaths, and must take heed that no
Prejudice be done to the King; as well as to see the Prisoner have no unfair
thing put upon him.


Then the Prisoner was carried back to the Tower.
On Saturday the 7th of May, 1681. Mr. Fitz-Harris was brought to the Bar of
the Court of King's Bench, about eight a Clock in the Morning.
Mr. Williams. MAy it please your Lordship, I am assigned of Counsel for this
Person, Mr. Fitz-Harris, the Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Attor. Genesis My Lord, if you please, I will only briefly acquaint them with
what our Exceptions are, that they may apply themselves to them.


L. Chapter J. Look you Gentlemen, I must tell you, all our time is strait enough
for this Matter, for we are all of us to be by and by with all the Judges in
the Exchequer Chamber; therefore we pray this of you, we will abridge no Man's
speaking what is material for his Client, but we desire you will keep to the
Matter, and the Points in Question between you, and save our time as much as
you can.


Mr. Attor. Genesis That is the reason, my Lord, why I would lay my Finger upon
those Points, that will be the Questions between us. Now the Exceptions I take
to the Plea, are these; This is a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court, and
some of our Exceptions are to the Form, and one is to the Matter. To the Form,
my Exceptions are these; First, we say, that the general Allegation, that he
was Impeached, de Alta Proditione, is uncertain, and too general, It ought to
have been particularly set out, that the Court might judge, whether it be the
same Crime; and it is not helped by the Averment. And the next Exception I take
to it, is, here is no Impeachment alleged to be upon Record, I mentioned this
the last time, and looking more strictly into it, I find, it is so as I said:
For they come and make a general Allegation, that Fitz-Harris, such a time, was
Impeached, Impetitus fuit, by the Commons, before the Lords, Quae quidem
Impetitio in pleno robore existit prout per Recordum inde, etc. Now, my Lord,
there is no Impeachment mentioned before: And quae quidem Impetitio, is a
Relative Clause, and if there be no Impeachment mentioned before in the Plea,
then there is nothing averred upon the Record, to be continued or discontinued,
for Impetitio, does not actively signify the Impeaching, or passively the
Person Impeached, but it signifies the Indictment or Impeachment, that
Instrument which contains the Accusation, and which is to be and remain upon
Record. Therefore, when they come and say, he was Impeached, and afterward
alledg, Quae quidem Impetitio remains upon Record, that cannot be good; If a
Plea should be Indictatus fuit, and afterward they say quod quidem
Indictamentum, etc. It cannot be good, for the Relative there is only illusive.
These are our Exceptions to the Form. For the Matter of it, it is a Plea to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and with submission there the Point will be, whether
a Suit depending, even in a Superior Court, can take away the Jurisdiction of
an Inferior Court, who had an Original Jurisdiction of the Cause, of the
Person, and of the Fact, at the time of the Fact committed. What use might be
made of it, as a Plea, in Bar, might be of another Consideration, but whether
this be enough to make it amount to such a Plea, as will take away the
Jurisdiction of a Court, that had an Original Jurisdiction? that is the Question
before you. These are the Exceptions I take, and do insist upon: And I desire,
my Lord, the Counsel will apply themselves to these Exceptions, to answer them,
and when we have heard what they can say, I hope to give them an Answer.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I am assigned of Counsel for the Prisoner at the Bar,
Edward Fitz-Harris, who is Indicted here for High Treason, and has pleaded a
special Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court: And I must crave leave to state
his Case upon the Indictment, the Plea to the Indictment, and the Demurrer to
the Plea. And the Case, my Lord, upon the whole Record stands thus: He was
Indicted this Term, by one of the Grand Jurie's for this County, of High
Treason. As to the Indictment, it cannot be expected I should state the Parts
of it, it being an Indictment I never saw; To this Indictment thus presented,
Fitz-Harris has pleaded thus: That he ought not to be compelled to answer to
this Indictment, because, that before the Indictment was found, at a Parliament
held at Oxford, the 21 st of March last, he was impeached by the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, in
the Name of themselves, and of all the Commons of England, of High Treason; and
that this was before the Court of Lords in that Parliament. He says further,
that this Impeachment is remaining in full force, and effect, before the Lords
in Parliament, prout per Recordum inde int' Record. Parliamenti remanens
plenuis liquet and apparet. These are the Words of the Plea: And then he avers,
that the High Treason mentioned in the Indictment, and the High Treason
specified in the Impeachment, are one and the same. And he further avers, that
he is the same Fitz-Harris named in that Indictment, and mentioned in the
Impeachment. And after the Averments, he concludes, to the Jurisdiction of the
Court; Whether upon all this Matter, they will proceed any further against him,
upon this Indictment, and demands the Judgment of the Court to that purpose.

Upon this Plea Mr. Attorney has demurred generally, and we that are of
Counsel for the Prisoner, have joined in Demurrer with him. Now in this Case,
which thus comes before you, for your Judgment upon this Plea and this
Demurrer, I take these things to be admitted.

First, That the Prisoner stands Impeached, by the Commons of England in
Parliament Assembled, of High Treason. Secondly, That the Impeachment thus made
by the Commons, in the Name of themselves, and of all the Commons of England,
before the Lords in Parliament for Treason, is now in being. Thirdly, Which I
omitted in the opening of the Plea, that this was done sed in Legem and Cons.
Parliamenti, and being so, remains in plenis suis Robore and Effectu; And more
particularly this Plea does refer to the Record, for the Parts and
Circumstances of the Impeachment, prout patet per Record inde inter, etc. So
that it does refer the Impeachment it self to the Record, and tells you this is
among the other Records of that Parliament, all this is admitted by the Plea.
Fourthly, And moreover, that this Treason, for which he stands Impeached before
the Lords, and the Treason for which he stands Indicted before this Court, are
one and the same Treason, and no way diverse, and so they are the same
numerical thing, and there is no manner of Difference. And that this Person
Fitz-Harris now Indicted, and the Fitz-Harris In peached, are one and the same
Person, and no way diverse. And withal, my Lord, it appears plainly upon the
Record, that this Impeachment was depending before: the Indictment found for
the Parliament was the 21 st of March, and it appears by the Record, this is
only an Indictment of this Term. And another thing I must entreat you to
observe, my Lord, it does not appear but that this Parliament is still in
being, for any thing to the contrary in the Record, and as I take the Case,
then it must be admitted so to be.

So then I take the Plea to be in substance thus, though Mr. Attorney was
pleased to except to both the substance and the form; but in substance the Case
is thus: Here is a Person Impeached in Parliament, by the Commons in Parliament
for High Treason, before the Lords in Parliament; and for ought appears that
Parliament still in being, and this impeachment still depending: Then here is
an Indictment for that very Treason; whether your Lordship now will think fit
in this Court to proceed upon that Indictment is the substance of the Case; I
shall speak to the form, by and by.

My Lord, by the way I think it will not be denied, but that the Commons in
Parliament, may Impeach any Commoner of Treason before the Lords in Parliament,
I take that to be admitted. And I do not find that Mr. Attorney denis it or
makes any doubt of that, for I think that was the Case of Tresilian and
Belknapp, who were Impeached in Parliament, by the Commons before the Lords: I
am sure my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan does in his Reports in Bushell's Case say
so; and upon that Impeachment of the Commons one of them was executed, and the
other banished in Parliament. My Lord, I cite it not merrily, but I cite it as
Authority. Indeed I do not go so far as to cite the Parliament Roll, it was in
the time of Rich. the 2. I have not seen the Roll of late truly, but I am sure
it is upon the Roll, and there it is to be found.

Since then Impeachments of Commoners will lie in Parliament, here then My
Lord, will be the Question, whether this Court may proceed upon an Indictment
for the same offense the Parliament was for. And here I shall distinguish upon
Mr. Attorney; he does allow the Parliament to be a superior Court, but
admitting that he says, though it be so, yet the inferior Court having
Original Jurisdiction of the Person and the Cause, it may proceed
notwithstanding an Indictment in the Superior Court: And Ergo, he* does infer
that this Court may proceed upon an Indictment, notwithstanding an Impeachment
in Parliament.

My Lord, I will compare a little the Case of an Indictment and an Impeachment,
and show you how manifestly they differ. I do take the Case of an Impeachment
not to be the Case of an Indictment; and so the Principle that Mr. Attorney
has taken is wrong, and the ground of that Argument wrong. I cannot say it is
like the Case of an Appeal, but I may say the Case of an Appeal is like the
Case of an Impeachment. For in an Appeal of Murder, though the Indictment be
Capital and the same that is given upon Criminals prosecuted for the King, yet
it is at the suit of the party, as in this Case it is at the suit of the
Commons, and so it is an intimation of, and Analogical to, and bears the
resemblance of an Impeachment in Parliament; I will not compare an Impeachment
to an Appeal, but I will say an Appeal imitates an Impeachment. And it is as
plain as can be, because Appeals are proper to Courts in Westminster Hall, and
it is at the suit of the party, the Prosecution and all the Process is ad
instantiam partis, so is an Impeachment at the suit of the Commons. An
Indictment is found upon the presentment of a Grand Jury who are Sworn ad
inquirendum pro Domino Rege pro Corpore Com. And it is a mistake in the form
when it is said and pro Corpore Com. for it is not for the King and the body of
the County, but for the King for the body of the County: But now an Impeachment
in Parliament is otherwise, it is not in the Name of the King, but in the Name
of the Commons in Parliament and of all the Commons in England, wherein it
suites with an Appeal which is at the suit of the party, so that it is like an
Appeal and not like an Indictment: an Indictment is for the King, an
Impeachment for the people. And as it is in its nature and constitution
different, so it is in the prosecution also, for that is by the Commons of
England, they are the prosecutors in effect, but now in all Indictments they
are prosecuted always by the Kings Attorney, or by some person in the name of
the King. We are now arguing upon the Methods and forms of Parliament,
therefore I must crave leave to insist upon those Methods more particularly.
The Commons they bring up the Impeachment to the Lords, the Commons they
prosecute the Impeachment, they manage the Evidence upon the Trial, and when
the Lords have considered of it, and have found the fact, the Commons come and
demand Judgment, and Judgment is given at the Prayer of the Commons, and no
otherwise, and there are no proceedings by the Attorneys. Indeed there have
been attempts by Attorneys to prosecute persons in Parliament, by exhibiting
Informations in the Parliament, but what success they have had I leave to them
to consider that are concerned, and have read the Rolls of Parliament. But it
is not safe to alter the old ways of Parliament; therefore I take it under
Correction, that it is out of the road of Comparisons, when they will compare
an Indictment and an Impeachment together, for they do not agree but differ
extremely.

I would then offer you some reasons why this Court ought not to proceed upon
this Indictment: I take it, it does not become the Justice of this Court to
weaken the Methods of proceedings in Parliament, as this Court will certainly
do. For if you will admit this to be the course that I have opened, your
proceedings will alter it. When there is an Impeachment depending in Parliament
for Treason, if your Lordships will admit there may be an Indictment here
afterward in this Court, and proceedings in this Court upon that Indictment,
it is to alter the Method of Parliament proceedings, and to subject the Method
of their proceedings there to the proceedings of this Court. And what the
Mischief of that will be, I must leave to your Lordship. As I opened it before,
the Methods of both Courts are different, and their proceedings very much vary,
I think I need not trouble your Lordship with that, We all know it very well in
the main. Indictments in this Court are to be tried by a Jury, where a Verdict
must be given presently. There is but very little time for giving the Evidence,
or for making Observations for the Crown, or for the public, and in order to
bring it to the Trial, there must be an immediate Plea of Guilty or Not Guilty.
Now if the proceedings of Parliament were so sudden, there might be a great
surprise, and great offenders pass unpunished, because the Prosecutors had not
greater time to inspect the Records that might be of avail in the Case.
Therefore in Parliament it is quite otherwise, there is time for Deliberation
and Consideration, there are many references, and many Examinations, which are
matters of Deliberation, and Consideration, which take up a great deal of time:
But here you are straightened not only in time, but bound up to strict Rules, and
so are straightened in your Methods and forms of proceedings, as Mr. Attorney
would here tie us up to the forms of little Courts; but it is not fit that the
Justice of the Kingdom and the high Court of Parliament should be crampt by the
Methods of an Inferior Court and a Jury. So you will then subject the Methods
of proceedings in Parliament to the Courts in Westminster Hall, and what the
Consequence of that will be is worth the consideration.

Another reason I would humbly offer is this, My Lord, the Parliament is the
Supreme Court certainly, and this Court is every way inferior to it, and it
will be very strange that that Supreme Court should be hindered by an inferior:
For the Highest Court is always supposed to be the wisest, the Commons of
England in Parliament are supposed to be a greater and a wiser body than a
Grand Jury of any one County. The Peers who are the Judges in that Court are
supposed to be the wisest Judges, as the Commons the wisest Inquest. Will the
Law of England now suffer an Examination, Impeachment and Prosecution for
Treason to be taken out of the hands of the greatest and wisest Inquest in
England? And will the Law of England suffer the Judicature upon this
Prosecution to be taken out of the hands of the wisest and greatest Judicature,
and put it into the power of a smaller Number of Judges, or of an inferior
Jury? I do think it does not stand, My Lord, with the wisdom of the Law or of
the Constitution of the Government.

Another thing is this, My Lord, the common argument in any extraordinary Case,
there is no Precedent for this way of proceeding: it is my Lord Cokes argument
in his Comment upon Littleton, fol. 108. and in the 4th. Inst. fol. 17. in his
Comment upon the High Court of Parliament. And he takes occasion to speak it
upon the account of that Precedent, the Case of the Indictment against the
Bishop of Winchester, and of that against Mr. Plowden, and he says this wus
never practiced before. Therefore it ought not to be, so he infers, and puts a
black mark upon it, by saying it is a dangerous attempt for inferior Courts to
alter or meddle with the Law of Parliaments; for the words I refer my self to
the Book, I dare not venture to repeat them upon my memory. So in this case, in
regard that it never was done from the beginning of the world till now, the 33
year of this King, I may say, it being without Precedent, there is no Law for
it.

My Lord, there is another mischief that will certainly follow upon this, and
that too runs upon the Comparison of an Appeal and of an Indictment. In the
Case of an Indictment it is in the power of the Prince to pardon that
Indictment, to pardon the punishment, and to pardon the offense, but in the
Case of an Impeachment, I take it to be otherwise, as it is in the Case of an
Appeal. And My Lord, if your Lordship will take this Case out of the power of
the Parliament, and bring it into this Court where the offense may be pardoned,
You do by that means subject that offense, and that method of proceedings which
would make it without consent of the party prosecuting, not pardonable by Law,
to a Pardon: and this may be of dangerous consequence to the public, that
crimes that are heinous and great in themselves, mighty bulky crimes, fit for
the consideration of a Parliament, be they never so great, never so dangerous
to the Government, yet should by giving this Court a jurisdiction, and
possessing it of these causes, expose them to the will of the Prince; and so
those crimes which are impardonable by methods of proceedings in Parliament,
would become pardonable by prosecution in this Court.

Now My Lord, for my Authority, that Impeachments are not pardonable, I would
only hint a little, to compare it to the Case of an Appeal, as Peuryn and
Corbett's Case in 3 Croke, Hill. 38 Eliz. fol. 464. There was an Appeal of
Murder; upon which he is found Guilty of Manslaughter, and Not Guilty of the
Murder. Then there was a Pardon pleaded of the burning in the hand, or of the
punishment; it is not plain in the Book whether the Pardon was after the
Verdict or before (that I cannot be clear in) but however there was a question
whether the Queen could pardon the burning in the hand, however it was there
allowed, but there was an exception. My Lord Coke, who was then Attorney
General, took, that the King could not pardon if it had been an Appeal of
homicide, and he concurred with the Court in that opinion: but that Appeal
being for Murder, and the Verdict of Manslaughter, they passed over the
question for this reason that I have mentioned, That the appeal was not for
Manslaughter, it was for Murder, and if he had been found guilty of the
Murder, it was not in the power of the King to pardon him, it being at the suit
of the party. So the opinion of that Book is, and of the then Attorney General.

Thus I have stated the thing, and the consequences of it, and it is not fit
for me to dwell upon it: You will consider of it I am sure.

Another thing I would say is this, if your Lordship should meddle with this
way of proceeding, it will invert the Law in another thing; for it is a
principle with us, That no man's life is to be put twice in danger for one and
the same thing: I will then put the Case thus, If your Lordship should proceed
upon this Indictment, and this person should be acquitted upon it, I am in your
Lordships judgment whether that acquittal will bind the Lords in Parliament;
if that will not bind them, but they may still proceed on the Impeachment, then
you invade that common right which every Englishman by the Law ought to have
preserved to him, that no person ought twice to be brought in question for one
and the same thing: And so, My Lord, you make a man to run the risque of his
life twice by Indicting him in this Court, where, though he be acquitted, he
may be called to an account again, if the Law be so. And if the Lords in
Parliament should be of opinion, for they are the Judges of that Case, that the
acquittal will not be binding to them, then a man's life is brought in question
twice upon the same account.

My Lord, I now come to this, the Time, how unseasonable a thing it is, and how
dangerous to the Government; I take it to be a critical thing now at this time
to make such attempts as these are. There are Lords now that lie under
Impeachments of Treason, the highest Treason I think that ever was contrived;
and upon this Impeachment one Lord has been convicted and executed. Suppose
upon the dissolution of that Parliament that impeached the late Lord Stafford
there had been an Indictment against him for one and the same Treason; and by
the same reason that this Court may proceed, his Majesty may appoint a High
Steward to try by a Jury of Peers: For the Court held before the High Steward
is as much a Court as any Court of the Kingdom, except that of Parliament. I
say, suppose the King had appointed an High Steward, and that Lord High Steward
had proceeded against my Lord Stafford, I think my Lord Stafford had been alive
at this day. For in the case of Treason your Lordship knows there must be two
Witnesses, and I am sure there came in fresh Testimony against my L. Stafford
after the second Parliament after the Impeachment. I appeal to those Noble
Lords that are here if it were not so; and had it not been for that fresh
Testimony that came in afterward, possibly my Lord Stafford might have been
alive at this time. And the Lords in Parliament, as I observed in the
beginning, when they find an high crime before them, when they find such a
general contagious design to subvert the Government, and yet they cannot come
to cut off the principal agents in this design, because perhaps there may not
be two Witnesses in strictness of the Law at the first, it is the wisdom of a
Parliament to deliberate and to take time. The good Queen who was used to say,
Truth was the daughter of Time, and Time would produce Truth, Veritas filia
temporis. If then there had been any any such hasty proceedings as in this
Case, I doubt my Lord Stafford had been now alive. Now then for these Lords
that are now in the Tower, if your Lordships do go on in this way, do you not
open such a gap as may be a ground to deliver them by the same Justice (I speak
it under correction here, and I only offer it to your judgment, for I have not
had many hours to consider of it, but your Lordship will think well of it,
before you give any Judgment; by the same Justice) the other Lords may be
tried by another Court? This I offer in point of reason, that this proceeding
will be very hard, and is an imprudent thing, if not an illegal proceeding. My
Lord, I am sure it will have this effect, it will stir up a question between
the jurisdiction of this Court, and the Court of Parliament. For in all
probability if this person should be acquitted, the Commons and the Lords too
will look into it. They are a Court that make a survey of the proceedings of
all other Courts, and they will examine this proceeding, or at least may do.
And if he be found Guilty, here is the power of the Commons in Impeaching, and
the Jurisdiction of the Lords in Trial and Judgment taken away by an Inferior
Court to them, and so stir a question between this Court, and that highest of
Courts, the Parliament. And what will be the consequence of that, the judgment
of that question will be in the Superior Court, for there is no middle Court
between this Court and the Parliament to judge of it. Therefore I submit it to
your Lordships.

These are the things which I offer to your Lordship in point of reason,
whereof some go to the prudence of the thing, some to the reason, and some to
the ill consequences that may happen upon it, and I think many to the
illegality of the act. And now this being said in the general, I come to the
particular exceptions made by Mr. Attorney as to the form of our Plea.

He was pleased to say, That this Plea was a plain frivolous Plea, which is his
exception in general, and he gave you three reasons for it at first, and does
now insist upon the same for substance.

One was this, and he insisted upon it at this time, This Plea does not set
forth any Record of an Impeachment, nor the particular matter of it, so as this
Court may judge of the reason of it, and he compares it to the Case of a Plea
of auter foitz acquit. If a man has been Indicted and acquitted, he may plead
it in another Court that has Jurisdiction of the cause, if he be again
Indicted for the same matter, but My Lord, first of all I take this Plea to be
well pleaded in form, and in the second place, if there be any informality or
defect (which I do not take it that there is, but if there were any such thing)
I take it it is of another consideration, which the Court will deliberate before
they give their Judgment on.

But I say in the first place, I take it to be a very good Plea, and that it is
good according to the pleading of auter foitz acquit. In pleading of a general
Act of Parliament, we need not set forth the whole Act, but referr to the
Record, and that will depend upon the Method of Impeachments in Parliament,
which I am of opinion being the General Law of Parliaments, this Court ought to
take Cognizance of. In the Case of auter foitz acquit, there is first an
Indictment, proceeding of the Court upon the Plea, a fair Trial and a fair
acquital; and a Record of all this matter. If now this Person come to be
Indicted again for the same offense, there is a Record for him to plead that
will show forth the whole matter, and if he does not plead that Record, it is
his own default. But in this Case here is no such Record to plead, and there is
the mistake, upon which Mr. Attorney has gone all along. And you must in this
Case be governed by the Rules and Methods of Parliament, which is this, the
Commons in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons of England, Impeach
such a person, and they bring up this Impeachment to the Lords in general, and
there they have Liberty to present Articles in due time after due
Consideration, which ought not to be done hastily. All this is no Record, such
as may be had in the Case of auter foitz acquit; for first, the Impeachment of
the Commons is no Record, when it is brought up to the Lords, there is only an
entry into the Journal for the Lords, that such a day, such a person came from
the House of Commons, and Impeached such a one. And you are not to expect the
same strict Method, and form of proceeding as in other Courts, the Courts of
Westminster Hall, or inferior Courts. Your Lordship in this Case, must be
governed by such a proceeding as is in Parliament. And must take it as it is,
and we have said enough, and as much as can be in our Case. We have not indeed
set forth an Indictment, a Plea, a Venire facias, etc. For there is no such
proceeding in Parliament, but there was an Impeachment, by the Commons in the
name of themselves, and of all the Commons of England before the Lords, that it
is in pleno robore and Effectu, and that it was secundum legem, and
consuetudinem Parliamenti, prout patet inde inter Recorda remanen. etc. And
here is enough. For when we refer you to a Record; that is as much as if we had
set forth the Record it self, for we tell you there is such a Record, and we
point you to the place where you may find it. So we take it, it is a very full
Plea, and if not, it is as much as any man can plead in such a Case, though it
be not pleaded particularly.

And My Lord, that your Lordship is to judge in this Case according to the
Methods of Parliament; I depend upon the authority of My Lord Coke, I will
repeat you some of his words, speaking of the Law of Parliaments, he says, and
he borrowed it out of Fleta: That this high Court of Parliament propriis suis
Legibus. (...) Et ista lex ab omnibus quaerenda, a multis ignorata, and a
paucis Cognita. But he tells you, and certainly he says true in it: Who ever
will be learned in the Law of Parliaments, must repair to the Rolls of
Parliament; and give me leave to cite his Opinion, which I hope may be of great
weight with this Court: It is in the fourth Institutes, fol. 15. He says for
any thing moved or done in the House of Commons, it ought to be determined,
adjudged and discussed by the course of Parliament, and not by the Civil Law,
nor yet the Commons Laws of this Realm, used in more inferior Courts, which was
declared so to be secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti, concerning the
Peers, and the like pari ratione for the Commons, and that stops this Court in
our Case: For so it is said in this Plea, which is the matter you are to be
governed by, that it is secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti. He tells
you further there is no notice to be taken of any thing said or done in the
House of Commons, but by the Report of that House, and every member thereof
has a judicial place, he takes it out of Henry the 7th. and so the Book is
expressly: And he goes on, this is the reason that Judges ought not to give any
opinion of matters of Parliament; because it is not to be decided by the
Commons Laws, but secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti. So he tells
you, you are bound by the Methods of Parliament, and I need not press the thing
much after his authority, for he was learned in Parliament matters.

But I would crave leave to mention a Case that was lately in this Court, and
that was the Case of My Lord of Shaftesbury, who was brought by Habeas-Corpus
to this Court, and upon that Habeas-Corpus, it was thus returned, that he was
committed by order of the Lords in Parliament; there to remain during the
pleasure of the King, and of the House of Lords. And this for an high Contempt
committed in that House: Upon this return we insisted, that My Lord might be
bailed, because it was uncertain, the pleasure of the King or the House of
Lords; and upon reading the Order there is no Crime expressed, but only in
general for an High Contempt. I speak it not for the particular Cases sake, but
to apply the reason of it to our Case, the reason then given by the Judges, Mr.
Justice Jones will please to remember it (for it was particularly declared by
him) why they could not bail My Lord, was this: He was pleased to say, we in
this Court take notice of the Court of Exchequer, and other Courts in
Westminster Hall, and it would be strange, if we should not take notice of the
Course of Parliament, and House of Lords. And if you are bound so to do in
other Cases, you are bound to do so in this: And if without pleading you take
notice of the Course of those Courts, you will also take notice of the Law of
Parliaments, and Customs of Parliaments: and (that I may make use of it to our
purpose in this Case) we need not particularly say secundum legem and
consuetudinem Parliamenti in hoc, instancing in this, and that, and the other
particular, but the Court is to look into it, without my pointing to the
particular Law of Parliament. So that My Lord, here is ground enough before the
Court, and I know the Court will look into it before they give judgment.

The second Exception is this, that it is not said in the body of the Plea,
that Fitz Harris is impeached for this Treason, but it comes in only in the
Averment. Now My Lord, as to that we must pursue the Impeachment as it is in
the Lords Journal: it is for Treason generally there, and it is said to be
secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti, which goes to all, and there is a
Record of it among the Records of Parliament, and Mr. Attorney has confessed
it by the Demurrer.

And that this is the same Treason we do Aver in fact, which also is confessed
by the Demurrer, and your Lordship will see by the Records and forrus of
Entries in Parliament, (that I may not repeat things over and over again) that
this is the Course, and Method of Parliaments.

Mr. Attorney has fancied an Exception of Grammar, an Adjective for a
Substantive, but I take it to be as well as any man can plead in this Case. For
what says the Prisoner? The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament
assembled, did Impeach me, which Impeachment is still in force before the
Lords. I take it to be as plain as can be: If they did impeach me, then there
was an Impeachment; it can bear no other sense.

My Lord, another Exception, and which was thought a strong one the other day,
and strongly urged, is, that the King may choose his Court, and they compared it
with the other Courts, but there is the mistake that runs all along in this
Case. It Is no doubt the King may chose his Court for his own action and suit,
but the Impeachment is an Impeachment of the Commons, and their suit is to be
tried no where else but in Parliament. And the Case that was the other day
cited by Mr. Attorney, for this purpose is true, of the person that was
arraigned for Treason, and had been Indicted and arraigned in Ireland, and he
may be arraigned and tried here, there is no Question of it; but to say
therefore that this is a Consequence from that Rule, that therefore he will
choose whether he will proceed in Parliament upon the Commons Impeachment, and
put a stop to the proceeding of the Parliament, by proceeding in this Court, I
take to be a great Non sequitur.

My Lord, I have offered these Reasons, as to the form of the Plea to maintain
it. Now as to the Precedents, I would a little speak what has been done in the
like Case, where this Court has taken hold of Causes, and the prosecution of
the Court has been stopped by Pleas to the Jurisdiction, and what has been
done upon those Pleas: What doom they have had, I will hint some of them to you.

There was a Case mentioned by your Lordship the other day, the Bishop of
Winchesters Case, 3 Edw. 3. I dare not say that I have looked upon the
Parliament Roll, but my Lord Coke tells us he has recited the Record, de verbo
in verbum: in the 2. Institutes, fol 15. there are all the proceedings, it was
not an Indictment, for my Lord Coke contradicts that, and says it was a
declaration; there the Record at large sets forth, that the Bishop of
Winchester was attached to answer the King, for that whereas at a Parliament
held at Sarum, it was ordained per ipsum Regem ne quis ad dom. Parliament.
summonitus ab eodem recederet sine licentia Regis. And that this Bishop in
contempt of the King, recessit without leave of the King; I think it is rather
an action than a Criminal proceeding, what says the Bishop to this? He comes
and says, si quis deliquerit erga Dominum Regem in Parliamento aliquo, in
Parliamento debet corrigi and emendari and non alibi in minore Curia quam in
Parliamento, etc. What becomes of this Plea; it is strange there should be such
an Inhibition, that no man should depart without leave of the King, and the
Bishop be punished for it, we do not find any Judgment was given, nor would
they venture to do it. My Lord Coke has a mark upon it, for this very reason
it looked as if there was a design to weaken the Parliaments, by bringing their
proceedings into Westminster Hall, but they would not do it, they would give no
judgment for the King, but for ought appears the Plea stood.

Then there is the other Case of Mr. Plowden, and many more in primo and
secundo Phil. and Mar. where a great many of them, some whereof were Burgesses,
and they submitted, but he did not. The Information there is this, that these
persons were summoned to the Parliament, and departed from thence, without the
leave of the King and Queen, though it was prohibited by them that any should
depart, most of them submit to a Fine, and if it had rested there, it might
have turned to the prejudice of the Commons as an example. But Mr. Plowden, he
pleads as one that understood himself, and the power of Parliaments and their
proceedings very well, and considers the time to have pleaded in, says he
continued in the Parliament from the beginning to the end of the Parliament,
but he relies not there, but he brings a traverse full of pregnancy, and if our
Plea be faulty theirs was 100 times as faulty, Absque hoc that he the said
Edmond Plowden, the said day and year, during the said Parliament without
License of the said King and Queen, and the Court aforesaid, did contemtuously
depart in Contempt of the said King and Queen, and their Commandment and
inhibition, and to the great detriment of the Commonweal and State of this
Kingdom, etc. All these things he pleads, which your Lordship knows to be a
very ill traverse; and yet this Case continued all the time of that Queen, and
the Court would never give judgment in it. This was in primo, and secundo. and
yet it appearing upon the face of the Information, that it was a Case that
concerned the Commons, the Court would not give judgment for or against the
Commons as long as the King and Queen lived.

There is a later Case, and that is Elliots Case 5 Car. there is an Information
against My Lord Hollis, Sir John Elliot, and many more: and there is a Plea put
in to the Jurisdiction of the Court; I have a Copy of My Lord Hollis's Plea,
and it is in a manner as faulty as Plowdens Plea, but the Court in that Case
does go, not upon the insufficiency of the Plea, but gives judgment generally
that this Court had a Jurisdiction, the assault happened in Parliament, and the
words were spoken there, and upon the Demurrer, they gave judgment upon the
whole matter; what became of that judgment? We know very well, it was reversed
19 of this King: And pray observe the proceedings in the reversal of that
judgment. Judgment was given against My Lord Hollis, and the rest of the
Gentlemen of the House of Commons, though there was no prospect of a
Parliament, yet they were obstinate and would not plead; for they thought the
judgment to be a very hard judgment, and this being a Plea in abatement,
judgment was given for want of a Plea over. It may fall out in this Case, that
this person may be obstinate, and not plead over, if you should give your
judgment against this Plea. In Elliots Case they were fined severly, and they
continued under this judgment in Prison, and in execution for the Fine a great
while, and they were delivered, by what I cannot indeed justify in all its
proceedings, I mean the long Parliament, but what was done in 19 of this King,
I think is good authority, which none can say but was a Parliament as useful to
the King, and Kingdom as ever could be: In that Parliament the Commons examined
this judgment; I speak because I have it in my printed Book, it is in Croke Car.
I confess it is not in the first Impression, but it is in the 2. Edition that I
have, and these are the expressions in it.


Lord Chief Justice. What Case is that.


Mr. Williams. It Is in Croke, Car. but the Reversal was in 19 of this King.


Lord Chief Justice. Was the judgment given, do you say 19. of this King? Can a
Case of that time be reported in Croke.


Mr. Williams. I don't say so absurd a thing. If your Lordship will have
patience to hear me, I Will tell you what I say. My Book which is the 2.
Impression of Croke, reflecting upon that Case in 5 Caroli, does publish the
Votes of the House of Commons about it, and the Reversal of the judgment, in
the 19. of this King. There the proceeding is this, Information is given to the
House of Commons, that there was such a Case published, which did Derogate much
from the privilege of Parliament invading the Liberty of speech, and the House
of Commons considering the Consequence, ordered the book to be sent for and
read, and taken into Consideration and debated; and upon Debate the House came
to this resolution, That the judgment against Elliott and others is an illegal
judgment and against the freedom and Liberty of speech, and this Vote they send
up to the Lords, where it is confirmed and resolved in agreement with the Vote
of the Commons. And by the way in Answer, to a Paper that is commonly spread
about by the name of the Observator: I say the Commons come to a Resolution,
and pass a Vote which is not indeed a Law, and when they have done that, they
may transmit their opinions to the Lords, and desire them to concur; then the
Lords and Commons have a Conference upon it, and at the Conference the Commons
reasons are delivered, which the Lords take up with them to their House and
debate them. Then they come to a Resolution to agree with the Commons.
Afterward upon this Resolution of both Houses they go regularly to work, by
Writ of Error to reverse the judgment. And if it should fall out in this Case,
that your Lordship should give judgment against the Plea, and this person
should be obstinate, and not plead over, and thereupon your Lordship give
judgment of death upon him, it may come to be a very hard Case if a Writ of
Error should be brought in Parliament, to reverse this judgment, and it should
be reversed when the party is dead. Therefore it will be of great Consequence
in that particular.

My Lord, I Will mind you of one old Case; it was 20 of Ri. 2. a person there
presents a Petition to the Commons in Parliament, and it seems there was
something suggested in the Petition, which did amount to High Treason, as there
may be some Petition or some Complaint against a great Minister that may
contain an Insinuation, as it were of High Treason; he was indicted out of
Parliament for High Treason, and was found Guilty, and by the grace of the
Prince he was pardoned, but because the Commons would not lie under that
Precedent of an Invasion of their Privilege, though he was a person without
doors, that prepared the Petition, and no more hurt done to him, but the
prosecution, he being pardoned the judgment was voided.


Lord Chief Justice. Where is that Authority?


Mr. Williams. 20. Ri. 2. To. Parl. 12. And you will find it in the Argument of
Selden's Case, published in Rushworth's Collections, fol. 47. and 48.

And now My Lord, I have done with the substance of the Case, with my reasons
for the matter and for the form. In this Case here is the Life of a person
before you, here is the right of the Commons to Impeach in Parliament before
you, here is the Judicature of the Lords to determine that Impeachment before
you, here is the Method and proceedings of Parliament before you, and how far
you will lay your hands upon this Case, thus circumstantiated we must submit to
you, but I hope you will proceed no further on the Indictment.


Lord Chapter Just. Pray Gentlemen let us a little direct you, not to spend our
time about that which is not to the purpose, or that is not in the Case; here
is nothing of the Commons Right to Impeach in Parliament before us, nor of the
Lords Jurisdiction, nor the Methods of Parliament in this Case, they are things
quite foreign to the Case, and the matter in hand, which is, whether this Plea
as thus pleaded, be sufficient to protect the Prisoner, from being questioned
in this Court, for the Treasonable matter in this Indictment before us.
Therefore you ought not to spend time in things that are not before us to be
considered, being out of the Case: For we have nothing to do with any
Privilege of Parliament, or of either of the Houses, here at this time.


Mr. Justice Jones. And Gentlemen there is nothing at all here, of any fact
done in Parliament that can be insisted on here, nor is there any Complaint
against Mr. Fitz Harris, for any thing he has done in Parliament. All Mr
Williams Precedents run to that; but this is for a thing done without doors.


Lord Chief Justice. We speak to you to come to the point, which is the duty of
all Courts, to keep Counsel to the points before them: The Sole matter before
us is whether this be a good Plea, to Ouste this Court of a Jurisdiction, which
otherwise unquestionably, we have of this matter.


Mr. Williams. It Is a hard matter for the Bar to answer the Bench, My Lord.


Sr. Fra. Wnning. My Lord, I shall pursue your direction as well as my
understanding will give me leave, and save your time as much as I can, but the
Court having assigned us of Counsel, you will give us leave to use our
discretion, keeping as near as we can to the points of the Case, and to the
Pleading. But if upon the reasoning of this Case, other Parliament Cases fall
in, I hope you will give me leave to cite them for maintaining our Plea. The
Plea here is to the Jurisdiction, and consists of two parts; first matter of
Record, which is that an Impeachment is depending in the House of Lords, (for
so it must be taken upon the pleading as I shall manifestly prove) the second
is matter in pais (viz.) the Averment that the Impeachment, and Indictment are
for one and the same Treason, and the Plea is made up of these 2 parts,
together with an Averment that the person is the same. The Kings Attorney has
been pleased to Demur generally to us, and I am sure that if our Plea be well
and formally pleaded, all the matter of fact is confessed by the Demurrer.

Mr. Attorney did to my apprehension make but one Objection the other day, and
he still insists upon it, That here is a Record too generally pleaded, and they
compare it to the common Case of an auter foitz acquit, upon another
Indictment; but I hope to make it evidently appear, That it is in no sort a
parallel Case. The matter which I conceive is confessed by the Demurrer, is
that there is an Impeachment by the Commons of England of High Treason against
Fitz. Harris lodged in the House of Lords secundum Legem and consuetudinem
Parliamenti. And that the Treason for which he was Impeached is the same
Treason contained in the Indictment, to the which the Prisoner has now
pleaded. Upon this matter of fact so agreed, the general Question is,

Whether an Impeachment for Treason, by the House of Commons, and still
depending be a sufficient matter to oust the Court from proceeding upon an
Indictment for the same Offense. My Method will be, shortly to speak to these
things.


Lord Chief Justice. Pray let us give you some direction, that is not the
question, nor can come in Question in the Case; you mistake the points of the
Case.


Sir Fran. Winning. Why My Lord?


Lord Chief Justice. The Question is whether you have pleaded sufficient matter
here to out us of our Jurisdiction. It is to no purpose to put Questions in the
Case that are not in it.


Sir Fran. Winning. My Lord, I know the Case is very nice and tender on all
sides, and therefore may very well bear an interruption; however I expressed my
self, my meaning is the same with your Lordships. The Method that I shall
proceed in will be this, I will suppose the Case before you had been of an
Impeachment, containing the special Treason for which he is now Indicted. I
will show in the next place, that as it is now pleaded, it is as available as if
the Impeachment, in the House of Lords had mentioned the particular Treason. I
shall then give some reasons why it is so, and mention one or two Precedents,
that have not yet been cited. Two of the Kings Council did agree that they
would not make a doubt of the Plea, if there had been a particular Impeachment,
and therefore I would, by considering what would be the reason of that Case,
apply it particularly to the present Case. The House of Lords is a Superior
Court to this: And is agreed to be the Highest Court of Record in the Kingdom,
Plowden 389. Co. Litt. 109, 110. 9. Co. in Pr^fat. And then I am within the
Common Rule of Pleading, according to the differences taken in Sparries Case,
5. Co. 61. and 62. That a suit first Commenced in an Inferior Court cannot stop
a suit in a superior Court though subsequent, but a suit in a Superior Court,
may be pleaded to stop the procedings of one that is Infeor. And though it may
be objected here, that the Parliament is determined and dissolved, and so there
would be a failure of Justice; yet this Objection is of no force, for if once
the suit be well Commenced in the Superior Court, it cannot after go down to
the Inferior: And what is begun in one Parliament may be determined in another;
so is the Case 4 Edward 3. n. 16. of the Lord Barkeley, and those that were
accused for the death of Edward the 2. And though it was objected there, as
has been here, that by this means there might be a stop of Justice, by the
Dissolution of the Parliament; yet the short and the true answer is, that it is
in Law to be presumed Parliaments will be called frequently; to consider of the
business of the Kingdom, and redress grievances, according to the several
Statutes made for that porpose, 4. Ed. 3. cap. 14. 36 Ed. 3. cap. 10. I shall
labor this no farther, but taking it as the common Rule of pleading, that a
Record in a Superior Court may be pleaded, to stop a proceeding in an Inferior:
I shall come to prove that this Record is well pleaded and could not be
otherwise unless Mr. Attorney would have had us plead what is false; this being
the truth of the Case; for the Commons did Impeach Mr. Fitz Harris generally of
Treason, as it is the Course of Parliaments for them to do, and in our very Plea
we allege that he was Impeached secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti,
and so Mr. Attorney has confessed by the Demurrer, and if they may prefer an
Impeachment in general accordto the Law and Custom of Parliament; why then so
far it must be allowed that we have pleaded well that he was Impeached of
Treason. It is very true My Lord, If a man will plead generally that he was
Indicted of High Treason, this would be ill, because the Court cannot take it
otherwise than he has pleaded it, and such a general Indictment would be
altogether void, and therefore no Averment could make it good or supply that
generality and uncertainty.

But an Impeachment generally for Treason, is good and warranted by the Law and
course of Parliament, and so confessed by the Demurrer. And so your Lordship
will take it to be, and will give Credit that all is regular in the proceedings
of that High Court. You will presume even in the Ecclesiastical Courts (as My
Lord Coke says in the 4th. Report) that all things are rightly done, when they
have a Jurisdiction a fortiori you will believe the greatest Court in the
Kingdom does proceed regularly. My Lord Coke, in the 4th. Inst. fol. 14. and
15. does say what the Law and Course of Parliament is, the Judges will never
intermeddle with. They always leave it to the Parliament who are the Superior
Judges, and are to determine the matters before them. For they take notice that
the Course of a Court, is the Law of a Court, as it is in Lane's Case in the 2.
Report, in the Case of the Exchequer. And therefore if a general Impeachment is
secundum legem and consuetudinem, which is confessed by the Demurrer in this
case, then you must take it for granted that the Parliament proceed rightly,
and that such a general Impeachment is sufficient in Law. There is a famous
Case that strengthens what I say, 11 Ri. 2 di. Rot. Parl. par. 2. the Case of
the Lords Appellants. You will find it also cited in Rushworths Col. part 1. in
the Appendix, fol. 51. Tresillian and others were appealed against for Treason,
and both the Judges of the Common, and of the Civil Law were by direction of
the King called to advise of that matter. And they did all declare that the
proceedings in that Case were neither agreeable to Common Law, nor Civil Law.
But the Lords in Parlialiament said it did not belong to the Judges of the
Common Law, or Civil Law, to guide them, but that they ought to proceed
according to the Course, and Law of Parliaments, (which are the words of our
Plea) and that therefore no opinion of theirs should out them of their
Jurisdiction, or alter the Course and Method of proceedings. My Lord, this Case
is very remarkable, but I will go a little further, the Judges in all Ages have
been so far from taking upon them to judge of the Laws and Customs of
Parliament, that they have denied to answer when their Advice has been
demanded, and insisted upon it, that they were not proper Judges of such
matters, as in 31 H(...) Par. N. 26. For there among other things the Judges
were demand (...) ^ether the Speaker of the House, during the Adjournment of
Parliament might be arrested; they desired to be excused from giving any
opinion; for said they, in this great matter they ought not interpose, it being
a matter of Parliament.

In the great Council primo and secundo Jacobi, about the Union of both
Kingdoms, the Judges refused to give their opinions upon several Questions put
to them, desiring to be excused for that such things did not belong to them,
but were matters fit for Parliament only. My meaning is to infer from hence
that since it is pleaded here to be according to the Law, and course of
Parliaments, and Mr. Attorney has acknowledged it, that now your Lordship is
foreclosed from further meddling with this Case, it appearing upon record to be
a matter whereof you cannot judge.

But the objection is, that admit the Impeachment should be taken to be
according to the course of Parliament, yet it is so general that the Court
cannot judge upon it: I answer, that it is evident the Impeachment was not for
nothing, it is most certainly to be presumed, that such a body of men as the
House of Commons would not Impeach a man for no Crime. Fitz Harris Avers by his
Plea, that it was for the same Treason, for which the Jury have found this Bill
against him: Now this Averment makes the matter as clear to the Court, as if
the Impeachment had mentioned the particular Treason.

Every days Experience shows that Averments, which are consistent with the
Record are good, and are of necessity to clear the Fact to the Court, so that
the Judges may give a judgment upon it. If the Defendant will plead a Recovery
in a formal action, in bar to an action of Debt, or other action it is not
enough for him to set out the Record, he must Aver also that the Cauuses of the
action are the same, and that it is the same person, who is mentioned in one
Record, and in the other Records, and this shows that the most special and
particular are of no use without Averments.

My Lord, there is a Case that I find directly to this purpose, which goes
further than the Case I did but now put, and that is, 26. Assiz. pl. 15. It is
also mentioned in Stamf. Pla. Cor. 105. Where a man was indicted for the Murder
of I. S. and he pleads a Record of acquittal, where he was indicted for the
Murder of I. N. But he Avers that I. S. in this Indictment is the same person
with I. N. in the other Indictment, and that was adjuged a good Plea, and the
party was acquitted, though the Averment there seemed to be a contradiction to
the Record. This makes it clear, that if an Averment may consist with the
Record, the Law will allow it. In Mores Rep. 823. Pl. 1112. The King against
Howard, it is said that if an Act of Parliament be certified into Chancery, no
Averment lies to say this is no Act of Parliament, because the Commons did not
assent to it; but if it appears in the Body of the Act, that the Commons did
not assent as if it was ordained by the King, and Lords, and without mentioning
any assent of the Commons: There it may be Aver'd to be no Act, for this being
a matter consistent with the Record, is Averrable: And so it is agreed in 33 H.
6. fol. 18. Pilkingtons Case.

Now Mr. Attorney has his Election here (as it is in all such Cases) either to
plead Null tiel Record, and then we must have produced it, and if we had
failed, it had been against us, as to the whole Plea. Or if he would not deny
the Record (as indeed he could not) he might have taken issue upon our
Averment, that it was not for one and the same offense; but he has Demurred and
thereby confessed there is such a Record, and confessed the Averment to be true
that he was Impeached for the same Crime, and that he is the same person, and
now it is plain to your Lordship, that I stated the Question right at first.

My Lord, I shall cite you one Precedent out of Rast. Ent. fol. 384. and 385.
Where a man was Indicted and acquitted, before certain Justices, and being
Indicted de novo


Lord Chief Justice. It is Title, Jail delivery, is it not?


Sir, Fran. Win. Yes, My Lord, it is: And he pleads, that he was Indicted coram
aliis Justitiarlis, for the same felony and upon this Plea the entry is made,
Quia testatum est hic in Cur. in praefat^s Justiciarios, that the said party
was acquitted of the felony, in manner and form as he had alleged in his
Plea. Therefore it is adjudged, that he should be discharged and go without day.
My Lord, I do not altogether rely upon this Precedent for Law, but I find it in
that book.

Now My Lord, I shall offer some Reasons in general: First that when once the
Commons in Parliament in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons of
England, have lodged an Impeachment against any man, it seems to me against
natural Justice, that should ever any Commoners afterward come to try or judge
that man for that fact. I speak this because every man in England, that is a
Commoner, is a party to the accusation, and so we have pleaded by such an
Impeachment, a man is subjected to another sort of Trial, Magna Charta says
that every man shall be tried by his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. And by
the Law of the Land, there are several sorts of Trial, some by Juries, others
not by Juries. This is one of those sorts, where the Trial is by the Law of the
Land, but not by his Peers; for it would be hard that any man should come to
Try or to give judgment upon a person, who has been his accuser before. And
in effect has already given his judgment, that he is Guilty by the accusation
of him, and so stands not indifferent. By this means the Trial by Jury is gone:
And the Lords, who are the Peers of the Realm, are Judges in point of fact, as
well as Law. Here is an enormous offense, against which all the Nation cries,
for so they do in the Impeachment: Then says the Law, it is not fit that you
should try him, who are parties, but the Lords are the proper Judges, they
shall Try him per testes, and the Commoners may come in as Witnesses, but not
as Judges.

My Lord, another reason is this, that if an Appeal of death, or any other
Appeal, were depending before the Statute of 3 H. 7. cap. 1. The King could not
proceed upon an Indictment for the same fact, because the King as the Common
parent does only take care that such Offenders should not go away with
Impunity, but the preference was given to the person more particularly
concerned, and the Kings Indictment must stay till the year and day were out,
to see whether they will proceed in their suits: And so says My Lord Chief
Justice Hales, in his Pleas of the Crown, 2442, 45. Then a minori admajus does
the Law so regard the interest of the Wife or the Heir, etc. in their suit, and
has it no regard to the suit of all the Commons of England? For manifestly an
Impeachment is the suit of the people, and not the Kings suit.

That's the 2. Reason; another Reason I shall urge, is that which was touched by
Mr. Williams: Suppose this man should be tried here, and be acquitted, Is it to
be presumed that he can plead this acquittal in Bar to the Impeachment before
the Lords? My Lord, I believe there is no considering man in England, that has
regard either to the Jurisdiction of Parliament or to the Nature of the suit,
will affirm that it would be a good Plea; and that he could bar the great
Court of the Kingdom, from proceeding against him, by saying he was acquitted
by a Jury in Westminster Hall, after the suit was first well commenced in that
Court.

My Lord, I say with reverence to the Court, that should you proceed in this
Trial, it may fall out that contrary to a Fundamental Rule of Law, a man shall
be twice put in danger of his Life, for one offense, which by the Law he cannot
be; and therefore I urge that as a reason, why you cannot proceed here on this
Indictment.

My Lord, I will now mention two or three Precedents, which will prove that
this Impeachment is according to the Course and Law of Parliaments, though it
may seem needless, after the Kings Learned Council have agreed it.

My Lord, I shall first mention the Case of Michael. de La Poole, Rot. Par. 18
or 28 H. 6. n. 18 He was a very great man, and came to the House of Lords
voluntarily, and said there was a Rumor that he was Guilty of horrible things.


Lord Chief Justice. Where did you take this Case, out of Cotton? it is
mentioned there; But I have seen a Copy of the Roll.


Sir Fran. Win. Yes My Lord; There upon the Commons pray he may be committed
upon his own confession, and that the thing being Debated in the House, the
Lords said we know not what was meant by those words, horrible things; it may
import only Misdemeanors, if it had been said Treason, we had known how to
have proceeded thereupon: And thereupon within a few days after the Commons
came and accused him of Treason: and there it is said that the Course of
Parliament, is to find out the Truth by Circumstances, and such degrees as the
Nature of the thing will bear, and they are not confined to the strict rules of
other Courts. I will not cite any more ancient Cases, though there are many to
be found of general Impeachments; for we are not disputing what is the right
and course of Impeachments, which is confessed, upon the pleading; but we have
had several Cases of late, the Earl of Clarendon was Impeached generally, and
the Commons took time to bring in their Articles: and I have had the experience
in 3 or 4 a Parliaments wherein we have been pretty well busied with
Impeachments, though we have had no great success in them; That though the
Commons may if they please, carry up particular Articles at first, yet the Law
and course is for the Lords to receive the general Impeachment, and the Commons
say that in due time they will bring in their Articles: So it was done in the
Case of the* Popish Lords, some particular Member was appointed to go up and
Impeach them of High Treason in General; and in that Case though the Parliament
was Dissolved, before any Articles sent up; yet afterward in the next
Parliament, the Articles, upon the former Impeachments were sent up, and
received, and My Lord ^^^fford since executed, upon his Conviction, upon that
Impeachment; yet Indictments were exhibited against them, before ever any
Impeachment, was sent up by the Commons, and preparations were made for their
Trials. But from that day to this, there has been no attempt to Try them upon
their Indictments, though there have been several Intervals of Parliament.

Our Case is stronger than that of the Lords, for in the Case at the Bar, the
first suit was in the House of Lords, by the Commons; whilst in the other Case,
the first was the suit of the King, by Indictment, and yet by a subsequent
Impeachment, that was stopped, and the Lords continue yet Prisoners in the
Tower. Our time has been so short that we could not see the Copies of Orders,
which we might otherwise have made use of, for maintaining this Plea; we sent
to the House of Lords, but the Officers were out of Town, and we could come at
the sight of nothing there, we have been told the opinion of the Judges was
delivered at Council* concerning these very Lords, that the Impeachments being
lodged in Parliament no other prosecution could be against them, till the
prosecution of the Commons was determined. So far the Courts below have always
been from meddling, with the Jurisdiction of Parliament, that even many times
in Questions upon Acts of Parliament, they have gone up to the Parliament, to
know what was meant by it: And I remember it was said by the Court in that Case
of My Lord of Shaftsbury, where it was agreed by all, that the Commitment was
too general, for it was only for a Contempt; whereas the Crime ought
particularly to appear in the Warrant, that it being in a Case of Commitment,
by the Parliament, (at least while that Parliament was continuing) they ought
not to meddle with it, nor could they inquire into the formality of the Warrant.

My Lord, I must mention one thing touching the Case of My Lord Hollis, which
was cited by Mr. Williams, and I have but a word to add: It is in the Appendit
to the first part of Rushworth's Col. and also in Croke, Car. fol. 181. It was
there pleaded to the Jurisdiction of this Court, that it was a matter done in
Parliament: In our Case his pleaded that an Impeachment is depending in
Parliament, that was but a prosecution for a Misdemeanor, this is a Case of
High Treason; it fell out in that Case, the Court here did adjudge, that the
Information did lie but upon a Writ of Error, it was agreed by the Lords
unanimously, that the judgment was Erroneous, and that the Parties should be
restored to all which they had lost, by reason of it; but if this man should
lose his Life by your judgment, what help would there be upon a Writ of Error?
The danger of such a thing requires great consideration, and it would be of
fatal consequence, if the Lords should hereafter adjudge that this Court had no
Jurisdiction.

As for Mr. Attorneys objection to day, that we have not set forth actually,
that there was any Impeachment; I do confess I was a little startled at it; for
the words of the Plea are, that Edward Fitz-Harris, by the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses was Impeached, which Impeachment is in force. I do not know how
in the world we could have thought of more express words, than to say he was
Impeached, and that that Impeachment is in full force as appears by the Record.

For the other Objection, the other day (for we would mention all, how little
soever they deserve an answer) that the King may choose in what Court he will
sue; it is agreed when it is at his own suit, but this is not so but at the
Commons suit, and can be no where else prosecuted, than where it now depends.
This is the Method and Course of Parliaments we say, and that the Method and
Course of Parliaments is the Law of the Land; your Lordship will take notice
that it is so.

To conclude as this Plea now stands, the Demurrer confessing the matter of it,
it cannot be overruled without deciding, whether the Lords can proceed upon
such General Impeachments, and whether the Commons can Impeach in such a
General way. We submit, the whole to your judgment, it is a Case deserves great
Consideration, as being of great weight and Moment, and highly concerns the
Jurisdiction of the Lords, the Privileges of the Commons, and the Rights of
all the people of England.


Mr. Wallop. May it please your Lordship, There are in this Plea three
Principal Parts upon which it turns, which are expressly alleged. First, That
Fitz-Harris before the Indictment was according to the Law and Custom of
Parliament impeached of High Treason, and this I humbly conceive is confessed
by Mr. Attorney upon the Demurrer. The Second thing is, That this Impeachment,
be it as it will, general or particular, does remain in full force and virtue.
This is plainly alleged and demurred to, and so confessed by Mr. Attorney; for
all things well alleged and pleaded, are confessed by the Demurrer. The Third
great Point and Hinge upon which it turns is this, That the High Treason
mentioned in the Indictment, and the High Treason for which he was Impeached in
the House of Lords, is one and the same Treason. This we have plainly averred,
and this Mr. Attorney has likewise by his Demurrer plainly confessed, as we
humbly conceive.

For the two former Points there is no difficulty in them, and therefore I
shall pass them over: It Is this third matter which I take to be the only point
in the Case, and if we have well averred it, and can by Law be let into such an
Averrment, then I hope your Lordship and this Court will not pretend to go on
in this Case. They Object and say because he is Impeached of High Treason
generally, without naming any particular Treason, that cannot be averred to be
the same, and a Demurrer does never confess the truth of that which by Law
cannot be said; but if it may be said, and is said plainly, then the Demurrer
confesses it.

My Lord, I humbly conceive this matter is well averrable, and we have taken a
good Averrment. I grant that a repugnant and an impossible Averrment cannot be
taken, as to averr a Horse to be a Sheep, which is apparently repugnant and
impossible, and in that Case a Demurrer can never confess the truth of that
which appears impossible to be true. But, My Lord, if there be no Impossibility
nor Repugnancy, nor Contradiction in the Averrment between the matters that are
averred to be the same, as there is not between that which is but generally
expressed, and that which is more specially alleged, where all may well stand
together, and the one includes the other, and needs only some farther
explanation, it is not only allowable to avert it, but most proper and in such
case only necessary. For, quod constat cla^^^^^^ debet verisicari, in this Case
it is not necessary that it should appear to the Court upon the view of the
Indictment and Impeachment, that the matter contained in both is the same* but
it is sufficient that it be proveable upon an Issue to be taken. And so much is
admitted by the Judges in Sparries Case, Co. 5. rep. 51. that if there be
convenient certainty which may be put in Issue, it is sufficient, and
consequently not necessary to appear at the first, but upon the event of the
issue afterward to be tried. And if they intend it otherwise, I confess I
understand them not. It is true, it must appear to the Court either at the
first opening, or upon an Issue subsequent to be found: And, My Lord, if this
matter may appear at first or at last, and the thing is possible to be proved,
then we are well enough: In Corbet and Barnes Case in the first Croke, fol.
320. a Battery supposed to be in London, and a Battery supposed to be in
Herefordshire were averred to be one and the same Battery, which naturally is
impossible, yet being transitory and therefore supposable to be done in any
County, such an averrment is allowable, though it seemed contradictory and
could not appear to the Court by comparing the several declarations to be any
way the same: And there being a Demurrer for that Cause in that Case, the truth
of the averrment was ruled to be confessed by the Demurrer: And so hereby the
Demurrer, the truth of the suggestion that the Treason in the Impeachment, and
the Treason in the Indictment is one and the same, is confessed.

By taking this Averrment, we offer them here a fair Issue, an Issue of Fact
tryable by a Jury, wherein the Attorney General might have joined with us if he
had pleased; but refusing that, and having demurred, and thereby confessed what
we have alleged, it must be taken to be true as if found by a Jury. And, My
Lord, That this matter is properly averrable and tryable, I think it is plain,
it being a Question of Fact, which is properly triable by the Country; and if
they had taken Issue upon that, we might have gone to a Jury where the matter
would have been easily proved. For upon Evidence given, the Jury might fairly
take into consideration the reading of this very numerical Libel set forth in
the Indictment, and the particular and special debates of the House of Commons
thereupon: And that upon those very Debates the House voted that Fitz-Harris
should be Impeached for matters contained in that Libel. And that upon those
Votes the Impeachment was carried up to the Lords: This is Evidence sufficient,
that the House of Commons did intend to accuse him of the same Treason
contained in the Indictment, which proves the Issue, that is, that the Treason
contained in the Impeachment is the same with that contained in the Indictment:
neither is this to put the Intention of the mind or secret thoughts of the
heart in Issue, which is against the rules of Law; but to put them into a way
of proof, which well stands with the rules of Law, which upon the general, or
other collateral Issue may well be inquired of by the Jury. As in an action
quare canem inordacem defendens scienter retinuit; Here [Soienter] is not
directly issuable, but it is proveable, and must be proved upon the general
Issue. So in the present case the intention of the Commons upon the Issue
offered by us, and refused by the Attorney General, might, and ought, and would
have been proved, and, without doubt, found by the Jury. Neither is this
general Impeachment such a notional thing as the other side would pretend; but
it is as if they should say, We do charge him to have Committed certain Crimes
that are Treason. Now whether the Crimes they say he had committed, and for
which they Impeached him are the same with those for which he is Indicted, is a
good and proper Issue. And if it appear to the Court to be the same, you will
certainly your selves take off your hands from these proceedings. This is all I
shall say as to the Averrment. And if we can well get over that, I take it, all
the rest is well enough.

But again they say the Impeachment is too general, and no man shall be put to
answer to such a general Accusation.

And I say so too, neither shall Fitz Harris be put to Answer to it without
special Articles; yet he cannot quash the Impeachment for this Cause, as he
might an Indictment, which shows the difference betwixt an Impeachment, and an
Indictment, which always contains the special matter, and without which it
might be quasht, and made no Record. But hereby the Law of Parliament such
general Impeachments are held good; And Articles are usually brought in
afterward, and after those additional Articles, which cannot be in the course
and way of Indictment; and therefore we must take the Impeachment as we find
it, and since it stands against us as a Record, though this general, we may,
and must Plead it in the same generallity; having no way to make it no Record,
as we have in case of such a general Indictment.

So then this being an Impeachment according to the Course of Parliament, it is
well lodged in the House of Lords where it only ought to be Tried, and we must
Plead it as we may, and as we find the Case to be: And having averred the
Crimes to be the same, we have done what we could, and therefore, Enough.

And that a general Impeachment without Articles is a Bar to any Indictment for
the same matter, was resolved by all the Judges, as I am informed, in the Case
of the Lords in the Tower, who were all Indicted for Treason, either in the
Kings Bench, or before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer: And afterward [5.
Dec. 78.] generally Impeached before the Lords in Parliament; and no Articles
exhibited till, 3. April 79. And yet in the mean time it was resolved at the
Council Table by all the Judges there attending, that after the general
Impeachment, before Articles, they could not be proceeded against upon those
Indictments, though the Parliament wherein they were Impeached, was dissolved.

And that was a stronger Case than this of Fitz Harris; For there the Inferior
Court was first possessed of the Cause, and yet the general Impeachment closed
up the hands of the Court: But in this Case, the Superior Court the Parliament
was first possessed of the Cause, which cannot be taken out of their hands by the
Inferior Court.

There is a farther difference betwixt an Impeachment in Parliament, and an
Indictment: That in an Indictment, which is always as particular as Articles
upon an Impeachment, you cannot Plead auter foitz Arraigned, but you must Plead
either auter foitz Convict, or Acquit, as appears in Sir William Wishipoles
Case, Cron. 1. 105. But in an Impeachment in Parliament, the other side will
acknowledge that after Articles exhibited there can be no Proceedings upon an
Indictment for the same offense, although the Defendant in the Impeachment be
neither Convict, or Acquit: Otherwise you may bring back all the Lords in the
Tower to the Kings Bench to be Tried, which Mr. Attorney will not I suppose
Attempt.

And it is observable in the Case of Sir William Wishipole; That to avoid the
doubt that the Party there should not be questioned, both upon the Coroners
Inquest, and the Indictment of Murder, it was Ruled by the Court, that the
first should be quasht as insufficient; so careful were the Judges to avoid
double vexation, in a Case, compared with this, of no great import.

I shall say no more to the Case, but only observe how scrupulous the Judges
have been to touch upon a Case, where they had the least suspicion or jealousy
that the Parliament had, or pretended to have a Jurisdiction, or were possessed
of the Cause. I am sure I could never get any thing by any Labors of mine in
those Cases; But upon all such Motions they were so aware of what might be the
Consequence, that they would always worship afar off, and would never come near
the Mount. They would ever retire when they came but near the Brink of this
Gulf.

Now my Lord, If you retain this Cause, in consequence you Charge your selves
with the blood of this man, wherein if you proceed regularly and according to
Law, all is well; But however, by over ruling his Plea, you take upon you his
blood one way or other: Through which you must wade to come at the Cause. And
whether it be advisable to come at it upon these terms, I leave it to your
Lordships wisdom to consider.


Mr. Pollexfen. My Lord, I shall not make any long Argument, there has been so
much said before me. But I would fain come to the Question if I could, for I
must confess afterall, I cannot see what the other side make the Question; Mr.
Attorney was pleased to say that both for the matter and form he objected
against our Plea: But if for the matter it be admitted to me that an
Impeachment in Parliament for the same matter will out this Court of
Jurisdiction; I will say nothing at all of it, for I apprehend that is not then
in Question.


Ld. Chapter Just. No, not at all.


Mr. Pollexfen. Then the matter seems to be agreed, and only the manner and
form of the Plea are now in Question. And for the manner they except to it in
these particulars. First, they say it is not alleged that there is any
Impeachment upon Record; now I confess form is a subtle matter in it self, and
it is easy for any man that reads other men's words and Writings if he will, to
make what Construction he will of them even Nolumus to be Volumus, but I know
the Court will not so do, But for an Answer to the Objection I think it is as
strongly and closely penned as I can tell how to pen any thing, he was
Impeached Quae quidem Impetitio etc. What can that Quae quidem signify but the
Impeachment that was just mentioned before? But what they mean by this to say
this is not the same Impeachment when the Words are positive that it is the same
I must confess I cannot Fathom.

My Lord, there was another thing spoken the last day, but they have not
mentioned it now; if there be any thing stirred in it, I hope your Lordship
will be pleased to hear us before you give your Judgment in it, That it was not
said to be sub pede sigil^i, but I know they will not insist upon it therefore I
say nothing to that.

But the great Question now is; whether or no this be not too general, the
alleging that he was Impeached in Parliament, and not saying how or for what
Crime, tho there be an Averment afterward that it is for the said Crime,
Whether this be not so general as that therefore this Plea should be naught.

First, for this of the Averment, I take it with submission let the Crimes be
never so particularly specified in the Record that is pleaded, and in that upon
which the party is brought in Judicature yet always there must be an Averment,
and that Averment is so much the substantial part of the Plea, That let the
matter never so much appear to be the same without an Averment it would be
naught, And it must come to be tried per pa^^, whether the offense be the same
or not; for if a man plead one Indictment for the murder of I. S. to another
Indictment for the murder of I. S. though they bear the same Name, he must Aver
they are one and the same Person, For else Non constat to the Court,* but there
may be two I. S. Therefore all Averments are still the substance of the Plea,
to bring the Identity of the matter into Judgment, and are to be tried by the
Country, so then the Objection to the Generality is not an Objection to the
substance, but rather an Objection to the form on their side, Because the
substance is alleged in the Plea that it is for the same Treason, which
substance* if Mr. Attorney had thought not fit to* have demurred to but taken
Issue on, must have been tried per pais.

Having thus spoken to the Averment, My Lord, Let me speak to the general
Allegation that he was Impeached for Treason, and not saying particularly what
the fact was.

My Lord, If they admit the Law that an Impeachment in Parliament does suspend
or take away the Jurisdiction of this Court then they have admitted a great
part of the fact and then the matter in Question will be what Impeachment in
Parliament it is that will take away the Jurisdiction of the Court, and there
can be but two sorts; the one at large where the whole Offense is specified;
the other not at large, but only in general Words, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses in Parliament Assembled in the Name of themselves and of all the
Commons of England, do Impeach such an one of High Treason. Now my Lord, if so
be such Impeachment in Parliament be a good Impeachment, then have We, I think,
the most plain Case pleaded that can be, as plain as the Fact, that this is an
Impeachment in Parliament, and then this Court is outed of its Jurisdiction.

They that have gone before have said which I must pray your Lordship to
remember, That the Court and we are to take notice of the proceedings in other
Courts, as other Courts are bound to take notice of the proceedings of this,
Then I would suppose in other familiar Cases, there is generally (as it is true
in Sparry's Case) the Writ or the Declaration which does in all civil Causes
set forth the particularity of the thing in Question, yet in some Cases we are
sure it does not do so, but the Course and practice of some Courts admits
general proceedings. Now wherever that is so, the party cannot mend himself
by making their Course otherwise than it is, For he must not say it is more
particular than the Course of the Courrt does make it, Therefore he has no
other way by the Law to bring his matter on, and help himself, but by an
Averment that it is the same, I will suppose a Case of such a Nature as this, a
man brings an Account in London upon Concessit Solvere and he does not
particularize in the Count any thing what or how his Debt did arise, But after
he brings another Account or delivery aspecial Declaration in an Account of
Debt shall not I because the first Declaration is in general Words, Aver, that
this is the same matter that he sued for by the Concessit Solvere, which he now
sues for in this particular Declaration: Or suppose a man in this Court does
bring an Account for diverse wares and Merchandises sold and does not express
any particulars, but that he was indebted, in general Words for Wares sold, and
afterward he comes and brings another Account, and says it is for such and
such Wares, so much for, Cloth, so much for Wine, etc. though his first
Declaration be in general not expressing what the Wares were, and the last is
particular, shall not I come and plead in Abatement to the second Declaration,
that the first and second were for one and the same thing. Suppose again an
Indictment of Barrelry be found against a man which is an Offense that is only
general and has no particulars alleged in the Indictment, Should not a man
that is the second time Indicted come and say this is one and the same. My
Lord, under favor in all these and such like Cases the Law must be Governed by
its own proceedings, and take notice of the Nature of the things depending
before the Court. And if so be upon Consideration of the Nature of the thing,
there is as much of certainty set forth as the Case will admit and is possible
to be had, we must permit the party to plead as he can, and help himself by the
Averment.

Then my Lord, the Question is whether an Impeachment generally in Parliament,
without particularly setting forth for what, be a good Impeachment there or no.
If they say it is not, then the bottom of the Plea is naught, and all is quite
gone, but if they say it is, then I have Pleaded my matter as it is? For I
cannot say that that is particular or make that particular that is not, and I
have done all that is possible for me to do in my Case. I have Pleaded what is
in the Record, and as it is in the Record, from which my Plea must not vary, and
I have Averred it is for the same matter, and you have Confessed it by the
Demurrer.

My Lord, I would not entangle the Question, but I must Confess I do not see
how they can extricate themselves out of this Dilemma, if they do admit a
General Impeachment is a good Impeachment. Then there are fresh Instances of
this considerable in the Case, as that which has been particularized of the
Lords in the Tower, and of the Opinion in February of the Judges in their Case.
For in the beginning of December were those Lords Indicted, and after, on the 5
th. of Dec. the House of Commons taking it into their Consideration, that there
was a Commission going out for an High Steward with an intent to bring them to
Trial before the Peers they, purposely to have the Carriage and Prosecution of
this great and horrid Treason, and take off the Prosecution upon the
Indictment, do Impeach the same Lords, and there the Impeachment is just the
same as this in our Plea of High Treason, but not of any particular Fact adding
only of other Crimes and Misdemeanors, which is as general as can be. Now my
Lord, the Judges did take so much Notice of it, that though the Parliament was
Dissolved before the particular Articles were carried up to set forth the
particular Offense. Yet in February following (some of the Judges are here, and
they will rectify me if I be mistaken) their Opinions being asked about it at
the Council Board upon the Petition of the Lords to be either Bayled or Tried,
they were of Opinion that this Impeachment, though thus general, was so
depending in Parliament that they could not be Tried. So that I think the
Proceedings in Parliament are of that Nature, that if you will meddle with what
they do, you will take notice of their Method of Proceedings as you do of other
Courts.

Why then my Lord, if this be so, how is it possible for us to do better? We
have Pleaded as our Fact is an Impeachment of High Treason, What would they
have had us to do, or wherein is our fault? What would they have had us said?
We were Impeached of any High Treason so and so particularizing, how can that
be? There is no such thing. Then they would have said Null. Trel. Record. And we
must have been Condemned for failing in our Record, then indeed we had been
where they would have had us; But having done according to our Fact, if that
Fact be such as in Law will out this Court of Jurisdiction, I see not how it is
possible we should Plead otherwise, or what Answer they will give to it.

My Lord, I will meddle as little as I can with what has been said, they have
mentioned that it is a Case of an high Nature, and this Impeachment in
Parliament they will look upon it as the Suit of all the people of England, why
then my Lord this must needs be agreed to me, if this Impeachment in Parliament
be in the Nature of an Appeal; Surely an Appeal does suspend the Proceedings
upon any Indictment for that Fact, which is the Case expressly in my Lord Dyer,
fol. 296. Stanley was Indicted of Murder and Convicted; after he was Convicted,
and before any Judgment, the Wife of the Party Murdered brought her Appeal,
then came they and moved for Judgment; no said the Court here is an Appeal
brought, and they could not go to Judgment till that Appeal was determined. So
the Stat. of 3. H. 7. Ca. 1. and Vaux's Case 4 Report. fol. 39. an Appeal of
Murder, the Party Convicted, before Judgment the Petitioner in the Appeal did
die. Then an Indictment brought and this Conviction Pleaded in Bar of that
Indictment, and Adjudged to be a good Plea, but then there was a fault found in
the Appeal, upon which the Conviction on the Appeal, was void in Law, and they
went on upon the Indictment. This is to show that if this be of the Nature of
an Appeal, then ought this Suit first to have its Course and Determination
before your Lordship proceed on this Indictment.

But my Lord, whether it be of this Nature or no, is a matter we know where
under great Controversy, and whether your Lordship will interpose in that
great Question, or whether it comes in Judgment under this Question, you will
do well to Consider, for it is a matter of Parliament and determinable among
themselves, not in the Courts below, nor have ever Inferior Courts taken upon
them to meddle with the Actions of the Superior Courts, but leave them to
proceed according to their Laws, and if that be done in any Case there will be
as much regard had in this great Cause to the Court of Parliament as in others.

Besides the Authorities Cited out of my Lord Coke and others, I would Cite one
more, and that is Cotton's Records, 5 H. 4. fol. 426. the Earl of
Northumberlands Case. He comes and Confesses himself to be Guilty of an Offense
against his Allegiance, the King delivered his Petition to the Justices and
would have them to Consider of it, No said the Parliament it is matter of
Parliament, and the Judges have nothing to do with it, The Lords make a
Protestation to this purpose, and then they went on themselves and Adjudged it
to be no Treason. There is only that one Record more which has been often
Cited, and that is, Rot. Parliamenti 11 R. 2 pars. 1. N. 6. In this Parliament
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Claimed the same Privilege: My Lord, I only
offer these things with what my Lord Coke says has been formerly thought
prudence in the Judges to do.

So that I hope that if the matter be good the Form is as good as the matter
can be put into, and therefore we hope you will allow us the benefit of it.


Mr. Attorney. May it please your Lordship, I am of Counsel in this Case for
the King, and notwithstanding what has been said I take it with Submission
that this Plea is a naughty Plea, as a Plea to your Jurisdiction, and there is
no matter disclosed therein that we can take a good Issue upon.

The great Substance of the Arguments of these Gentlemen Assigned of Counsel
for the Prisoner, is against the Prisoner. For the great matter of their
Arguments was lest this Gentleman should escape (which Arguments in several
Instances they have used to support the Plea) but the Prisoner Pleads this Plea
to the purpose that he might escape. Therefore if these Gentlemen had taken
Instructions from him, surely they would have used Arguments to the same
purpose that he might escape.

My Lord, they object we have admitted here that there is an Impeachment
depending, that we have admitted it is for the same matter, and that we have
admitted the Parliament to be in being, but no Fact is admitted that is not
well Pleaded. Indeed if that be admitted that the Parliament is still in being
then it goes very hard with us, and if not so admitted the whole force of Mr.
Williams his Argument falls to the ground. But I say my Lord, with Submission
to this matter that the beginning, continuance, Prorogation, Adjournments, and
Dissolution of Parliaments are of public Cognizance, and the Court ex Officio
will take Notice of them, so that they need not be Averred. And so is the 41.
of the Queen, the Bishop of Norwich's Case. A Private Act of Parliament was
Pleaded, and the day of the Parliament mistaken, there was a general Demurrer,
and it was resolved that it was naught, and Judgment given against the Bishop
though no Exception was taken in particular, because the days of the beginning
and ending Parliaments are of public Notice, and the Judges take notice, when
a Parliament is in being and when not. That Is a sufficient Answer to that
matter.

Then for those many Cautions that have been given you, what a difficult thing
it is for two Jurisdictions to interfeir, Mr. Fitz Harris is much concerned in
that matter who has forfeited his Life to the Law as a most notorious Offender
that certainly deserves nothing but punishment, yet he would fain live a little
longer, and is much concerned that the Judicature of Parliament should be
preserved. If it be not Law he shall not be oppressed in it, but if it be Law
fiat Justitia. Certainly no Consideration whatsoever ought to put Courts of
Justice out of their steady Course, but they ought to proceed according to the
Laws of the Land.

My Lord, I observe it is an unusual Plea, and perhaps they had some reason to
put it so. It concludes si curia procedere vult, I wonder they did not put in
aut debeat, that is the usual form of such Pleas for you have no Will but the
Law, and if you cannot give Judgment you ought not to be pressed in it, but it
being according to Law that great Offenders and Malefactors should be brought
to Condign punishment, we must press it whatsoever the Consequences are. And if
we did not take it to be the Interest of all the Kingdom, and of the Commons
too as well as of the King, my Lord, I should not press it, but it is all their
Interest that so notorious a Malefactor that has certainly been Guilty of
Treason in the highest Degree, and that for the utmost Advancement of the late
Popish Plot, should not escape or the truth be stifled, but brought into
Examination in the face of the Sun that all men may see what a Villainous thing
has been Attempted to raise up the whole Kingdom against the King, but they
say if it be not Law you will not proceed, it Ties your hands. But with
Submission they have not given you one Instance to make good what they say.
Many things have been that a Plea pending in a Superior Court is Pleadable to
the Jurisdiction of an Inferior Court; for my Lord, that is it we put upon them
to show if it had been Pleaded in Abatement it would have had its weight and
been considered of, as in Sparry's Case where it was no Plea to the
Jurisdiction.

Put the Case it had been a good Impeachment, and he had been Arraigned upon it
and acquitted, If he had afterward come to be Indicted in this Court, and the
Prisoner will not plead this in Bar but to the Jurisdiction of the Court, it
would not have been a good Plea? But he had lost his Advantage by mispleading:
If then an Arraignment, and an acquittal or Conviction thereupon not a good
Plea to the Jurisdiction; then certainly an Impeachment depending singly cannot
be a good Plea to the Jurisdiction. This Court has a full Jurisdiction of this
Case and of this Person, both of the Crime and of the party who is a Commoner
and not only to find the Indictment, but to proceed to Justice, and this you
had at the time of the fact Committed: For certainly we need not put Cases for
to prove that the King's Bench especially since the Statute for trying Treason
beyond the Seas has an universal Jurisdiction of all Persons and Offenses.
Pray then what is it that must out this Court of their Jurisdiction? For all
the Cases that have been, or can be put about matters which are not originally
examinable in this Court, make not to the matter in Question, there it is true
the Court may be by Plea outed of its Jurisdiction as at Common Law, where a
fact is done super altum mare, and so Pleaded, that puts it out of the Courts
Jurisdiction, and that was my Lord Hollis and Sir J. Eliots Case, and so that
was my Lord Shaftsbury's Case too, the fact was done out of their Jurisdiction,
and that may be Pleaded to the Jurisdiction, because they had no Original
Jurisdiction of the fact, but where the Crime and the Person were absolutely
within the Jurisdiction of the Court, and the Court may Originally take
Cognizance of it, as this Court had of the present Case, I would fain know what
can out that Jurisdiction less than an Act of Parliament, I will be bold to say
the King by his Great-seal cannot do it, nor can an Act of either House, or
both Houses together without the King out the Jurisdiction. To say their
proceedings ought to be a Bar, that is an other Case, the party has his
Advantage and may plead it in abatement or Bar as the Case requires, for if
there had been an Acquittal or Conviction, the party could not plead it to the
Jurisdiction, Therefore for those Cases they put when you come to examine the
reason of them you see how they stand. viz. that the Court had no Original
Jurisdiction.

My Lord Shaftsbury was committed by the Lords for a Crime in that House, a
Contempt to that House; he is brought here, and it appears to be a Commitment
in Execution. My Lord, that was out of your Jurisdiction; and if you had bailed
him, what would you have done? would you have bailed him to be tried here? No,
you could not do it, and therefore you proceeded not in that Case. And so in
the other Cases; for there is not one of their Cases that have been cited of
the other side, but where it was out of the Jurisdiction of the Court
originally, and not at all within it. As for the Case of the five Lords in the
Tower, because they say it will have a mighty influence upon them, and they put
the Case, That there was in December an Indictment, and afterward an
Impeachment from the Commons; and they cite some Opinion given at the
Council Board, which I hope these Gentlemen will not say was a Judicial
Opinion, or any way affects this Cause: But for that, my Lord, I observe the
Lords took care that these Indictments should be all removed into the Lords
House; so they did foresee that the King might have proceeded upon the
Indictments, if they had not been removed thither. But our Case now is quite
another thing: for those Lords were not fully within your Jurisdiction. You
cannot try a Peer of the Realm for Treason: and besides, the Lords have pleaded
in full Parliament, where, by the Law of Parliament, all the Peers are to be
their Judges; and so you cannot out them of that Right. And the reason is plain,
because thereby you must do them an apparent prejudice; they having pleaded
there, all the whole Peerage are their Tryers. But upon Trial before
Commissioners, they must have but a select number of Peers to be their Tryers.
But in none of those Cases has any Judicial Opinion been given: for the Case
of 11 R. 2. first cited by Sir Fran. Winnington, and then by Mr. Pollexfen, a
Declaration in Parliament, That they proceeded according to the Law of
Parliament, and not according to the Common Law, nor according to the practice
of Inferior Courts; that will be nothing to our purpose at all, that was in
case of the Lords Appellants; a proceeding contrary to Magna Charta, contrary
to the Statute of Edw. 3. and the known Privilege of the Subject. But those
proceedings had a countenance in Parliament; for there was an Oath taken by all
the Lords in Parliament, That they would stand by the Lords Appellants: And
thereupon they would be controuled by none, and they would not be advised by
the Judges, but proceed to the trying of Peers and Commoners according to their
own will and pleasure. And between that time of 11 R. 2. and 1 H. 4. see what
havoc they made by those illegal proceedings; and in 1 H. 4. you will see,
that these very Lords were sentenced, except one or two of them who were
pardoned: and then it was expressly resolved by Act of Parliament, That no more
Appeals of that nature, nor any Appeals whatsoever, should be any more in
Parliament. And if so, these Gentlemen had best consider how they make an
Impeachment like an Appeal; for in that Statute it is said, There shall be no
more Appeals. And the Petition upon which this Act is founded, runs thus: They
pray that no Impeachment or Appeal may be in Parliament. But when the King came
to make the Grant, he grants only for Appeals, and principally to out those
Lords Appellants who were condemned by that very Parliament: So that it is a
very pretty matter at this time of day to liken an Impeachment to an Appeal.

But, my Lord, the other great point is this: There is nothing at all certainly
disclosed to you by this Plea; therefore there is nothing confessed by us,
only the Fact that is well pleaded: therefore I shall come to consider what is
said by them as to the form of it. They say, my Lord, that they have pleaded it
to be secundum legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti; and if that be sufficient,
let them have said what they would, that would have healed all. But I say, my
Lord, with submission, they must disclose to you what is the Law and Custom of
Parliament in such case, or else you must take it upon you upon your own
knowledge, or you cannot give Judgment. It Is very well known what this Lex and
Consuetudo Parliamenti is* no person versed in the Records, but knows it, that
by course of Parliament a Message goes up with a Declaration to impeach the
party generally; and then after, there are Articles or a Bill of Impeachment
produced. Now till that be produced, sure there is no Counsel of the other side
will say, that ever the party can be called to answer. And because these
Gentlemen do pretend to urge their knowledge herein, I would observe, there are
three things to be considered of the Parliament; the Legislative part, the
matters of Privilege, and the Judicial part proper to this Case: For the
Legislative part, and matters of Privilege, both Houses do proceed only
secundum legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti; but for the Judicial part, does
any man question, but that in all times they have been guided and directed by
the Statutes and Laws of the Land? and have been outed of a Jurisdiction in
several Cases, as by the Statute of 4 Edw. 3. and 1 H. 4. And the Lords in all
Writs of Error, and all matters of Judgment, proceed secundum legem Terrae;
and so for Life and Death. And there is not one Law in Westminster Hall, as to
matters of Judgment, and another in the Court of the Lords above. But I will
not trouble your Lordship any farther to pursue these things: But it is not
sufficiently disclosed to you, that there is any such thing as an Impeachment
depending there; it is only alleged, that he was impeached, and so much the
News-book told us that he was impeached: but to infer thence that there was an
Impeachment carried up and lodged for the same High Treason, is no consequence.
And then it is alleged, Quae quidem Impetitio, when no Impeachment is before
set forth, but only that he was impeached generally. And as I observed before,
a person might go up with a Message to impeach, but that cannot be said to be
an Impeachment to which the party is compelled to answer; it must be an
Impeachment on Record, and appearing on the face of the Record for what Crime
it is; and so they ought to have set it forth.

Now that this is too general that is alleged here, I take it the Books are
very full. When a Record is pleaded in Bar or in Abatement, the Crimes ought to
be set out to appear the same; and so, my Lord, are all the Presidents of
Coke's Entries 53. Holdcroft and Burgh's Case, and Watts and Brays Case in 41
and 42 of Q. Eliz. Coke's Ent. 59. Wrott and Wigg's Case, 4 Rep. 45. and in
Jews and Scholastica's Case, and Dives and Manning's Case. The Record must be
set out, that the Court may judge upon it; and the Record must not be tried per
Pais, but by it self. But for what they say, plead it never so certainly, there
must be an Averment, it must be so it is true; but that is for another purpose
than they urge it: The reason is, because if it be for another Fact that he
has committed, he may be indicted again, though it be of the same nature; but
whether of the same nature or not of the same nature, is the thing must appear
upon the Record pleaded, because the Court must be ascertained that it was
sufficient for the party to answer to it: for if it were insufficient, he may
be again proceeded against; as if an Indictment be pleaded which was
insufficient, though the party pleads an Acquittal or Conviction upon it, it
will not avail him; for the Court will proceed on the other Indictment: And so
is the Resolution in Vaulx's Case, and in Wigg's Case, though there was a
Judgment given of Acquittal, yet he was tried again. So that, my Lord, that is
one great reason why it must appear, that the Court may judge whether it be
sufficient for the party to answer. And you have now that here before you, if
this be such an Impeachment as they have pleaded it, as this person could not
answer to by any Law of Parliament or other Court; then it is not sufficient to
out you of your Jurisdiction: And I do think that by no Law they are or can be
compellable to answer to a general Impeachment of High Treason. And to give you
authority in that, there are many might be cited, as the Cases of my Lord
Stafford and the other Lords in the Tower, and so is the ancient course of
Parliament; with submission, I will be bold to say, the Impeachments are all
so, that ever I met with: And it appears by them, that they all conclude contra
Coronam and dignitatem Regis, in the form of Indictments, laying some
Overt-Acts and the special particular Crimes for which the person is impeached,
as Overt-Acts for Treason required by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. And I hope they
will not say, That without an Overt Act laid in the Impeachment, the
Impeachment can be good. If then this be so general that it cannot make the
Crime appear to the Court, and is so insufficient that the Court cannot give
Judgment, I take it you will go on upon the Indictment, which charge him with
a particular Crime.

My Lord, Mr. Pollexfen does put the case of Barretry where such Averment is
allowable, but that is a special, certain, and particular Crime, but
High Treason is ^ot so; there are abundance of special sorts of High Treason,
there is but one sort of Barretry, and there are no sub-divisions; therefore
there is nothing to be averred but the special facts that make that Barretry.

Then there was another Authority out of the Book of Assizes cited by Sir Fra.
Winnington, and greatly relied upon: A man is indicted for the murder of J. S.
and afterward for the murder of J. N. the former was pleaded to the second
with an Averment that it is the same person, that is but according to the
common form of Averments, to be of matter of fact: For if J. S. was known as
well by the name of J. N. as of J. S. the Indictment was for the murder of the
same person, and there it is pure fact averred. But where it is Essential, as
this case is, that the particular Treason do appear, to say that it is the same
particular Treason, and to say that matter of fact aver'd shall enlarge a
Record, I think, is impossible to be found any where. And of all the Cases that
I have seen or heard, I confess none of the Instances come up to it. For the
Case in Moor, King, and Howard, cited by Sir Francis Winnington, that is an
authority as expressly against him, that nothing can be more: For if there be an
Indictment for Felony in such a particular act, and then he is indicted again,
he cannot come and plead a general Indictment of Felony, and then aver it is for
the particular Felony, and so to make the fact enlarge the Record, and put
matter of Record to be tried by a Jury.

Mr. Wallop was of opinion that upon this Averment the Jury may try the Fact.
What a pretty case would it be, that a Jury should judge upon the whole Debates
of the House of Commons whether it be the same matter or no; for those Debates
must be given in evidence if such an issue be tried. I did demur with all the
care that I could, to bring nothing of that in question; but your Lorship knows
if they have never so much in particular against a man, when they come to make
good their Impeachment they must ascertain it to a particular Crime; and the
Overt-acts must be alleged in the Impeachment, or else there is another way
to hang a Subject than what is the Kings highway all over England. And admit
there was an intimation of a purpose to Impeach, a Message sent up, and any
Judgment given thereupon, pray consider what may be the consequence as to the
Government; a very great matter depends upon this: if there be any Record of
that Parliament, then is the French Act gone; for so is the Resolution in 12
Jacobi, where the Journal Book was full of proceedings, yet because there was
no Judgment passed, nor no Record of a Judgment in a Writ of Error, they
adjudged it no Session; but if any Judgment had been given, then it had been
otherwise. So that the consequences of these things are not easily seen, when
men debate upon touchy matters.

But that which is before your Lordship is this point upon the pleading, and, I
conceive, I have answered all the Presidents they have cited; therefore, my
Lord, I do take it, with submission, there is nothing of that matter before you
concerning an Impeachment depending before the Parliament; but whatsoever was
done, it is so imperfectly pleaded, that this Court cannot take any notice of it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, I shall endeavor to be short, and shall confine my
self (because I am tender of your time) to the point in Question; which is,
whether this Plea be sufficient in point of Form. There have been many things
said on the other side, which I must crave leave to take notice of so far only
as to show they are not in question before you. Those are what relate to the
matter of the Plea; for they argue it is good both in matter and form; and from
the matter of the Plea they have taken occasion to debate, whether a Commoner
may be impeached: Whether this Court has power to judge of the privileges and
course of Parliament? none of which Questions will arise upon our case now.
Therefore I will not now debate whether Magna Charta, which has ordained that
every man shall be tried by his Peers, and the Statute of 4 Edw. 3. which says,
that the Lords shall not be compelled, nor shall have power to give Judgment
upon a Commoner, have sufficiently secured the Liberty of the Subject from
Impeachments. Nor is it the question before your Lordship, whether you shall
judge of any matter that is a right or privilege of Parliament; here is
nothing before you that was done in Parliament; but this is an Indictment for
High Treason committed by Fitz-Harris in this County. Now, my Lord, as that is
not the Question, neither will it be the Question, Whether an Impeachment
depending in the House of Lords against a Commoner, by the House of Commons,
will bar this Court of its Jurisdiction. For though they have entered upon it,
and debated it at large, and seemed to obviate the Objections made to that if
it had been a Question; as by saying that the King has no Election, because
this is not the suit of the King, but the suit of the Subject. I will not now
ex instituto argue that point; but I will humbly offer a few things to your
Lordships consideration, and I shall take my hints from them. They say the
House of Commons are the grand Inquest of the Nation, to enquire of Treasons
and other high Crimes, and they make these Presentiments to the House of Lords.
Now when such a Presentment is made, it is worthy consideration whether it be
not a Presentment for the King; for an Impeachment does not conclude as an
Appeal does, but contra Ligeantiae suae debitum, and Coronam and Dignitatem
Domini Regis, so far it is the Kings suit. In an Impeachment the Witnesses for
the Prisoner are not sworn, the Prisoner has not Council for his life in
matter of Fact, as in cases of Appeal at the suit of the Subject he has. The
King may pardon part of the Sentence, it was done so in Rich. the 2 d's time,
and it was done so lately in my Lord Stafford's Case; but take it for a
supposition that it is the suit of the People, yet that cannot preclude the
King from his suit neither; for at Common Law before the Statute of 3 Hen. 7.
where a man had an Appeal for Murder, the King had not his hands tied up, not
to proceed upon the Indictment; it had been used so, I do agree, and so it is
recited, that it had been used so, in the Statute of 3. Hen. 7. but there was
no positive Law for it, nor could it have been pleaded in bar of an Indictment,
that the Indictment was within the year, but the King used to stay out the year
in favor of that suit. But since the Statute the use is otherwise; and the
reason why they proceed immediately is, because now an Acquittal or an
Attainder upon the Indictment is no bar to the Appeal, but the party may go on
in his Appeal. I mention this, because the consequence which they urge as such
a dismal one, will be nothing; which is, What if he should be acquitted here,
he could not plead auter foits acquit, so would be twice brought in jeopardy
for the same offense: For it is the same in all Cases of Appeals, a man comes
in jeopardy twice if he be indicted within the year, and attainted or acquitted
within the year, it is no bar to the Appeal. But this is not like the Case of
an Appeal for Murder neither, for though it has been used discretionarily in
the Court to stay the Suit of the King, and to prefer the Suit of the Subject,
it was then because the Subject had the first and nearest concern, as the Son
in the death of his Father, and it did mostly concern him to prosecute it. The
King is concerned as the Fountain of Justice only, to bring Offenders to
condign punishment; but the nearest damage, and the first to be preferred, was
that of the party who had lost his Relation. Now the reason of that turns quite
contrary here: For as in that Case the Subject had the nearest concern in the
loss of his Father, and so was best entitled to the Suit; so in this Case that
very reason will have the Kings Suit to be preferred; for there is no Treason
but against the King, and in Treason against himself, the King has the nearest
concern, and the wrong is primarily and originally to himself. And the Subjects
damage is but a consequence of that, as all hurt to the King must needs hurt
the people. So the Kings Suit is to be preferred here, as the Subjects was in
the other Case.

Now for the Objection that has been made, that if you try this man, upon the
same reason you may try the Lords in the Tower. Their Case is different, as has
been already observed by Mr. Attorney; And that which has been done by the
Lords in that case, to me does rather seem to imply that this Trial may be in
this case. For if the Lords after an Impeachment brought up against the five
Lords in the Tower, and after the special matter in the Articles which does
ascertain upon what they do proceed, have thought fit notwitstanding to remove
the Indictment by Certiorari into Parliament, (for so it was in fact) that no
prosecution might be upon them, then certainly they thought the Kings Court
might proceed without doing so.

My Lord, I will mention no more upon this matter, but leave it to your
Lordships consideration: But as to the form of the Plea I do conceive, with
submission, it is not a formal Plea.

We know here of no form of pleading an Indictment, but what does set forth the
Indictment particularly; the Presidents are so, it is so in Vaulx's Case, and
all the Presidents that I have seen; so is the President in Rast. Ent. where in
an Appeal the Defendant waged Battle, the Plaintiff replies he was formerly
indicted, he sets forth the Indictment particularly. All the Presidents are so,
and the Law Books resolve it must be so, as Wrott and Wigg's Case, where the
Defendant in an Appeal of Murder by the Wife pleads, that he was indicted for
Manslaughter before the Coroner of the Verge, and Coroner of the County, for
killing the Husband at Shepperton in the County of Middlesex, and had his
Clergy with reference to the Record, and the usual Averments; with this
farther, that he averred that Shepperton at the time of the Indictment and
Death was within the Verge. To which the Plaintiff demurred, and Judgment for
the Plaintiff. Now two things are resolved by this Judgment.

1. That it is necessary to set forth the whole Record of the Indictment, or
otherwise they ought not to have given Judgment for the Plaintiff, by reason
the Indictment was insufficient, as 'twas pleaded, (in that it did not say that
Shepperton was within the Verge, which was necessary to entitle the Coroner of
the Verge to a Jurisdiction) because being pleaded with reference to the Record
upon Null tiel Record pleaded, and the Record thereupon brought in, that defect
might have been cured.

2. That no Averment of Fact can supply that which should appear upon Record,
therefore the Averment that Shepperton was within the Verge did not mend the
matter, though confessed by the Demurrer as much as it is in this case, that it is
the same Treason.

But they say there is a difference between this Case and those which I have
put; for that it is the course of Parliament (of which your Lordships must take
notice) to impeach general, so they could not have pleaded otherwise than they
have done, unless they had pleaded it otherwise than the Cases was; this reason
holds rather the other way: for if in any Case such a general way of pleading
with reference to the Record were to be admitted, it were in case of an
Indictment, because the Court knows there is no Indictment but what does
particularly set forth the Felony, which when produced, is capable of being
applied; but here if the Record be brought in, 'twill no more ascertain the
matter of the Impeachment than the Plea does already* And whereas they say your
Lordship is bound to take notice of the course of Parliament, so your Lordship
will take notice too, that it is not the course of Parliaments to try any man
upon such a general Impeachment. I never heard of any man (I speak it with
submission to them that know better) that was brought to plead Not guilty upon
a general Impeachment of High Treason; that is, upon the Commons bare saying,
We do impeach such an one of High Treason. I know none that ever was brought to
answer that general Accusation.

And now, my Lord, as the Plea is naught for not setting out the Record, so is
the Averment, with submission, insufficient too. For though he does aver that
the Treason in the Indictment and the Treason for which he was impeached, are
one and the same, and not diverse Affirmatively and Negatively; yet as this Case
is, he ought to have said, that the Treason for which he is indicted, and the
Treason mentioned in the Impeachment, is one and the same: For if he was
impeached generally for High Treason without mention of particulars, it is
impossible to be reduced to a certainty: So it is an Averment of a Fact not
capable to be tried.

First, because, with submission to these Gentlemen that have said it, the
Debates of the House of Commons are not to be given in Evidence, and made
public to a Jury; nay, they are not always possible to be reduced to a
certainty, as the circumstances may be; for they do not always particularly
resolve upon what particulars they will accuse before they go up, but a general
Allegation serves the turn: So that such Averment is not triable per Pais,
because as the Case may be, it may not be capable of any certainty from the
Debates of the House of Commons.

Another reason is, because by this way of pleading, Proceedings may be staid
for Treason, though subsequent to the Impeachment, which no man yet has
pretended to say: For suppose now a general Impeachment lodged, and a Treason
afterward committed by the party, I think no man will say that the House of
Commons when they bring up their special matters cannot make even this
subsequent Treason an Article upon that Impeachment, neither can it be said
that such Averment as this is upon such Plea pleaded to an Indictment here
below would be repugnant, because there is no time at all laid in the
Impeachment as it is here pleaded, nor no time when the Impeachment was brought
up, so that it cannot appear to the Court whether the Treason in the Indictment
be subsequent or not, the consequence of which is, we must try whether the
House of Commons upon this general Impeachment did intend to proceed to try him
for a fact committed after the Impeachment carried up. My Lord, this would be
to affirm, that a man once impeached in Parliament shall never be tried for any
offense; it would be like that Privilegium Clericale which they made use of to
exempt themselves from punishment for all offenses.

But, my Lord, we do think upon the whole matter without entering upon the
Debate, whether a particular Impeachment lodged in the House of Lords does
preclude the King from his proceedings: We have a good Case upon this Plea, for
that is not a Question necessary to be resolved, though it be not granted by
the King neither. But the Question is, whether this be a formal Plea, and
whether here be sufficient matter set forth upon a Record to bring that other
matter into question, and tie up the hands of the Court.


Mr. Serj. Jeffreys. My Lord, there has been already enough spoken in this
Case* I shall desire only to offer one word to that single point (viz.) the
informality of the Plea; which I take to be the sole Question in this Case, for
to argue whether because there was no Bill passed, or Decree made in the House
of Lords (though the Articles had been carried up) the Impeachment did not fall
to the ground by the Dissolution, I conceive altogether improper; for I think
it does not affect the Question, though I desire to take notice that Sir Fr.
Win. Mr. Williams, and Mr. Wallop, were all mistaken: for there were no such
Concessions made by any of the Kings Counsel the other day, as they allege,
because we did not think it to be the Question, and therefore made no
discourses about it.

But, my Lord, I desire first to take notice of a Case or two that has been
cited on the other side, and then I shall apply my self to that which is the
Question before you at this time. They cite the Case of the Lords in the Tower
as a Judgment for them, which seems to be a Judgment against them; for by the
Lords granting a Certiorari to remove the Judgments into Parliament, they seem
to be of opinion, that notwithstanding they were impeached before the Lords,
yet there might have been proceedings below upon those Indictments, had not
they been removed, and there they remain to this day; nay further, to those
Impeachments they have pleaded to Issue, which is ready for a Trial. But in the
Case at Bar, there only is an Accusation, without any further proceedings
thereupon.

And as to the Case of my Lord Shaftsbury, that makes strongly for us, as I
conceive. Mr. Justice Jones's opinion was taken notice of by Sir Fran.
Winnington, that they would not meddle by any means with matters depending in
Parliament: But I must remember, he then gave this reason for his opinion,
because the Parliament was then in being. And I must humbly put your Lordship
in mind, that the whole Court did then declare, That if the Parliament had been
dissolved, they would have said something more to that Case. I do not say, that
they would have given such or such a Judgment, but I attended at the Bar at
that time, and I appeal to the memory of the Court, if the Court did not then
make such a Declaration.

But now to the Question: Without all peradventure, the Cases cited by Mr.
Pollex^en are true. If I bring a general Indebitarus assumpsit for Wares sold
and delivered, and after bring a particular Indebitatus assumpsit for such and
such Wares, naming the particulars, the party may come and plead in Bar, and
aver it is for the same thing; and it is a good Averment, because there is
sufficient matter set forth in the Record to support such an Averment: For the
doubt is only, whether the particular Goods mentioned in the second, be not
the same that were intended under those general words (Goods and Merchandises)
in the first.

But suppose there had been only an account brought, and no declaration put
in, could then the Defendant have pleaded such a Plea with such an Averment,
when there was not sufficient matter of Record set forth in their pleading,
whereby the Court might be able to give a Judgment, or put it into a way of
Trial whether it was for the same or not?

And is it not so in this Case? there being but a bare Accusation: For I still
keep to the informality of the pleading, and I take it not to be such a
dangerous Case, as these Gentlemen of the other side do pretend, for you to
determine it: For I am sure it will be better for the Court to answer, if ever
they shall be required, that they have performed their Duty and done Justice
according to their Consciences and their Oaths, than ever to be afraid of any
Threats or Bug^^^s from the Bar.

For would not they by this manner of pleading, put upon your Lordships a
difficulty to judge, without any thing contained in the Impeachment to guide
your Judgment, whether the Prisoner be impeached for the same thing for which
he is indicted? May not the Treason intended in this Impeachment be for
Clipping or Coining of Money? for it is generally said to be only for
High Treason. How comes this then to be helped so as to be any way issuable,
and be tried? Shall it be by that way which Mr. Wallop laid down, that if Mr.
Attorney had taken Issue, the Jury must have tried the Question by having the
Debates of the House of Commons given in Evidence? Certainly that cannot be, my
Lord. If there were but one sort of Treason, there might be some color for
this sort of pleading; but there are diverse kinds of Treasons, and how is it
capable to be tried? who can prove the intentions of the House of Commons,
before they are come to a Resolution? and therefore cannot be given in
Evidence, or be regularly brought into Judgment.

Therefore we rely upon the informali^y and uncertainty of the pleading only,
and meddle not with the Question, whether an Impeachment in the House of Lords
supersedes an Indictment in the King's Bench; for we say, the have not pleaded
it so substantially, as to enable the Court to judge upon the Question: and
therefore we pray your Lordships Judgment, that the Plea may be overruled.


Sir Fran. Withins. My Lord, there has been so much of your time already taken
up by those Gentlemen that have argued before me, that I shall be very short in
what I have to say.

The Question is not at this time, how far forth the Commons in Parliament may
impeach or not impeach a Commoner, before the Lords in Parliament, or where the
Lords may admit or not admit of such Impeachments; that is not the Case here,
as I humbly conceive, nor will I meddle with it: I shall only speak to the
validity of the Plea according to the Law. Now I say that this Plea of the
Prisoner as thus pleaded, cannot be good to out this Court of Jurisdiction: For
first, the Prisoner cannot be admitted to make the Averment in this Plea, that
the Treason mentioned in the Impeachment in Parliament, and that contained in
this Indictment, is the same; for if, as the Gentlemen that argued on the other
side urged, that this Court must take notice of the Proceedings and Law of
Parliament, then you will take notice that no person is there tried upon a
general Impeachment of Treason. Special Articles are always first exhibited: In
this Case then either the House of Commons have carried up special Articles
against the Prisoner to the Lords in Parliament, or not; if the House has done
it, then the Plea might have been pleaded better by setting forth the Articles
(which is part of what they say on the other side, that it could be pleaded no
better) for then it would have appeared plainly whether the Treason were the
same or not. If the Articles are not carried up, shall it lie in the mouth of
any particular person to say what Articles the Commons in Parliament would have
carried up? Shall any single person be admitted to say what the House would
have done, before the House it self says it? In Cases of Impeachments, it lies
in the Discretion and Judgment of the Commons upon Debate to exhibit what
Articles they in their Wisdoms shall think fit; and sure it shall never come,
that any particular person shall limit them to this or that particular Treason
beforehand; no surely.

Now suppose in such a Case as this, after such a Plea pleaded, the Commons
upon deliberation should carry up Articles quite different, such a Plea then
would appear to be a stark lie, and the pleading and allowing of it, an
apparent delay of Justice. So that I conceive, my Lord, the Prisoner shall by
no means be admitted (nor indeed can it be) to aver the intention of the House
of Commons, (which cannot be tried) before they have declared it themselves:
and therefore I conceive the Plea to be naught for that reason.

But, my Lord, I conceive that the Prisoners Plea is ill for another reason,
because the Court in this Case, by any thing expressed in this Plea, cannot
discern nor take notice whether it be the same Treason or not.

Now the reason why the Record, as this Case is, ought to be alleged
specially, is because the matter contained in it may plainly appear to the
Court, and then by that means the Court might judge whether it be the same
Treason or not. Now Treason generally alleged in the Impeachment, is the
Genus, and the particular Treason mentioned in the Indictment is only a
Species, and the Averment in the Plea is, that the Genus and the Species is the
same, which is absurd, and if allowed, tends to hoodwink and blind the Court
instead of making the matter plain for their judgment.

Pleas ought to be plain and certain, because the Court upon them alleged, is
to judge either of men's Estates or Lives; and for that reason the matter ought
to come plainly and fairly before them, that wrong may be done to neither party
by reason of the obscureness or doubtfulness of the Allegation: if therefore a
Hoodwink be brought instead of a Plea it ought not to be allowed. And therefore
for these reasons (for what I have farther to say has been already said by
others) I conceive it ought to be overruled. I humbly submit it to the Court.


L. C. J. You have done your Arguments, Gentlemen, on all sides.


Coun. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Look you Gentlemen, I Will tell you, you have taken up a great part of
our time. We never intended when we assigned four Counsel to Mr. Fitz-Harris,
that they all should make formal Arguments in one day, it is the first time that
ever it was done; but because it is as you press it in a Case of Blood, we were
willing to hear all you could say, that you might not afterward say, but that
you were fully heard on all sides. But in truth, I must tell you, you have
started a great many things that are not in the Case at all. We have nothing to
do here, whether the Commons House at this day can Impeach for Treason any
Commoner in the House of Lords, we have nothing to do with this, what the Lords
Jurisdiction is, nor with this point, whether an Impeachment in the Lords House
(when the Lords are possessed fully of the Impeachment) does bar the bringing
any Suit, or hinder the proceeding in an Inferior Court: But here we have a
Case that rises upon the pleadings; whether you have brought here before us a
sufficient Plea to take away the Jurisdiction of the Court, as you have pleaded
it, that will be the sole point that is before us: And you have heard what
exceptions have been made to the form, and to the matter of your pleading. We
do ask you again, Whether you think you are able to mend your Pleading in any
thing, for the Court will not catch you, if you have any thing wherein you can
amend it, either in matter or form? If you will let us know it we shall
consider of it; But if you have not, if you abide by this Plea, then we do
think it is not reasonable, nor will be expected of us in a matter of this
consequence to give our Judgment concerning this Plea presently. All the Cases
cited concerning Facts done in Parliament, and where they have endeavored to
have them examined here, are nothing to the purpose at all. For plainly, we do
not assume to our selves a Jurisdiction to inquire of such matters, for words
spoken, or Facts done in the Commons-House, or in the Lords, we call none to
question here, nor for any thing of that nature which takes off most of the
Instances you have given; but our Question is barely upon the pleading before
us, whether we have a sufficient pleading of such an Impeachment as can
foreclose the hands of the Court? And as to that we shall take some reasonable
time to consider of it; we will not precipitate in such a Case; but deliberate
well upon it before we give our Judgment. Take back your Prisoner.


Mr. At. Genesis Before he goes away, we hope you will set a reasonable time, as
short as you can, to have him come again, for your Judgment.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, we can send for him when we please, to come hither by
Rule; you see this business is come on in the busy part of a Term, and it is
impossible for the Court to attend nothing but this, we will take some
reasonable time.


Then Fitz-Harris was carried back to the Tower.
On Tuesday. May 10. Mr. Attorney moved the Court to appoint a day for their
Judgment on the Plea, and for Fitz-Harris to be brought up, which they
appointed to be the next morning.

And accordingly on Wednesday morning, May. 11. he was brought from the Tower
to Westminster Hall.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray that Fitz-harris may be brought to the Bar.


L. C. J. Where is the Lieutenant of the Tower? bid him bring Fitz-harris to
the Bar (which was done).


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray your Judgment on the Plea.


L. C. J. Why? Mr. Fitz-Harris, you have been Arraigned here for High Treason,
and it is for endeavoring and compassing the Kings death, and other Treasons,
specially mentioned in this Indictment; you have pleaded here to the
Jurisdiction of this Court, that there was an Impeachment against you by the
Commons of England in Parliament, before the Lords for the Crime of
High Treason, and you do say that that Impeachment is yet in force, and you do
say by way of averment, that this Treason whereof you are now Indicted, and the
Treason whereof you were Impeached by the Commons of England, before the Lords,
are one and the same Treason. And upon this the Attorney General, for the King,
has Demurred, and you have joined in Demurrer. And we have here the arguments
of your Counsel, whom we assigned to argue it for you; we have heard them at
large, and have considered of your Case among our selves, and upon still
consideration and deliberation concerning your Case, and all that has been
said by your Counsel, and upon conference that we have had with some other of
the Judges, we are three of us of Opinion that your Plea is not sufficient to
bar this Court of its Jurisdiction, my Brother Jones, my Brother Raymond, and
my Self are of Opinion that your Plea is insufficient, my Brother Dolben not
being resolved, but doubting concerning it: And therefore the Court does order
and award, That you shall answer over to this Treason.


Cl. of Cr. Edward Fitz-Harris, Hold up thy hand.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire I may have Liberty to advise with my
Counsel before I plead.


L. C. J. Mr. Fitz-Harris, When you proposed a difficulty you had in a matter
of Law, the Court were willing to assign you Counsel; because it is known you
cannot be a fitting person to advise your self concerning the Law. But as to
this, we cannot assign you Counsel; it is only a matter of Fact, whether you be
Guilty, or not Guilty? Therefore in this Case you cannot have Counsel allowed to
advise you.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire before I plead, or do any thing of that
nature, that I may make an end of my Confession before your Lordship, and some
of the Privy Council.


L. C. J. Look you, Sir, For that you have trifled with us already; you
pretended you had some scruples of Conscience, and that you were now become
another man, and would reveal and discover the whole of this design and Plot,
that you are said to be Guilty of here; but you have trifled several times
concerning it, and we can say nothing concerning that now; we must now have
your Plea; if afterward you have a mind to confess and be ingenious, you may
do it; but now you must either plead, or not plead.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I have some Witnesses a great way off, and I desire
time to have them ready for my defense.


Cl. of Cr. Edward Fitz-harris, Hold up thy hand; (which he did) Thou have been
Indicted of High Treason, upon that Indictment thou have been Arraigned, and
have Pleaded to the Jurisdiction of this Court: To which Plea His Majesty's
Attorney General has Demurred, and thou have joined therein; And upon the
whole matter, this Court, upon mature and considerate deliberation is of
opinion, that thou ought to answer Over. How say thou, Art thou guilty of
the High Treason whereof thou have been Indicted, and have been Arraigned, or
not Guilty?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Cul. Prist. etc. How will thou be tried?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance.


L. C. J. Now if you have any thing to move, do it: We could not hear your
motion till you had pleaded; for the method of the Court must be observed.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I have some Witnesses at a distance, my Lord.


L. C. J. Where are your Witnesses?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I have one Witness in Holland, a very material one; that I am
much concerned to have for my Life.


Mr. Just. Jones. What is his Name?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. His Name is Steward, my Lord.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Fitz-Harris, I Will tell you, reasonable time is allowed
to all men to make their defense in; but when a man is in Holland, I know not
what time you will take for that.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. What time your Lordship thinks fit for a man to return from
thence hither.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Attorney, Why should not we allow Mr. Fitz-Harris time
for his Trial till next Term?


Mr. Attorn. Genesis I think he has not offered any thing to entitle him to it:
he does not tell us, And I would fain know what the Witnesses will prove.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It may be Mr. Attorney will confess what it is that Witness
can prove.


Mr. At. General. For the whole proof in a Case of Treason lies on our side.


L. C. J. Commonly, and prima facie, it does so; but there may be some things
that the Prisoner may give in Evidence for himself, that may be material for
him to urge for his Defense.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I know not whether it be safe for me to tell what he
can say?


Mr. Just. Jones. Then you reserve it wholly in your own Judgment, whether he
be a material Witness or no?


Mr. Fitz-Harris. If My Lord Chief Justice pleases, I will acquaint him in
private with it.


Mr. At. General. I never saw any good effect of these private Proceedings. If
he have any thing to offer, he may do it publicly, in the face of Justice. And
therefore I desire he may be Tried this Term; for he has had an whole Terms
notice, and time enough to consider what persons are material as Witnesses for
him.


Mr. Just. Jones. Unless he do show good Cause to the contrary, he must be
Tried this Term.


Mr. At. General. And, my Lord, where it is in the same County where the Fact
was committed, there is the less reason to stay; Criminals in High-Trrason, the
Fact must be plain and evident against them.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Attorney, peradventure he has been made to depend upon
his Plea, and has been advised so to do.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Yes, my Lord, and have been close Prisoner, and not allowed
to speak with any Body.


L. C. J. If so, then it may be a surprise upon him.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I have been allowed nothing to prepare for my
Defense.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, He ought to be provided for his Trial this Term. I do
not know, my Lord, what Witnesses he can pretend to have; The Fact was done in
Middlesex here, and the proof of the Circumstances of that Fact do arise here;
and I do not know what surprise he can complain of. As to the Witness he tells
you of that is in Holland, he does not tell you to what purpose he is a
Witness; so that you may know whether it be material or not. I know very well,
my Lord, in the Old-Bayly, when the Priests did urge it, that they had
Witnesses beyond Sea in other Countries, they were not suffered to delay their
Trial upon such a pretense. We must submit it to your Lordship's discretion:
but we suppose it will not be a precipitous proceeding, he having notice of his
Trial all this Term.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, Truly, since he pretends he is surprised, and has
depended upon his Plea, and has Witnesses that require some time to fetch, we
think it reasonable that he should have till the next Term; and we will defer
it till then. We are all of that Opinion, (especially it being such a little
delay) to enable him to have what Witnesses he does pretend to have.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I never desired in this Case, nor in any other, nor
ever shall do, that Justice be precipitated. I know these open and fair Trials
proceed with such equal steps to all parties, that we need not be hasty, and
therefore if your Lordship be of that Opinion, I submit to it, so it be the
first Week of the next Term.


L. C. J. The first Week it cannot be.


Mr. At. Genesis Within the first seven days I mean.


L. C. J. The first Thursday in the Term. And take notice Mr. Fitz-Harris, that
is the day appointed for your Trial.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I desire Liberty to see my Wife, and have a Solicitor in the
mean time.


L. C. J. I will tell you, for that, Mr. Fitz-Harris, the Court would never
deny any thing of that nature to any one in your Condition and Circumstances;
but your Wife makes an ill use of the Liberty we granted her: And if she do
make an ill use of it, then the Court must restrain her, and hold their hands
over her. If we were satisfied she would use the Liberty lawfully, and not
abuse it --


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I am sure she will use it lawfully hereafter, and
make no ill use of it.


L. C. J. Look you, upon her good usage of it, if she will fairly demean her
self, and not abuse it again, We are willing to take off the last Rule, and she
shall have the same Liberty she had before that Rule.


Mr. Sol. Genesis With this, if your Lordship please, we desire there may be some
other judge of her Prudence besides her self, and the Lieut. of the Tower be by.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire I may have a Solicitor; for he was never
allowed to come and speak to me, though I had a Rule for him.


L. C. J. Look you, as to your Counsel now, which was the main Reason why you
prayed a Solicitor, we cannot allow you them any more; for now We are come to a
matter of Fact only, and we cannot by the Rules of Law allow you Counsel.
Therefore what need you have of a Solicitor, I cannot tell; his business
before, was to go from you to the Counsel, and from them to you, which is
ceased now. But this, Mr. Attorney, if he have a desire to see Papers* and would
send for any Papers that concern his Defense, so as they contain no new
Treasonable matters and Contrivances, he ought sure to have them; and if he
have Papers at his House, or any where else, which he desires to make use of in
his own Defense, being inspected by the Lieutenant, to see that there be no
matter of evil contained in them, he may have one to do that for him without
any danger.


Mr. At. Genesis I do not oppose it, My Lord; But I desire that all Caution may
be used that can be; for this Solicitor of his is a Lawyer, and writes Tracts
of Law; but any thing material for his Defense I am not against.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, You need not fear any harm will be that ways; for he is
not to speak with him alone.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. I hope his Solicitor may come to him to take Instructions
how to send for his Witnesses?


Mr. Just. Jones. You can tell how to do that surely without a Solicitor?


L. C. J. Just as the last Rule was, let there be another Rule made: For he
must have all just advantages to enable him for his Defense.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. I hope I shall have a Rule of Court to make my Witnesses
appear.


Mr. Just. Dolben. That you may have without Motion.


L. C. J. We will give you any thing that will enable you to make a fair
Defense.


Cl. of Cr. He shall have Subpoenas for his Witnesses.


L. C. J. Then, Mr. Fitz-Harris, you must expect no other notice: You must take
notice now, that upon the first Thursday in the next Term, that you are to
receive your Trial here. Take the Prisoner back.


Mr. At. Genesis In order to his Trial, I desire the Sheriff may bring in the
Freeholders Book to the Clerk of the Crown, to strike the Jury.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, We will consider of that, how far we can do that, And
the Course of the Court shall be observed. But I doubt how we can.


Mr. Attorn. That is the practice in Trials at the Bar.


L. C. J. In Civil Causes, but not in Criminal, that I know of.


Mr. At. Genesis We have reason to desire it; because we are afraid of some
practice in this Cause, and fear there may be some odd carriage in the return
of them.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. May I not see my Wife before I go hence?


L. C. J. With all our hearts; She may go to you, and with you, Sir, if you
please; We will not hinder you of her company, so she carry her self fairly.


Then the Lieutenant took back his Prisoner.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Trial at large of Edward Fitz-Harris and Oliver Plunket will shortly be
Published.


