THE NEW HERESY OF THE JESUITS: Publicly maintained at PARIS in the College
of CLERMONT, by Conclusions, Printed 12. December. 1661.

Denounced to all the BISHOPS OF FRANCE.

Translated out of the French Original.

Lucae 5. 39.

Nemo bibens vetus, statim vult novum: dicit enim, vetus melius est.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord 1662.

THE NEW HERESY OF THE JESUITS; Publicly maintained at Paris in the College
of Clermont, by Conclusions, Printed the 12 of December 1661. Denounced to all
the Bishops of France.
AS it is the duty of Bishops to cut off, whilst they are yet in the bud, the
Errors that tend to the ruin of Faith; so is it no less the part of Divines,
to make Discovery of them, and stir up their pastoral vigilance by giving them
a timely advice thereof. For which Reason, My Lords, you will not I am
confident, disapprove the Information given you of a New Heresy publicly
maintained by the Jesuits in their College of Paris, by Conclusions, printed
and defended the 12 of December past, which bear in Front this Title:
Assertiones Catholicae de Incarnatione contra saeculorum omnium ab Incarnato
verbo praecipuas haereses. Catholic Assertions of the Incarnation, against the
principal Heresies of all Ages since Christ: Whereby they sufficiently
intimate, that excepting some subtleties of the Schools, they would have us
take for Catholic truths, whatever else they advance in opposition to these
Heresies.

They propose then for the Heresy of the 10th Age, the Schism of the Grecians,
and pretend by the following words to prescribe us what we ought to believe,
that we fall not into this Heresy.

X. SAECULUM. Romanae Ecclesiae Caput, contra Graecos Schismaticos.
HOc tandem saeculo Schisma Phocii invalcscens, Graecos, ab Ecclesiae capite
dis-junxit. Christum nes ita caput agnoscimus, ut illius regimen dum in caelos
abiit, primum Petro tum d^inde successoribus commiserit, and eandem quam
habebat ipse infallibilitatem concesserit, quoties ex Cathedra loquerentur.

Datur ergo in Ecclesia Romana Controversiarum Fidei Judex infallibilis, etiam
extra Concilium generale tam in questionibus Juris, quam Facti. Vnde post
Innocentii X. and Alexandri VII. Constitutiones, fide divina credi potest,
librum cui titulus est Augustinus Jansenii esse haereticum, and quinque
Propositiones exeo decerptas, esse Jansenii, and in sensu Jansenii damnatas.

Propugnabuntur Deo duce, and auspice Virgin in Aula Collegii Claromontani
Societatis Jesu, die 12 Decembris, Anno 1661.

X. AGE. The Head of the Roman Church against the Schismatic Grecians.
IT was in this Age that the Schism of Photius growing strong, cut off the
Grecians from the Head of the Church; for our parts we acknowledge Jesus Christ
to be in such sort the Head, that he has left the government first to S.
Peter, and afterward to his Successors, and that he has bequeathed unto them,
as often as they shall speak out of their Chair; the same infallibility which
he himself had.

Wherefore there is in the Church of Rome, an infallible judge of Controversies
of Faith, even out of a General Council, as well in Questions of right, as
matters of Fact, for which reason, now after the Constitutions of Innocent X,
and Allexander VII, one may believe with Divine Faith, that the Book of
Jansenius, entitled Augustinus, is Heretical: and that the five Propositions
extracted out of it, are of Jansenius; and condemned in his sense.

This Conclusion contains two parts; One, the Primacy of the Pope; in which all
Catholics agree: The other the Infallibility which the Jesuits attribute to
him.

Nor is the question, concerning that Infallibility, which some Divines
maintain, and which regards only the judgments of Popes touching the truths
revealed by God in the Holy Scripture and Tradition.

It is well known what the opinions of the Gallican Church, and School of Paris
are upon this Subject: and what is to be understood by their words Sententia
Parisiensium, when one meets with them in the Books, even of Jesuits, upon this
matter.

It is also known, that those among some modern Doctors, who would be most
favorable to Popes, as Dr. Du Val; were nevertheless of Opinion, that it is
not a point of Faith, that the Pope is Infallible; Non est de Fide summum
Pontificem esse infallibilem; and that the contrary opinion, is neither
erroneous nor rash; Non est erroneum neque temerarium temeritate opinionis
dicere summum pontificem in decernendo errare posse.

But these same Divines how passionate soever they were, to exalt the authority
of the Sovereign Bishops, do acknowledge, as a thing certain, unquestionable,
and agreed on by all Catholics, that in matters of fact, they are not
infallible, but may be deceived, and so really have been in sundry occasions.
All Catholics are of Agreement, says Cardinal Bellarmin, that the Pope,
acting as Pope, with advice of his Council, nay even of a general Council, may
be deceived in particular affairs, depending on the information and attestation
of Men. And, applying this general Maxim to a particular fact, altogether
conformable to that of Jansenius, to wit, whether the Heresy of the
Monothelites were contained in the Letters of Honorius, as the VI general
Council, confirmed by so many Popes, had determined: A General Council, says
he, that is a lawful one, cannot err in the definition of dogmatical points of
Faith, wherein the VI Council likewise was free from error; but it may err in
questions of Fact. Generale Concilium legitimum non potest errare, ut neque
erravit hoc sextum, in dogmatibus Fidei definiendis: tamen errare potest in
questionibus de Facto,

And Cardinal Baronius says the same, upon the same subject of the sixth
Ecumenical Council. The Condemnation, even of General Councils, is not
received with so much rigor, in what concerns men's persons, and their
writings: For no man doubts, but that whoever he be, he may be deceived in
matters of Fact: in which occasion, the saying of St. Paul is appliable, we can
do nothing against truth, but for truth. In his enim quae facti sunt,
unumquemque contingere posse falli, nemini dubium est.

All other Divines, even the more wedded to the interest of the Court of Rome,
have hitherto contained themselves within these bounds. But the Jesuits will
neither admit Bounds nor Examples in their excesses and extravagancie^. It is
not enough for them to make the Pope infallible, in the manner as some other
Divines have done; they must needs have it, that Jesuus Christ has given him
the same infallibility, which Himself enjoyed here on earth: and as this
infallibility of Jesus Christ reached to all things, and not only to matters
revealed, but also to such, as till then had not been revealed, and which he
revealed by uttering them; so they will have the Pope to become infallible, not
only in proposing to the Church the truths comprised in Divine Revelation, but
also certain facts, which we are sure were never revealed by God: as, whether
such Propositions be found in a Book composed in the 17th. AGE.

These are not consequences drawn by others out of their Doctrine; They
themselves infer them, and make them pass for Catholic Assertions, according
to the Title of their Conclusions. There is then in the Church an infallible
Judge of controversies of Faith, even out of a General Council, as well for
questions of right, as of fact. And that we may not doubt of their meaning by
questions of Fact, though the word it self of Fact, taken in opposition to that
of Law or Right, does sufficiently clear it; they allege for an example, and a
consequence of this new infallibility of Jesus Christ communicated to the Pope;
that after the foresaid Constitutions, one may believe with Divine Faith that
Jansenius his book is heretical, and that the five Propositions are truly this
Authors. Vnde post Innocentij X, and Alexandri VII, Constitutiones fide divina
credi p^test, librum cui titulus est Jansenij Augustinus, esse haereticum, and
quinque propositiones ex eo decerptas esse Jansenii.

Behold the Proposition which they publicly advance in the face of the
greatest City of the World: nor will it be amiss to take notice of the origin
and date thereof: For these same men that now so boldly maintain it, had for
some time ago laid the seeds of it in their other writings: and it was easily
discernable that their whole conduct was to be built upon this error. They had
severally exposed the Inferences in one place, and the Principles in an other;
but still with certain windings, and intricacy of words, that might as occasion
served, be a cloak to them. It is now in fine that they discover to the Church
without any mask what they pretend to establish.

Let the whole Church then hear and take notice, that the 12 of December in the
year 1661. was the day, on which the Jesuits brought to light this monstrous
opinion, whereof they had been so long in labor: that this was the day, on
which they proposed, as a Catholic assertion, that the Pope speaking out of
his Chair, has the same infallibility with Jesus Christ, not only in
questions of Right, but also in those of Fact; and consequently that one may
believe with Divine Faith, that the five propositions are the opinions of
Jansenius.

It is not conceived needful, My Lords, to use many words, to make appear, that
there is not here a simple Error, nor a simple Heresy, but a Source of Errors,
and as one may say, a General Heresy, which overthrows all Religion.

For your Lordships know, that the first and principal ground of Christian
Religion, is this, that our Faith does not depend on the word of Men, but on
the word of God, who is truth it self: that this is it which makes it
inconcussible and wholly Divine; whereas it would be purely humane, did it rely
upon any Authority less than That of God: or that we could not bear the like
Testimony to our selves, which St. Paul did to the Christians of Thessalona^a,
to have received the word which God was pleased to propose to us by his Church,
not as the word of Men, but as the word of God, as it tr^ly is. Non ut verbum
hominum, sed sicut est vere, verbum Dei. All whatsoever is comprehended under
the notion of Faith (says St. Bernard) is founded upon the solid truth,
persuaded us by the Oracles of God, confirmed by miracles, and consecrated by
the Childbearing of a Virgin, by the blood of our Redeemer, and the glory of
Jesus raised from the dead. Totum quod in Fide est certa ac solida veritate
subnixum, oraculis and miraculis divinitus persuasum, stabilitum, and
consecratum partu Virginis, sanguine Redemptoris, gloria Resurgentis.

Whoever then says, A thing not revealed nor attested by God, (as, that
certain Propositions are truly such an Authors of these later ages) is an
object of Divine Faith, because the Pope has declared it; either establishes
for the ground of Faith, an authority purely human, and the word of a man,
which is as much as to overthrow Faith; or makes a God of the Pope, and of his
word, a divine word, and Holy Scripture; which is not only an Heresy, but a
horrible impiety, and a kind of Idolatry.

For Idolatry does not consist only in giving to man the name of God, but
much more in ascribing to him the attributes proper to God, and the honor
which is due only to him. Now this submission of our understandings and
intellective faculties, implied in each Act of Faith; is nothing else than the
adoration which we exhibit to the primary Truth: and so whoever pays it to the
word of Man, what rank soever he holds in the Church; whoever professes he
believes a thing with Divine Faith, on no other motive then because a Man has
said it; places a Man in the Throne of God, transferres the honor due only to
the Creator, to a Creature, and, for as much as lies in him, makes a kind of
Idol of the Vicar of Jesus Christ.

And that, my Lords which will give you a greater horror of this Impiety, is
this, that the Authors thereof imagined they should be able to foster it, under
favor of the respect, which all the Catholics bear the Pope; and that no man
would have the boldness to oppose it, for fear of incurring his displeasure;
whereas on the contrary, could any one commit a greater outrage against the
first Minister of Jesus Christ, then to imagine he could be honored by a
Blasphemy so injurious to Jesus Christ; that it could be pleasing to him to be
made equal to his Master, by sharing with him the same Infallibility which he
possesses, and that men should yield to his words that Supreme Worship of
Divine Faith, which is due to God alone.

S. Paul and S. Barnabe, perceiving the people went about to give them the same
honors which they were wont to pay to their false Gods, tore in pieces their
garments, thereby to express the extreme displeasure which they resented; and
cast themselves into the midst of the Assembly to hinder it: And we may with
reason believe, that the Pope himself, were he truly advertised of this
horrible excess, would not fail to employ his whole Authority to suppress these
profane worshippers, and would abhor it as a crime able to cause the loss of
himself in the sight of God, to give way to the least compliance in so
detestable a flattery. He would with trembling reflect on the just vengeance of
God, upon that last King of the Jews, for only suffering the tumultuary
acclamations of a giddie brained people, who, hearing him speak, cried out, It
was the voice of a God, and not of a man; Dei voces and non hominis: For the
Scripture teaches us that immediately the Angel of our Lord stroke him, because
he had not given to God the honor due unto him: Confertim autem percussit cum,
Angelus Domini, eo quod non dedisset honorem Deo. And yet how much less
criminal was the flattery of that people, then this of the Jesuits; theirs
might have passed for a sudden transport of joy, not regulated by reason; and
sometimes the Holy Scripture it self gives the Name of God to Supreme Judges
and Princes: But here is given to the Pope deliberately upon a laid Defign, and
by way of establishing a Dogmatical Assertion of Theology, not an empty and
insignificant name, but one of the most glorious Attributes of God, and most
incommunicable to a creature, to wit, that his Word should have entailed upon
it such an infallibility, as to deserve that submission of divine Faith, which
cannot without Idolatry be rendered to any but the first and sovereign Verity.

For the like cannot be said in this question, which those who maintain the
Popes infallibility in matters of Faith, are wont to answer, That in believing
the decisions of the Pope, they do not build their Faith on the word of a man;
because he does but propose what has been formerly revealed by God in Holy
Scripture and Tradition, and so their faith relies still on the Word of God.
Nothing I say, like this can be applied to the matter in hand, in regard
whereof the Jesuits pretend, That the Pope is as infallible as Jesus Christ,
and that his decision is an Object of Divine Faith. For when the Pope shall
propose a fact of the 17th Age; as that certain Heretical Propositions were
taught by an Author of those times; it cannot be pretended that he proposes a
matter revealed in Scripture or Tradition: He may well say, I judge it to be
thus; but he cannot say, God has revealed it. He may speak as from himself,
but he cannot say, God has spoken; Dominus locutus est: And, as it is a man
that speaks, and not God, all they who hold that one may believe with divine
Faith, a decision of this nature, do most visibly commit the like abominable
excess, which that blinded people did, by crying out with them, Voces Dei and
non hominis.

And albeit the Popes piety be a sufficient Antidote to preserve him from being
poisoned with this sacrilegious opinion, nevertheless, they who present this
poison unto him cannot excuse themselves from being as guilty toward him, as
were those wretched Sycophants toward their King, of whose death, they were
the cause, by their impious flatteries. For a man is not then only esteemed a
murderer either of the soul or body, when effectively he takes away the life of
one or the other, but also when he lays a cause, which of its own nature is
sufficient to work the death of either, though the effect do not follow. So S.
Cyprian calls those Christians Parricides, who through fear of persecution,
offered up to the Idols their sucking Infants; because although they could not
really deprive them of the life of Grace, which they had received in Baptism,
by this Idolatry whereunto they were in no sort consenting, as S. Austin
remarks; they did notwithstanding what lay in them, to bereave them of it. In
illis quidem interfectionem non faciunt, sed quantum in ipsis est,
interfectores fiunt. Flatter not your selves, says S. Austin, speaking to
those who give occasion to others of committing sin, upon account that your
brother is not dead by the scandal you gave him; it is true, he is not dead,
and yet you are murderers: Et ille vivit, and tu homicida es. One may say the
same to the Jesuits, in respect of the Pope, whom they go about to poison with
so pestiferous an opinion: Non sibi blandiantur, quia ille non est mortuus, and
ille vivit, and isti homicidae sunt.

But it is not the Pope only, before whose feet they cast this stumbling block,
but even the generality of the faithful, by persuading them to build their
belief on the word of a man, and to submit their judgments thereunto, as to
the first Verity, which as has been showed, cannot be done without a kind of
Idolatry: Insomuch that the Jesuits are near upon the same impiety with those
Heretics, who would have Divine honors exhibited to the Blessed Virgin; for,
as the true respect and veneration due to her, as the most holy of Creatures,
took not any thing off from the crime of those Heretics and their followers;
even so the reverence which all the faithful ought to bear to the Head of the
Church, will in no sort exempt them from a heavy sin before almighty God, if
through the deceit of the Jesuits, they give unto the words of a man how
eminent soever he may be in the Church, that sovereign difference of divine
Faith, which cannot without impiety be given to any thing but the Word of God
himself.

Worldly men make small account of these kind of sins, because, being wholly
buried in flesh and blood, none but gross and material Objects make Impression
on them. Deluded devotes permit themselves to be easily carried away with these
excesses; because they imagine it to be a part of their false Piety, to embrace
blindly whatever contibutes to the honor and advantage of those things and
persons, for which they ought to have a respect, and from this root are sprung
all those opinions, which they call pious, without ever examining whether they
be true or false: as if a falsity could be the object of piety, or that God,
who is truth, could be honored with the unclean Sacrifice of a Lie. But you,
My Lord, know that all those who have been nourished with the true spirit of
Christianity, make a far different judgment hereof: they equally hate a lie,
to whose advantage soever it redound, whether of the Pope, or the Blessed
Virgin, or of Jesus Christ himself: which yet would a little startle a man to
hear, had not St. Austin expressly taught it: For this Holy Father fears not to
maintain that, if a lie or calomny, which one makes use of to take away the
temporal life of Man, be a detestable crime; That is yet a far greater, which
tends to the destruction of his spiritual life; as all manner of lies in matter
of Religion, even though employed in giving false praises to Jesus Christ. For
which reason, the same Father says, that a Christian would commit a notorious
folly, who would not rather expose himself to all manner of indignities, even
those that strike the greatest horror into pious Souls; then condescend to the
insolence of a person, that would force him to corrupt the holy Gospel, thereby
to bestow false praises upon Jesus Christ.

Since then, according to the Judgment of this great Father, it would be a
crime of abomination to give false honors to Jesus Christ himself, who being
God, is above all our praise and honors; how much more abominable is it, to
give a mortal Man, environed with infirmities, as the Scripture says, the
honors that appertain to God alone? But into what a labirinth of errors will
not men run headlong, if one grant them the freedom to cloak their capricious
fancies with the mantle of piety? For if opinions must be born with, how false
soever they be, because a false piety judges them pious; and if this be a
plausible reason to exempt Popes from the common defects of humane nature, that
one may piously believe, that God, having entrusted them with the Government of
his Church, will have a care to preserve them from falling into defects
prejudicial to the good thereof; as the Jesuits from this ground conceive they
have a right to invest the Pope in the same state of infallibility with Jesus
Christ, even in matters of Fact, when they propose them to the whole Church:
Why may not others lay claim to the same right, of attributing to him the same
impeccability which Jesus Christ had, in all such affairs as concern the
Government of the Church, and the Functions of his Sovereign Pontificate? Why
shall this latter opinion be less pious, than the former? does it not appear
more advantageous to the Church, that the Head thereof should be in this sort
impeccable, then that he should be infallible in matters of Fact? And have not
an infinity of Souls, redeemed with the Sacred Blood of Jesus Christ, received
damages incomparably greater, by the evil Government of some Popes, then they
can possibly receive by their want of understanding or due attention in the
perusal of a particular Author.

Some one that should have lived in the first ages of the Church, catching hold
of these seeming conveniences of man's weak understanding, would he not have
thought himself well grounded to assert.

That God would never permit the seat of St. Peter to be possessed, for the space
of almost an Age together, by persons most unworthy of that dignity; As Card.
Baronius acknowledges with grief to have hapened, during the far greater part
of the tenth Age, by the power of the Marquis of Toscany, who tyranising, what
with arms, what with money, over the Clergy and people of Rome, caused them to
enthrone in St. Peter's Chair, Men not only vicious in their own persons, but
also notoriously dammageable to the Church; into which they brought most
horrible disorders; as that in particular of John the Tenth, whereof Baronius
sadly complains, who made an Infant of five years old Archbishop of Rheimes; on
which the Cardinal makes this reflection: Tantum nefas, quo Iura omnia
Ecclesiastica sauciantur, ejus pontificis authoritate introductum, quem infamis
faeminae infami opera in Petri solium intrusisset.

Would he not have believed, that God Almighty would never have suffered, the
Vicar of Him, who made that solemn Protestation, that his Kingdom was not of
this World; to attempt the disposing of Temporal Kingdoms; to take them from
some, and confer them on Others; as Julius the second did That of Navarre,
which, to the prejudice of our Kings, the Kings of Spain possess upon me no
other title, than a pretended gift of the Pope, in taking it from its lawful
King?

Would he not have thought, that God would never have permitted Schism to have
crept even into the Chair of Unity; in such sort, that the Church for almost 40
years should not have been able to discern its true, from its false Pastor;
groaning under the oppression of two Mercenaries, struggling for the right
Title, and agreeing only in this joint design, to keep the Church in this
dismal division; as in effect it happened about the end of the 14th. Age,
whilst one of these Anti-popes kept his seat at Avignon, the other at Rome?

Would he not have thought, that God would never have permitted, that he, whose
principal charge it is to keep all Christians in Unity, should by rash and
precipitate excommunications, be the Cause, that whole Kingdoms should fall off
from the Communion of the Church; whereby an infinite number of Souls should
miserably suffer shipwreck against the Rocks of Schism and Heresy; as it
happened to the Kingdom of England, by the precipitancy of Clement the
Seventh; as Cardinal Peron most pregnantly represented to Paul the fifth, to
keep him from falling into a like oversight in the cause of the Venetians;
adding the example of Leo the Tenth in regard of Germany, and remonstrating to
him, That he ought to consider, he was then in the same Crisis, and at the same
point, in which Leo the tenth was the ruin of Catholic Religion in Germany;
in which Clement the seventh destroyed It in England, in which Clement the
eighth preserved It in France.

It is certain, that, to confine our discourse to what may appear advantageous
to the Church, and to what we (according to our weak understanding) would be
apt to judge fitting to be done; had any of those that appear the wisest among
Men, been admitted in to the Council of God, when he was casting the models of
his Church; they would all have concurred in this judgment, that it would be
in no sort expedient, to permit those who were to supply his place upon earth,
to fall into disorders so opposite to the duty of their Charge, and so
prejudicial to the Souls of Men, committed to their conduct* But the Counsels
of God are entirely different from those of Men; and he was pleased out of his
inscrutable judgments by the succeeding events, quite to confound our
pretended wisdom. For he permitted all that, which we would have conceived he
ought to have prevented: So that Persons truly pious ought to be convinced, by
so many deplorable examples, of this important verity, that God would not have
the firm subsistence of his Church depend on the Saintity, wisdom, or
clear-sightednesse of any one single person, though he were the Head and
Sovereign Pastor of it. This is the pious reflection which Cardinal Baronius
makes upon the disorders of the 10th. Age: To the end, says he, that God might
make appear that his Church was not the contrivance of Man, but an Institute
purely divine, it was necessary he should show, that the vices of bad Popes,
should never be able to destroy It: as Kingdoms often are overthrown by the
vicious lives of their Kings. Vt enim Deus significaret eandem suam Ecclesiam
nequaquam humanum esse figmentum, sed plane divinum inventum, oportuit
ostendisse eam nequaquam pravorum Antistititum opera perdi posse, and ad
nihilum redigi; sicut de aliis diversarum gentium regnis and been statutis
Rebus-publicis fastum constat.

It is the same case of this kind of Infallibility, which by a new and
unheard of error the Jesuits grant to the Pope: which God has permitted to be
disproved by so many evident examples, that not any Divine can give credit to
it, without condemning himself of formal Heresy; for if all the decisions of
Popes, touching matters of Fact, were as many Articles of Faith, there not
being one able Divine, that does not impugn some one of them, there would not
be one that did not impugn a point of Faith.

For example, who is there now a days that does not esteem the Letters imputed
to the first Popes, not only not to be Theirs, but contrariwise, a Rapsody
collected by some Forger and Impostor. And notwithstanding both Pope Nicholas
commanded the Bishops of France to receive them, and his Successors inserted
them into the book of Decretals, which by their Apostolical authority they
proposed to serve for a rule to the whole Church, wherein they speak, at least,
as much out of their Chair, as in their ordinary Bulls. How then can one,
without Impiety, believe, that these letters are suppositions, as now all the
ablest Churchmen do, even the Jesuits themselves, if there be an obligation to
hold the same Infallibility in the Popes, as in Jesus Christ, even in matters
of Fact? would the infallibility of Christ permit that one should propose to
the Church false pieces instead of true ones?

There are scarce any matters of Fact of more importance to the Church, then to
know whether a Council be General or no, whether Lawful or illegittimate.
Nevertheless, did the Kingdom of France become Heretic, for not acknowledging
the Council of Florence to be Ecumenical, notwithstanding all the Bulls of
Eugenius the fourth, and all his declarations prefixed at the head of this
Council, to oblige the whole world to receive it as a General one? Did the
Cardinal of Lorraine fall into Heresy, when he openly declared to Pope Pius
the fourth, his, and the whole Kingdom of France's opinion on this subject, in
the following terms: For as much as concerns the last of the Titles to be
given to our Holy Father, taken out of the Council of Florence; I cannot deny
but that I am a French man, bred up in the University of Paris, in which it is
the common Tenet, that the authority of a Council is above the Pope, and all
that bold the contrary are censured as Heretics: That in France the Council of
Constance is held Ecumenical in all its parts: That they adhere to That of
Basile, and hold That of Florence neither for a Lawful nor a General One: and
it were an easier work to kill all French men, then to draw them from their
said persuasion. This Letter which the Cardinal of Lorrain writ to his
Secretary at Rome, to be communicated to Pope Pius the 4th. is to be seen in
the collection of Memorials concerning the Council of Trent, published by the
deceased Mr. Du Puis, and printed by Cramoisi.

During the first disagreement betwixt Pope Eugenius the 4th. and the Council
of Basile, he put forth a most authentic Bull, by which he declared that he
transferred this Council to Bolognia, and that all those who should maintain
this Translation was just and lawful, were both out of the Truth and Catholic
Faith. Fuit igitur a Basiliensi civitate legitima pro tunc nostra Concilii
dissolutio, and asserentes contra sunt penitus ab omni veritate and fide
Catholica alieni. All which notwithstanding the Fathers of the Council of
Basile, maintaining that this Translation was injust and invalid, Eugenius was
forced by another Bull equally authentic, to acknowledge that the said
Translation was in effect null, and that the Council had been duly held from
its beginning to that very time. Both these Bulls are to be seen in Raynald;
the first in the year 1433. the other in the year 1434. Now, shall the one and
the other of these Bulls be Articles of Faith? and shall we be obliged to
believe that the same Council was at the same time, an unlawful conventicle,
and a Lawful Synod of the whole Church, assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost.

The same Raynald makes mention of an other Bull of Eugenius the 4th. against
the Cardinal of Arles who presided over the Council of Basile; where he is
called Iniquitatis Alumnus, atque perditionis filius. If the voice of Popes, in
the judgments which they make of persons in their Bulls, ought to be esteemed
as infallible as that of Jesus Christ, we should be obliged to look upon this
Cardinal as a most wicked person: but what if God has judged otherwise, and
if, from obliging us to abhor him as a Child of Iniquity, and a Son of
Perdition, he would have us bear respect and veneration to him, as one of the
Blessed, confirming his Saintity by public Miracles, authorized by an other
Pope, to wit, Clement the Seventh, who by an authentic Bull has enrolled him
in the number of the Blessed, declaring, not that he did penance after having
been a Son of Iniquity, but that he had ever a celestial, chaste, and immaculate
life; as it is to be seen in the Bull of his Beatification, reported at length
by Ciaconius.

These few examples may sufficiently show the falsity of the Jesuits
pretension. But without seeking further, the very Authors themselves, of this
new Doctrine, fall into Heresy, by the undeniable sequel of their error. For
in these very same Conclusions, they maintain, that Pope Honorius, in his
Letters taught nothing but what was most consonant to the Catholic Faith,
touching the two wills, and two operations in Jesus Christ. Duas in Christo
voluntates and operationes fuisse profitemur; nec aliud a nobis sensit Honorius
dum operationem Christi unicam esse scripsit. Now, if it be a point of Faith,
as the Jesuits pretend, that the Book of Jansenius is Heretical, and the five
Propositions are his, because two Popes have affirmed it, and that one ought to
consider what they say with the same regard as if Jesus Christ had said it;
with how much more reason may one say the same of the letters of Pope Honorius,
which were both strictly examined, condemned and burnt by the Authority of a
General Council of the whole Church, in which the Pope presided by his Legates,
and which in this very point was confirmed by two following General Councils,
and by a great number of Popes? For if ever Popes speak out of their chair, it
is then chiefly when they speak in General Councils, and in the confirmation of
them by their Apostolical power.

And so consequently one cannot doubt, but that Leo the second spoke out of his
Chair, when in diverse Letters which he wrote in confirmation of the sixth
Ecumenical Council, he in particular ratified the Condemnation of Honorius,
pronouncing an Anathema against him, because in stead of inlightning the Church
[these are his words] by the Doctrine of Apostolical Tradition, he suffered it
to be defiled by a profane corruption. Qui hanc Apostolicam Ecclesiam non
Apostolica Traditionis doctrina lustravit, sed profana traditione immaculari
permisit. And consequently, if, when the Popes speak out of their chair, of
what matter soever they speak, whether of right, or of Fact, they enjoy the
same Infallibility with Jesus Christ, and that all they so pronounce is an
Article of Faith; it ought to be a point of Faith that the Letters of Honorius
are Heretical, and he that denies it, especially after having asserted this
General Maxim, bears in his forehead the most notorious mark of an Heretic,
according to S. Paul, which is, to be condemned by his own proper judgment.

Nor will it serve, to have recourse to the pretended falsifying of the Acts of
the sixth Council, and of the letters of Leo the second; For as this pretension
is both unsustainable, ridiculous and extravagant, (as in the last Assembly of
the Clergy, the Bishops even most addicted to the Jesuits did acknowledge) if
there were no other then this poor evasion to excuse men from believing with
Divine Faith, that Honorius was justly anathematized, and his Letters legally
condemned, as full of Heresies; one must needs have renounced all common sense,
to make any other judgment of this Pope, or not to hold his Letters for
heretical.

But, as it is the property of Error to destroy it self, the same person, that
by this new Opinion of the Jesuits should be engaged of necessity to maintain
these Letters of Honorius to be Heretical; by the same principle would be
obliged to acknowledge the falsity of his own opinion, For how could he believe
that all the Popes were endued with this infallibility of Jesus Christ speaking
out of their chair; seeing Honorius fell into an error, in a conjecture where
it is hard to conceive how he should not speak out of his chair, since he spoke
as Judge of controversies of Faith, for the adjusting the greatest variance
that then reigned in the Church, and which had divided all the Patriarks of the
East. And nevertheless, without insisting on the judgment of the Sixth
Council, and supposing, which yet is most absurd, that the Acts of it were
corrupted; how can any one pretend that Honorius in this occasion, was assisted
with the Infallibility of Jesus Christ, since having by his Letters approved
the letter of Sergius Patriarch of Constantinople, either he understood it
rightly, and then he fell into an Error of right, by approving an heretical
Opinion of one only Will in Jesus Christ, which he must have acknowledged to
have been contained in the letter of Sergius: Or else he mis-understood the
said letter, taking in a Catholic sense, that which Sergius writ in an
heretical one, in which case he must needs have erred at least in a matter of
Fact.

So that the Jesuits can in no sort avoid being Heretics, for if it be an
heresy, as questionless it is, to ascribe to the Popes, speaking out of their
chair, the same infallibility which Jesus Christ has, as well in matters of
right, as of fact, in such sort that their decision even in matters of Fact,
may be believed by divine Faith, then they must needs be Heretics, because
they are engaged to maintain not an heresy only, but a blasphemy: And if they
pretend this opinion is true, they are likewise Heretics, because they impugn
faith, by impugning the decision of so many Popes and General Councels touching
the condemnation of Honorius, whom, according to their erroneous Opinion, one
is bound to believe by divine Faith, to have been most justly condemned, since
it was by the sentence of Judges, as infallible, both in matters of right, and
of fact, as Jesus Christ himself.

My Lords, I dwell too long upon the refutation of so visible a folly, but
permit me to lay before you one other pernicious consequence thereof. Your
Lordships have seen the design of their Conclusions, and how glorious a Title
they prefix before them: Assertiones Catholicae contra saeculorum omnium
praecipuas Haereses. What can a man rationally conceive, when he sees what
Doctrines (in pursuance of that Title) they oppose to these heresies, but that
their meaning is to obtrude them upon us for Catholic truths, maintained by
the Church against Heretics, and which we are bound to embrace under pain of
Heresy, and of falling off from the Communion of the Church. Wherefore
according to the Jesuits, the Catholic Church can never receive the Grecians
back into Communion, nor reunite its members cut off by so deplorable a Schism,
otherwise then by obliging them to confess that Jesus Christ has given to the
Popes the same infallibility which he himself had, in all they propose to the
whole Church, even particular Facts. And as all Heretics of these latter Ages
have embraced the Error of the Grecians, touching the Primacy of the Holy Seat;
so likewise neither can we open the Church doors to any of them, upon other
terms then by extorting from them a profession of this new Article of Faith.

But admitting the Church should not tie them to such hard measure, yet what a
World of Obstacles are by this opinion cast in the way of their conversion?
What scandal does it not give them? What a fair pretext does it afford their
Ministers, to decry the Catholic Church in their Sermons to their abused
flock, and render it odious and contemptible, and confirm them in their ancient
reproach and calumny, so often cast upon Catholics of equalling the Pope with
God almighty?

It is well known that this was the principal Engine to work so many people to
a revolt from the Church. Is it possible, that even Religious persons should
concur with them in so pernicious a design, and furnish them with arms to
fight against us, giving them a just occasion to look upon the submission which
all faithful Christians yield to the Pope, as an insupportable yoke imposed on
their consciences, even in matters that no ways concern the Catholic Faith,
nor whereof the knowledge does in any sort contribute to Salvation.

This is it, My Lords, that has chiefly forced us to speak in this ranconter:
It was absolutely necessary that Catholic Divines should make all have to cry
out against this impiety, lest these uncircumcised should take occasion to
insult over the Hosts of the living God: We were obliged to prevent them, that
it might appear to all the World, that these excesses were no less detested in
the Catholic Church, out of the love of truth, then they seemed to detest them
upon the account of justifying their guilty separation.

But if, to have exposed their complaints to the public, be enough to acquit
Divines of the duty incumbent on them; it will not suffice for the honor of
the Church, and an entire reparation of this scandal, that they alone should
speak in this occasion. It Is your part, My Lords, who ought to be inflamed with
a pious zeal for the purity of Christian Doctrine, whereof you are the
Depositaries; for the safety of Souls, whereof you are the Spiritual Fathers;
for the Sanctity of the Church, whereof you are the Bridegrooms; for the honor
of Jesus Christ, whose chief Ministers you are; to consider before Almighty
God, what service you owe him, in an occasion of this importance, where the
Faith of the Church is violated by a capital error that strikes at the very
roots thereof, where the Faithful are in danger to be poisoned by an opinion,
that tends to change into Idolatry the veneration which they owe to their
Sovereign Pastor; where the Church is profaned by an impiety, that dishonours
and exposes it to the outrages of its enemies; and finally where Jesus Christ
is horribly blasphemed by a Sacrilegious parity, which they endeavor to
establish betwixt his sacred words, and those of his Minister, by making the
one, as well as the other, the object of Divine Faith.

Some one (...) say, it is an extravagance, which deserves not to have such
notice taken of it; and this without question will be the pretext to move you
to connive at such an excess. But you ought to consider, My Lords, that how
extravagant soever the opinion may be, It is advanced by persons who may give a
just occasion to apprehend strange consequences of it. For clearly, it is not
by chance, or the blind passion of some one private person, that it now comes
to light; but of old there have been dispositions laid for the introducing it:
nor was it ushered in with such pomp and ceremony, but just at that nick of
time which they conceived most favorable to procure it a successeful
acceptance, and in which they thought, not any one would have the boldness to
hold up his hand in opposition to it.

Their pretensions perchance are not yet ripe enough to draw a formal
approbation of it from the Bishops; but their hopes are, since we must speak
the plain truth, that their credit, and the power, which of late they have got,
of doing both good and bad Offices, will at least be able to keep them in
silence; so that not one shall dare attempt the condemnation of it, for fear of
drawing on his head the vengeance of so potent a Society; and that the Sorbone,
which now they think they have brought to their beck, will never have the
confidence to censure it, what aversion soever it may have inwardly for it.

They hope then, under the favor of this silence, and whilst the whole world
shall seem buried in sleep, dum dormirent homines, this cockle, which they have
sowed in the fields of the Church, will take root and grow up by the advantage
of the season; In the mean time they will leave it to grow to maturity,
according to their manner of expression, relinquent tempori maturandum; and
when it shall be fully ripe, they will extract the natural consequences; that
necessarily must spring from it. For the present, they tell us modestly, one
may believe with Divine Faith such like particular Facts; but we shall shortly
hear, that we are bound to believ them; which grad^tion will be easy for them
to establish, because it follows by a necessary consequence out of their
principle; it being certain that no man can believe with Divine Faith, but what
is a matter of Faith: and what is such, ought of necessity to be believed in
that nature, when it shall be sufficiently proposed. It i^ enough for their
turns at present, that the Bishops do not condemn this opinion: but we shall
see them ere long inveagle them in, to be the approvers of it, according to an
other of their Maxims, which is; That the Church does approve all such
Doctrines, as ^t suffers without making opposition.

It highly concerns you, My Lords, to reflect on the danger whereunto not only
the Church, but you your selves are also exposed; lest one day the Jesuits
bring you in for abettors of their Heresy, and God himself lay it to your
charge. For though it be a most false error, that the Church approvs all
opinions which it does not suppress, it is notwithstanding a constant truth,
confirmed by Popes and Councils, that God imputes to Pastors the approval of
errors, which they did not in due time oppose. Error cui non resistitur,
approbatur Qui non corrigit resecanda, committit. Which made the second Council
of Tours declare, that the Shepherd seemed to side with the Woolf, as often as
he did not hinder the slaughter of his flock, having the power to do it. And
St. Leo, speaking of those that were negligent in applying remedies to the
grievances of the Church, lays them all at their doors: Qui multam saepe
nutriunt pestilentiam, dum necessariam dissimulant adhibere medicinam. But
these are reflections altogether needless to be suggested to you, My Lords,
whose zeal and Pastoral vigilance is of greater force to represent you what is
expedient for the good of the Church in these occasions, then all the
discourses that can be made you. It is enough for private Divines to lay before
your eyes the emergent evils, and deep wounds inflicted on its Doctrine, and
only to say to each of you in particular the same which a Prophet said to God,
Vide, Domine, and considera. See and consider what Doctrine is taught in the
Church, whereof you are the Masters. Their duty extends no further, and this
done, they may take up their rest, and lament before Almighty God in Silence
and Humility.

Paris the 1st. of January 1662.
FINIS.

