THE ARRAIGNMENT OF Algernon Sidney, Esquire, November, 7th. 1683.
ALgernon Sidney Esquire, was by Habeas Corpus brought up to the Bar of the
Court of King's Bench, and the Clerk of the Crown having read the Return, Mr.
Attorney General informed the Court, there was an Indictment against the
Prisoner, and prayed he might be charged with it.

Clerk of the Crown. Algernon Sidney hold up thy hand


(which he did.) Midd. ss.

THe Jurors for our Lord the King, upon their Oath do present, That Algernon
Sidney, late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, Esquire, as a false Traitor against the Most Illustrious, Most
Excellent Prince, our Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, and his Natural Lord, Not having the
fear of God in his Heart, nor weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but moved
and seduced by the instigation of the Devil, utterly withdrawing the cordial
Love, and true, due and natural Obedience which a true and faithful Subject of
our said Lord the King should bear, toward him the said Lord the King, and of
Right is bound to bear; Contriving, and with all his Strength intending, to
disturb the Peace and Common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England, and to
stir up and move War and Rebellion against the said Lord the King, and to
subvert the Government of the said Lord the King, in this Kingdom of England,
and to Depose and Deprive the said Lord the King, from the Title, Honor and
Regal Name, of the Imperial Crown of his Kingdom of England, and to bring and
put the said Lord the King to Death, and final Destruction, the thirtieth Day
of June, in the Five and thirtieth Tear of the Reign of our Lord King Charles
the Second, new King of England, etc. and diverse other Days and Times, as well
before, as after, at the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, Maliciously and Traitorously, with diverse other Traitors to the
Jurors aforesaid unknown, did Conspire, Compass, Imagine and intend to Deprive
and cast down, the said Lord the King, his Supreme natural Lord; not only from
the Regal State, Title, Power and Rule of his Kingdom of England: but also to
Kill and ^ring and put to Death, the same Lord the King, and to change, alter
and utterly Subvert, the Ancient Government of this his Kingdom of England, and
to cause and procure a miserable Slaughter among the Subjects of the said Lord
the King through his whole Kingdom of England, and to move and stir up an
Insurrection and Rebellion against the said Lord the King, within this Kingdom
of England, And to fulfill and perfect those his most horrid, wicked and
diabolical Treasons, and traiterous Compassings, Imaginations and Purposes, the
same Algernon Sidney as a false Traitor, then and there, and diverse other Days
and Times as well before as after, Maliciously, Traitorously and advisedly, did
Assemble himself, meet and consult with the aforesaid other. Traitors to the
Jurors aforesaid unknown, and with the same Traitors did Treat of, and for
those his Treasons and Traiterous Compassings, Imaginations and Purposes, to be
executed and fulfilled. And that the aforesaid Algernon Sidney as a false
Traitor, maliciously, traitorously and advisedly, then and there, and diverse
other Days and Times as well before as after, upon himself did assume, and to
the aforesaid other Traiters did promise, That he would be Aiding and Assisting
in the Execution of their Treasons and Traiterous Compassings, Imaginations and
Purposes aforesaid, and to fulfill, perfect and reduce to effect those their
most horrid Treasons and Traiterous Compassings, Imaginations and Purposes
aforesaid, the same Algernon Sidney* as a false Traitor, then and there
Falsely, Maliciously, Advisedly and Traitorously did send one Aaron Smith into
Scotland, to invite, procure, and incite diverse evil disposed Subjects of our
said Lord the King, of his Kingdom of Scotland, to come into this Kingdom of
England* to advise and consult with the aforesaid Algernon Sidney, and the
aforesaid other unknown Traitors in this Kingdom of England, of Aid and
Assistance to be expected and supplied from the Kingdom of Scotland to fulfill,
perfect, and reduce to effect those their most Wicked, Horrid, and Traitorous
Treasons aforesaid. And that the aforesaid Algernon Sidney to fulfill and
perfect those most Wicked, Horrid, and Devilish Treasons, and Traitorous
Compassings. Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid, And to persuade the Subjects
of the said Lord the King of this Kingdom of England* That it is lawful to make
and stir up on Insurrection and Rebellion against the said Lord the King that
now is, the said Thirtieth day of June, in the Five and Thirtieth year of the
Reign of the said Lord the King that now is, at the Parish of St. Giles in the
Fields in the County of Middlesex, falsely, unlawfully, wickedly, seditiously,
and Traitorously, did make, compose, and write, and caused to be made,
composed, and written a certain false, Seditious and Traitorous Libell, in
which said False, Seditious and Traitorous Libel among other things is
contained as follows in these English words, viz. The Power Originally in the
People of England is deligated unto the Parliament, He (the most Serene Lord,
Charles the Second now King of England, meaning) is subject unto the Law of
God, as He is a Man to the People, that makes him a King, inasmuch as He is a
King, the Law sets a measure unto that subjection, and the Parliament Judges of
the particular Cases thereupon arising, He must be content to submit his
interest unto theirs, since He is no more then any one of them in any other
respect then that He is by the consent of all raised above any other; if He
does not like this Condition, He may renounce the Crown; but if he receive it
upon that Condition (as all Magistrates do the Power they receive) and swear to
perform it, He must expect that the performance will be exacted or revenge
taken by those that He has betrayed. And that in another place in the said
false Seditious and Traiterous Libel, among other things, these False,
Seditious and Traiterous English Sentences are contained (that is to say) We
may therefore change or take away Kings, without breaking any Yoke, or that is
made a Yoke which ought not to be one, the injury is therefore in making or
imposing, and there can be none in breaking it. Against the Duty of his
Allegiance, against the Peace of the said now Lord the King, His Crown and
Dignity, etc. And against the Form of the Statutes in this Case made and
provided, etc.

How say thou, art thou guilty of this High Treason whereof thou stand
Indicted, or not Guilty?


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I find here an heap of Crimes put together, distinct in
nature one from another, and distinguished by Law; and I do conceive, My Lord,
That the Indictment it self is thereupon void, and I cannot be Impeached upon
it.


L. C. Justice. We are not to admit of any Discourses, till you Answer the
Question, Whether you be Guilty or not Guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis If he will Demurr, my Lord, We will give him leave.


Col. Sidney. I presume your Lordship will direct me, for I am an ignorant Man
in matters of this kind, I may easily be surprised in it, I never was at a
Trial in my life of any Body, and never read a Law-Book.


L. C. Just. Because no Prisoner under your Circumstances is to have Counsel,
but in special Cases to be assigned in matters of Law, the Court is bound by
their Oaths and Duty of their Places, that they shall not see any wrong done to
you: But the business we are to tell you now is, You are to plead Guilty* or
not Guilty, or Demur, which is a Confession in point of Law.


Col. Sidney. Under favor, my Lord, There may be Indictments that are
erroneous, and if they are erroneous and vicious, they are null, and ought not
to be answered to.


Mr. Just. Wythins. If you please to demur to it, you shall have liberty to
make any Exceptions.


Col. Sidney. I don't demur, it is only Exceptions. I think in matters of Life,
a Man may give in his Exceptions to the Bill, and plead not Guilty afterward.
I am sure in Sir Henry Vane's Case, the Court said it, and offered him to do
it; That which, under favor, I hope to do.


L. C. Justice. You must Plead or Demurr.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, If I put in Exceptions to the Bill, I don't plead till
those Exceptions are overruled. This was in the case of Sir Henry Vane.


L. C. Justice. Sir, I must tell you, you must either Plead or Demurr.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, There are in this Indictment, some Treasons or reputed
Treasons, that may come within the Statute of the 13th of this King, which is
limited by time, the Prosecution must be in Six Months, and the Indictment
within Three. Now, my Lord, if that this Business that is mentioned, be above
six Months before my Commitment, or above three before the Indictment, I think,
under favor, I ought not to answer to these Matters.


L. C. Justice. You are mistaken in the Law. That will be saved when the Fact
comes to appear. If they allege the thing to be at a time, which according to
that allegation would maintain the Indictment, if upon the Trial it appear
otherwise, the Court is bound to take notice of it, when you come to your
Trial, but we are not bound to examine that before you have pleaded.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, Every body will acknowledge, that there have been or may
be vicious Indictments. Now if I plead to an erroneous Indictment, and am
Acquitted, I may be Indicted again. Bills of Attainder have been upon Errors in
Original Indictments, as that of the Duke of Somerset. Now if there be here
several things distinct in Nature, distinguished by Law that are put together,
it is impossible to make a positive Answer to any one. If any one should tell
me, that I by my self, or by others, by Sword or by Pistol conspired to kill
the King, I can say, I did it, or I did it not. If any one say, I have levied
War, and by several Acts undertake to prove I have done it, I can say I have
done it, or I have not. But here I don't find any thing specifyed, or can tell
upon what Statute I am Indicted. I pray, I may see the Record.


L. C. Justice. That we cannot do. You shall hear it read again if you will. If
you think it to be a void Indictment, Demur to it if you will.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I desire you to accept of this

(showing a Parchment.)
L. C. Justice. What is it? Put in what Plea you shall be advised; but if you
put in a special Plea, and Mr. Attorney demurrs, you may have Judgment of
Death, and by that you wave the Fact.


Col. Sidney, I cannot make any Objection to the Bill after I have pleaded, Not
Guilty, for I accept the Bill thereby to be good.


L. C. Justice. If you can assign any Matter of Law, do. But otherwise what a
kind of thing would it be. All Criminals would say in all Cases, I doubt
whether the Bill be Good or Bad. And after I have thus considered of it, I will
Plead. You are misinformed, and this the Court tells you, as a Duty incumbent
on them.


Mr. Just. Wythins. If you Demur, and show what your Causes are, We will assign
you Counsel.


Col. Sidney. I desire you would not try me, and make me to ^un on dark and
slippery Places, I don't see my way.


L. C. Justice. Don't apprehend your self to be so, as if the Court would run
you on any inconvenience. But they are bound to see the Methods of Justice
preserved, they are those that you, and all the King's Subjects are bound to
conform to. If any one of us were in the same Condition, we must observe the
same Methods of Law.


Clerk of the Crown. Art thou Guilty, or not Guilty?


Col. Sidney. Then pray* my Lord, Will you tell me this, Is it true, That a
Man, how vicious so ever an Indictment is, must Answer or Demurr to it.


L. C. Just. He must either Answer or Demurr.


Col. Sidney. Are there no Exceptions to be admitted?


L. C. Justice. None, And if you don't do the one, or the other, Judgment
passes, as if you had pleaded.


Col. Sidney. This is a Plea.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Will you stand by it, Consider your self, and your Life, If
you put in that Plea, and Mr. Attorney Demurrs, if your Plea be not good, your
Life is gone.


Col. Sidney. Pray my Lord, Give me a day to consider of it.


Lord Chief Justice. No, We must not introduce new Methods, or Forms for any
body. The same Case that is with you, may be with other people.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I do not pretend to any thing but what is Law, and due
to every Man upon English Ground. I would be very sorry to do that which may be
hurtful.


L. C. Justice. You have the rule of the Court. You must do one or the other.
Call him to it.


Col. Sidney. I desire this may be read

(showing the same Parchment.)
L. C. Justice. It shall not be read, unless you put it in as a Plea.


Mr. At. General. I must do my duty, Mr. Williams exceeds his Liberty, he
informs the Prisoner several things.


Mr. Williams. I only said, if it was a Plea, put it in, Mr. Attorney can hear
all I say. Whereupon Mr. Williams was reproved by the Lord Chief Justice.


Col. Sidney. I only give it as exceptions to the Bill*


Clerk of the Crown. Art thou Guilty, or not Guilty?


Col. Sidney. If any one should ask me any particular thing, I could tell how
to answer.


L. C. Justice. He asks you a particular thing. It Is the duty of the Court to
pronounce Judgment, if you do not plead.


Col. Sidney. Why then, if you drive me upon it, I must plead.


Lord Chief Justice. I am sure there is no Gentleman of the Long Robe would put
any such thing into your head. There was never any such thing done in Capital
Matters.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I am there Indicted for Conspiring the Death of the
King, I have not Conspired the Death of the King; I am there Indicted for
Levying of War, I have not done that. I am Indicted for having Invited in
others, of another Nation, I have not done that neither. I am there Indicted to
have written a Seditious Libel to stir up the Spirits of the People against the
King, I have not written any thing to stir up the People against the King. --


L. C. Justice. We are not to hear all this, you must Plead as other People, or
else in plain English we will pronounce Sentence. We ought to give all Men
satisfaction that will be satisfied; but if they wont be directed, we cannot
help that.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, If you put me upon this inevitable necessity, it lies
upon you; I must plead then.


Clerk of the Crown. Art thou Guilty, or not Guilty?


Col. Sidney. Not Guilty.


Clerk of the Crown. Culprit, how will thou be tried?


Col. Sidney. By God and my Country.


Clerk of the Crown. God send thee a good Deliverance.


L. C. Justice. If you be not Guilty, I pray God you may escape.


Mr. At. General. My Lord, will you please to appoint a day for his Trial,
that he may take notice of it now?


L. C. Justice. What time would you have?


Mr. At. General. A Weeks time, do you think that will be enough?


Col. Sidney. No, Pray my Lord give me a Fortnights time.


Mr. At. General. I will not oppose it.


Col. Sidney. In the next place I desire a Copy of the Indictment.


L. C. Justice. We cannot grant it by Law.


Col. Sidney. I desire you would please to give me Counsel.


L. C. Justice. We cannot do it, If you assign us any particular Point of Law,
if the Court think it such a Point as may be worth the debating, you shall have
Counsel. But if you ask for Counsel for no other reason then because you ask
it, we must not grant it. The Court is bound to see that nothing be done
against you, but what is according to the rules of Law. I would be very loath to
draw the guilt of any man's blood upon me.


Col. Sidney. Has not every body Counsel?


L. C. Justice. No.


Col. Sidney. I have several Points of Law.


L. C. Justice. Tell us them.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, Will you oblige me that am an ignorant man, and confess
my self so; upon hearing my Indictment for things I know not of, a long thing
presently to raise a point of Law.


L. C. Justice. It Is not we oblige you Mr. Sidney, it is the Law obliges you. We
are the Ministers of the Law, it is the Law says we are not to allow you Counsel
without making your Objections, that the Court may understand whether it be
fit; It Is the Law says we may not allow you a Copy of the Indictment. Therefore
don't go away and say that we as Men sitting here impose upon you, we sit here
only to administer the Justice of the Nation.


Mr. Justice Wythins. Sir you will have a Fortnights time to consider of
Objections in Law.


L. C. Justice. If you will have it Read, you shall. Those things that you may
have by Law, God forbid but you should have the benefit of them.


Col. Sidney. I desire, my Lord, to hear it read again.


Mr. At. General. Would you have it read in Latin.


Col. Sidney. Yes, If you please, I do understand a little Latin.


Then the Indictment was read in Latin. Col. Sidney. What is that Statute.


L. C. Justice. When you come to your Trial, Mr. Attorney will tell you what
Statute he goes upon. And he may give in Evidence, any Act of Parliament that
comprehends Treason.


Col. Sidney, My thinks he should say what Statute he goes upon.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Sir, would you have a new Indictment for you?


L. C. Justice. He must take notice of his Trial this day fortnight; Lieutenant
of the Tower, you may take the Prisoner back again.


Then the Lieutenant of the Tower took away his Prisoner. THE TRIAL OF Algernon
Sidney, Esquire NOVEMBER, 21, 1683.
ALgernon Sidney, Esquire, was brought to the Bar of the Court of King's Bench
by Habeas Corpus, and Proclamation for Information being made, he desired Pen,
Ink and Paper, which were granted him. And he also desired, that two persons (
viz.) Mr. Winn and Mr. Gibbs might write for him, which was also allowed by the
Court.

Coll. Sidney. My Lord, when I was last here before your Lordship, I did desire
a Copy of my Indictment, and I thought the Law did allow it me. But being in an
hurry, carried first to a Tavern, then led through Soldiers, and surprised
absolutely, I could not give that reason why I thought the Law allowed me a
Copy. My Lord, I was denied a Copy, and thereby I was deprived of the benefit
of a special Plea I designed to have put in. This would have been a great help
to your Lordship, and to me; the denial of which has been a great prejudice.
Now, my Lord, that which I thought was Law then, I think I can give a better
testimony that it is so now upon the Statute of 46. E. 3. wherein it is
expressed, that tout parts and tout gents, that is, all people shall have a
Copy of every Record; and it enumerates several matters, as well that against
the King as other people. This is a general Law still in force: my Lord
Strafford had a Copy, and my Lord Stafford, and the Lords in the Tower had
Copies of their Indictments. And under favor; I think it was never more
necessary than to me, there never having been, perhaps, a Charge so long, and
so confused. Now, my Lord, I have a Copy transcribed of this Statute.


Showing a Paper. Lord Chief Justice. We remember the Law very well. Mr. Sidney
did move for a Copy of the Indictment, and the Court denied him then, and so
shall now. And yet all this while we shall deny you nothing that is Law. You
shall have the right that becomes a Subject in your condition. And we must tell
you, that notwithstanding all that Case we ought not to have given you so much
favor (perhaps in strictness) as we did. And because you did particularly take
notice of the Case of Sir* Henry Vane last time, I will show you the Court did
indulge more to you than was done to that person. In Sir Henry Vane's Case, by
the opinion of all the Judges, it was declared, that no Copy ought to be given,
neither of the whole, nor any part of the Indictment, except they show matter
of Law. But your Counsel, since you went away, moved for the Copy of the
Indictment; and to satisfy them, I directed the Case that you took notice of
to be read in the Court. And I thought they had been sufficiently satisfied.
You had the Indictment read to you in La^i^e, which was denied in the Case of
Sir Henry Vane. And there is a later Case known to most persons here. By the
opinion of all the Judges of England, a Copy of the Indictment was denied to my
Lord Russel. Therefore arraign him upon the Indictment; we must not spend our
time in discourses to captivate the people.


Col. Sid. Is not this a good Law my Lord?


Holding out the Paper. L. C. J. You have the rule of the Court.


Mr. Just. Wythens. Any thing the Law will allow you, you shall have; but I am
sure if you did advise with your Counsel, they must tell you the same thing.

So the Clerk of the Crown called the Jury, and after several Challenges, the
names of the Jury were as follow,

The Jury.
John Amger. Richard White. William Linn. Lawrence Wood. Adam Andrews. Emery
Arguise. Josias Clerk. George Glisby. Nicholas Baxter. William Reeves. William
Grove and John Burt.



L. C. J. Look you Gentlemen of the Jury, there are some Gentlemen at the Bar,
as we are informed, are apt to whisper to the Jury; it is no part of their duty;
nay, it is against their duty: and therefore Gentlemen, if you hear any of them
by you, that offer to whisper, or make Comments in this Cause, as you are upon
your Oaths, and I doubt not but will do your duty between the King and the
Prisoner; so I expect if you hear the Counsel say any thing, you will inform
the Court. Let us have no Remarks, but a fair Trial in God's Name.


Cl. of Cr. You that are sworn look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his
Cause. He stands indicted by the Name of Algernon Sidney of, etc. (as in the
Indictment) your Charge is to inquire, etc.


Then Proclamation for Evidence was made. Mr. Dolben. May it please your
Lordship, and you Gentlemen that are sworn. This is an Indictment of High
Treason preferred against Algernon Sidney, the Prisoner at the Bar. The
Indictment sets forth, That he as a false Traitor against our most Illustrious
Prince, Charles the Second, his natural Lord, not having the fear of God in his
heart, and on the Thirtieth of June in the Thirty Fifth Year of the King, and
diverse other days and times, as well before as after, in the Parish of St.
Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, traitorously, with diverse
Traitors unknown, did conspire the Death of the King, and to levy War within
this Kingdom. And to complete these Traitorous Purposes did then and there
maliciously, advisedly and traitorously send one Aaron Smith into Scotland, to
excite some ill disposed persons of that Kingdom to come into this, and to
consult with the said Algernon Sidney and other Traitors, of and upon
assistance from the Kingdom of Scotland, to carry on those Designs. And the
Indictment sets forth further, that to persuade the people of England it was
lawful to raise Rebellion, the said Algernon Sidney did cause to be written a
false Seditious Libel, in which is contained these English Words, The Power is
originally in the People, and that is delegated to the King. The King is
subject to the Law of God as a King, as a man to the people that made him a
King. In as much as he is a King, the Law sets a measure to that Objection,
(etc. put in the Indictment.) This is laid to be against the duty of his
Allegiance, against the peace of the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against
the Form of the Statute in that Case made and provided. If we prove him guilty,
we doubt not but you will find it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar
stands indicted of the highest Crimes, the conspiring the Death of the King,
and the Overthrow of the English Monarchy. Gentlemen, we shall use this Method
in our Evidence. We shall show by many Witnesses, that there was a design of
raising and making a Rebellion within this Kingdom. For, Gentlemen, you must
take notice, and I think there is no English Man but does believe, that for
several years last past a design was laid, and for that purpose several secret
Insinuations were made use of, and public Libels spread abroad to persuade the
people that the King was introducing Arbitrary Power, that he subverted all
their Rights, Liberties, Properties* and whatever was dear to them. They
endeavored to make the world believe the King was a Papist. And when,
Gentlemen, by such Stratagems they had worked upon many incautelous persons,
when they thought they had gotten a sufficient party, then there was a design
of an open rising (for they thought all things were ripened) and that was to be
in several parts of the Kingdom. Some persons to effect this design were for a
present Assassination of the King. Others would do it in a more fair and
gentile way. They thought it below persons of that great Quality as the
Prisoner is and therefore were for doing it by open Force:

When we have given that general Evidence, we shall then come to show you what
share and part the Prisoner had in this Design. For certainly he was looked
upon as a very eminent person, whose Education abroad, and former practices at
home had rendered him fit to advise and proceed in such Affairs. We shall prove
when these matters were ripe, this Gentleman was of the Council of State, of
the Six that were to manage this matter of the Rising. We shall show the
several Consultations they held: one at Mr. Hambden's House, another at the
House of my Lord Russel. There we shall acquaint you what Debates they had; for
they acted like very subtle Men; and there they debated, whether the Rising
should be first in the Country or City, or both together. They came to a
resolution it should be in both places at once. Then when they had asserted
that point, they come to consider the time of Rising; and upon that they
thought fit to call in Aid of Scotland first; and that was this Gentleman's
particular Province. For he being a man of great Secrecy, was to send an
Emissary into that Kingdom, and invite some persons over totreat with them
about it. We shall prove that an Emissary was sent, and this Gentleman gave him
a considerable Sum to bear his Charges. We shall prove that several Scotch
Gentlemen, in pursuance of this Resolve, came here to treat with this great
Council of State, about this Affair: And shall make it appear to you, that
as soon as ever the least Discovery of this Plot was, these persons concealed
themselves and withdrew, as the rest of the Plotters that have fled from
Justice.

Gentlemen, this was not enough for this Gentleman to consult on these several
Passages, but to demonstrate to the World, that his Head and Heart was entire
in this Service, and that he might carry it on the more effectually, he was at
this very time, when this Emissary was gone into Scotland, preparing a most
Seditious and Traitorous Libel, we instance in some particular Words of it. But
we shall show you, that the whole Design of this Treatise is to persuade the
People of England, that it is lawful, may, that they have a right to set aside
their Prince, in c^se it appear to them, that he has broken the Trust laid
upon him by the People. Gentlemen, he does use in that Treatise several
Arguments drawn from the most Rebellious Times that ever were in England, from
the late Rebellion (I must needs use that word notwithstanding the Act of
Oblivion, when a Gentleman shall now attempt to do those things for which he
was pardoned then) and from other Kingdoms, where Rebellion has been
prosperous against Princes. Then he falls to Reasoning, and uses great Reason
in the Case, That all the Power of the Prince is originally in the People, and
applies that Discourse, that the power of the King was derived from the People
upon Trust, and they had already declared the King had invaded their Rights,
and therefore he comes to argue, they might assume that original power they had
conferred. And he tells the King, that is no hard condition; if he thinks it
so, he should lay down his Crown, if not, he threatens the condition would be
exacted, or otherwise should be revenged by those he had betrayed: and who but
this Gentleman and his Confederates, that thought himself not only able to
govern this Nation, but many Monarchies, should call him to account for it? For
he lays down this Principle, That tho all the People do rise against their
Prince, it is no Rebellion. The whole Book is an argument for the People to
rise in Arms, and vindicate their wrongs. He lays it down, That the King has no
Authority to dissolve the Parliament; but it is apparent the King has dissolved
many; therefore he has broken his Trust, and invaded our Rights. And at last
concludes with that passage laid in the Indictment, We may therefore shake off
our Yoke; for it is not a Yoke we submitted to, but a Yoke by Tyranny (that must
be the meaning of it) they have imposed on us.

Gentlemen, if we prove all these matters to you, I doubt not you will do right
to the King and Kingdom, and show your abhorrence of those Republican
Principles; which, if put in practice, will not only destroy the King, but the
best Monarchy in the World.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray call Mr. West.


Who appeared. Col. Sidney. I pray one word, my Lord, before Mr. West be sworn,
I have heard, my Lord, Mr. West has confessed many Treasons, and I desire to
know whether he is pardoned, or no.


L. C. J. I don't know that.


Col. Sid. My Lord, how can he be a Witness then?


L. C. Just. Swear him: for I know no Legal Objection against him. He was a
good Witness in my Lord Russel's Trial.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, if another did not except against him, it is nothing to
me.


Mr. North. Pray give an account to the Court of what you know of a general
Insurrection intended in England.


Col. Sidney. What he knows concerning me.


L. C. J. We will take care of that, that no Evidence be given but what ought
to be.


Col. Sid. Is it ordinary that he should say any thing, unless it be to me and
my Indictment?


L. C. J. Mr. Sidney, you remember in all the Trials about the late Popish
Plot, how there was first a general account given of the Plot in Coleman's
Trial, and so in Plunket's, and others: I don't doubt but you remember it. And
Sir William Jones, against whose Judgment, I believe, you will not object, was
Attorney at that time.


Mr. North. Mr. West, What do you know of the general Insurrection lately
designed?


Mr. West. My Lord, I have had the honor to know Colonel Sidney several years;
but I don't remember that I ever saw him from the time I came acquainted with
any part of the Conspiracy, till the Discovery that was at the Council.


Mr. North. Pray give an account of what you know of the Plot in general.


Mr. West. My Lord, in October last Captain Walcot came to me, and told me that
my Lord Shaftesbury had designed an Insurrection in November; I used some
Arguments to dissuade him from it. But a little afterward he came and told me
the thing was wholly disappointed, and then it went off, and my Lord
Shaftesbury went for Holland. Colonel- Romsey afterward about Christmas said
there were some Lords and Gentlemen intended to make an Insurrection, the
persons were the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord of Essex, my Lord Howard, my Lord
Russel, the Prisoner at the Bar, and Mr. Hambden Junior. After some time he
told me they had altered their measures, and were resolved not to venture upon
an Insurrection in England, till they had a concurrency in Scotland. Afterward
I was not privy to any thing else, but what I had the Report of from Mr.
Nelthorp and Mr. Ferguson. Mr. Nelthorp told me the Prisoner had said --


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I am very unwilling to interrupt the Gentleman --


Lord Chief Justice. You must not interrupt the Witness. Go on, Sir.


Mr. West. Mr. Nelthorp told me, the Prisoner at the Bar had sent Aaron Smith
into Scotland, and given him a sum of money to bear his Charges, and sent
Letters to some Scotch Gentlemen to invite them to Town. The Letter bore a Cant
of settling some business in Carolina; but the business was coming up about the
Insurrection. After this Mr. Smith returned, and some Scotch Gentlemen with
him; and soon after Mr. Ferguson gave an account of that Affair, and said, the
Scotch proposed, if they might have thirty thousand pounds in ready money, they
would undertake to make an Insurrection in Scotland without the concurrence of
England. He said this Proposal was agreed to, and money would be soon ready;
and he said, that Sheppard would return the money. That the Arms were ready
bought, and my Lord of Argile would go into Scotland, and head the Scots. He
told me when things were thus settled, some difference arose about raising the
money; and at last he told me, my Lord Gray did offer to raise ten thousand
pounds out of his own Estate, if the rest would pay their proportion. Then the
Scots came down to 'less, but that would not be complied with. The places for
the Rising were Bristoll, Taunton, York, Chester, Exeter, London. That there
had been some Debates whether they should begin at London, or the other places;
and at last it was resolved, they should begin at London with the rest of the
places.

My Lord, this was the Account I had of the matter in general of Mr. Ferguson;
but he said they were disappointed. Afterward he told me the Prisoner at the
Bar and Major Wildman were very instrumental in working of it off* because they
could not agree upon the Declaration to be made upon the Insurrection. The
English were for a Common wealth; but the Scotch Gentlemen answered, Fairly it
might come to it in time, but the Noblemen there would not agree to it at
present. As to the Prisoner in particular I know nothing, and did never speak
with him till since the Discovery.


Mr. At. Genesis Colonel Romsey.


Sworn. Mr. North. Pray Sir, will you give the Court an account of what you
know of any Insurrection intended, and how they designed to carry it on*


Col. Romsey. My Lord, the latter end of October, or beginning of November, I
was desired by my Lord Shaftesbury to go to Mr. Sheppards to know of the
Gentlemen that were met there, what was done about the Rising intended at
Taunton; and I had their answer, that Mr. Trenchard had failed them, and that
it must cease for that time. That was all at that time.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What else do you know of any Insurrection afterward?


Col. Romsey. After that we had several meetings at Mr. West's Chamber, where
we had divided the City into twenty parts, and seven parts Mr. Goodenough had
brought an account of; the other thirteen he said nothing of; for he had not
spoke with those that were to tell him how many men they would afford. There
was there Captain Walcot, Mr. West, the two Goodenoughs, Mr. Borne, Mr. Wade,
and my self.


L. C. J. What was the Result of those Debates?


Col. Romsey. To see what number of men they could produce in the City for the
Insurrection.


L. C. J. Was there a Rising designed?


Col. Romsey. Yes.


L. C. J. And did these people meet?


Col. Romsey. There was no time set.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When was the meeting?


Col. Romsey. There were several meetings in March, and April, and May.


Mr. Sol. Genesis After the meeting at Sheppards?


Col. Romsey. Yes, a great while. It ceased, I think, six weeks or three months?


L. C. J. Who did you meet with at Mr. Sheppards?


Col. Romsey. There was the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray, my Lord Russel, Sir
Thomas Armstrong, Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Sheppard.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who did you expect should head this Army?


Col. Romsey. That was never said any thing of.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were to manage the Rising?


Col. Romsey. We that met there.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you no expectation of great men?


Col. Romsey. Mr. West told me, and Mr. Goodenough, that there was a Council,
which were the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Essex, my Lord Howard, Colonel
Sidney, Mr. Hambden, and my Lord Russel, there was Six.


L. C. J. What did he tell you of them six?


Col. Romsey. He told me they were managing a Business with Scotland.


Lord Chief Justice. A Business, pray speak plain, tell all you know.


Col. Romsey. For the Insurrection.


L. C. J. Say so then, we know nothing of the Business you were about.


Col. Romsey. My Lord, Mr. West had that Discourse with my Lord Howard I never
had; he is more fit to speak to that than me.


L. C. J. Speak your own knowledge, and no more.


Mr. Jones. After the death of my Lord Shaftesbury, who were the Managers, and
were to carry it on?


Col. Romsey. I told you Mr. West and Mr. Goodenough did tell me the Duke of
Monmouth, my Lord Essex --


Mr. At. Genesis He told you so before. Do you know there was an Insurrection
then intended?


Col. Romsey. Yes, because we met toward the management of it, the company
that met at Mr. West's Chamber, and other places.


Mr. At. Genesis What discourse had you with Mr. Ferguson about it?


Col. Romsey. Not about those Gentlemen.


Mr. North. The next thing we shall show, shall be that the Scotch men came to
Town.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I must ever put you in mind, whether it be ordinary to
examine men upon Indictments of Treason concerning me that I never saw, nor
heard of in my life.


L. C. J. I tell you, all this Evidence does not affect you, and I tell the
Jury so.


Col. Sidney. But it prepossesses the Jury.


Mr. Keiling called and sworn. Mr. At. Genesis I ask you in general, what you
know of the Risign to have been last Spring?


Mr. Keiling. My Lord, It was some time last Summer Mr. Goodenough came to me,
and brought me three Papers numbered on the backside; I asked him to what end
he delivered them me? he told me, One was for my self, and I was to deliver the
other Two to whom I could Trust in the two Divisions. I asked him, What was the
Design? he said, To Raise Men; says I, Do you design a general Insurrection?
He said, if he did not, if the King was taken off this would do well; for then
People would know how to have recourse to a formidable Body. And I have heard
him say, That Colonel Sidney, whom I don't know, had a considerable part in
the management of that Affair.


Mr. At. Genesis We Charge him with Conspiring, and there must be Confederates in
the Case. Now then we come to the Prisoner, We will call my Lord Howard, that
was one of the Persons that did Consult.


The Lord Howard Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury of
your knowledge of what Transactions there have been with the Prisoner about
this Affair of the general Rising.


Lord Howard. Truly my Lord, In the entering of the Evidence I am about to
give, I cannot but observe what a natural uniformity there is in Truth. For the
Gentleman that have been before, have so exactly instanced, in every
particular, with what I have to say, that two Tallys could not more exactly
fall into one another, though, I confess I had not seen their Faces, till the
Plot brake out, for some Months before.

My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, About the middle of January last, it was
considered by some of us that met together, That it was very necessary and
expedient to an Enterprise that had been long in hand, and fallen flat then,
that it should be revived by some Consult or Caball that should be set up to
give Life to it, and Governance to the Motions of it. The first (for ought I
know) Movers of this, were the Duke of Monmouth, the Gentleman at the Bar, and
my Self: And there we did agree, That we should bethink our selves of some few,
we were willing it should not exceed Five* at the most Seven. This Agreement
being at first between us Three; I remember the Duke of Monmouth undertook to
engage my Lord Russel, and my Lord Salisbury; and this Gentleman Colonel
Sidney for my Lord of Essex, and Mr. Hambden; and these being put together, did
presently constitute a little Caball of as great a Number as was intended. This
being settled among them, it was within a few days after, I cannot certainly
tell when, but between the middle and latter end of January, that I was told,
That the Persons had agreed to enter into this Conjunction of Counsels; and in
order to that, they had appointed a Meeting at Mr. Hambden's House, to which I
was invited. This in time was between the middle and latter end of January, but
I cannot tell exactly. When we came there, there was all those Gentlemen I
before-named, the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Essex, my Lord Russel, Colonel
Sidney, Mr. Hambden, and my Self. It was at Mr. Hambden's House, which Ranges
on the same Row with Southampton House: And being met, Mr. Hambden, I suppose,
did think it most properly belonged to him, to take upon him the part as it
were to open the Sessions, that was to give us a little account of the Reason,
End, and Intention of that Meeting: In which Discourse, he took occasion to
recapitulate some Design, that had been before chiefly carried on by my Lord
Shaftesbury, before this time Dead; and also took Notice of the ready
disposition and inclination of the Minds of Men to go on with it; and did give
one instance of his Judgment of it, That it being a Design communicated to so
many, it had not been so much as Revealed, or a murmur or whisper gone about
it: From whence he took occasion to tell us, That it was absolutely necessary
for the future, there should be some Counsel that should be as a Spring a
little to Guide and Govern the Motions of the rest, for that there were diverse
things to be taken care of, which if not taken care of by particular Persons,
would all miscarry. This was the Substance of the Prologue and Introduction he
made. From hence he made a Transition to some particular Things that he thought
was most principally to be taken Care of. And though it is impossible for me to
remember the Order and Method in which we Discoursed, or who said this or that,
but that which the Sense of all resulted to was this: That since we did not
come prepared for it, we should consider what were the Things that would
hereafter challenge our particular Care, that was, The time When, the places
Where, and the Persons by whom these Things should be carried on. This led into
some particular Discourse concerning some of these Heads: For the Time, that it
should be shortly, lest the Minds of Men should chil: And then as to the place
Where, whether in the City or Country, or both jointly. In all these, some
Opinions were given, but not settled to any Resolution, but they were committed
to our Thoughts to be digested afterward. But these being the Things that
every one was to take upon his thoughts, there was this Prerequisite to the
undertaking, and that was to consider what Magazines were to be got; and that
led to another particular, which was, With what they should be gotten, and that
was Money; and thereupon was propounded a considerable Sum to be raised; and as
I remember, the Sum propounded by the Duke of Monmouth was Twenty-Five Thousand
Pounds, or Thirty Thousand Pounds. And then it was considered, how it should be
raised without drawing Observation or Jealousy. These are only the Heads that
were then agreed on, hereafter to be better considered. But the present
Resolution that was taken, was, That before any Procedure was made in any of
these things, or any advance toward the Undertaking; the first Thing to be
considered, was, How to make a Coalition of Councels between Scotland, and what
we were doing here; and for that purpose we should bethink our selves of some
ut Person to be sent thither to Unite us into one Sense and Care. This is as
much as Occurs to my Memory upon that Meeting. About a Fortnight or three Weeks
after, which I suppose carried it to the middle of February next we had another
Meeting, and that was at Southampton House at my Lord Russels, and there was
every one of the same Persons; and when we came there, there happened to fall
in a Discourse which I know not how it came in, but it was a little warmly
urged, and thought to be untimely, and unseasonable; and that I remember was by
Mr. Hambden, who did tell us, That having now United our selves into such an
Undertaking as this was, it could not but be expected, that it would be a
Question put to many of us; To what End all this was? Where it was we intended
to Terminate? Into what we intended to Resolve? That these were Questions he
met with; and it was probable, every one had or would meet with from those
Persons, whose Assistance we expected; and that if there was any thing of a
Personal Interest designed or intended, that there were but very few of those,
whose Hearts were now with us, but would fall off: And therefore, since we were
upon such an Undertaking, we should resolve our selves into such Principles, as
should put the Properties and Liberties of the People into such Hands, as it
should not be easily Invaded by any that were Trusted with the Supreme
Authority of the Land; and it was mentioned to Resolve all into the Authority
of the Parliament. This was moved by him, and had a little harshness to some
that were there; but yet upon the whole Matter we generally consented to it,
That it was nothing but a Public Good that we all intended. But then after
that, We fell to that which we charged our selves with at the first Meeting,
and that was concerning sending into Scotland, and of settling an Understanding
with my Lord of Argyle: And in order to this, it was necessary to send a
Messenger thither to some Persons, whom we thought were the most leading Men of
the Interest in Scotland. This led us to the insisting on some particular
Persons; the Gentlemen named, were my Lord Melvin, Sir John Cockram, and the
Cambells; I am sure it was some of the Alliance of my Lord of Argyle, and I
think of the Name. As soon as this was propounded, it was offered by this
Gentleman Colonel Sidney, that he would take the Care of the Person; and he
had a Person in his Thoughts, that he thought a very sit Man to be entrusted;
one or two, but one in special, and he named Aaron Smith to be the Man, who was
known to some of us, to others not; I was one that did know him, and as many as
knew him, thought him a proper Person. This is all that Occurs to me that was
at the second Meeting, and they are the only Consults that I was at.


Mr. At. Genesis What was he to do?


Lord Howard. There was no particular Deed for him, more than to carry a
Letter. The Duke of Monmouth undertook to bring my Lord Melvin hither, because
he had a particular dependence upon him, and I think some Relation to his Lady:
But to Sir John Cockram there was a Letter to be sent under the disguise of
carrying on some business of the Plantation in Carolina. This Letter I suppose
was Writ by my Lord Russel (though I know it not) for he was personally known
to my Lord Russel, and I don't know that he was known to any of us. About three
Weeks after this, then he was dispatched I suppose.


Mr. At. Genesis To what purpose were these Gentlemen to come up?


Lord Howard. These were to acquaint us how they found Scotland tempered, and
what Opportunities or Advantages there was or might be of putting them into a
Commotion, and how Men might be Raised, and how they would fall under Argyle,
and also to keep Time and Place with us. After this, I was with Col. Sidney,
when he was going into London, and he did take out several Guinnies, I cannot
tell how much 'twas, I suppose they might be about Sixty, and put them into his
pocket (and set me down at my Lodging) which he said were to give Aaron Smith;
whether he gave it or no, I don't know; and after that he was sent.


Mr. At. Genesis Who told you so?


Lord Howard. Col. Sidney, For I was inquiring of him; and he said, he had not
heard of him in three Weeks, or but once when he was about New Castle. After
this, I had occasions that called me into the Country, and there I was. Some
time after that, I went to the Bath: And this is all the Account I can give.


Mr. Soli. Genesis Do you know that Aaron Smith did go?


Lord Howard. I know nothing but by hearsay. Col. Sidney told me, he was gone,
and was upon the Road, and he heard from him about New Castle.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you understand by the discourse after he was gone, that he
went in pursuance of that Debate?


L. Howard. Yes my Lord, That was the whole end of his going.


Mr. Just. Wythens. I think you say, that Gentleman (speaking of Col. Sidney)
undertook to send him?


L. Howard. Yes, he did.


L. Chapter Just. Will you ask him any Questions?


Col. Sidney. I have no Questions to ask him.


Mr. At. Genesis Silence -- You know the Proverb. The next step is to show you my
Lord, that these persons came up immediately after Aaron Smith went down
thither; and according to that which was said to be the Shadow and Pretense of
their coming hither, they pretended they came about Carolina business. Sir
Andrew Foster and Mr. Blathwaite.


Sir Andrew Foster Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, give an account what Scotch
Gentlemen came up lately.


Sir Andrew Foster. My Lord, About the end of the Spring, or beginning of
Summer, as I remember, these Gentlemen Sir John Cockram, and Commissary Monro,
and the two Cambbels Father and Son, came up hither. I did not see the Father
at all, but I saw the Son the day of the Lord Russels Trial; but the other two,
I think I saw a little before the Discovery of the Plot.


Mr. At. Genesis What did they pretend they came about?


Sir Andrew Foster. They pretended they came to make a Purchase in Carolina,
and I saw their Commission from the Persons said to be concerned in that Design.


Lord Chapter Just. Who do you speak of?


Sir Andrew Foster. Sir John Cockram and Commissary Monro.


Mr. At. Genesis As soon as the Rumor came of the Plot, What became of those
Gentlemen?


Sir Andrew Foster. Sir John Cockram absconded, but Commissary Monro never
absconded, and the Cambels I heard were seized, changing their Lodging from
place to place.


Mr. Atterbury Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Atterbury, Will you give my Lord and
the Jury an Account what you know of these Scotch men, their absconding and
lying hid.


Mr. Atterbury. My Lord, Upon the latter end of June, or the beginning of July;
the beginning of July it was, I was sent for into London upon a discovery of
some Scotch Gentlemen that lay about Blackfriars; and when I came down there,
there was the Common Sergeant and some others, had been before me, and found
them making an escape into a Boat.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were they?


Mr. Atterbury. Sir Hugh Cambel, and Sir John Cockram, and one that was
committed to the Gate House by the Counsel as soon as brought thither.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall end here, my Lord: How long had they been in Town?


Mr. Atterbury. They had been in Town some little time.


Mr. At. Genesis We have done with this piece of our Evidence. Now to show that
while this Emissary was in Scotland, at the same time the Colonel (which will
be another Overt Act of the Treason) was VVriting a Treasonable Pamphlet. I
will call you the VVitnesses. It is all of his own writings. Sir Philip Lloyd.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir Philip Lloyd, Pray will you look upon those Papers, and give
my Lord and the Jury an account where you found them.


Sir Philip Lloyd. I had a Warrant my Lord, from the Secretary by the King and
Council, to seize Mr. Algernon Sidney's Papers; and pursuant to it, I did go to
his House, and such as I found there I put up. I found a great many upon the
Table, amongst which were these, I suppose it is where he usually writes, I put
them in a Pillowbear I borrowed in the House, and that in a Trunk; I desired
Coll. Sidney would put his Seal upon them, that there should be no mistake; he
refused, so I took my Seal, and Sealed up the Trunk* and it was carried before
me to Mr. Secretary Jenkins Office. When the Committee sat, I was commanded
to undo the Trunk, and I did so, and sound my own Seal upon it. And I took the
Papers out of the Bagg I put them into before.


L. Chapter Just. Was Col. Sidney present when you seized these Papers?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Are these some of those Papers?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. Yes, I verily believe it.


Mr. At. Genesis In the next place, I think we have some Papers of his particular
Affairs which will prove his hand. Call Mr. Sheppard, Mr. Cook and Mr. Carry.


Mr. North. Sir Phil. Lloyd, When were they Seized?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. Toward the latter end of June my Lord.


Iury-Man. Which June?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. Last June.


Mr. Sheppard Sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you look upon those Writings
(showing the Libel) Are you acquainted with Col. Sidney's hand?


Mr. Sheppard. Yes, My Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Is that his hand Writing?


Mr. Sheppard. Yes Sir I believe so. I believe all these Sheets to be his hand.


Mr. At. Genesis How come you to be acquainted with his hand?


Mr. Sheppard. I have seen him write the indorsement upon several Bills of
Exchange.


Mr. Carry Sworn. Col. Sidney. My Lord, I desire you would please to consider
this, That Similitude of hands can be no evidence.


L. Chapter Just. Reserve your self till anon, and make all the advantageous
Remarks you can.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you had any dealing with him?


Mr. Carry. I never saw him write to my knowledge more than once in my life, but
I have seen his Indorsement upon Bills, and it is very like that.


L. Chapter Just. Do you believe it is his hand as far as you can guess?


Mr. Carry. My Lord, It is like what came to me for his Handwriting.


L. Chapter Just. And you believe it to be his Hand?


Mr. Carry. Yes.


Mr. Cook Sworn, and the Papers shown him. L. Chapter Just. What say you Mr. Cook?


Mr. Cook. My Lord, I did never see Col. Sidney Write, but I have seen several
Notes that have come to me with Indorsement of his Name, and we have paid them,
and it is like to this.


L. Chapter Just. And you were never called to account for mispayment?


Mr. Cook. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis I pray it may be read. We will read as much as is necessary to
prove the Indictment.


Col. Sidney. I pray it may be all read.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Attorney must have what part he desires read, and you shall
have what part you will have read afterward.


Col. Sidney. I desire all may be read.


Mr. At. Genesis Begin there. Secondly, There was no Absurdity in this, because
it was their own Case.


Clerk Reads. 2dly. There was no Absurdity in this, tho it was their own Case;
but to the contrary, because it was their own Case: that is, concerning
Themselves only, and they had no Superior. They only were the Competent
Judges, they decided their Controversies, as every man in his own Family does,
such as arise between Him and his Children, and his Servants. This Power has
no other restriction, than what is put upon it by the municipal Law of the
Country, where any man, and that has no other force, than as he is understood
to have consented unto it. Thus in England every man (in a Degree) has a right
of Chastizing them; and in many places (even by the Law of God) the Master has
a power of Life and Death over his Servant: It were a most absurd Folly, to
say, that a man might not put away, or in some places kill an Adulterous Wife,
a Disobedient Son, or an Unlawful Servant, because he is Party and Judge; for
the Case does admit of no other, unless he had abridged his own right by
entering into a Society, where other Rules are agreed upon, and a
Superiour-Judge constituted, there being none such between King and People:
That People must needs be the Judge of things happening between Them and Him
whom they did not constitute, that they might be Great, Glorious, and Rich; but
that they might Judge them, and fight their Battles; or otherwise do good unto
them as they should direct. In this sense, he that is Singulis Major, and ought
to be obliged by every man in his Just and Lawful commands tending to the
Public Good: And must be suffered to do nothing against it, nor in any respect
more than the Law does allow.

For this Reason Bracton says, that the King has three Superiors, to wit,
Deum Legem and Parliament'; that is, the Power Originally in the People of
England, is delegated unto the Parliament. He is subject unto the Law of God as
he is a man to the people that makes him a King, in as much as he is a King:
the Law sets a measure unto that Subjection, and the Parliament Judges of the
particular Cases thereupon arising: He must be content to submit his Interest
unto Theirs, since he is no more than any one of them, in any other respect
than that He is by the Consent of all, raised above any other.

If he does not like this Condition, he may renounce the Crown; but if he
receive it upon that Condition, (as all Magistrates do the Power they receive)
and Swear to perform it, He must expect that the Performance will be Exacted,
or Revenge taken by those that he has Betrayed.

If this be not so, I desire to know of our Author, how one or more men can
come to be guilty of Treason against the KING, As Lex facit ut sit Rea. No man
can owe more unto him than unto any other* or he unto every other man by any
rule but the Law; and if he must not be Judge in his own Case, neither he nor
any other by Power received from him, would ever try any man for an Offense
against him, or the Law.

If the King, or such as he appoints, cannot Judge him, he cannot be Judged by
the ways ordinarily known amongst us. If he or other by Authority from him may
Judge, he is Judge in his own Case, and we fall under that which he accounts
the utmost of all absurdities: if a remedy be found for this, he must say that
the King in his own Case may Judge the People, but the People must not Judge
the King, because it is theirs; that is to say, the Servants entertained by the
Master may Judge him, but the Master must not Judge the Servant whom he took
only for his own use. The Magistrate is bound by no Oath or Contract to the
People that Created him, but the People is bound to its own Creature, the
Magistrate.

This seems to be the ground of all our Authors follies; he cannot comprehend
that Magistrates are for or by the People, but makes this Conclusion, as if
Nations were created by or for the Glory or Pleasure of Magistrates, and affect
such a Piece of nonsense; it ought not to be thought strange if he represent,
as an absurd thing, that the Headless Multitude may shake off the Yoke when
they please. But I would know how the Multitude comes under the Yoke, it is a
badge of Slavery. He says that the Power of Kings is for the preservation of
Liberty and Property. We may therefore change or take away Kings without
breaking any Yoke, or that made a Yoke, which ought not to be one; the Injury
is therefore* in Making or Imposing, and there can be none in breaking it.

That if there be not an injury, there may perhaps be an inconvenience; if the
headless Multitude may shake off the Yoke, I know not why the Multitude should
be concluded to be headless; it is not always so. Moses was head of the
Multitude that went out of Egypt, Othniel led them against the King of
Mesopitamia, under the conduct of Phaebidas; they obtained a Victory against
the Moabites, they had the like success under Shamger, Barac, Gidion, Jeptha,
Samuel, Sampson, and others against Cannanites, Midianites, Philistines and
others; the Multitude that opposed Saul and Ishbosheth had David for its head;
and the Ten Tribes that rejected Reoboam chose unto themselves Reoboam; the
Athenians rising against the Thirty Tyrants had Thracibulus; those that drove
-- from Thebes were conducted by Pelopidas: when the Romans drove out the
Tarquins, They chose Brutus and Publicola, and they destroyed the december Jurii
under Horatius and Vellerius. All the Multitudes that afterward revolted from
them under Mauritius, Telerius, Spartanus, and others, were not Headless; and
we know of none that were, but all either found Heads, or made them. The
Germans set up Arminius; the Britans, and others in latter times, the
Cartinians, that rise against Peter the cruel, had the Lord Detracta Mara.

The French, when they grew weary of the corrupted Races of Pharomond and
Pepin, and the same Pepin and Hugh Capet: The Scots when they slew James the
Third, had his Son to be their head; and when they deposed and imprisoned Queen
Mary, the Earl of Murray and others supplied the want of Age that was in her
Son: And in all the Revolutions we have had in England, the people have been
headed by the Parliament, or the Nobility and Gentry that composed it; and when
the Kings failed of their Duties; by their own Authority called it. The
multitude therefore is not ever headless, but does either find or create heads
unto it self, as occasion does requite; and whether it be one man, or a few, or
more, for a short or a longer time, we see nothing more regular than its
motions. But they may, says our Author, shake off the Yoke; and why may they
not, if it prove uneasy or hurtful unto them? Why should not the Israelites
shake off the Yoke of Pharaoh, Jabin, Sisera, and others that oppressed them?

When pride had changed Nebuchadnezzar into a beast, what should persuade the
Assyrians not to drive him out amongst Beasts, until God had restored unto him
the Heart of a Man? When Tarquin had turned the Legal Monarchy of Rome into a
most abominable Tyranny, why should they not abolish it? And when the
Protestants of the Low Countries were so grievously oppressed by the power of
Spain; under the proud, cruel and savage conduct of the Duke of Alva, why
should they not make use of all the means that God had put into their hands for
their deliverance? Let any Man who sees the present state of the Provinces that
then united themselves, judge whether it is better for them to be as they are,
or in the condition unto which his fury would have reduced them, unless they
had, to please him, renounced God and their Religion: Our Author may say, they
ought to have suffered: The King of Spain by their resistance lost those
Countries; and that they ought not to have been Judges in their own case. To
which I answer, That by resisting they laid the foundation of many Churches,
that have produced multitudes of men, eminent in gifts and Graces; and
established a most glorious and happy Commonwealth, that has been since its
first beginning, the strongest Pillar of the Protestant Cause, now in the
World, and a place of refuge unto those who in all parts of Europe have been
oppressed for the name of Christ: Whereas they had slavishly, and, I think I
may say, wickedly as well as foolishly, suffered themselves to be butchered, if
they had left those empty Provinces under the power of Anti Christ, where the
name of God is no otherwise known than to be blasphemed.

If the King of Spain desired to keep his Subjects, he should have governed
them with more justice and mercy; when contrary unto all Laws both Humane and
Divine, he seeks to destroy those he ought to have preserved, he can blame none
but himself, if they deliver themselves from his tyranny: and when the matter
is brought to that, That He must not reign, or they over whom he would reign,
must perish; the matter is easily decided, as if the question had been asked in
the time of Nero or Domitian, Whether they should be left at liberty to destroy
the best part of the World, as they endeavored to do, or it should be rescued
by their destruction? And as for the peoples being Judges in their own case, it
is plain, they ought to be the only Judges, because it is their own, and only
concerns themselves.


Mr. At. Genesis The latter end, the last sheet of all,. 35.


L. C. J. The argument runs through the book, fixing the power in the people.


Cl. of the Cr. The general revolt of a Nation from its own Magistrates, can
never be called rebellion.


Mr. At. Gen.. 37.


Cl. of Cr. The power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not in the King.


Mr. At. Genesis So much we shall make use of; if the Colonel please to have any
other part read to explain it, he may.


Then the Sheets were shown to Col. Sidney. Colonel Sidney. I do not know what
to make of it, I can read it.


L. C. J. Ay, no doubt of it, better than any man here. Fix on any part you
have a mind to have read.


Colonel Sidney. I do not know what to say to it, to read it in pieces thus.


L. C. J. I perceive you have disposed them under certain heads: To what heads
will you have read?


Colonel Sidney. My Lord, let him give an account of it that did it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we will not delay Colonel Sidney from entering on his
defense, only we have this piece of Evidence to give further. One of his
Accomplices was my Lord Russel, we will give in Evidence his Conviction. We will
only ask my Lord Howard, Was your Lordship sworn as a Witness at the Trial of
my Lord Russel?


L. Howard. Yes*


Mr. At. Genesis Whether or no, when you met, were there in those debates any
reflections upon the King, that he had broken his duty?


L. Howard. Not that I remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Why would you rise?


L. Howard. If you mean upon the misgovernment, not personally upon the King?


Mr. At. Genesis Ay.


L. Howard. Yes, and principally and chiefly that, which we thought was the
general disgust of the Nation, the imposing upon the City at that time.


Mr. Just. Wythins. That was complained of at that time?


L. Howard. Yes, my Lord, We took it all along to be the chief grievance.


L. Chapter Just. Have you any more Witnesses?


Mr. At. Genesis Only the Record.


Mr. Sol. Genesis I know there is no time misspent to make things clear. If the
Jury have a mind to have the words read again -- --


L. Chapter Just. If they have a mind, let it.


Then Mr. Trinder was Sworn, and testified it to be a true Copy of the Record,
and said he examined it at Fishmongers-Hall with Mr. Tanner.

Then the Record of the Conviction of the Lord Russel was read.

L. Chapter Just. What will you go to next, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Sol. Genesis We have done, unless the Jury desire to have the words of the
Libel read again.


(But they did not.) Col. Sidney. My Lord, I desire to know upon what Statute I
am Indicted.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I will give as plain an Answer, You are Indicted upon
the old Statute of 25 E. 3.


Col. Sidney. Then I desire to know upon what branch of that Statute?


Mr. At. Genesis Why, I will acquaint you, It Is upon the first branch of that
Statute, for Conspiring and Compassing the Death of the King.


Col. Sidney. Then I conceive, what does not come within that, does not touch
me.


Mr. At. Genesis Make what Inferences you please Colonel, we will answer you.


Col. Sidney. I desire to know what the Witnesses have sworn against me upon
that point?


Mr. At. Genesis Go on, You have heard the Witnesses as well as we.


L. Chapter Just. He says, You are Indicted upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. which
Statute makes it High Treason to Conspire the Death of the King, and the
Overt*Act is sufficiently set forth in the Indictment; now the Question is,
whether it is proved?


Col. Sidney. They have proved a Paper found in my Study of Caligula and Nero,
that is Compassing the Death of the King, is it?


L. C. J. That I shall tell the Jury. The point in Law you are to take from the
Court, Gentlemen: Whether there be Fact sufficient, that is your duty to
consider.


Col. Sidney. I say my Lord, that since I am Indicted upon that Statute, I am
not to take notice of any other. I am Indicted for Conspiring the Death of the
King, because such a Paper is found in my House; Under favor, I think that can
be nothing at all to me. For though Sir Philip Lloyd did ask me, whether I
would put my Seal to it, he did not ask me till he had been in my Closer, and I
knew not what he had put in, and so I told him I would not do it. Then come
these Gentlemen upon similitude of hands. My Lord, We know what similitude of
hands is in this Age. One told me within these two days, that one came to him,
and offered him to counterfeit any hand he should show him in half an hour. So
then, my Lord, I have nothing to say to these Papers. Then for point of
Witness, I cannot be Indicted, much less Tried or Condemned on 25 E. 3. for by
that Act there must be two Witnesses to that very branch unto which the Treason
does relate, which must be distinguished. For the Levying of War, and
Conspiring the Death of the King, are two distinct things, distinct in nature
and reason, and so distinguished in the Statute. And therefore the Conspiring
the Death of the King is Treason, and the other not. 1 E. 6. 12. 5 E. 6. 11.
does expressly say, there must be two Witnesses to either of these Acts. Now
here is my Lord Howard, (I have enough to say of him by and by) It Is he only
who speaks of six men, whom he calls a select Council, and yet selected by no
man in the world. I desire to know who selected my Lord Howard? Who selected
me? If they were selected by no body, it is a Bull to say they were a select
Council. If they were not selected, but erected themselves into a Cabal, then
they have either confidence in one another, or find they are near equally able
to assist in the design. Here is nothing of all this, -- These six men were
strangers to one another. For my own part I never spoke with the Duke of
Monmouth above three times in my life, and one time was when my Lord Howard
brought him to my House and cozened us both. He told the Duke I invited him,
and he told me the Duke invited himself, and neither of them was true. Now that
such men as these are, not hardly knowing one another, should presently fall
into a great and intimate friendship, and trust and management of such
businesses as these are, is a thing utterly improbable, unless they were mad.
Now I do find in my Lord Howards Deposition against my Lord Russel, that they
were in prosecution of my Lord Shaftsbury's design; and yet he acknowledges the
Duke of Monmouth said he was mad, and he himself said so too. Now that they
should join with four more in the prosecution of the design of a madman, they
must be mad too. Now whether my Lord Howard would have you think he was mad,
because a madman cannot be guilty of Treason, I cannot tell. My Lord Howard in
his last Deposition at my Lord Russel's Trial, fixes the two meetings, one
about the middle of January, the other ten days after: Now he fixes one to be
the latter end of January, the other the middle of February. Then he makes it
to be the prosecution of my Lord Shaftsbury's design. I do not find that any
one there had any thing to do with my Lord Shaftsbury, for my part I had not. I
had not seen his face in two years. Then, my Lord, that I go upon is, whatever
my Lord Howard is, here is but one Witness. The Law of God and the Law of man,
understood and taken by all men, does require two Witnesses; Moses says so, so
the Apostles the same after him, and Christ says the same, That every matter is
to be established by two Witnesses. There ought to be two Witnesses to the same
thing. Now for one to come and tell a Tale of a Tub, of an imaginary Council,
and another of a Libel, a Paper written no body knows when, is such a thing,
you can never go over it. But if the Law of God be, that there must be two
Witnesses to the same Fact* there is an end of this matter. And under the
Judicial Law the penalty would be in this Case, to put a man to death. Now here
there are but two things, which if allowed of, no body will be safe for
Perjury. The one is to suffer men to give their testimony, one to one thing,
and another to another, that the fraud cannot be discovered; and the other is
to take away the punishment. Now the punishment is taken away in some measure:
and do but take away the other point whereby the fraud cannot be discovered,
and then there is no defense can be made. That both witnesses should be to the
same point, see the Story of Susanna. Two Elders testified they saw her in the
Act of Adultery: They were carrying of her to her death: both of them said the
same thing; until they were taken asunder and examined, the fraud was not
discovered; and then one said, she was under a Tree of the right hand, and the
other, under the Tree on the left; and she escaped, and they were punished. But
now if you apply it to several Facts, my Lord Howard may say what he pleases,
and if another shall come with a supplemental proof, no Justice can be had.
But, my Lord, I desire this, If there be two Witnesses to prove the Conspiracy,
and in that there were those matters done that are Treason, I must answer to
it; but if there be not, I presume, I need say nothing to it. If you do not
allow it me, I desire Council to Argue it.


L. C. J. That is a point of Fact, Whether there be two Witnesses? I tell you
beforehand, one Witness is not sufficient.


Col. Sidney. Why then there is my Lord Howard, and never another.


L. C. J. Nay, do not make those inferences; I will tell the Jury, if there be
not two Witnesses as the Law requires in this Case, they ought to acquit you.


Col. Sidney. You confound me, I cannot stir. You talk of a Conspiracy; What is
a Conspiracy to kill the King? Is there any more Witnesses than one for Levying
of War?


L. C. J. 'Pray do not deceive your self; You must not think the Court and you
intend to enter into a Dialogue. Answer to the Fact; if there be not sufficient
Fact, the Jury will acquit you. Make what Answer you can to it.


Col. Sidney. Then I say, There being but one Witness, I am not to Answer to it
at all.


L. C. J. If you rely upon that, we will direct the Jury presently.


Col. Sidney. Then for Levying War, what does any one say? My Lord Howard, let
him if he please, reconcile what he has said now, with what he said at my Lord
Russel's Trial. There he said, he said all he could; and now he has got I do
not know how many things that were never spoken of there. I appeal to the Court
whether he did then speak one word of that, that he now says of Mr. Hambden. He
sets forth his Evidence very Rhetorically, but it does not become a Witness,
for he is only to tell what is done and said; but he does not tell what was
done and said. He says they took upon them to consider, but does not say what
one man said, or what one man resolved, much less what I did. My Lord, If these
things are not to be distinguished, but shall be jumbled all up together, I
confess I do not know what to say.


L. C. J. Take what liberty you please. If you will make no Defense, then we
will direct the Jury presently. We will direct them in the Law, and recollect
matter of Fact as well as we can.


Col. Sidney. Why then my Lord, I desire the Law may be reserved to me, I
desire I may have Council to that point of there being but one Witness.


L. C. J. That is point of Fact. If you can give any testimony to disparage the
Witness, do it.


Col. Sidney. I have a great deal to that.


L. C. J. Go on to it then.


Col. Sidney. Then, my Lord, was there a War Levied? Or was it prevented? Why
then, if it be prevented, it is not Levied; if it be not Levied, it is not within
the Statute; so this is nothing to me.


L. C. J. The Court will have patience to hear you; but at the same time I
think it is my duty to advertise you, That this is but mispending of your time.
If you can Answer the Fact, or if you have any mind to put any disparagement
upon the Witnesses, that they are not Persons to be believed, do it, but do not
ask us Questions this way or the other.


Col. Sidney. I have this to say concerning my Lord Howard: He has accused
himself of diverse Treasons, and I do not hear that he has his Pardon of any: He
is under the terror of those Treasons, and the punishment for them: He has
shown himself to be under that terror: He has said, That he could not get his
Pardon, until he had done some other jobbs, till he was past this drudgery of
swearing: That is, my Lord, that he having incurred the penalty of
High Treason, he would get his own indemnity by destroying others. This by the
Law of God and Man, I think, destroys a man's Testimony. Besides, my Lord, he is
my Debtor, he owes me a considerable sum of Money I lent him in time of his
great necessity; he made some Covenants with me for the payment of that Money,
which he has broken; and when his Mortgage was forfeited, and I should take
the advantage the Law gives me, he finds out a way to have me laid up in the
Tower: He is a very subtle man; At my Lord Russel's Trial, he carried his
Knife, he said, between the Paring and the Apple; and so this is a point of
great nicety and cunning, at one time to get his own Pardon, and at the same
time to save his Money. Another thing, my Lord, is, when I was Prisoner, he
comes to my House, and speaks with my Servant, and says, how sorry he was that
I should be brought in danger upon this account of the Plot, and there he did
in the presence of God, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, swear, he did
not believe any Plot, and that it was but a Sham; and that he was confident if
I had known any thing, I would have told it him. He has said somewhat of this
before, I have several Witnesses to prove both. He was desirous to go further,
and he would not only pay my debt by his Testimony against me, but he would
have got my Plate and other Goods in my hands into his hands, and he desired my
Men, as a place of trust, to put them into his hands. And the next news was,
that there was a Warrant against my Lord Russel and me. But then, my Lord, he
made other affirmations in the same presence of God, that I was innocent in his
opinion, and he was confident of it; for if he had known any thing of it, he
would have told it. Now I know, in my Lord Russel's Case, there was Dr. Burnet
said something like it. And when he came to answer it, he said he was to face
it out, and make the best of it he could. Now he did face it out bravely
against God, but he was very timorous of Man. So that my Lord, he does say at
the same time, at my Lord Russel's Trial, upon his Oath, That he did believe
that the Religious obligation of an Oath did not consist in the formality of
applying it to the place, etc. but in calling God to witness. So that when he
did call God to witness before Doctor Burnet and my Servant, and others, and
this is not consistent with the Oath he has taken here, as the Gentleman said
at my Lord Russel's Trial, unless he has one Soul in Court, and had another at
my house, these things are inconsistent, and cannot be true; and if he swear
both under the Religion of an Oath, he swears himself perjured. Then my Lord,
he talks of Aaron Smith, What have I to do with Aaron Smith? He says I sent
him; my Lord, there is no body else speaks a word of it. Then by a strange kind
of construction and imagination, they will have it, that some Papers here,
which are said to be found in my Study, have relation to this Plot, as they
call it; I know of none, nor am in none. Now, my Lord, I am not to give an
account of these Papers, I do not think they are before you, for there is
nothing but the similitude of Hands offered for proof. There is the like Case
of my Lady Carr some few years ago: She was indicted of Perjury, and as (...)
against her, some Letters of hers were produced, that were contrary to what she
swore in Chancery; and her band was proved; that is to say, it was like it* but
my Lord Chief Justice Ke^ing directs the Jury, that though in Civil Causes it
is a proof, yet it is the smallest and least of proofs; but in Criminal cases
it was none at all. So that my Lord Howard's testimony is single; and what he
talks of those two businesses that he calls a Consult, and Aaron Smith, is
destroyed by want of proof. What could six men do? Can my Lord Howard raise
five men by his credit? by his purse? Let him say as much for me, with all my
heart; for my part I do not know where to raise five men. That such men as we
are, that have no followers, should undertake so vast a design, is very
unlikely: And this great design that was carried on thus, it had neither
Officers nor Soldiers, no place, no time, no Money for it. That which he said
last time, which he forgotnow, he talked of twenty five or thirty thousand
pound, but no man knew where it was to be had, but last time he said, it was
spoken in jest. Now this is a pretty Cabal, that six men should meet about a
business; and they neglect every one of the points relating to the thing they
met about, make no step about the business, and if any one did speak of it, it
was but in jest. This is a very deep maintaining of the Plot. Then my Lord, as
to these Papers, I do not think, I am to give any account of them, I would say
nothing to the disparagement of Sir Philip Lloyd, I never saw him till he cause
to my House, but yet I say, he is the Kings Officer, and when I am prosecuted
at the Kings Smit, I think he ought to be no Witness. The Government of France
is violent and absolute, but yet a few years ago, a Minister of State had his
Papers taken from him, and abundance of them had dangerous Plots against the
King in them; but because they were inventoried in his Officers presence, or
those reputed by him, there was no use could be made of them, it was an
irreparable fault in the process, and that saved him. The similitude of hands
is nothing: we know that Hands will be counterfeited, so that no man shall know
his own hand. A Gentleman that is now dead told me, that my Lord Arlington
about five years ago, desired him to write a Letter, and seal it as well as he
could; he writ it with care, and sealed it with a Wafer and Wax upon it, and
within a few days, my Lord Arlington brought him five Letters, and he did not
know which was his own. The Attorney shows these Papers to me, I do not know
whether they are my own or no; but these very Papers, such as they are, do
abhor as much as any one can, such a design. Look upon them, you see they are
all old Ink. These Papers may be writ perhaps, these twenty years, the Ink is
so old. But my Lord, it is a polemical Discourse, it seems to be an Answer to
Filmer, which is not calculated for any particular Government in the World: It
goes only upon these general Principles, That according to the universal Law of
God and Nature there is but one Government in the World, and that is Entire and
Absolute; and that the King can be bound by no Law, by no Oath, but he may make
all Laws, and abolish them as he pleases: And this whether of Age or no, a Man,
or a Child, of Sense, or out of his Sense. Now, my Lord, what if any man in his
Cabinet should have written this Book? Then he has another Principle, he says,
It Is the same thing whether a King come in by Election, by Donation, by
Inheritance, or Usurpation, or any other way; than which, I think, never was a
thing more desperately said. Cromwell, when one White a Priest wrote a Book,
wherein he undertook to prove, That Possession was the only Right to Power,
though he was a Tyrant, and a violent one, (you need not wonder I call him
Tyrant. I did so every day in his Life, and acted against him too) it would be
so odious a Principle, he would not endure it, and he used him very slightly
for it. Now this Filmar that no man must write against, is the man that does
assert it, That it is no matter how they come by their Power, and gives the same
Power to the worst Usurpers, as they that most rightly come to the Crown. By
the same Argument, if the arrantest Rascal of Israel had killed Moses, David,
etc. and seized upon the Power, he had been possessed of that Power, and been
Father of the People. If this be Doctrine, my Lord, that is just and good, then
I confess it may be dangerous for any thing to be found in a man's House
contrary to it; but if a Commoner of England write his present thoughts, and
another man upon looking on his Book, write his present thoughts of it, what
great hurt is there in it? And I ask Mr. Attorney how many years ago that was
written?


L. Chapter Just. I don't know what the Book was in answer to. We are not to speak
of any Book that Sir Robert Filmar wrote, but you are to make your Defense,
touching a Book that was found in your Study, and spend not your time, and the
Courts time, in that which serves to no other Purpose, than to gratify a
luxuriant way of Talking that you have. We have nothing to do with his Book,
you had as good tell me again, That there was a parcel of people rambling
about, pretending to my L. Russel's Ghost, and so we may answer all the
Comedies in England. Answer to the matter you are indicted for. Do you own
that Paper?


Col. Sidney. No, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Go on then, it does not become us to be impatient to hear you,
but we ought to advertise you, that you spend not your time to no purpose, and
do your self an Injury.


Col. Sidney. I say first, It Is not proved upon me: and secondly, It Is not a
Crime if it be proved -- --


L. Chapter Just. You began very materially in one thing: it is material for you to
apply your self to take off the Credibility of my Lord Howard that is a
Witness; call your Witnesses to that purpose, or if you have any other point to
take away the Credibility of any other Witness.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I have seven or eight points of Law.


L. Chapter Just. I hear not one yet.


Col. Sidney. Why, my Lord, Conspiring to levy war is not Treason, and I desire
to have Counsel upon that.


L. J. Just. It Is not a Question. You had as good ask me, whether the first
Chapter in Littleton be Law?


Col. Sid. My Lord, I have neither made war, nor conspired to levy war.


L. C. Just. You are still in a mistake, you shall not think that we intend to
dialogue with you, to let you know how far the proof has been given or not
given, but when we come to direct the Jury, then we shall observe how far the
Law requires there should be two witnesses. But whether there be such a proof,
that must be left to the Jury.


Mr. Just. Wythens. If you agree the Conspiracy, I will tell you my mind of it;
I cannot give you my Opinion in Law, till the Fact be stated.


L. Chapter Just. The Law always arises upon a point of Fact; there can be no
doubt in point of Law, till there be a settlement in point of Fact.


Mr. Just. Holloway. My Lord has put you in a right way: The Conspiracy is
proved but by one Witness, if you have any thing to take off his Credibility
*it is to the purpose.


Col. Sidney. Truly, my Lord, I do as little intend to mis-spend my own Spirit,
and your Time, as ever any man that came before you. Now, my Lord, if you will
make a Concatenation of one thing, a Supposition upon Supposition, I would take
all this asunder, and show, if none of these things are any thing in
themselves, there can be nothing joined together.


L. Chapter Just. Take your own Method, Mr. Sidney; but I say, if you are a man of
low Spirits and weak Body, it is a Duty incumbent upon the Court, to exhort you
not to spend your time upon things that are not material.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I think it is very material that a whimsical imagination
of a Conspiracy, should not pass for a real Conspiracy of the Death of the
King; besides, if these Papers were found in my House, it is a Crime created
since my Imprisonment, and that cannot come in, for they were found since. My
Lord, if these Papers are right, it mentions 200. and odd Sheets, and these
show neither Beginning nor Ending, and will you, my Lord, indict a man for
Treason for scraps of Paper, found in his House relating to an ancient Paper,
intended as innocently as any thing in the world, and piece and patch this to
my Lord Howards Discourse, to make this a Contrivance to kill the King: Then my
Lord, I think it is a Right of Mankind, and it is exercised by all studious men,
that they write in their own Closets what they please for their own Memory, and
no man can be answerable for it, unless they publish it.


L. C. J. Pray don't go away with that right of mankind, that it is lawful for
me to write what I will in my own Closet, unless I publish it; I have been
told, Curse not the King, not in thy thoughts, not in thy Bedchamber, the
Birds of the air will carry it. I took it to be the duty of mankind, to observe
that.


Col. Sidney. I have lived under the Inquisition --


L. C. J. God be thanked, we are governed by Law.


Col. Sidney. I have lived under the Inquisition, and there is no man in Spain
can be tried for Heresy --


Mr. Just. Withins. Draw no Presidents from the Inquisition, here, I beseech
you Sir.


L. C. J. We must not endure men to talk, that by the right of nature, every
man may contrive mischief in his own Chamber, and he is not to be punished,
till he thinks fit to be called to it.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, if you will take Scripture by pieces, you will make all
the Penmen of the Scripture blasphemous; you may accuse David, of saying, There
is no God; and accuse the Evangelists, of saying, Christ was a Blasphemer and a
Seducer; and the Apostles, That they were drunk.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Sidney, if there be any part of it, that explains the
sense of it, you shall have it read; indeed we are trifled with a little. It Is
true, in Scripture it is said, there is no God, and you must not take that
alone, but you must say, the fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Now
here is a thing imputed to you in the Libel; if you can say, there is any part
that is in excuse of it, call for it. As for the purpose, whosoever does
publish, that the King may be put in chains or deposed, is a Traitor; but
whosoever says, that none but Traitors would put the King in Chains or depose
him, is an honest man; therefore apply ad idem, but don't let us make
Excursions.


Col. Sidney. If they will produce the whole, my Lord, then I can see whether
one part contradicts another.


L. Chapter Just. Well, if you have any Witnesses call them.


Col. Sidney, The Earl of Anglesey.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, in God's Name, stay till to morrow in things that are
pertinent.


Col. Sidney. I desire to know of my Lord Anglesey, what my Lord Howard said to
him concerning the Plot that was broken out.


L. Anglesey. Concerning this Plot you are now questioned for?


Col. Sidney. The Plot for which my Lord Russel and I was in Prison.


L. Anglesey. The Question I am asked, is, what my Lord Howard said before the
Trial of my Lord Russel, concerning the Plot; I suppose, this goes as a branch
of that he was accused for. I was then in the Country, when the Business was on
foot, and used to come to Town a day or two in the Week, living near in
Hertfordshire, and I understanding the Affliction my Lord of Bedford was in, I
went to give my Lord a Visit, we having been acquaintance of above fifty years
standing, and bred together in Maudlin College in Oxford. When I came to my
Lord of Bedford, and had administered that comfort that was fit for one
Christian to give another in that distress, I was ready to leave him, and my
Lord Howard came in. It was upon the Friday before my Lord Howard was taken, he
was taken (as I take it) upon Sunday or Monday, my Lord Howard fell into the
same Christian Office that I had been just discharging, to compassionate my
Lords affliction, to use Arguments to comfort and support him under it, and
told him, he was not to be troubled, for he had a discreet, a wise and a
virtuous Son, and he could not be in any such Plot, ( I think that was the word
he used at first, though he gave another name to it afterward) and his Lordship
might therefore well expect a good Issue of that business, and he might believe
his Son secure, for he believed he was neither guilty, nor so much as to be
suspected. My Lord proceeded further, and did say, that he knew of no such
barbarous Design ( I think he called it so in the second place) and could not
charge my Lord Russel with it, nor any body else. This was the effect of what
my Lord Howard said at that time, and I have nothing to say of my own knowledge
more than this; but to observe that I was present when the Jury did put my Lord
Howard particularly to it; what have you to say to what my Lord Anglesey
testifies against you? My Lord, I think did in three several places, give a
short account of himself, and said it was very true, and gave them some further
account why he said it, and said, he should be very glad it might have been
advantageous to my Lord Russel.


Col. Sidney. My Lord of Clare, I desire to know of my Lord of Clare, what my
Lord Howard said concerning this Plot and me.


Lord Clare. My Lord, a little after Colonel Sidney was taken, speaking of the
Times, he said, that if ever he was questioned again, he would never plead, the
quickest dispatch was the best, he was sure they would have his Life, though he
was never so innocent, and discoursing of the late Primate of Armaghs
Prophecy; for my part, says he, I think the Persecution is begun, and I
believe it will be very sharp, but I hope it will be short, and I said, I hoped
so too.


Mr. At. Genesis What answer did your Lordship give to it?


Lord Clare. I have told you what I know, my Lord is too full of discourse for
me to answer all he says; but for Colonel Sidney, he did with great
asseverations assert, that he was as innocent as any man breathing, and used
great Encomiums in his praise, and then he seemed to bemone his misfortune,
which I thought real, for never was any man more engaged to another, than he
was to Colonel Sidney, I believe. Then I told, they talked of Papers that were
found, I am sure, says he, they can make nothing of any Papers of his.


Mr. At. Genesis When was this?


Lord Clare. This was at my house the beginning of July.


Mr At. Genesis How long before my Lord Howard was taken?


L. Clare. About a week before.


Mr. At. Genesis I would ask you, my Lord, upon your honor, would not any man
have said as much, that had been in the Plot?


L. Clare. I cannot tell, I know of no Plot.


Col. Sidney. Mr. Philip Howard.


Mr. I. Wythins. What do you ask him.


Col. Sidney. What you heard my Lord Howard say concerning this pretended
Plot, or my being in it?


Mr. Phil. Howard. My Lord, when the Plot first brake out, I used to meet my
Lord Howard very often at my Brothers house, and coming one day from Whitehall,
he asked me, what News? I told him, my Lord, says I, there are abundance of
people that have confessed the horrid Design of murdering the King, and the
Duke. How, says he, is such a thing possible? says I, it is so* they have all
confessed it. Says he, do you know any of their names? yes, says I, I have
heard their Names. What are their Names? says he, why, says I, Colonel Romsey,
and Mr. West, and one Walcott and others, that are in the Proclamation (I cannot
tell whether Walcott was in hold) says he, it is impossible such a thing can be;
says he, there are in all Countries, people that wish ill to the Government,
and says he, I believe there are some here; but says he, for any man of Honor,
Interest or Estate, to go about it, is wholly impossible. Says I, my Lord, so
it is, and I believe it. Says I, my Lord, do you know any of these people? No,
says he, none of them; only one day, says he, passing through the Exchange, a
man saluted me, with a Blemish upon his Eye, and he embraced me, and wished me
all happiness; says he, I could not call to mind who this man was: but
afterward, I recollected my self, that I met him at my Lord Shaftsburies, and
heard afterward, and concluded his name to be -- his at whose house the King
was to be assassinated --


Mr. At. Genesis Rombald.


Mr. Howard. Ay, Rombald. My Lord, May I ask, if my Lord Howard be here?


L. C. J. He is there behind you.


Mr. Howard. Then he will hear me. My Lord says I, what does your Lordship
think of this business? says he, I am in a maze; says I, if you will be ruled
by me, you have a good opportunity to Address to the King, and all the
discontented Lords, as they are called; and to show your Detestation and
Abhorrence of this thing; for, says I, this will be a good means to reconcile
all things. Says he, you have put one of the best Notions in my Head that ever
was put. Says I, You are a very good Pen man, draw up the first Address (and I
believe, I was the first that mentioned an Address, you have had many an one
since, God send them good success) says he, I am sorry my Lord of Essex is out
of Town, he should present it. But says I, Here is my Lord Russel, my Lord of
Bedford, my Lord of Clare, all of you that are disaffected, and so accounted,
go about this business, and make the Nation happy, and King happy Says he, will
you stay till I come back? Ay, says I, if you will come in any time; but he
never came back while I was there. The next day, I think, my Lord Russel was
taken, and I came and found him at my Brother's House again (for there he was
day and night) says he, Cozen, what News? Says I, my Lord Russel is sent to the
Tower. We are all undone then* says he. Pray, says he, go to my Lord
Privy Seal, and see if you can find I am to be taken up, says he, I doubt it is
a Sham-Plot, if it was a true Plot, I should fear nothing; says I, what do you
put me to go to my Lord Privy Seal for? He is one of the King's Cabinet
Counsel, do you think he will tell me? I will not go; but says I, if you are not
Guilty, why would you have me go to inquire? why, says he, because I fear it is
not a true Plot, but a Plot made upon us, and therefore, says he, there is no
man free. My Lord, I can say no more as to that time, (and there is no man that
sits here, that wishes the King better than I do.) The next thing I come to, is
this, I came the third day, and he was mighty sad and melancholy, that was when
Col. Sidney was taken: says I, why are you melancholy, because Col. Sidney is
taken? Says I, Col. Sidney was a man talked of before, why, you were not
troubled for my Lord Russel, that is of your Blood, says he, I have that
particular Obligation from Col. Sidney, that no one man had from another. I
have one thing to say farther, I pray I may be rightly understood in what I
have said.


L. C. J. What, you would have us undertake for all the people that hear you? I
think you have spoken very materially, and I will observe it by and by to the
Jury.


Col. Sidney. Pray call Doctor Burnet.


Mr. Just. VValcott. What do you ask Doctor Burnet?


Col. Sidney. I have only to ask Dr. Burnet, whether after the News of this
pretended Plot, my Lord Howard came to him? And what he said to him?


Dr. Burnet. My Lord, the day after this Plot brake out my Lord Howard came to
see me, and upon some discourse of the Plot, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to
Heaven, he protested he knew nothing of any Plot, and believed nothing of it,
and said, that he looked upon it as a ridiculous thing.


My Lord Pagett was sent for at the Prisoners request, being in the Hall. Col.
Sidney. My Lord, I desire Joseph Ducas may be called, (who appeared, being a
Frenchman.)


Col. Sidney. I desire to know, whether he was not in my House when my Lord
Howard came thither, a little after I was made a Prisoner, and what he said
upon it?


Ducas. Yes, my Lord, my Lord Howard came the day after the Colonel Sidney was
taken, and he asked me, Where was the Col. Sidney? and I said, he was taken by
an Order of the King; and he said, oh Lord! what is that for? I said, they have
taken Papers; he said, Is some Papers left? yes, Have they taken something
more? No, well you must take all the things out of the house, and carry them to
some you can trust: I dare trust no body, says he; I will lend my Coach and
Coach man I said, if the Col. Sidney will save his Goods; he save them, if not,
it is no matter. A little after the Lord Howard came in the House of Col. Sidney
about eleven a Clock at Night. When he was in, I told him, what is this? They
talk of a Plot to Kill the King and the Duke, and I told him, they spoke of one
general Insurrection; and I told him more, that I understood that Col. Sidney
was sent into Scotland: when my Lord Howard understood that, he said, God
knows, I know nothing of this, and I am sure if the Col. Sidney, was concerned
in the matter, he would tell me something, but I know nothing. Well my Lord, I
told him, I believe you are not safe in this house, there is more danger here
than in another place. Says he, I have been a Prisoner, and I had rather do any
thing in the World than be a Prisoner again.


Then my Lord Pagett came into the Court.

Col. Sidney. Pray my Lord be pleased to tell the Court, if my Lord Howard has
said any thing to you concerning this late pretended Plot; or my being any
party in it.


Lord Pagett. My Lord, I was Subpoena'd to come hither, and did not know upon
what account. I am obliged to say, my Lord Howard was with me presently after
the breaking out of this Plot, and before his appearing in that part which he
now Acts, he came to me; and I told him, That I was glad to see him abroad, and
that he was not concerned in this disorder. He said, he had Joy from several
concerning it, and he took it as an injury to him, for that it looked as if he
were Guilty. He said, he knew nothing of himself nor any body else. And though
he was free in discourse, and free to go into any Company indifferently; yet he
said, he had not seen any body that could say any thing of him, or give him
occasion to say anything of any body else.


Col. Sidney. Mr. Edward Howard.


Mr. Rd. Howard. Mr. Sidney, what have you to say to me?


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I desire you would ask Mr. Edward Howard the same thing,
what Discourse he had with my Lord Howard about this Plot?


L. C. J. Mr. Howard, Mr. Sidney desires you to tell what Discourse you had
with my Lord Howard about this Plot.


Mr. E. Howard. My Lord, I have been for some time very intimate with my Lord,
not only upon the account of our Alliance, but upon a strict intimacy and
correspondence of friendship, and I think, I was as much his as he could expect
from that Alliance. I did move him during this time, to serve the King upon the
most honorable account I could, but that proved ineffectual: I pass that, and
come to the business here. As Soon as the Plot brake out, my Lord having a great
in* timacy with me, expressed a great detestation and surprising in himself to
hear of it, wherein my Lord Howard assured me under very great Asseverations,
that he could neither accuse himself, nor no man living. He told me moreover,
That there were certain* persons of quality whom he was very much concerned
for, that they should be so much reflected upon or troubled, and he condoled
very much their condition both before and after they were taken. My Lord, I
believe in my Conscience, he did this without any Mental Reservation, or
Equivocation, for he had no reason to do it with me. I add moreover, if I have
any sense of my Lords Disposition, I think if he had known any such thing, he
would not have stood his being taken, or made his Application to the King in
this manner, I am afraid not so suitable to his quality.


L. Chapter Just. No reflections upon any body.


Mr. Howard. My Lord, I reflect upon no body, I understand where I am, and have
a respect for the place; but since your Lordship has given me this occasion, I
must needs say, That that Reproof that was accidentally given me at the Trial
of my Lord Russel, by reason of a weak Memory, made me omit some particulars I
will speak now, which are these, and I think they are material: My Lord upon
the discourse of this Plot did further assure me, that it was certainly a Sham,
even to his knowledge; how, my Lord, says I, do you mean a Sham? Why, says he,
such an one, Cozen, as is too black for any Minister of public Employment to
have devised, but, says he, it was forged by People in the dark, such as
Jesuits and Papists, and, says he, this is my Conscience; says I, my Lord, if
you are sure of this thing, then pray, my Lord, do that honorable thing that
becomes your quality, that is, give the King satisfaction as becomes you; pray
make an Address under your hand to the King, whereby you express your
Detestation and Abhorrence of this thing: says he, I thank you for your
Counsel, to what Minister, says he, shall I apply my self? I pitched upon my
Lord Hallifax, and I told him of my Lords desire, and I remember my Lord Howard
named the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord of Bedford, the Earl of Clare, and he said
he was sure they would do it; that he was sure of their Innocence, and would be
glad of the occasion: and I went to my L. Hallifax, and told him that my Lord
was willing to set it under his hand, his detestation of this Plot, and that
there was no such thing to his knowledge. My Lord Hallifax very worthily
received me, says he, I will introduce it; but my Lord Russel being taken, this
was laid aside, and my Lord gave this reason. For, says he, there will be so
many People taken, they will be hindered. I must needs add from my Conscience,
and from my Heart before God and Man, that if my Lord had spoken before the
King, sitting upon his Throne, abateing for the solemnity of the presence I
could not have more believed him, from that assurance he had in me. And I am
sure from what I have said, if I had the Honor to be of this Gentleman's Jury
I would not believe him.


L. C. Just. That must not be suffered.


Mr. At. Genesis You ought to be bound to your good behavior for that.


L. C. Just. The Jury are bound by their Oaths to go according to their
Evidence, they are not to go by men's conjectures.


Mr. Howard, May I go my Lord?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Howard desires he may stay, we shall make use of him.


Col. Sidney, My Lord, I spoke of a Mortgage that I had of my Lord Howard, I
don't know whether it is needful to be proved; but it is so.


L. Howard, I confess it.


Col. Sidney, Then my Lord here is the other point, He is under the fear, that
he dare not but say what he thinks will conduce toward the gaining his Pardon;
and that he has expressed, that he could not have his Pardon, but he must
first do this drudgery of swearing. I need not say, that his Son should say,
That he was sorry his Father could not get his Pardon unless he did swear
against some others.


Col. Sidney, Call Mr. Blake (who appeared) My Lord, I desire he may be asked,
whether my Lord Howard did not tell him that he could not get his Pardon yet,
and he could ascribe it to nothing, but that the drudgery of swearing must be
over first.


Then my Lord Chief Justice asked the Question. Mr. Blake, My Lord, I am very
sorry I should be called to give a public account of a private Conversation,
how it comes about I don't know. My Lord sent for me about six Weeks ago, to
come and see him. I went and we talked of News, I told him I heard no body had
their Pardon; but he that first discovered the Plot, he told me no; but he had
his Warrant for it. And, says he, I have their Word and Honor for it; but says
he I will do nothing in it till I have further order, and says he, I hear
nothing of it, and I can ascribe it to no other reason; but I must not have my
pardon till the drudgery of swearing is over. These words my Lord said, I
believe my Lord will not deny it.


Then Mr. Sidney called Mr. Hunt and Buroughs, but they did not appear. Col
Sidney, It Is a hard case they don't appear, One of them was to prove that my
Lord Howard said he could not have his Pardon till he had done some other Jobs.


L. C. Just. I cannot help it, If you had come for assistance from the Court I
would willingly have done what I could.


Then Col. Sidney mentioned the Duke of Buckingham, but he was informed he was
not subpaena'd. Col. Sidney, Call Grace Tracy and Elizabeth Penwick (who
appeared) I ask you only, what my Lord Howard said to you at my House
concerning the Plot, and my being in it?


Tracy, Sir he said, that he knew nothing of a Plot he protested, and he was
sure Col. Sidney knew nothing of it. And he said If you knew any thing of it,
he mustneeds know of it, for he, knew as much of your concerns as any one in
the World.


Col. Sidney, Did he take God to Witness upon it?


Tracy, yes.


Col. Sidney, Did he desire my Plate at my House?


Tracy* I cannot tell that, he said the Goods might be sent to his House.


Col. Sidney. Penwick. What did my Lord Howard say in your hearing concerning
the pretended Plot, or my Plate carrying away?


Penwick, When he came he asked for your Honor; and they said your Honor was
taken away by a man to the Tower for the Plot, and then he took God to Witness
he knew nothing of it, and believed your Honor did not neither. He said he was
in the Tower two years ago, and your Honor, he believed, saved his Life.


Col. Sidney, Did he desire the Plate?


Penwick. Yes, And said it should be sent to his House to be secured. He said
it was only Malice.


Mr. Wharton stood up. Mr. Wharton. It Is only this I have to say, That if your
Lordship pleases, to show me any of these sheets of Paper I will undertake to
imitate them in a little time that you shall not know which is which. It Is the
easiest hand that ever I saw in my life.


Mr. At. Genesis You did not write these Mr. Wharton?


Mr. Wharton. No; but I will do this in a very little time if you please.


L. C. Just. Have you any more Witnesses?


Col. Sidney. No, my Lord.


L. C. Just. Then apply your self to the Jury.


Col. Sidney. Then this is that I have to say. Here is a huge Complication of
Crimes laid to my Charge: I did not know at first under what Statute they were,
now I find it is the Statute of 25 of Ed. 3. This Statute has two Branches; one
relating to War, the other to the Person of the King. That relating to the
Person of the King, makes the Conspiring, Imagining, and Compassing his Death,
criminal. That concerning War is not unless it be Levied: Now my Lord I cannot
imagine to which of these they refer my Crime, and I did desire your Lordship
to explain it. For to say that a Man did meet to Conspire the King's Death, and
he that gives you the account of the business does not speak one word of it,
seems extravagant; for Conspiracies have ever their Denomination from that
point to which they tend; as a Conspiracy to make false Coin infers Instruments
and the like. A Conspiracy to take away a Woman, to kill, or rob, are all
directed to that end. So Conspiring to kill the King, must immediately aim at
killing the King. The King has two Capacities Natural and Politic, that which
is the Politic cannot be within the Statute, in that sense he never dies, and
it is absurd to say it should be a fault to kill the King that cannot die: So
then it must be the natural sense it must be understood in, which must be done
by Sword, by Pistol, or any other way. Now if there be not one word of this,
then that is utterly at an end, though the Witness had been good. The next
point is concerning Levying of War. Levying of War is made Treason there, so it
be proved by Overt Act, but an Overt Act of that never was, or can be pretended
here. If the War be not Levied it is not within the Act, for Conspiring to Levy
War is not in the Act. My Lord, There is no Man that thinks that I would kill
the King that knows me, I am not a Man to have such a design, perhaps I may say
I have saved his Life once. So that it must be by Implication, that is, It is
first imagined, that I intended to raise a War, and then it is imagined that War
should tend to the Destruction of the King. Now I know that may follow, but
that is not Natural or necessary, and being not Natural or necessary, it cannot
be so understood by the Law. That it is not it plain; for many Wars have been
made, and the Death of the King has not followed. David made War upon Saul, yet
no body will say he sought his Death, he had him under his power and did not
kill him, David made War upon Ishbosheth, yet did not design his Death; and so
in England and France Kings have been taken Prisoners, but they did not kill
them. King Stephen was taken Prisoner, but they did not kill him. So that it is
two distinct things, to make War and to endeavor to kill the King. Now as
there is no manner of pretense that I should endeavor to kill the King
directly, so it cannot be by inference, because it is Treason under another
Species. I confess I am not fit to argue these points, I think I ought to have
Counsel, but if you will not allow it me I cannot help it; but these things are
impossible to be jumbled up together. Now I say this, If I am not under the
first Branch, if not directly I cannot be by Implication, though I did make War
I cannot be said to Conspire the Death of the King, because it is a distinct
Species of Treason, and my Lord Coke says, it is the overthrow of all Justice to
confound Membra dividentia; now if the making of War cannot be understood to be
a Conspiring the Death of the King, then I am not guilty of this Indictment,
but heremy Lord is neither Conspiring the Death of the King, nor making War,
nor Conspiring to make War. Besides, I say, it is not the best Man's Evidence
here would be good in this Case, because the Law requires two. The next thing
is the business of Aaron Smith, which my Lord tells so imperfectly, and so
merely conjectural, that there is nothing in it, but his Rhetoric in setting
it out. He tells you of a Letter sent with him, but he does not tell you by
whom writ, what was in it, or whether it was delivered or no: So that I think
we may lay that aside as the other, as things nothing in them at all. Then says
Mr. Attorney, These Scotch Gentlemen are come to Town, I profess I never heard
the Names of one of them till he named them to me in the Tower. I have not sent
my self, nor writ a Letter into Scotland never since the Year 59, nor do I know
one Man in Scotland to whom I can write, or from whom I ever received one. I
returned into England in the Year 77* and since that time have not writ nor
received a Letter from Scotland. Then some Gentlemen came hither, What is that
to me. I never saw one of the Cambells in my life, nor Monro; if any one can
prove I have had Communication with them, I will be glad to suffer. Then here
are Papers, if any thing is to be made of them you must produce the whole for
it is impossible to make any thing of a part of them. You ask me, What other
Passage I would have read, I don't know a Passage in them, I cannot tell whether
it be good or bad. But if there are any Papers found ('it is a great doubt
whether they were found in my Study or no, or whether they be not counterfeit;
but though that be admitted that they were found in my house) the hand is such
that it shows they have been writ very many years. Then that which seems to be
an account of the Sections and Chapters that is but a scrap, and what if any
body had, my Lord, either in my own hand or another found Papers that are not
well justifiable, Is this Treason? Does this imagine the Death of the King?
Does this reach the Life of the King? If any Man can say I ever printed a sheet
in my life, I will submit to any Punishment. Many others, my Lord they write,
and they write what comes into their heads. I believe there is a Brother of
mine here has forty Quire of Paper writtenby my Father, and never one sheet of
them was published, but he writ his own mind to see what he could think of it
another time, and blot it out again, may be. And I my self I believe have
burned more Papers of my own writing than a Horse can carry. So that for these
Papers I cannot answer for them. There is nothing in it, and what Concatenation
can this have with the other design that is in it self nothing, with my Lords
Select Counsel selected by no body to pursue the design of my Lord Shaftsbury?
And this Counsel that he pretends to be set up for so great a business, was to
be adjusted with so much fineness so as to bring things together, What was this
fineness to do? (taking it for granted which I don't) This was nothing (if he
was a credible Witness) but a few Men talking at large of what might be or not
be, what was like to fall out without any manner of intention or doing any
thing. They did not so much as inquire. Whether there was Men in the Country,
Arms, or Ammunition. A War to be made by five or six Men, not knowing one
another; not trusting one another. What said Dr. Coxe in his evidence at my
Lord Russel's Trial, of my Lord Russel's trusting my Lord Howard? He might say
the same of some others. So that my Lord, I say, these Papers have no manner of
coherence, no dependence upon any such design. You must go upon conjecture upon
conjecture; and after all, you find nothing but only Papers, never perfect,
only scraps, written many years ago, and that could not be calculated for the
raising of the People. Now pray what Imagination can be more vain than that?
and what Man can be safe, if the King's Counsel may make such (whimsical I
will not say but) groundless Constructions? Mr. Attorney says the Plot was broken
to the Scots (God knows we were neither broken nor joined) and that the
Cambells came to Town about that time I was taken, and in the mean time my Lord
Howard, the great Contriver of all this Plot, who was most active; and advised
the business that consisted of so much fineness; he goes there and agrees of
nothing: and then goes into Essex upon great important business greater then
the War of England and Scotland, to what purpose? To look after a little
pimping Manor, and what then? Why then it must be laid aside, and he must be
idle five Weeks at the Bath, and there is no inquiring after it. Now I desire
your Lordship to consider, whether there be a possibility for any Men, that
have the sense of Porters and Grooms; to do such things; as he would put upon
us. I would only say this, If Mr. Attorney be in the right there was a
Combination with the Scotts, and then this Paper was writ; for those that say I
did it, say, I was doing of it then, and by the Notes, there is work enough for
four or five years, to make out what is mentioned in those scraps of Paper, and
this must be to kill the King. And I say this my Lord that under favor, for
all constructive Treasons you are to make none, but to go according to plain
proof, and that these Constructive Treasons belong only to Parliament, and by
the immediate Proviso in that Act. Now my Lord I leave it to your Lordship, to
see whether there is in this, any thing that you can say is an Overt Act of
Treason mentioned in 25 E. 3. If it be not plainly under one of the two
Branches, That I have endeavored to kill the King, or Levied War, then it is
matter of Construction, and that belongs to no Court but the Parliament. Then
my Lord this has been adjudged already in Throgmorton's Case. There is twenty
Judgments of Parliament, the Act of 13 Eliz. that says. -- I should have some
body to speak for me my Lord.


L. C. Just. We are of another Opinion.


Mr. Just. Wythins. If you acknowledge the matter of Fact, you say well.


Col. Sidney. I say there are several Judgments of Parliament, that do show
what ever is Constructive-Treason does not belong to any private Court, that of
1 Mary. 1 E. 6. 1 Eliz. 5 Eliz. 18. another 13 Car show this. Now my Lord, I
say that the business concerning the Papers, it is only a similitude of hands,
which is just nothing. In my Lady Carrs Case, it was resolved to extend to no
criminal Cause, if not to any, then not to the greatest, the most Capital. So
that I have only this to say, That I think it is impossible for the Jury to find
this matter, for the first point you proved by my Lord Howard that I think is
no Body, and the last concerning the Papers, is only imagination from the
similitude of hands. If I had published it, I must have answered for it, or if
the thing had been whole and mine, I must have answered for it; but for these
scraps never showed any Body, That I think does not at all concern me. And I
say, if the Jury should find it (which is impossible they can) I desire to have
the Law reserved unto me.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury. The Evidence has been
long; but I will endeavor to repeat it, as faithfully as I can. The Crime the
Prisoner stands accused for, is compassing and imagining the Death of the King.
That which we go about to prove that compassing and imagining by, is by his
meeting and consulting how to raise Arms against the King, and by plain matter
in writing under his own hand, where he does affirm, It is lawful to take away
and destroy the King. Gentlemen I will begin with the first part of it, the
Meeting and Consultation to raise Arms against the King. The Prisoner Gentlemen
has endeavored to avoid the whole force of this Evidence by saying, that this
in point of Law cannot affect him, if it were all proved; for this does not
amount to a proof of his compassing and imagining the death of the King, and he
is very long in interpreting the Act of Parliament to you of 25 E. 3. and
dividing of it into several Members or Branches of Treason, And does insist
upon it, that though this should be an offense within one Branch of that Statute,
yet that is not a proof of the other, which is the Branch he is proceeded upon,
that is the first Clause against the compassing and imagining the Death of the
King. And, sais he, conspiring to Levy War is not so much as one Branch of that
Statute, but it must be War actually levied. This is a matter he is wholly
mistaken in, in point of Law. It has been adjudged over and over again, That
an Act which in one Branch of that Statute may be an overt Act to prove a man
Guilty of another Branch of it. As levying War is an overt Act to prove a man
Guilty of Conspiring the Death of the King. And this was adjudged in the Case
of Sir Henry Vane, so is meeting and consulting to raise to Arms. And reason
does plainly speak it to be so; for they that conspire to raise War against the
King, cannot be presumed to stop any where; till they have Dethroned or Murdered
the King. Gentlemen I will not belong in citing Authoritys, It has been settled
lately by all the Judges of England, in the Case of my Lord Russel, who has
suffered for this Conspiracy. Therefore that point of Law will be very plain
against the Prisoner. He has mentioned some other things, as that there must
be two Witnesses to every particular Fact, and one Witness to one Fact, and
another to another is not sufficient, it has been very often objected, and as
often overruled: It was overruled Solemnly in the Case of my Lord Stafford.
Therefore if we have one Witness to one overt Act, and another to another, they
will be two Witnesses in Law to convict this Prisoner. In the first part of our
Evidence, we give you an account of the general Design of an Insurrection that
was to have been, that this was contrived first, when my Lord Shaftsbury was in
England, that after my Lord Shaftsbury was gone, the business did not fall; but
they thought fit to revive it again, and that they might carry it on the more
steadily, they did contrive a Counsel among themselves of six, whereof the
Prisoner at the Bar was one. They were the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord of Essex,
my Lord Howard, my Lord Russel, the Prisoner at the Bar, and Mr. Hambden. This
Counsel they contrived to manage this affair, and to carry on that design,
that seemed to fall by the Death of my Lord of Shaftsbury, and they met; this
we give you an account of, first by Witnesses that gave you an account in
general of it. And though they were not privy to it, yet they heard of this
Counsel, and that Col. Sidney was to be one of this Counsel. This Gentlemen, If
it had stood alone by it self, had been nothing to affect the Prisoner at all.
But this will show you, that this was discoursed among them that were in this
Conspiracy. Then my Lord Howard gives you an account that first the Duke of
Monmouth, and he, and Col. Sidney met, and it was agreed to be necessary to
have a Counsel that should consist of six or seven, and they were to carry it
on. That the Duke of Monmouth undertook to dispose my Lord Russel to it, and
Col. Sidney to dispose the Earl of Essex, and Mr. Hambden: that these Gentlemen
did meet accordingly, and the substance of their discourse was, taking notice
how the design had fallen upon the Death of my Lord Shaftsbury, that it was fit
to carry it on before men's Inclinations were cool, for they found they were
ready to it, and had great reason to believe it, because this being a business
communicated to so many, yet for all that it was kept very secret, and no body
had made any mention of it, which they looked upon as a certain argument that
men were ready to engage in it. This encouraged them to go on in this
Conspiracy. Then when the Six met at Mr. Hambden's house, they debated
concerning the place of rising, and the time, the time they conceived must be
suddenly before Men's minds were cool, for now they thought they were ready and
very much disposed to it, and for place, they had in debate whether they should
rise first in the Town, or in the Country, or both together. And for the
Persons they thought it absolutely necessary for them to have the United
Counsels of Scotland to join with them, and therefore they did refer this
matter to be better considered of another time, and they met afterward at my
Lord Russel's House in February, and there they had Discourse to the same
purpose. But there they began to consider with themselves, being they were to
destroy this Government, what they should set up in the room of it; to what
purpose they engaged. For they did very wisely consider, If this be only to
serve a turn, and to make one Man great, this will be a great hinderance in
their Affair, therefore they thought it was necessary to engage upon a public
account, and to resolve all into the authority of a Parliament, which surely
they either thought to force the King to call, or otherwise, that the People
might call a Parliament, if the King refused, and so they to choose their own
Heads. But still they were upon this point, That it was necessary for their
Friends in Scotland to have their Counsels united with them, and in order to
that, it was necessary to contrive some way to send a Messenger into Scotland,
to bring some Men here to treat and consult about it, and Col. Sidney is the
Man that does engage to send this Messenger, and he had a man very fit for his
turn, that is, Aaron Smith, whom he could confide in, and him he undertook to
send into Scotland. This Messenger was to fetch my Lord Melvin, the two
Cambells, and Sir John Cockram, Col. Sidney as he engaged to do this, so
afterward he did show to my Lord Howard Money, which he affirmed was for that
business, he says it was a Sum of about sixty Guinneys, and he believes he gave
it him, for that Col. Sidney told him, Aaron Smith was gone into Scotland, That
the Pretense was not barefaced to invite them over to consult of a Rebellion,
but to consult about the business of Carolina, being a Plantation for the
Persecuted Brethren, as they pretended in Scotland. Gentlemen, these Scotch-men
that were thus sent for over, they came accordingly, that is, the two Cambells,
and Sir John Cockram, and the Discourse with Sir Andrew Foster was according to
this Cant that was agreed on beforehand, concerning a Plantation in Carolina.
This was that that was pretended for their coming hither; but the true Errand
was, the business of the Insurrection intended. Gentlemen, that they came upon
such a design, is evident from the circumstances; they came about the time the
business brake out, and in that time suspiciously changing their Lodging, they
were taken making their escape, and this at a time before it was probable to be
known abroad, that these men were named as part of the Conspirators. These
things do very much verify the Evidence my Lord Howard has given, and there
is nothing has been said does at all invalidate in* The sending of Aaron Smith
into Scotland, and his going, and the coming of these men, and their
endeavoring to make their escape, are mighty concurrent Evidences with the
whole Evidence my Lord Howard has given. Now, What objections are made against
this Evidence* truly none at all. Here are persons of great Quality have given
their Testimony, and they do not impeach my Lord Howard in the least* but some
do extremely confirm the truth of my Lord Howard. My Lord Anglesey gives you an
account of a discourse at my Lord of Bedfords, That my Lord Howard came in, and
that my Lord Howard should there comfort my Lord of Bedford, and enlarge in the
Commendations of his Son, and say he was confident he knew nothing of the
Design, and he must be innocent. Gentlemen, This is the nature of the most part
of the Evidence. My Lord of Clare his Evidence is much the like, that is, his
denying that he knew of any Plot. Now here is my Lord Howard under a guilt of
High Treason; for he was one of those Censpirators not yet discovered, nor no
Evidence of any discourse leading to any thing that should give occasion to him
to protest his innocence: and, says he, I know nothing of the Plot. You would
have wondered if he should have been talking in all places his know ledg, and
declaring himself: His denying of it under the guilt, when he was not accused*
is nothing to his Confession when he comes to be apprehended and taken for it.
Here Mr. Philip Howard says, he had several discourses with him about this
business upon the breaking out of the Plot, and that he advised him to make an
Address, and that this was a thing that would be very acceptable, and very much
for their vindication; and my Lord Howard (he says) thanked him for his very
good advice, and said, he would follow it: and presently after when my Lord
Russel was apprehended, Mr. Howard tells him the news that my Lord Russel was
apprehended; this was sudden to him. And what says he? We are all undone. When
my Lord Russel that was one of this Counsel that was a secret Counsel, and
could not be traced but by some of themselves, when he is apprehended, then he
falls out into this expression* We are all undone. This is an Argument my Lord
Howard had a guilt upon him. For, why were they all undone, that my Lord Russel
was apprehended, any more than upon the apprehending the rest? Yes, because my
Lord was one of the six, and now *it was come to the knowing of that part of the
Conspiracy. It was traced to the Counsel of six, which in all likelihood would
break the neck of the Design. Now tho he put it off afterward, saying, I
believe it is a Sham Plot, yet this was but, a trivial put off. And then, when
Colonel Sidney is taken, the same Witness Mr. Howard tells you, my Lord was
very sad and melancholy; for then he had greater reason to lie under an
apprehension of being detected. Therefore Gentlemen, this will rather confirm
the truth of the Evidence, than any way impeach it. Then (for I would repeat it
all, tho I think it has no great weight in it) Doctor Burnet says. That after
the Plot my Lord Howard pretended he knew of no Plot. This is no more than was
testified by the other Lords before; and all it imports, is, that my Lord did
not discover himself to Doctor Burnet. But I would fain know, if my Lord had
told Doctor Burnet, had it not argued that he had great confidence in him, that
he thought him a man fit to be entrusted with such a secret: and unless the
Doctor desires to be thought such a man, himself must own, it is no objection,
That my Lord Howard did not tell him. Ducas's Testimony is no more neither,
That he protested he was innocent, and believed Colonel Sidney was innocent;
and this was before my Lord Howard discovered any thing of this Plot. Then
Colonel Sidney objects, This is by malice, my Lord Howard owes him money, and
seeks to pay his Debts by taking away his Life; and in further prosecution of
this malice, would have seized upon his Goods. But the Evidence does not
receive such construction, for my Lord Howard only offered Colonel Sidney the
civility of his House to protect his Plate and Goods. Now Gentlemen, there were
two other Witnesses, my Lord Paget, and Mr. Edward Howard; but they say no more
than the rest of them, that he did protest his innocence, and Mr. Howard says,
he advised him to make an Address to the King. This, Gentlemen, I repeat, not
that it is material, but for no other reason, than because Colonel Sidney had
produced it; and so we are to think, he intended to make some use of it: but I
cannot see any inference to be drawn from it. There is one Witness more, and
that is Mr. Blake, to the credit of my Lord Howard, who comes here, and says,
that when he discoursed about a Pardon, My Lord should say, That he had a
Warrant for his Pardon, but that he had not yet passed it, and could not yet;
and he apprehended the reason was, because the drudgery of Swearing was not
over. But this is but what my Lord Howard had conjectured: First, it does not
appear, that there is any promise of Pardon at all to my Lord Howard, on any
terms imposed on him. In the next place, whatever expectation he has of a
Pardon, he cannot reasonably hope for it without making a clear discovery of all
he knows: For to stifle his Evidence he has given, is not a way to deserve a
Pardon of his Prince. Therefore, Gentlemen, whatever expressions were used, tho
he called it the drudgery of Swearing, however unwilling he is to come to it,
and tho he gives it very many hard names* and might think it very harsh to come
and own himself to be one of the Conspirators, it might be irksome* and very
irksome, yet none of them tell you, That my Lord Howard should say, that what
he had said was not true. Now he has come and given his Evidence, and you have
heard all these objections against it, and not one of them touch it in the
least.

I come in the next place to the other part of the Evidence* The Papers found
in Colonel Sidney's House. And in the first place he objects, They cannot affect
him; for, says he, there is no proof they were found in my House, no proof they
were written by me; for comparison of Hands, that is nothing; and if they were
proved to be mine, it is nothing at all to the purpose: they are an Answer to a
Polemical Discourse, wherewith he entertained himself privately in his Study.
Why you have observed, I know, that Sir Philip Lloyd in the first place swears,
that by Warrant from the Secretary he searched his House, and he found the
Papers lying upon Colonel Sidney's Table in his Study, when he came in there;
and there is no ground nor color for you to suspect otherwise than that they
were there, and he found them there. For the surmise of the Prisoner at the
Bar, that they might besaid there, it is so foreign and without ground, that by
and by you will think there is nothing at all in it. In the next place we prove
Colonel Sidney's Hand, and that by as much proof as the thing is capable of;
such a proof as in all cases has been allowed; and that is, for men to come
that know and are acquainted with the Handwriting* and Swear they know his
Handwriting, and they believe this to be his Hand. You have heard from Mr.
Sheppard, a man that used to transact business for him, pay money for him; and
Mr. Cook, and Mr. Carry, men of known Credit in the City of London, that have
had the like dealings with Colonel Sidney, and they Swear, this is his
Handwriting, as they verily Believe. So that, Gentlemen, this proof to you of
Colonel Sidney's Handwriting, does verify Sir Philip Lloyd, That these Papers
must be found there, if Colonel Sidney writ them: and then this being found
that they were writ by him, the next thing will be, How far this will be an
Evidence to prove his compassing and imagining the Death of the King.
Compassing and imagining the Death of the King, is the Act of the mind, and is
Treason whilst it remains secret in the Heart, tho no such Treason can be
punished, because there is no way to prove it; but when once there is any Overt
Act, that is, any thing that does manifest and declare such intention, then the
Law (...)nd punishes it as High Treason.

Now after this Evidence, I think no man will doubt, whether it was in the
heart of the Prisoner at the Bar to destroy the King. But first he objects,
That this is a part of a Book, and unless you take the whole, nothing can be
made of it: As it is in wresting of Texts of Scripture, says he; you may as
well say, That David says there is no God, because David has said, The fool
has said in his heart there is no God. But Gentlemen, the application will not
hold, for you see a long Discourse has been read to you, a continued thread of
Argument; it is not one Proposition, but an whole series of Argument: These are
the Positions, That the King derives all his Power from the People; That it is
originally in the People, and that the measure of Subjection must be adjudged
by the Parliament; and if the King does fall from doing his Duty, he must
expect the People will exact it. And this he has laid down as no way
prejudicial to him; for, says he, The King may refuse the Crown, if he does not
like it upon these terms. But, says he, if he does accept it, he must expect
the performance will be exacted, or revenge taken by those he has botray'd.
Then next, he sets up an objection, and then argues against it: Ay, but shall
the People be judge in their own Cause? And thus he answers it, It must be so;
for is not the King a Judge in his own Cause? How can any man else be Tried, or
Convicted of any Offense, if the King may not be Judge in his own Cause; for to
judge by a man's self, or by his Deputy, is the same thing; and so a Crime
against the King cannot be punished. And then he takes notice of it as a very
absurd Position, That the King shall judge in his own Cause, and not the People.
That would be to say, The Servant entertained by the Master, shall judge the
Master, but the Master shall not judge the Servant. Gentlemen, after this sort
of Argument he comes to this settled Position, We may therefore, says he,
change, or take away Kings, (without breaking any Yoke, or that is made a
Yoke;) the injury is therefore in imposing the Yoke, and there can be none at
all in breaking of it. But he goes on in his Book, and that is by way of Answer
to an Objection, That if there be no injury, yet there may be inconvenience, if
the headless multitude should shake off the Yoke. But says he, I would sain
know how the multitude comes to be headless: and there he gives you many
instances in Story, and from Foreign Nations he comes home to the English, and
tells you how all Rebellions in later Ages have been headed; and tells you the
Parliament is the Head, or the Nobility and Gentry that compose it; and when
the King fails in his Duty, the People may call it. The Multitude therefore is
never headless, but they either find or create an head, so that here is a plain
and an avowed Principle of Rebellion Established upon the strongest reason he
has to back it. Gentlemen, This with the other Evidence that has been given,
will be sufficient to prove his Compassing the Death of the King. You see the
Affirmations he makes: when Kings do break their Trust they may be called to
account by the people. This is the Doctrine he Broaches and Argues for: He says
in his Book in another part, that the Calling and Dissolving of Parliaments is
not in the Kings Power. Gentlemen, You all know how many Parliaments the King
has Called and Dissolved; if it be not in his Power, he has done that that
was not in his Power, and so contrary to his Trust. Gentlemen, at the entrance
into this Conspiracy they were under an apprehension that their Liberties were
invaded, as you hear in the Evidence from my Lord Howard, that they were just
making the Insurrection upon that Tumultuous opposition of Electing of Sheriffs
in London. They enter into a Consultation to raise Arms against the King; and
it is proved by my Lord Howard, that the Prisoner at the Bar was one.
Gentlemen, Words spoken upon a supposition will be High Treason, as was held in
King James's time, in the Case of Collins in Rolls Reports, The King being
Excommunicate may be Deposed and Murdered, without affirming he was
Excommunicated; and this was enough to Convict him of High Treason. Now
according to that Case, to say the King having broken his Trust may be Deposed
by his people, would be High Treason, but here he does as good as affirm the
King had broke his Trust. When every one sees the King has Dissolved
Parliaments; this reduces it to an Affirmation. And though this Book be not
brought to that Counsel to be perused, and there debated, yet it will be
another, and more than two Witnesses against the Prisoner: For I would ask any
man, suppose a man was in a Room, and there were two men, and he talks with
both apart, and he comes to one and endeavors to persuade him that it is
lawful to Rise in Arms against the King, if so be he break his Trust, and he
should go to another man, and tell him the King has broken his Trust, and we
must seek some way to redress our selves, and persuade the people to Rise;
these two Witnesses do so tack this Treason together, that they will be two
Witnesses to prove him Guilty of High Treason. And you have heard one Witness
prove it positively to you, That he consulted to Rise in Arms against the King,
and here is his own Book says, it is lawful for a man to Rise in Arms against
the King, if he break his Trust, and in effect he has said, the King has
broken his Trust: Therefore this will be a sufficient demonstration what the
imagination of the Heart of this man was, that it was nothing but the
destruction of the King and the Government, and indeed of all Governments.
There can be no such thing as Government if the people shall be Judge in the
Case: For what so uncertain as the heady and giddy Multitude? Gentlemen, I
think this will be a sufficient Evidence of his Consulting the death of the
King. You have here the Prisoner at the Bar that is very deep in it. Indeed
some men may by Passion be transported into such an Offense, and though the
Offense be never the less, what ever the motives are, yet in some it is less
dangerous, for those that venture upon Passion, to raise Commotions and
Rebellion, are not always so much upon their Guard, but that they may make some
false steps to entrap themselves. But this Gentleman proceeds upon a surer
Foundation, it is his Reason, it is his Primciple, it is the Guide of all his
Actions, it is that by which he leads and directs the steady Course of his
Life. A man convinced of these Principles, and that walks accordingly, what
will not he do to accomplish his designs? How wary will he be in all his Actions?
Still reasoning with himself which way to bring it most securely about.
Gentlemen. This is the more dangerous Conspiracy in this man, by how much the
more it is rooted in him: and how deep it is, you hear, when a man shall write
as his Principle, that it is lawful for to depose Kings, they breaking their
Trust, and that the Revolt of the whole Nation can not be called Rebellion. It
will be a very sad Case when people Act this according to their Consciences,
and do all this for the good of the people, as they would have it thought; but
this is the Principle of this man. Gentlemen, We think we have plainly made it
out to you, and proved it sufficiently* that it was the imagination of his
Heart to destroy the King and made sufficient proof of High Treason.


Coll. Sidney. Give me leave, my Lord* to say a very few words, I desire Mr.
Solicitor would not think it his Duty to take away men's lives any how: First,
We have had a long story. --


Lord Chief Justice. Nay Mr. Sidney, We must not have vying and revying* I
asked you before what you had to say; the course of Evidence is, after the
Kings Counsel have concluded; we never admit the Prisoner to say any thing.


Coll. Sidney. My Lord, It was a wise man said, there never could be too much
delay in the Life of a man: I know the Kings Counsel may conclude, if they
please. Mr. Solicitor, I would not have him think that it is enough by one* way
on another to bring a man to death: My Lord, This matter of Sir Henry Vane is
utterly misrepresented. --


Lord Chief Justice. I must tell you Gentlemen of the Jury; that what the
Prisoner says that is not proved, and what the Kings Counsel have said, of
which there is no proof to make it out* must not be taken into any
consideration.


Coll. Sidney. Then my Lord here is a place or two in Old Hales, [turning over
my Lord Hales Book] for the Overt Act of one Treason, not being an Overt Act of
another, your Lordship knows Coke and Hales were both against it [he Reads]
Compassing by bare words is not an Overt Act, Conspiring to Levy War is no
Overt Act.


Mr. Solicitor General. I desire but one word more for my own sake as well as
the Prisoners, and that is, that if I have said any thing that is not Law, or
misrepeated, or misapplied the Evidence which has been given, I do make it my
humble Request to your Lordship to rectify those mistakes as well in point of
Fact as point of Law; for God forbid the Prisoner should suffer by any mistake.


Lord Chief Justice. Gentlemen, The Evidence has been long, and it is a Cause
of great concernment, and it is far from the thoughts of the King, or from the
thoughts or desire of any of his Judges here to be instrumental to take away
the life of any man, that by Law his Life ought not to be taken away. For I had
rather many Guilty men should escape* than one innocent man suffer. The
question is, whether upon all the Evidence you have heard against the Prisoner,
and the Evidence on his behalf, there is Evidence sufficient to Convict the
Prisoner of the High Treason he stands charged with. And as you must not be
moved by the denial of the Prisoner further than as it is backed with proof, so
you are not to be inveigled by any insinuations made against the Prisoner at
the Bar, further or otherwise than as the proof is made out to you. But it is
usual, and it is a duty incumbent on the King's Counsel to urge against all
such Criminals, whatsoever they observe in the Evidence against them, and
likewise to endeavor to give answers to the Objections that are made on their
behalf. And therefore, since we have been kept so long in this Cause, it will not
be amiss for me (and my Brothers, as they shall think fit,) to help your memory
in the fact, and discharge that Duty that is incumbent upon the Court as to the
points of Law. This Indictment is for High Treason, and is grounded upon the
Statute of 25 E. 3. By which Statute the compassing and imagining the death of
the King, and declaring the same by an Overt Act is made High Treason. The
reason of that Law was, because at Common Law there was great doubt what was
Treason; wherefore to reduce that High Crime to a certainty, was that Law made,
that those that were Guilty might know what to expect. And there are several
Acts of Parliament made between the time of Edward the Third, and that of 1 M.
but by that Statute all Treasons that are not enumerated by after Acts of
Parliament remain as they were declared by that Statute of 25 E. 3. And so are
Challenges and other matters insisted upon by the Prisoner, left as they were
at the time of that Act: I am also to tell you that in point of Law, it is not
only the Opinion of us here, but the Opinion of them that sat before us, and
the Opinion of all the Judges of England, and within the memory of many of you,
That tho there be Two Witnesses required to prove a man Guilty of High Treason,
yet it is not necessary there should be Two Witnesses, to the same thing at one
time. But if two Witnesses prove two several Facts, that have a tendency to the
same Treason, they are two Witnesses sufficient to convict any man of
High Treason. In the Case of my Lord Stafford in Parliament, all the Judges
assisting, it is notoriously known, That one Witness to a Conspiracy in
England, and another to a Conspiracy in France, were held two Witnesses
sufficient to convict him of High Treason. In the next place, I am to tell you,
That tho some Judges have been of Opinion that words of themselves were not an
Overt Act; but my Lord Hales, nor my Lord Coke, nor any other of the Sages of
the Law, ever questioned but that a Letter would be an Overt Act, sufficient to
prove a man Guilty of High Treason; For scribere est agere, Mr. Sidney says,
The King is a Politic Person; but you must destroy Him in His natural
capacity, or it is not Treason; but I must tell, If any man compass to Imprison
the King, it is High Treason: so was the Case of my Lord Cobham, and my Lord
Coke. When he says, If a man do attempt to make the King do any thing by force
and compulsion, otherwise than he ought to do, that it is High Treason within
that Act of 25 Eliz. III. But if it were an Indictment only for the Levying of
War, there must be an actual War Levied; but this is an Indictment for
compassing the Death of the King; and the other Treason, mentioned in that Act
of Parliament, for the Levying War, may be given in Evidence to prove the
Conspiracy the Kings Death: For it is rightly told you, by the Kings Council,
That the imagination of a man's heart is not to be discerned; but if I declare
such my imagination by an Overt Act; which Overt Act does naturally Evince,
that the King must be Deposed, Destroyed, Imprisoned, or the like, it will be
sufficient Evidence of Treason within that Act. In the next place, having told
you what the Law is, for, Gentlemen, it is our Duty upon our Oaths, to declare
the Law to you, and you are bound to receive our Declaration of the Law; and
upon this Declaration, to inquire whether there be a Fact, sufficiently proved,
to find the Prisoner Guilty of the High Treason, of which he stands Indicted:
And for that, I must tell you, what ever happens to be hearsay from others, it
is not to be applied immediately to the Prisoner; but however, those Matters
that are remote at first may serve for this purpose, To prove there was
generally a Conspiracy to Destroy the King and Government: And for that matter,
you all remember it was the constant rule and method observed about the Popish
Plot, first to produce the Evidence of the Plot in general: This was done in
that famous Ca^e of my Lord Stafford in Parliament. Gentlemen, I am also to
tell you, This alone, does not at all affect the Prisoner at the Bar, but is
made use of as a circumstance to support the credibility of the Witnesses: and
is thus far applicable to the business before you, That it is plain, by persons
that don't touch the Prisoner at the Bar, (and I am sorry any man makes a doubt
of it at this time of day) that there was a Conspiracy to kill the King; for
after so full a proof in this place, and in others, and the Execution and
Confession of several of the Offenders, I am surprised to observe that the
Prisoner at the Bar, and some others present, seem not to believe it.

But, Gentlemen, you hear the first Witness; I speak of West: He tells you he
had the honor to be acquainted with Mr. Sidney, and that he had Discourse with
Walcot, a person Convicted and Executed for this horrid Conspiracy. Why, says
he, he told me at my Chamber, That they were not only the persons concerned,
but that there were other persons of great Quality that had their Meetings for
the carrying on the Business in other places. And Ferguson, that was the Ring
leader in this Conspiracy, told him there was a Design of a general
Insurrection; it was once laid down, but it is now taken up again. There are
other Counselors of great importance; and he names, among the rest, the
Prisoner at the Bar. Mr. West goes a little further, and he tells you this:
says he, He did not only tell me so, but that there was a Design to conciliate
a Correspondence with some persons in Scotland, and they were to do it under
the Cant of having business in Carolina. There is Mr. Keeling, he tells you
too, There was a Design for a general and public Insurrection; That he was
present with the Good-enough's, one and the other, and that they had taken upon
them to divide, and did divide the City into such and such districts: And what
was the business? It was, that there might be a general Insurrection; might be
an Insurrection, not only to Destroy the King and the Duke, but to Destroy all
the Kings Loyal Subjects; and in taking away their Lives, to take away the Life
of Monarchy it self; and to Subvert the Religion Established by Law. Then comes
in Colonel Rumsey, and he gives you an Account that he had heard of such things
in Mr. West's Chamber; and tells you he had received such Intelligence. And all
these give you an Account, that there was such a Design to kill the King: And
this is the Substance of the general Evidence produced to prove the Conspiracy.
Then to make this Matter come home to the Prisoner at the Bar, first*my Lord
Howard gives you an Account, and does directly Swear, That about the middle or
latter end* of January last, he happened to meet with Colonel Sidney, the
Prisoner at the Bar, and the Duke of Monmouth (they were the Persons first
began to have Discourse about this matter) and how they met with a
disappointment; the thing had slept a great while, and that it was fit it
should be revived again; and that Persons of Quality were mentioned, who were
to have an immediate care in the carrying on of the business, and that it
should not be divulged to too many; accordingly* there was my Lord Russel, my
Lord of Essex, my Lord of Salisbury, and Mr. Hambden named. He tells you, the
Prisoner at the Bar undertook for my Lord of Essex, and Mr. Hambden, and he
tells you, the Duke of Monmouth undertook for my Lord Russel, and the rest; and
that this was the Result of one Meeting: He goes yet further, That pursuant* to
this, it was communicated to those persons so to be engaged, and the Place and
Time was appointed; the Place, Mr. Hambden's House; but is not so positive to
the Time, but only to the Place, and Persons. He says, all these Persons met,
and he gives you an Account, That Mr. Hambden (because it was necessary for
some persons to break silence) gave some short account of the design of their
Meeting, and made some reflections upon the mischiefs that attended the
Government, and what apprehensions; many people upon the late Choice of
Sheriffs, and that there had been a Male Administration of Public Justice;
That it was fit some means should be used to redress these Grievances. He cannot
tell you positively, what this man, or that man said there; but says, that all
did unanimously consent to what was then debated about an*Insurrection; and in
order to it, they discoursed about the time, when it should be, and that they
thought fit it should be done suddenly, while men's minds were wound up to that
height, as they then were; and as the first Witness tells you, There was a
Consideration, whether it should be at one place, or at several places
together: He says, then it was taken into consideration, that this could not be
carried on, but there must be Arms and Ammunition provided. The next step is,
about a necessary concern, the concern of Money, and therefore our Law calls
Money, The Sinews of War. My Lord Howard tells you, That the Duke of Monmouth
proposed 25. or 30000 l. That my Lord Gray was to advance 10000 l. out of his
own Estate: but then they thought to make their Party more strong, by the
Assistance of a Discontented people in Scotland, my Lord of Argyle, and Sir
John Cockram, and several other people there to join with them. That pursuant
to this, all they after met at my Lord Russels, and the same Debate is
Reassumed, and among the rest, this particular thing of conciliating a
friendship with the Scotch; the Cambels, my Lord of Argyle, and my Lord Melvin
were particularly mentioned. That Coll. Sidney took upon himself to find out a
Messenger, but it was my Lord Russel's part to Write the Letter; One of the
Messengers named to convey the fame, was Aaron Smith, he was known, says my
Lord Howard, to some of us; and then we all agreed, that Aaron Smith was the
most proper man: Upon this they brake up that very time. Afterward comes my
Lord Haward to Coll. Sidney at some distance of time, and he comes to him, and
shows him Threescore Guineys, and told him, he was going into the City, and
that they were to be given to Aaron Smith. He tells you after this, That he had
some other discourse about a fortnight or three weeks after, with Coll. Sidney;
and that Coll. Sidney did take notice, that he had sent him, and that he had an
account of him, as far as Newcastle. So that it is very plain, That it was not
sudden and rash thoughts, it is a little more than according to the language we
meet with in some Pamphlets of late, more than Heats and Stirs. Gent. Then I
must tell you, here are Circumstances proved in pursuance of this Design, for
Sir, Andrew Foster informs you, how that Sir John Cockram, and the Cambels, and
one Monro, as I take it, came to Town, and that he had Discourse with some of
them about their business of coming out of Scotland; and he says, they
pretended, it was about business of some Trade to Carolina, which does still
corroborate the Evidence. He tells you likewise, That there being a noise of
discovering the Plot, they begun to hide; Sir John Cockram began to hide, and
sculk from place to place; they came first with that Cant in their Mouths,
about Carolina; The Messenger Atterbury tells you, When they came to take these
Men, how they shuffled from place to place. So Gent. I must tell you, That if
in case there be but One Witness to prove a direct Treason, and another Witness
to a Circumstance that contributes to that Treason, that will make two
Witnesses to prove the Treason: Because I would explain my Mind, Not long ago
all the Judges of England were commanded to meet together, and one that is the
Senior of the Kings Council was pleased to put this Case. If I buy a Knife of
I. S. to kill the King, and it be proved by one Witness I bought a Knife for
this purpose, and another comes and proves, I bought such a Knife of I. S. they
are Two Witnesses sufficient to prove a man Guilty of High Treason: and so it
was held by all the Judges of England then present, in the presence of all the
Kings Council. And therefore Mr. Sidney is mightily mistaken in the Law: For in
case of any Treason (except the Treason at the Bar) or in Treason for Clipping
and Coining, one Witness is sufficient at this day. Now Gent. Supposing all
this should not be sufficient, here is a Libel, and it is a most Traitorous and
Seditious Libel. If you believe, that that was Coll. Sidney's Book, writ by
him, no man can doubt but it is a sufficient Evidence, that he is Guilty of
Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King; and let us consider, what proof
can be greater than what has been given of it. Mr. Sheppard, an intimate
acquaintance of his, that has seen him write, he looks upon the hand, and says,
He is extremely acquainted with the hand, and says He, I believe in my
Conscience this Book is Coll. Sidney's hand. Gent. Do you expect Mr. Sidney
would call a Witness to be by to see him write that Book?

In the next place, you have two Tradesmen, Coke and Carry, and they tell you,
one had seen him write once, the other had seen his hand writing, and they both
believe it his Hand writing, and they have good reason, for they have paid
several sums of Money, upon Notes which they took, as well as This, to be his
Hand writing Gentlemen, Besides that, give me leave to tell you, here is
another thing* that makes it more plain. This very Book is found in Colonel
Sidney's House, on the Table in his Study, where he used to write, by a
Gentleman, against whom Colonel Sidney cannot make the least Objection; and that
there was that fairness offered by the Gentleman, Pray Colonel put your Seal
upon it, that you may see, that no injury be done you; but Mr. Sidney would not
do it. Therefore he Seals them with his own Seal, and carries them to
White Hall where they were broken open, and Swears that those Papers were
found in his Closet, whereof this was one. Another thing which I must take
notice of to you in this Case, is, to mind you, how this Book contains all the
Malice, and Revenge, and Treason, that Mankind can be guilty of: It fixes the
sole Power in the Parliament and the People; so that he carries on the Design
still, for their Debates at their Meetings were to that purpose. And such
Doctrines as these suit with their Debates; for there, a general Insurrection
was designed, and that was discoursed of in this Book, and encouraged: They
must not give it an ill Name: It must not be called a Rebellion, it being the
general Act of the People. The King, it says, is responsible to them, the King
is but their Trustee; That he had betrayed his Trust, he had misgoverned, and
now he is to give it up, that they may be all Kings themselves. Gentlemen, I
must tell you, I think I ought more than ordinarily to press this upon you,
because I know, the Misfortune of the late unhappy Rebellion, and the bringing
the late Blessed King to the Scaffold, was first begun by such kind of
Principles: They cried, He had betrayed the Trust, that was delegated to him
from the People. Gentlemen, in the next place, because he is afraid their Power
alone will not do it, he endeavors to poison Men's Judgments; and the way he makes
use of, he colors it with Religion, and quotes Scripture for it too, and you
know, how far that went in the late times; How we were for binding our King in
Chains, and our Nobles in Fetters of Iron. Gentlemen, This is likewise made use
of by him to stir up the People to Rebellion. Gentlemen, if in case the
Prisoner did design the Deposing the King, the removing the King, and if in
order thereunto he be guilty of Conspiring to Levy War; or, as to the Letter
writ by my Lord Russel, if he was privy to it, these will be Evidences against
him. So that it is not upon two, but it is upon greater Evidence then 22, if you
believe this Book was writ by him. Next I must tell you, Gentlemen, upon, I
think, a less Testimony, an Indictment was preferred against the late Lord
Russel, and he was thereupon Convicted and Executed; of which they have brought
the Record. These are the Evidences for the King.

For the Prisoner he has made several Objections; As that there was no War
Levied: For that, Gentlemen, at the beginning of the Cause, I told you, what I
took the Law to be, and I take it to be so very plainly. But, Gentlemen, as to
the Credibility of my Lord Howard, he offers you several Circumstances. First,
He offers you a Noble Lord, my Lord Anglescy, who says, That he attending my
Lord of Bedford upon the misfortune of the Imprisonment of his Son; after he
had done, my Lord Howard came to second that part of a Christians Office, which
he had performed, and told him, he had a very good Son, and he knew no harm of
him; and as to the Plot, he knew nothing of it. Another Noble Lord, my Lord
Clare tells you, that he had some Discourse with my Lord Howard, and he said,
that if he were accused, he thought they would but tell Noses and his business
was done. Then Mr. Philip Howard, he tells you, how he was not so intimate with
him as others, but he often came to his Brothers; and that he should say he
knew nothing of a Plot, nor did he believe any; but at the same time, he said,
he believed there was a Sham Plot: and then he pressed him about the business
of the Address; but that now my Lord of Essex was out of Town, and so it went
off. Another thing Mr. Sidney took notice of, says he, it is an Act of Revenge
in my Lord Howard, for he owes him a Debt, that he does (besides by his
Allegation) does not appear.


Col. Sid. My Lord, he has confessed it.


L. Chapter Just. Admit it; yet in case Colonel Sidney should be Convicted of this
Treason, the Debt accrues to the King, and he cannot be a Farthing the better
for it. But how does it look like Revenge? I find my Lord Howard, when he
speaks of Colonel Sidney, says, he was more beholding to him than any body,
and was more sorry for him; so says my Lord Clare. Gentlemen, You have it
likewise offered, that he came to Colonel Sidney's House, and there he was
desirous to have the Plate and Goods removed to his House, and that he would
assist them with his Coach and Coachman to carry them thither; and did affirm,
that he knew nothing of the Plot; and did not believe Colonel Sidney knew any
thing: and this is likewise proved by a couple of Maid Servants, as well as the
French Man. You have likewise some thing to the same purpose said by my Lord
Paget, and this is offered to take off the Credibility of my Lord Howard. Do
you believe, because my Lord Howard did not tell them, I am in a Conspiracy to
kill the King; therefore he knew nothing of it; he knew these Persons were Men
of Honor, and would not be concerned in any such thing. But do you think,
because a Man goes about and denies his being in a Plot, therefore he was not
in it: Nay, it seems so far from being an Evidence of his Innocence, that it is
an Evidence of his Guilt. What should provoke a Man to discourse after this
manner, if he had not apprehensions of Guilt within himself? This is the
Testimony offered against my Lord Howard, in disparagement of his Evidence. Ay,
but further its objected, he is in expectation of a Pardon: And he did say, he
thought he should not have the Kings Pardon, till such time as the drudgery of
Swearing was over. Why, Gentlemen, I take notice, before this Discourse
happened, he Swore the same thing at my Lord Russel's Trial. And I must tell
you, though it is the Duty of every Man to discover all Treasons; yet I tell
you, for a Man to come and Swear himself over and over Guilty, in the face of a
Court of Justice, may seem irksome, and provoke a Man to give it such an
Epithet. It Is therefore for his Credit, that he is an unwilling Witness: But,
Gentlemen, consider, if these things should have been allowed to take away the
Credibility of a Witness, what would have become of the Testimonies, that have
been given of late days? What would become of the Evidence of all those, that
have been so profligate in their Lives? Would you have the Kings Council to
call none but men, that were not concerned in this Plot, to prove that they
were Plotting? Ay, but Gentlemen, it is further objected, This Hand looks like
an old Hand, and it may not be the Prisoners Hand, but be Counterfeited; and
for that there is a Gentleman, who tells you what a dexterous Man he is. He
says, he believes he could Counterfeit any Hand in half an hour; it is an ugly
temptation, but I hope he has more Honor than to make use of that Art, he so
much glories in. But what time could there be for the Counterfeiting of this
Book? Can you, imagine that Sir Philip Lloyd through the Bag Sealed up did it?
Or, who else can you imagine should, or, does the Prisoner pretend, did write
this Book? So that as on one side, God forbid, but we should be careful of Men's
Lives, so on the other side, God forbid, that Flourishes and Varnish should
come to endanger the Life of the King, and the Destruction of the Government.
But, Gentlemen, We are not to anticipate you in point of Fact, I have according
to my Memory recapitulated the matters given in Evidence. It remains purely in
you now, whether you do believe upon the whole matter, that the Prisoner is
Guilty of the High Treason, whereof he is Indicted.


Mr. Just. Withins. Gentlemen, It Is fit you should have our Opinions; in all
the points of Law we concur with my Lord Chief Justice: Says Colonel Sidney,
here is a mighty Conspiracy, but there is nothing comes of it, who must we
thank for that? None but the Almighty Providence: One of themselves was
troubled in Conscience, and comes and discovers it, had not Keeling discovered
it, God knows whether we might have been alive at this day.

Then the Jury withdrew, and in about half an hours time returned, and brought
the Prisoner in, Guilty.

And the Lieutenant of the Tower took away his Prisoner.


Monday 26. Nov. 1683. Algernoon Sidney Esquire was brought up to the Bar of
the Court of Kings* bench to receive his Sentence. L. Chapter Just. Mr, Attorney,
will you move any thing?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar is convicted of High Treason, I
demand Judgment against him.


Cl. of Crown. Algernoon Sidney. Hold up thy hand (which he did) Thou have been
indicted of High Treason, and thereupon arraigned, and thereunto pleaded not
Guilty, and for thy Trial put thy self upon God and the Country, which Country
has found thee Guilty, What can thou say for thy self, Why Judgment of death
should not be given against thee, and execution awarded according to Law?


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I humbly conceive, I have had no Trial, I was to be
tried by my Country, I do not find my Country in the Jury that did try me,
There were some of them that were not Freeholders, I think my Lord, There is
neither Law nor President of any man that has been tried by a Jury, upon an
Indictment laid in a County, that were not Freeholders. So I do humbly
conceive: That I have had no Trial at all, and if I have had no Trial, there
can be no Judgment.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Sidney, you had the Opinion of the Court in that matter
before, We were unanimous in it, for it was the Opinion of all the Judges of
England, in the Case next proceeding yours, though that was a Case relating to
Corporations, but they were of Opinion, that by the Statute of Queen Mary the
Trial of Treason was put as it was at Common Law, and that there was no such
Challenge of Common Law.


Col. Sidney. Under favor, my Lord, I presume in such a Case as this, of Life,
and for what I know concerns every man in England, you will give me a day and
Counsel to argue it.


L. Chapter Just. It Is not in the Power of the Court to do it.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I desire the Indictment against me may be read.


L. Chapter Just. To what purpose?


Col. Sidney. I have somewhat to say to it.


L. Chapter Just. Well, read the Indictment.

Then the Clerk of the Crown read the Indictment.


Col. Sidney. Pray Sir, will you give me leave to see it, if it please you.


L. Chapter Just. No, that we cannot do.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, there is one thing then that makes this absolutely void,
It deprives the King of his Title, which is Treason by Law Defensor fidei.
There is no such thing there, if I heard it Right.


L. Chapter Just. In that you would deprive the King of his Life, that is in very
full I think.


Col. Sidney. If no body would deprive the King, no more then I, he would be in
no danger. Under favor these are things not to be overruled in point of Life
so easily.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Sidney, We very well understand our duty, we don't need to be
told by you what our Duty is, we tell you nothing, but what is Law, and if you
make Objections, that are immaterial, we must overrule them. Don't think that
we overrule in your Case that we would not overrule in all men's Cases in your
Condition. The Treason is sufficiently laid.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I conceive this too, that those words, that are said to
be written in the Paper that there is nothing of Treason in them, Besides that
there was nothing at all proved of them only by similitude of hands, which upon
the Case I alleged to your Lordship was not to be admitted in a Criminal Case.
Now it is easy to call a thing proditorie, but yet let the nature of the thing
be examined, I put my self upon it, that there is no Treason in it.


L. Chapter Just. There is not a Line in the Book scarce, but what is Treason.


Mr, Just. Withins. I believe you don't believe it Treason.


L. Chapter Just. That is the worst part of your Case; When men are riveted in
Opinion, that Kings may be deposed, that thy are accomptable to their People,
that a general Insurrection is no Rebellion, and, justify it, it is high time
upon my word to call them to account.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, the other day I had a book, wherein I had King James
Speech, upon which all that is there is grounded in his own Speech to the
Parliament in 1603 and there is nothing in these Papers, which is called a
Book, though it never appeared, for if it were true, it was only Papers found in
a private man's Study, never showed to any body; and Mr. Attorney takes this to
bring it to a crime in order to some other Counsel, and this was to come out
such a time, when the Insurrectio^ brake out. My Lord, There is one Person I
did not know where t^ find then, but every Body knows where to find now, that
is the Duke of Monmouth; if there had been any thing in Consultation, by this
means to bring any thing about, he must have known of it, for it must be taken
to be in Prosecution of those Designs of his: And if he will say there ever was
any such thing, or knew any thing of it, I will acknowledge whatever you please.


L. Chapter Just. That is over; you were Tried for this Fact: We must not send for
the Duke of Monmouth.


Col. Sidney. I humbly think I ought, and desire to be heard upon it.


L. Chapter Just. Upon what?


Col. Sidney. If you will call it a Trial --


L. Chapter Just. I do. The Law calls it so.


Mr. Just. Withins. We must not hear such Discourses, after you have been Tried
here, and the Jury have given their Verdict; as if you had not Justice done you.


Mr. Just. Holloway. I think it was a very fair Trial.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I desire, That you would hear my Reasons, why I should
be brought to a new Trial.


L. Chapter Just. That cannot be.


Col. Sidney. Be the Trial what it will.


Cl. of Cr. Crier, make an Oyes.


Col. Sidney. Cannot I be heard my Lord?


L. Chapter Just. Yes, If you will speak that which is proper; it is a strange
thing. You seem to appeal, as if you had some great hardship upon you. I am
sure, I can as well appeal as you. I am sure you had all the Favor showed you,
that ever any Prisoner had. The Court heard you with Patience, when you spoke
what was proper; but if you begin to Arraign the Justice of the Nation, it
concerns the Justice of the Nation to prevent you: We are bound by our
Consciences and our Oaths to see right done to you; and though we are Judges upon
Earth, we are accomptable to the Judge of Heaven and Earth; and we act
according to our Consciences, though we don't act according to your Opinion.


Col. Sid. My Lord, I say. In the first place I was brought to Westminster by
Habeas Corpus, the 7th of this Month, granted the day before to be Arraigned,
when yet no Bill was exhibited against me; and my Prosecutors could not know it
would be found, unless they had a Correspondence with the Grand Jury, which
under favor ought not to have been had.


L. Chapter Just. We know nothing of it: You had as good tell us of somebodies
Ghost, as you did at the Trial.


Col. Sid. I told you of two infamous Persons that had acted my Lord Russel's
Ghost.


L. Chapter Just. Go on, if you have any thing else.


Col. Sid. I prayed a Copy of the Indictment, making my Objections against it,
and putting in a special Plea, which the Law, I humbly conceive allowed me: the
help of Counsel to frame it was denied.


L. Chapter Just. For the Copy of the Indictment, it was denied in the Case you
cited. This favor showed you to day, was denied at any time to Sir Henry Vane,
that is to have the Indictment read in Latin. Don't say on the other side, we
refused your Plea. I told you, have a care of putting it in. If the Plea was
such as Mr. Attorney did demurre to it. I told you, you were answerable for the
Consequences of it.


Mr. Just. Withins. We told you, you might put it in, but you must put it in at
your Peril.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, I would have put it in.


L. Chapter Just. I did advertise you. If you put in a Plea, upon your Peril be it.
I told you, We are bound by Law to give you that fair advertisement of the
great danger you would fall under, if it were not a good Plea.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, my Plea was that, could never hurt me.


L. Chapter Just. We do not know that.


Col. Sid. I desire, my Lord, this, that it may be considered, That, being
brought here to my Trial, I did desire a Copy of my Indictment, upon the
Statute of 46, E. 3. which does allow it to all Men in all Cases.


L. Chapter Just. I tell you the Law is otherwise, and told you so then, and tell
you so now.


Col. Sid. Your Lordship did not tell me, That was not a Law.


L. Chapter Just. Unless there be a Law particular for Col. Sidney. If you have any
more to say --


Col. Sid. I am probably informed, and, if your Lordship will give me time,
shall be able to prove it, That the Jury was not summoned, as it ought to be:
My Lord, if this Jury was not summoned by the Bailiffe, according to the
ordinary way, but they were agreed upon by the Undersheriff, Graham, and
Burton, I desire to know, whether that be a good Jury?


L. Chapter Just. We can take notice of nothing, but what is upon the Record: Here
is a return by the Sheriff; if there had been any indirect means used with the
Sheriff, or any else, you should have mentioned it, before they were Sworn.


Col. Sid. Is there any thing in the World more irregular then that?


L. Chapter Just. I know nothing of it. That time is past.


Col. Sid. Now, my Lord, All men are admitted on the Jury.


L. Chapter Iu. Why you did not like Gentlemen, and now you don't like those that
you had. In plain English, if any Jury had found you Guilty it had been the
same thing. It had been a good Summons, if they had acquitted you.


Col. Sidney. When the Jury, thus composed, was sworn, 4 witnesses, of whom 3
were under the terror of Death for Treasons, were produced against me. And they
confessed themselves guilty of Crimes, of which I had no knowledge, and told
storys by hearsay. And your Lordship did promise in summing up the Evidence,
that the Jury should be informed what did reach me, and what not, and I don't
remember that was done.


L. Chapter Just. I did it particularly, I think I was as careful of it as possibly
I could be.


Col. Sidney. My Lord Howard being the only Witness, that said any thing
against me; Papers, which were said to be found in my house, were produced as
another Witness, and no other Testimony given concerning them, but that the
hand was like unto mine. No man can say, I read them, or showed them to any
man. None knew when they were written; The Ink showed, they had been done many,
and perhaps, 20 or 30, years. Yea, some passages were read out of them, without
examining what went before and after, when I desired the whole might be read,
it was refused, unless I specified the passage, which I could not do, knowing
not one word in them. When I alleged, that in Criminal Cases similitude of
hands could not be taken for Evidence, proposed my Points of Law concerning
Constructive Treason etc. And I did conceive, that no Court under the
Parliament could be Judges of it, and did desire the Statute, which did so
Enact it, might be read, it could not be obtained: And I cited many Judgments
in Parliament.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Sidney, If you arraign the Justice of the Nation so, as though
we had denied you the Methods of Justice, I must tell you, you do what does not
become you, for we denied you nothing that ought to have been granted. If we
had granted you less, I think we had done more our duty. What points of Law do
you mean?


Col. Sidney. That of Constructive Treason, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. We do not go upon Constructive Treason, it is plain Treason within
25. E. 3.


Col. Sidney. Is Writing an Act?


L. Chapter Justice. Yes, it is agere.


(Proclamation made for silence. Mr. Bamfield. Sir, I pray you to hear me one
word as Amicus Curiae, I humbly suppose that your Lordship will not give
Judgment, if there be a material defect in the Indictment, as the Clerk did
read it, he left out Defensor fidei, which is part of the Style of his Majesty.


L. Chapter Just. We have heard of it already, we thank you for your Friendship,
and are satisfied. Mr. Sidney, there remains nothing for the Court, but to
discharge their Duty, in pronouncing that Judgment, the Law requires to be
pronounced, against all Persons convicted of High Treason; and, I must tell
you, that though you seem to arraign the Justice of the Court, and the proceeding
--


Col. Sidney. I must appeal to God and the World. I am not heard.


L. Chapter Just. Appeal to whom you will. I could wish with all my heart, instead
of Appealing to the World, as though you had received something extreme hard in
your Case, that you would Appeal to the great God of Heaven, and consider the
Guilt, you have contracted, by the great Offense, you have committed. I wish
with all my heart, you would consider your Condition, but if your own
Ingenuity, will not provoke you, nothing I can say, will prevail with you to do
it, if the Kings General Pardon, in which you had so great a share of the Kings
mercy, will not. I could wish, that, as a Gentleman, and as a Christian you
would consider, under what Particular Obligations you lie to that Gracious
King, that has done much more for you. I should have thought it would have
wrought in you such a temper of mind, as to have turned the rest of your life
into a generous acknowledgement of his Bounty and Mercy, and not into a State
of constant Combining and Writing, not only to destroy Him, but to subvert the
Government; and I am sorry to see you so earnest, in the Justification of the
Book, in which there is scarce a Line, but what contains the rankest Treason,
such as deposing the King: It not only incourages, but justifies all Rebellion.
Mr. Sidney, you are a Gentleman of Quality, and need no Counsel from me: If I
could give you any, my Charity to your Immortal Soul, would provoke me to it. I
pray God, season this affliction to you. There remains nothing with the Court,
but to Pronounce that Judgment, that is expected, and the Law requires, and
therefore the Judgment of the Court is,

That you be carried hence to the place from whence you came, and from thence
you shall be drawn upon an Hurdle to the Place of Execution, where you shall be
hanged by the Neck, and, being alive, cut down; your Privy Members shall be cut
off, and burned before your Face, your Head severed from your Body, and your
Body divided into four Quarters, and they to be disposed at the Pleasure of the
King. And the God of infinite Mercy have mercy upon your Soul.


Col. Sidney. Then, O God, O God, I beseech thee to Sanctify these sufferings
unto me, and impute not my Blood to the Country, nor the City, through which I
am to be drawn; Let no inquisition be made for it, but if any, and the shedding
of Blood, that is innocent, must be revenged, Let the weight of it fall only
upon those, that maliciously Persecute me for Righteousness sake.


L. Chapter Just. I pray God work in you a temper fit to go unto the other World,
for I see you are not fit for This.


Col. Sidney. My Lord, feel my Pulse (holding out his hand) and see if I am
disordered, I bless God, I never was in better temper, then I am now.


Then the Lieutenant of the Tower carried back his Prisoner. FINIS.

