THE ARRAIGNMENT, etc. OF Sir Richard Grahme, Baronet, Viscount PRESTON in the
Kingdom of Scotland, AND John Ashton, Gent.
Anno Regni Domini WILLIELMI and Dominae MARIAE, Angl. etc. Secundo. Die
Veneris, 16. die Januarii, Anno Dom. 1690.
The King and Queens Writ of Habeas Corpora was sent to the Governor of the
Tower of London, to bring up the Bodies of Sir Richard Grahme Baronet, Viscount
Preston in the Kingdom of Scotland, John Ashton and Edmund Elliot Gent. to the
Sessions House in the Old Bailey, London; where they were brought between the
hours of Ten and Eleven in the Forenoon; and, being placed at the Bar, were
Arraigned upon an Indictment of High Treason found the day before by the
Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex, at Hicks Hall, in manner following:

Cl. of Arraignments. SIR Richard Grahme, hold up your hand, [Which he did, and
so the other two.] -- You stand indicted by the names of Sir Richard Grahme,
late of the Parish of St. Anne within the Liberty of Westminster, in the County
of Middlesex, Baronet; John Ashton, late of the Parish of St. Paul
Covent Garden in the County aforesaid, Gentleman; and Edmund Elliott, late of
the Parish of St. James within the Liberty aforesaid in the County aforesaid,
Gent. for that you, as false Traitors against the most Illustrious and most
Excellent Princes William and Mary, King and Queen of England, Defenders of the
Faith, etc. your Sovereign Lord and Lady, not having the fear of God in your
hearts, nor weighing the duty of your Allegiance, but being moved and seduced
by the instigation of the Devil, the cordial Love, and true, due, and natural
Obedience, which every true and faithful Subject of our said Sovereign Lord and
Lady, the King and Queen that now are, toward them our said Sovereign Lord and
Lady the King and Queen should, and of right ought to bear, wholly withdrawing;
and contriving, practicing, and with all your strength indending the Peace and
Common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to disquiet, molest, und disturb;
and War and Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and
Queen that now are, within this Kingdom of England to stir up, move, and
procure; and the Government of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen of
this Kingdom of England to subvert, change and alter; and our said Lord and
Lady, the King and Queen, from the Title, Honor, and Royal Name of the
Imperial Crown of this their Kingdom of England to depose and deprive; and our
said Lord and Lady the King and Queen to death and final destruction to bring
and put; you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott, the
Nine and twentieth day of December, in the second year of the Reign of Our said
Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are; and diverse other days and times,
as well before as after, at the Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County
aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously, Devillishly, and Traitorously, with Force and
Arms, etc. with diverse false Rebels and Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, did
Conspire, Treat of, Compass, Imagine, and intend our said Lord and Lady the
King and Queen that now are, (your supreme and natural Lord and Lady) from the
Royal State, Crown, Title, Power, and Government of their Kingdom of England,
to Deprive, D^pose, and Cast down; and the same our Lord and Lady the King and
Queen that now are, to Kill, and bring and put to Death; and the Government of
this Kingdom of England to Change, Alter, and wholly to Subvert; and a
miserable Slaughter among the Subjects of our said Lord and Lady, the King and
Queen, within Their Kingdom of England, to Cause and Procure; and an
Insurrection, War, and Rebellion against Our said Lord and Lady, the King and
Queen that now are, within this Kingdom of England to Move, Procure, and Aid;
and the same your most evil, wicked, and Devilish Treasons, and Taiterous
Compassings, Imaginations, and Purposes aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect, and
bring to effect, you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund
Elliott, as false Traitors, then and there, to wit, the said Nine and twentieth
day of December, in the said second year of the Reign of our said Lord and
Lady, the King and Queen that now are, and diverse other days and times, as well
before, as after, at the Parish of St. Clement Danes aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, with Force and Arms, etc. falsely, unlawfully, wickedly and
traitorously, did Propose, Consult, and Agree to Procure and Prepare great
Numbers of Armed Men, War and Rebellion against our said Lord and Lady the King
and Queen, within this Kingdom of England to Levy, and Make; And that you the
said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott, afterward, to wit,
the same Nine and twentieth day of December, in the aforesaid second year of
the Reign of our said Lord and Lady, the King and Queen that now are, at the
Parish of St. Clement Danes aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely,
maliciously, and traitorously, did Prepare, and Compose, and then and there did
Cause, and Procure to be Prepared, and Composed, several Traitorous Letters,
Notes, M^morandums, and Instructions in writing, to show and inform Lewis then
and yet the French King, and his Subjects, then and yet Enemies of our said
Lord and Lady, the King and Queen that now are, and very many other
evil-disposed persons, and false Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, of and
concerning the Number, Force, and Condition of certain Ships, for, and on the
behalf of our said Lord and Lady, the King and Queen of England, then, and
there designed and prepared for the defense of their Kingdom of England and
their Enemies aforesaid to repel and resist; and how some of the same Ships
were Manned, and of the Names of the Captains of several of the said Ships; and
how the Castles and Fortresses of our said Lord and Lady, the King and Queen,
called Portsmouth, South Sea, and Gosport, within this Kingdom of England, were
strengthened and fortified, and how the same Castles and Fortresses, into the
hands and possession of Enemies and false Traitors against our said Lord and
Lady, the King and Queen, might be taken and seized; as also of the time,
places, ways, manners, and means by which, when, and where the same Enemies of
our said Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, this Kingdom of England might
invade and infest; and the same Enemies, and the Ships of the Enemies of this
Kingdom of England, should fight against our said Lord and Lady, the King and
Queen, and their faithful Subjects; as also to procure, provide, prepare, and
obtain against our said Lord and Lady, the King and Queen that now are,
Assistance and Armed Men, our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now
are, from their Royal State and Government of this Kingdom of England to cast
down and Despose, and to stir up, promote, and procure the aforesaid Lewis the
French King, (then, and yet an Enemy of our said Lord and Lady the King and
Queen) this Kingdom of England to Invade; and to send Ships within this Kingdom
of England, the City of London, of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen
that now are, to Plague; as also to cause very many Subjects of our said Lord
and Lady the King and Queen that now are, to Rise, and War and Rebellion
against our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen within this Kingdom of
England to move, procure, make, and levy. And you the said Sir Richard Grahme,
John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott afterward, to wit, the same day and year, at
the aforesaid Parish of St. Clement Danes in the County of Middlesex, of and
for the same your Treasons and Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and
Purposes aforesaid, to execute, fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect into your
Hands, Custody, and Possession, then and there Secretly, Knowingly, Unlawfully,
and Traitorously did obtain, procure, detain, had, concealed, and kept two
several Bills of Exchange then before made, for the Payment of several Sums of
Money to the Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are;
as also very many Traitorous Letters, Notes, Memorandums, and Instructions in
Writings, then and there composed and prepared with that intent to show and
inform Lewis then and yet the French King, and his Subjects, then and yet
Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are, and very
many other Evil Disposed Persons, and False Traitors to the Jurors unknown, of
and concerning the Number, Force and Condition of the Ships, for and on the
behalf of them our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen of England, then and
there designed, and prepared for the Defense of Their Kingdom of England, and
to Repel, and Resist their Enemies, and how some of the same Ships were
Manned, and of the Names of the Captains of diverse of the same Ships, and how
the Castles and Fortresses of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, called
Portsmouth, Southsea, and Gosport, within this Kingdom of England were
Strengthened, and Fortified; and how the same Castles and Forts into the Hands
and Possession of Enemies and false Traitors against our said Lord and Lady the
King and Queen, might be taken and seized; as also the Times, Places, Ways,
Manners, and Means, by which, when, and where the same Enemies of our said Lord
and Lady the King and Queen, this Kingdom of England might Invade, and Infest,
and the Enemies, and Ships of the Enemies of this Kingdom of England should
Fight against the same our Lord and Lady the King and Queen of England, and
their faithful Subjects; as also to procure, provide, prepare, and obtain
against our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, Assistance and Armed Men, to
Invade this Kingdom of England, and our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen
that now are, from their Royal State and Government of this Kingdom of England,
to cast down and depose, and to stir up, promote, and procure the aforesaid
Lewis the French King then, and yet an Enemy of our said Lord and Lady the King
and Queen, to Invade this Kingdom of England, and to send Ships within this
Kingdom of England, the City of London, of our said Lord and Lady the King and
Queen to plague; as also to cause very many Subjects of our said Lord and Lady
the King and Queen, to Rise, and War, and Rebellion against our said Lord and
Lady the King and Queen, within this Kingdom of England, to move, procure,
make, and levy. And you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund
Elliott, afterward, to wit, the Thirtieth day of December, now last past, at
the aforesaid Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County of Middlesex,
concerning, and for the same your Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings,
Imaginations, and Purposes aforesaid, to execute, fulfill, perfect, and bring
to Effect, for One Hundred Pounds in Moneys, numbered by you the said Sir
Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott then and there paid, and
deposited, unlawfully and Traitorously did hire and prepare, and then and there
did cause and procure to be hired and prepared a certain Ship, and three Men;
you, the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott, with the
said Bills of Exchange, and the aforesaid Traitorous Letters, Notes,
Memorandums, and Instructions in Writing, into the Hands, Custody and
Possession of you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliot,
secretly, unlawfully, and traitorously, kept concealed and detained from this
Kingdom of England, unto, and into France, in Parts beyond the Seas, then and
yet under the Rule and Government of the said Lewis the French King, then and
yet an Enemy of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, secretly to carry
and transport, with that intent the said Bills of Exchange, Traitorous Letters,
Notes and Memorandums, and Instructions in Writing there in parts beyond the
Seas, to the Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and other
Evil-disposed Persons to deliver and disperse. And the said most wicked
Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings and Imaginations aforesaid, to fulfill
perfect, and bring to effect, as also to cause, promote and procure the
aforesaid Enemies of our said Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, to invade this
Kingdom of England with Ships and Armed Men. And you the said Sir Richard
Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott, afterward, to wit, the 30th Day of
December now last past, at the aforesaid Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the
County aforesaid, concerning, and for the same your Treasons, and Traitorous
Compassings, Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid, to execute and fulfill,
maliciously, traitorously, and advisedly, then and there, and diverse other
days and times, as well before as after, took upon your selves to very many
other Traitors to be aiding and assisting in the execution of the Treasons, and
Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid; and then and
there, to wit, the same 30th day of December now last past, at the Parish of
St. Clement Danes, in the County aforesaid, maliciously, secretly and
traitorously did hire, and prepare, and then and there did cause and procure to
be hired and prepared a certain Boat, and one Man, to the Jurors aforesaid
unknown; you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott, from
thence to, and into the aforesaid Ship, so as aforesaid hired and prepared to
carry and convey. And you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund
Elliott, maliciously and traitorously into the same Boat, then and there did
enter; and your selves from thence, in and by that same Boat, unto and into the
Ship aforesaid, then and there unlawfully and traitorously did cause, and
procure to be carried with the intention aforesaid. And you the said Sir
Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliott, with the same Bills of
Exchange, and the aforesaid traitorous Letters, Notes, Memorandums and
Instructions in Writing, and in your Hands, Custody and Possession then and
there, in and with the Ship aforesaid, did sail, and depart toward the
aforesaid Kingdom of France, in Parts beyond the Seas; the same your most
wicked, evil and traitorous Intentions, Purposes, Compassings and Imaginations
aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect and promote, against the Duty of your Allegiance,
against the Peace of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are,
their Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in that Case made,
and provided, And the Indictment further sets forth, that long before the
aforesaid Nine and Twentieth day of December now last past, open War between
our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and the aforesaid Lewis the French
King was begun, declared, and waged, and yet is; Which said Lewis the French
King, and his Subjects, and the men of those parts, then and yet, were, and
are, Enemies to our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are, and to
their Kingdom of England: And that in the time of the aforesaid War between
them our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and the aforesaid Lewis the
French King, you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Ellyott,
being Subjects of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are, as
false Traitors against our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, during the
War aforesaid, to wit, the Nine and Twentieth day of December, in the Second
year of the Reign of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are,
and diverse other days and times as well before as after, at the Parish of St.
Clement Danes aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, with force, and Arms, etc. To
the aforesaid Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now
are, unlawfully, and Traitorously were adhereing, and assisting, and in
Execution, and performance of the same adhering you the said Sir Richard
Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Ellyott, then, and there to wit, the same Nine
and Twentieth day of December in the Second year of the Reign of our said Lord
and Lady the King and Queen that now are, abovesaid, at the aforesaid Parish of
St. Clement Danes in the County aforesaid, falsely, Maliciously, and
Traitorously did prepare, and compose, and then and there did cause, and
procure to be prepared, and composed as also into your Custody, and Possession
then, and there unlawfully secretly, and Traitorously did obtain, detain,
conceal, and keep, diverse traitorous Letters, Notes, Memorandums, and
Instructions in writing, to show and inform the aforesaid Lewis then and yet
the French King, and his Subjects, then and yet Enemies of our said Lord and
Lady the King and Queen that now are, of and concerning the Number, Force, and
Condition of certain Ships, for and on the behalf of our said Lord and Lady the
King and Queen of England, then and there designed, and preparing, for their
defense of their Kingdom of England, and their Enemies aforesaid to repel, and
resist; and how some of the same Ships were manned, and of the Names of several
of the Captains of the said Ships; and how the Castles and Frotresses of our
said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, called Portsmouth, Southsea, and
fortified, and Gosport within this Kingdom of England were strengthened, and
how those same Castles and Fortresses into the hands and possession of the said
Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen might be taken, and
Seized, as also of the Time, Places, Ways, Manners, and Means, by which, when,
and where the same Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that
now are this Kingdom of England might invade, and Infest, and they the said
Enemies, and the Ships of the said Enemies of this Kingdom of England should
fight against our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and their faithful
Subjects. And that during the War aforesaid, to wit, the aforesaid Thirtieth
day of December now last past, you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton,
and Edmund Ellyott, at the aforesaid Parish of St. Clements Danes in the County
aforesaid, unlawfully, and Traitorously did hire, and prepare, and then and
there did cause, and procure to be hired and prepared a certain Ship, and three
men, you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Ellyot, with the
same Traitorous Letters, Notes, Memorandums, and Instructions in writing, from
this Kingdom of England, unto, and into France in parts beyond the Seas, then
and there under the Rule and Government of the aforefaid Lewis the French King,
then and yet an Enemy of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen, secretly,
during the War aforesaid, to carry, and transport, to the intent the same
Traitorous Letters, Notes, Memorandums, and Instructions in writing there, in
parts beyond the Seas, to the aforesaid Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the
King and Queen that now are to deliver, and disperse during the War aforesaid
in aid of the said Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the King and Queen in the
War aforesaid: And that you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and
Edmund Ellyott, during the War aforesaid, to wit, the aforesaid thirtieth day
of December now last past, at the Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the County
aforesaid concerning, and for the same your Treasons and traitorous Adhereings
and purposes aforesaid to execute and fulfill, maliciously, traitorously, and
advisedly, then, and there did hire and prepare, and then and there did cause,
and procure to be hired, and prepared a certain Boat, and one man to the Jurors
unknown you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton, and Edmund Ellyott from
thence to and into the Ship aforesaid, by you as aforesaid, hired and prepared
to carry, and convey: And that you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John Ashton,
and Edmund Ellyott, maliciously, and traitorously into the same Boat then and
there did enter, and your selves from thence secretly in and by the same Boat
unto and into the same Ship then, and there did cause and procure to be carried
in prosecution of the adhereing aforesaid. And you the said Sir Richard Grahme,
John Ashton, and Edmund Ellyott then and there with the same traitorous
Letters, Notes, Memorandums, and Instructions in writing, in your custody and
possession being, during the War aforesaid, to wit, the same day and year, in
and with the Ship aforesaid did sail, and depart toward the aforesaid Kingdom
of France, to the intent the same traitorous Letters, Notes, Memorandums and
Instructions in writing in parts beyond the Seas to the said Enemies of our
said Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are to deliver, concerning and
for Aid, Intelligence, and Counsel by you the said Sir Richard Grahme, John
Ashton, and Edmund Ellyott to the same Enemies of our said Lord and Lady the
King and Queen that now are to give, and yield, during the War aforesaid,
against the Duty of your Allegiance, against the peace of our said Sovereign
Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now are, their Crown and Dignity, and
against the Form of the Statute in that case made and provided. How say you Sir
Richard Grahme, are you guilty of this Felony, and High Treason whereof you
stand indicted, or not guilty?


L. Preston. My Lord, I have something humbly to offer to your Lordships.


L. C. J. Holt. What is it your Lordship would say?


L. Preston. My Lord, I find I stand indicted by the name of Sir Richard
Grahme, Baronet, but I do take my self to be entitled to another way of Trial,
as being a Peer of England, by virtue of a Patent before the Vote of Abdication
was made; and it was in a time when all your Processes, and all your Writs went
in the late King's Name, and all Officers acted by virtue of his Commissions.
My Lord, This is a matter that concerns me in point of Life, Estate, Posterity,
and all that is dear to me; and therefore I desire to know whether your
Lordships think fit to allow me my Peerage; I offer it, my Lord, with all the
respect and modesty imaginable.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, I apprehend your Lordship to offer against your being
tried here, that you are a Peer.


L. Preston. I take my self to be so, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, you must make that out to the Court.


L. Preston. I told your Lordships the Ground of my Claim, and Apprehension; it
is from a Patent I received before the Vote of Abdication, when all
Commissions, and all Process, and all the Courts of Judicature run in that Name.


L. C. J. Holt. Where is that Patent, my Lord?


L. Preston. It is in the Hands of the House of Lords.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord Preston, we cannot take notice of that Patent; if your
Lordship plead that you were made a Peer by a Patent under the Great Seal of
England, you must produce it under the Great Seal, that the Court may see what
it is, and whether it be sufficient to justify your Plea.


L. Preston. I hope your Lordship and this Court will enable me to do that, by
sending an Order to the Clerk of the House of Lords, to bring the Patent
hither; for it is in his hands.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, that is not in our power: If your Lordship take your
self to be a Peer, and would thereby stop this Court from proceeding to try
you, you must be ready to make it out.


L. Preston. I am ready to make it out, if I had my Patent here, that would
make it out. Certainly there is some Authority now in being (I humbly offer it
with all submission and respect) that may order the Clerk of the House of Lords
to attend this Court, and produce this Patent.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord Preston, we are not to enable you to plead to the
Jurisdiction of the Court.


L. Preston. My Lord, I offer it with all respect to the Court: I am concerned
in it for my Life, and my All, and if that be overruled, this I hope you will
do before you go on, you will hear me by my Counsel,


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, it is nothing that you have said; for if your Lordship
plead this Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court, it ought not to be received
without showing your Patent.


L. Preston. My Lord, I desire my Counsel to be heard to this matter.


L. C. J. Holt. I know your Lordship has had the benefit of Counsel, and I know
your Counsel must tell you, that what you say goes for nothing, unless you put
in your Plea, and produce your Patent, that the Court may judge upon it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I have observed what my Lord Preston has mentioned --


L. Preston. Pray Mr. Solicitor will you speak out, that I may hear what you
say?


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, I say, I have taken notice of what your Lordship has
offered: It has been most truly observed by the Court, that it is your
Lordships part to make good your Plea, and it ought not to be expected that any
Court should help a Person to plead to its Jurisdiction: But because it should
not be pretended that an advantage was taken against the Prisoner for a defect
in point of form, or that any thing was insisted on which should have the least
appearance of a hardship, and that we may proceed in the most clear and
unexceptionable manner that can be, I must beg leave to observe to your
Lordship and the Court, how far this matter which my Lord Preston has insisted
on has been debated and determined in another place.


L. C. J. Holt. So; on Mr. Solicitor.


M. Soll Genesis My Lord, upon the 11 of Nov. 1689. My L. Preston did make some
claim in the House of Lords that he was a Peer of the Realm; the House of Lords
demanding of him upon what he founded his pretense; he said he claimed by
Letters Patents from the late King James, which passed the Great Seal before
the time of the Vote of Abdication. The Lords required that those Letters
Patents should be produced, which being done, and my L. Preston insisting upon
his claim to be a Peer of England, the Lords thought fit that day to commit my
Lord Preston to the custody of the Black Rod. The next day being the 12th of
November, upon solemn debate of the validity of these Letters Patents, and
consulting with the Judges then present, the Lords nemine contradicente did
adjudge and declare those Letters Patents to be void and null: And by another
Order of the same date, they did order Mr. Attorney General to prosecute my
Lord Preston in the King's Bench for a High Misdemeanor in presuming to claim
Peerage by those Letters Patents. And by a third it was ordered that the
Letters Patents should remain in Custody of the Clerk of the Parliament. Thus
you see, my Lord, this matter has had already a solemn determination in a
Court which had the most proper Conusance and Jurisdiction of Claims in this
Nature. And they having pronounced their Judgment, I did not think it would
have been urged again in this place. I thought it proper to mention these
things to show how it comes to pass that my Lord Preston has not his Letters
Patents to produce, and to satisfy every man that there is no hardship put upon
my Lord Preston, by Trying him here when he ought to be Tried by another
Judicature. The Lords have given Judgment against these Letters Patents, and
have Ordered that they shall remain in Custody of the Clerk of Parliament, and
my L. Preston is not a stranger to these transactions, and therefore if my
Lords Council had been of opinion he could have made any use of them, they
would have informed him he must have taken another course to have got them, and
could not expect this Court should make an Order for him, contrary to the Order
of the House of Lords, to take the Letters Patents out of the hands of the
Clerk of the Parliament, and this, to help him to a Plea against their own
Jurisdiction. I omitted one thing that upon the 27th. of the same Month of
November, upon my L. Prestons humble Submission and Petition his Lordship was
discharged of his Imprisonment and the House of Lords were pleased to remit the
Order given to Mr. Attorney, for Prosecuting him in the King's Bench for the
Misdemeanour. So that I cannot but wonder to hear of this Claim of Peerage
after that Submission. But there is nothing offered to the Court by my Lord
that the Court can take any legal notice of. If my Lord will plead any thing to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, he ought to have his Plea in Form, and be ready
with his Proofs to make it good.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. My Lord Preston upon this last Order of the House of Lords
has disclaimed any right of Peerage when he made his Petition, otherwise he had
not been discharged.


L. Preston. My Lord I beg leave --


Mr. S. Thompson. Besides, My Lord, what my L. Preston offers is a matter of
Record as all Letters Patents are, and tho out of his hands he might have had
recourse to the Record of the Inrolment.


L. Preston. For that, my Lord, I must humbly beg of your Lordships a little
time to put my self in a Capacity to plead it in Form. If you will over rule
it, I can say nothing to it; I offer it with all the modesty and respect
imaginable.


L. C. J. Holt. It shall do your Lordship no prejudice, My Lord, God forbid but
that you should make use of all advantages that you can invent for your
defense. But, my Lord, we must tell you what you have offered is nothing that
we can take any notice of, unless you had your Patent to produce, and we cannot
give your Lordship time to plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court.


L. Preston. Then if your Lordships are pleased to over rule this matter I
submit, but I hope you will give me leave to make all the just defense I can
for my self. Does your Lordship over rule me in it.


L. C. J. Holt. I suppose we are all of the same Opinion, if not I suppose they
will declare their minds.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. That which has been said by Mr. Solicitor, was only that
you and all the World may be satisfied that there is nothing of hardship put
upon you. But the Court, if this had not been said, yet could take no notice of
what you say, unless it were pleaded, and pleaded in a legal Form. But if the
matter be, as the Kings Counsel have represented it, that this Patent you now
pretend to have, has already had its determination in a proper place, this
Court (which is an Inferior Court to that of the Lords in Parliament) cannot
intermeddle with it. We cannot help you, nor can we set up what was condemned
there. So that you can entertain no hope or expectation of our doing any thing
for you in this matter, or any releif or help by such a Plea.


L. Chapter Baron. My L. Preston, you may remember, (I am sure some of us that were
there present do,) that you did decline further insisting upon this matter in
the House of Lords, and thereupon you had that great favor from the House
shown you, as the King's Counsel have opened.


L. Preston. I did decline it, it is true, my Lord; when they had declared it a
Misdemeanour, I made my application to the Court, and therein declared I was
sorry for having misdemeaned my self.


M. S. Thompson. If your Lordships please we will read the very Orders of the
House of Lords, to satisfy my L. Preston, that we put no hardship upon him.


L. Preston. If there be any thing of hardship upon me in this Case, it is
because I think I have a Right to insist upon this matter, and cannot have an
occasion or power to have that which I would make my Defense by.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Lordship shall have a fair Trial, if you will please to
put your self in a Condition to be tried, by pleading to the Indictment.


M. B. Lechmere. The Lords in Parliament have disclaimed you for being a Peer,
and we cannot make you one.


L. Preston. My Lord, I hope your Lordships will put no hard thing upon me, but
give me leave and your Lordships help to make my defense.


L. C. J. Holt. You shall by the Grace of God have all the liberty you can
desire to make your defense; But you must first plead.


L. Preston. Since your Lordships are pleased to over rule me in this Case. I
shall say no more of it. I did not intend to offer any thing that might be an
offense to the Court*


L. C. J. Holt. As I told your Lordship before, so I assure you now again it
shall do you no prejudice.


L. Preston. Then if your Lordship please, since the Language is different in
which the Indictment is written from that in which it was read, and some things
may be of different signification in both Languages, I desire the Indictment
may be read in Latin.


L. C. J. Holt. Read it in Latin.


L. Preston. I have one thing to beg of your Lordship, before it be read.


L. C. J. Holt. What is it you desire my Lord.


L. Preston. My Lord, I humbly desire, because I cannot retain all the Contents
in my memory, that my Solicitor may have leave to stand by me.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Do you all join in this desire, for if you should each of
you severally, have it read a great many times over, they that take Notes in
shorthand may take a Copy of it as it is read, and a Copy not to be allowed.


L. C. J. Holt. If we find they desire to be troublesome we can over rule them.


L. Preston. I would be guilty of nothing that may give the Court offense, nor
offer any thing that should take up the time of the Court unnecessarily.


L. C. J. Holt. If they would have it read in Latin, let it be read.


L. Preston. If it be troublesome to the Court, I wave it my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. No, we do not think it troublesome.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Mr. Ashton and Mr. Ellyott do you also desire to have it
read again?


Ashton, Ellyott. We all join with my Lord, and desire it may be read in Latin


L. C. J. Holt. Read it.


(Which was done.) Cl. of Arr. Juratores pro Domino Rege and Domina Regina:
super Sacramentum suum presentant quod -- and contra formam Statuti in eo casu
editi and provisi.


L. Preston. My Lord, I am sorry I have taken up so much of your time, I
thought the difference of Language might have made some mistake, which I
thought would be of advantage to me in my Trial: And for the same reason I
humbly request you will please to order me a Copy of the Indictment.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, that we cannot do; it has been frequently demanded
upon these occasions, but always denied. I have always known it denied.


L. Preston. Your Lordship will give me leave to say what your Lordship must
needs know much better than I, there is a Statute in the 46 of Edw. 3. that
does order a Copy of any Record to any Prisoner, or other Person if he demand
it: And it has been granted, as I am informed in other Cases, particularly in
the Case of Colonel Sidney.


L. C. J. Holt. No, my Lord, it was denied in Colonel Sidneys Case.


L. Preston. If I mistake I beg your Lordships pardon. It is a Reason in a late
Law made for the Reversal of Mr. Cornishes Attainder. The Parliament, do there
say that it was not a legal Trial, because he had not a Copy of the Indictment,
and time given him to prepare for his defense.


L. C. J. Holt. Truly, my Lord, I do not know how that matter stands: That
Reversal of Mr. Cornishes Attainder is but a private Act of Parliament. I never
saw it, nor heard it read, nor can we take notice of it. But your Lordship is
to be Tried by the same methods of Law, that all Persons that have gone before
you have always been, it has always been the course, that the Prisoner should
not have a Copy of his Indictment, Col. Sidney had it not, and I remember in
the Case of Sir Hen. Vane in the year 1662, he demanded a Copy of the
Indictment, and it was denied him, and it has been constantly denied ever since
in all such Cases.


L. Preston. I humbly desire to know whether it was not granted in the Case of
my Lord Russel.


L. C. J. Holt. No indeed my Lord, my Lord Russel had it not, I can take it
upon me to say that, for I know all the proceedings in that Cause.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. No my Lord, never any Man had it in all my experience.


L. C. J. Holt. Some of us that are here were of Council for my Lord Russel at
that time, and we did not advise him to demand a Copy of the Indictment, for we
knew he could not have it by Law.


L. Preston. I am very tender of taking up your Lordships time unnecessarily,
but it stands me upon to do all I can to defend my self, may not I have my
Counsel heard to that point, because if it be a point of Law, though your
Lordships are of Counsel for the Prisoner, yet I beg that I may have my Counsel
heard to argue it.


L. C. J. Holt. To what point would you have your Counsel heard?


L. Preston. To that point, whether I may not have a Copy of my Indictment
according to the 46. of Ed. 3. that is the point I would have my Counsel heard
to.


L. C. J. Holt. There is no such Statute as your Lordship mentions, that gives
the Prisoner a Copy of his Indictment.


Mr. Jones. If your Lordship please to hear me for my L. Preston --


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, Mr. Jones, you are mistaken in this matter: If my Lord
himself will show that there is any such Statute, we will consider of it, and
if it be a matter that requires debate, we may assign my Lord Counsel to argue
it, but till then Counsel are not to be heard. My L. Preston, if your Lordship
can show us that Statute, pray do?


L. Preston. My Lord I desire none if it be not so.


L. C. J. Holt. I have heard a discourse concerning such a Statute, but I could
never find it.


L. Preston. I suppose my Solicitor is here with it, there is such a Statute
my Lord.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. The Court over ruled it in the Case of Sir H. Vane.


L. C. J. Holt. And so it was I remember in another Case, and in none of the
Trials that have been since King Charles the Second came in, was ever a Copy
given that I know or heard of.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord this Statute that my L. Preston mentions, the 46 of Ed.
3. is printed at large in the Preface to my Lord Cokes 3d. Report; and has been
insisted upon in several Cases in the Kings Bench, where the Prisoner has
desired a Copy of his Indictment, but a Copy has been always denied, and this
Statute has been taken to extend only to Records, which may be Evidence for the
Subject.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. 'Twas always ruled that it did not extent to this matter.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, it is a misconstruction of that Statute that your
Lordship thinks that it gives the Prisoner a Copy of his Indictment: For that
Statute says that all persons shall be free to make use of the Public
Records, and take Copies of them, because oftentimes the Records are Evidences
of Men's Estates, and their Titles.


L. Preston. My Lord, an Indictment I suppose is a Record.


L. C. J. Holt. But not such a Record as is within the intent of that Statute.


L. Preston. My Lord, I am tender of taking up your Lordships time, but since
all that is dear to me is at stake, I desire to this point I may be heard by
Counsel.


L, C. J. Pollexfen. My Lord, I am satisfied you have had Counsel with you, I
have heard a great many. Does any one of them tell you that this has been done?
If ever an one of them will come and show us when it haseen done, you say
something, but I dare say none of them will or can. Mr. Jones there, is as like
as any body, but I believe he will not say it ever was done.


L. Preston. My Lord I cannot say my Counsel has told me so, but I have read
such a Statute my self, for it stands me upon it, and I believe there is such a
Statute, and it will be produced before your Lordships. If your Lordships will
insist upon not allowing me a Copy, I desire I may be heard to it by my
Counsel, for I take it to be a point of Law, with humble submission to your
Lordships.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, we must not hear Counsel to debate plain points that
have no manner of Question in them; It has been always disallowed and it is a
settled point at Law, and as plain as any whatsoever, that no Copy of an
Indictment ought to be allowed to a Prisoner in Felony or Treason.


L. Preston. My Lord, there is a Statute that says it shall be allowed to all
Persons to have Copies of Records, as well for, as against the King, and
certainly the Indictment is a Record* and a Record of great consequence to me
at this time; and though my Counsel has not told me when it was done, yet those
that I have advised with, do say that the Statute is express.


L. C. Baron. If any doubtful words be in such a Statute, yet the constant
practice must expound it, and since it has been so often denied, nay always,
the law is now settled, that it is not within the meaning of that Statute.


L. C. J. Holt. We must go in the way of our Predecessors, we received the law
from them, and must not contradict the received practice of the Judges in all
Ages, nor alter the determinations that have been made in all Cases of the like
nature.


L. Preston. I hope your Lordships intend, and I don't question it, that my
Trial should be a legal Trial; If there be such a Statute that gives me a Copy
of the Indictment, and the Court deny it me. I am not legally tried.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. If you please to name the Statute My Lord, It shall be
read to you, but you are mistaken if you think there is any thing in that
Statute that will do your Lordship service in this point.


L. C. J. Holt. See the 46. of Ed. 3. Read it.


L. Preston. Here is a Copy of the Record in Court.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. It is not Printed, but it is mentioned in the Preface to
my L. Cooks third Report, and it is mentioned no where but there that I know
of: but whether there were any such Statute or no Non constat, for it is not
printed But if it be a Statute, it does not meddle with things of this nature,
such as Indictments; for you must consider, my Lord yours is not a Case
different from all other Cases of like nature as to this; But it is the Case of
all men that are Tried as you are to be. And if all people were to have Copies
of their Indictments to make exceptions out of them before they plead instead
of days of Gaol delivery, the whole year would not be sufficient, but would be
spent before they could be brought to their Trial.


L. Preston. My Lord, I am to defend my self as I can by Law, and not to
consider what other peoples Cases are. It is my particular Case now, what the
Case may be as to any other hereafter, or what the general consequence may be
is not to be considered, but if there be any thing that is legal that can give
me an advantage in making my defense, I know your Lordships are too just to
hinder me from taking advantage of it.


L. C. Baron. My Lord it is no new thing to demand it, it has been frequently
demanded, but it has been always over ruled:


L. Preston. My Lord, it is now desired, and a reason is given you that perhaps
was not given before; there is such a Law. My Lord Chapter Justice says well it is
not printed, but it is a Record, and there is a Copy of that Record in Court. I
desired there should be, I am sure.


L. C. J. Holt. If you have a Copy of any Record of an Act of Parliament, it
shall be read, if it be proved.


L. Preston. Nay we offer nothing if we don't prove it, but there is such a
Record, and the Solicitor is ready to attest it: Pray swear Mr. Whitaker.


Mr. Serj. Tompson. Swear him.


Araignment. You shall true answer make to all such questions as shall be
demanded of you by the Court, So help you God. Is this a true Copy?


Mr. Whitaker. It is a true Copy.


L. C. J. Holt. Where did you examine it?


Mr. Whitaker. My Lord it is a true Copy of the Record, I examined it at Mr.
Pettyts-Office in the Tower.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Upon what number Roll is it?


Mr. Whitaker. There is the number Roll and all upon the Book.


Clerk reads. Item pria les Commons que come record and queconque chose en la
Court le Roy de reason devoient demurrer illeoques pur perpetual evidence and
eide de touts parties a ycelly and de touts ceux a queux en null manner ills
atteignent quant, mestier lour fuit. Et ja de nouvel refusent en la Court
nostre dit Seignior de search ou evidence encounter le Roy ou disadvantage de
luy. Que please os deiner per Estatute que Search and Exemplification soit
faitz as toutz Gentz de queconque Record que les touch en ascun manner auxy
bien de ce que chiet encountre le Roy come autres Gentz. Le Roy le voet.
L. C. J. Pollexfen. It is only Copies of Records that they shall have for
Evidence.


L. C. J. Holt. My L. Preston, your Lordship hears by this Record, you may as
well pray that an exemplification be made of this Indictment as a Copy, for so
the words of this Act run, it is only meant of those Records that were to be
given in Evidence. But this Indictment that you would have a Copy of, is not
now to be given in Evidence nor to be exemplyfied, and so it does not reach
your Case.


L. Preston. My Lord, this Indictment is a Record, and a Record against me, and
I think it is given in Evidence against me.


Mr. J. Eyres. No my Lord, it is no Evidence but an accusation, it is no proof
at all.


L. Preston. It is always sworn unto.


Mr. J. Eyres. The Witnesses are Sworn that Testify the matter of it to the
Grand Jury, but the Indictment it self is no Evidence.


L. C. J. Holt. Suppose a Statute be doubtful, as truly I do not take this to
be, we are to expound the Statute as it has been expounded in all Ages: It was
never thought by any Judges in any Reign, that this Statute did entitle a
Prisoner to have a Copy of his Indictment, but always held the contrary.


L. Preston. Will your Lordship be pleased then to allow me Counsel to be heard
to it?


L. C. J. Holt. No, my Lord, not Counsel in a plain Case: If the Court
apprehend there is any Matter that may be debateable, or whereupon a Doubt may
be made, we may assign Counsel, and shall; but never in a plain Case, where
there is no manner of Question.


L. Preston. My Lord, here is a Doubt in this Case.


L. C. Baron. But, my Lord, it is not the Doubt of the Prisoner, but the Doubt
of the Court that will occasion the assigning Counsel.


L. Preston. But the Prisoner may offer his Doubt to the Court, and your
Lordships are so just, that you will take care that the Doubt may be legally
resolved.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, it is our Duty to see Justice and Right done, and God
willing, it shall be.


L. Preston. And I am bound in Duty to my self in such a Case to insist upon
all Advantages I can have by Law.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, no Body blames you, though your Lordship do urge
things that are unnecessary, or improper; and we shall take care that it shall
not tend to your Lordships prejudice. We consider the Condition you are in; you
stand at the Bar for your Life; you shall have all the fair and just Dealings
that can be; and the Court, as in Duty bound, will see that you have no Wrong
done you.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. My Lord Preston, for this thing that you now mention, in
all Ages in all our Books, it is the same thing, and has been in all Men's Cases
that have been for their Lives, denied; and this Statute that you bring is
quite of another intent: For it is said, the Records shall remain in Court for
perpetual Evidence, and the Aiding of all Persons to whom they shall belong. My
Lord, this is none of your Case; for God knows, you expect no Aid from this
Indictment: But this is meant of all Copies that concern the Estates of Men,
that they may have recourse to their Records to make out their Evidences to
their Estates, or to have them Exemplified under the Seal of the Court for
Evidence: But to have a Copy of an Indictment, thereby to be enabled to consult
with Counsel, how to make Exceptions to that Indictment, is a thing that has
been denied in all Ages by all the Judges that ever were. If any one can say
the contrary, it were something; but shall we now admit Counsel to debate a
thing that has been in all Ages denied, and never admitted so much as once?
That cannot be expected from us.


L. Preston. The Act says, That it shall be all Records that shall be in Aid to
any Person that shall desire it. Here is no distinction made of what kind the
Records are to be: If it be for the Aid of any Person, it ought to be granted,
and I may be aided by this Record, if I have a Copy of it; and I think it is
hard, when I am so much concerned in this Record, that I cannot be helped to it
by this Law.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Constant Experience has gone according to what we say.


L. Preston. If that be Law, and it has not been demanded, then they are not
entitled to have the benefit of it: But now I demand it, sure it is good Law.


L. C. J. Holt. It is no question a good Law, but not applicable to your
Lordship's Case: I suppose we are all of the same Opinion; if any think
otherwise, I desire they would speak.


L. Preston. My Lord, I submit to the Court, but then I desire one Thing, you
know my Life, my Fortune, my Reputation, my Posterity, and all are at Stake,
and all that is Dear to me must fall with me if I miscarry. Therefore I take
leave to represent, That I have had very short Notice of my Trial, I assure you
I have not had above 6 or 7 days Notice, I hope you will not refuse me a little
longer time before I come to my Trial, and I have had no Copy of the Jury yet.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If my Lord please to Plead to the Indictment, that will be time
enough to move afterward, and till Issue is joined, it cannot properly be
moved for.


L. C. J. Holt. It is not proper to desire time yet, till you have put your
self upon your Trial by Pleading to the Indictment.


L. Preston. It was granted in Colonel Sidney's Case, he had 8 or 10 days
granted him after he had Pleaded; and in the Act for the Reversal of Mr.
Cornish's Attainder, it is given as one Cause for the Reversal, that he had not
time to prepare for his Defense.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, 7 days time is very fair Notice, your Lordship knew
when the Sessions would be, and your Lordship might reasonably expect, that you
should be Tried here, I think truly you have had very fair Notice.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, we have had 7 days Notice of our Trial it is true, this
day Seven night at Night we had Notice we were to be Tried as this day, but 3
days of the 7 we had not the Liberty of seeing any Friend or Counsel, or any
Body, not till Tuesday Night, and that we got with great Application, and great
Charge to get an Order for our Counsel to come to us, so that though we have
had 7 days Notice, yet we have had but 3 days in all to consult with any Body,
and we never have had a Copy of our Jury till this Minute.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. We see the Nature of the Thing, and I am sorry that I must
say it is fit that we should take notice of it, perhaps the thing that you are
accused of is not true; but if it be true, you see what it is, that there are
Letters and Papers preparing for a Design to set all the Kingdom in Confusion:
Men that will venture upon such sort of Things are not to Condemn the Law if it
be a little hard upon them, for it is the common preservation that is
principally aimed at in Prosecutions of this Nature; and if this Accusation be
true. it is but Just and Reasonable, that all speed should be used to enquire
into and prevent it, and as it falls out in this Case, it is not in our Power
to do it. This Sessions is set before this Business is known, and this is an
Act done in this County, and therefore the Sessions is the proper place for the
Trial, and so you have the same sort of Proceedings that all other Criminals
have, which are very many, though I hope not many of so high a Nature, 7 days
Notice you have had you acknowledge; if my Lords please we will Indulge you as
far as we can, and give you time for your Trial till to morrow, but you must
Plead presently.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, we debate the time of your Trial too early, for you
must put your self upon your Trial first, by Pleading.


L. Preston. My Lord, I hope I shall always carry my self as becomes me toward
the Court, but I do not really think, you have any Trials that are of so great
Concernment, and this sure is a fit time for me to offer it, for it may be, I
have a great many Witnesses in the Country, and at a distance from this place
and one another.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, we cannot Dispute with you concerning your Trial, till
you have Pleaded, I know not what you will say to it, for ought I know there
may be no occasion for a Trial, I cannot tell what you will Plead, your
Lordship must Answer to the Indictment before we can enter into the Debate of
this matter.


L. Preston. Will your Lordship give me leave to move it afterward.


L. C. J. Holt. You may offer any thing then concerning your Trial, if you can
show any Reason to defer it, it will be proper to do it then.


L. Preston. Truly, My Lord, I think one Reason why my Trial ought to be put
off, is, Because I have a Privilege of excepting against so many of my Jury,
but if I have not time to look into the Panel I shall loose that Privilege.


L. C. J. Holt. We are not come to that yet, you are to Plead now.


L. Preston. Then your Lordships are pleased to overruled my Claim of Peerage.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, We are of Opinion you ought to Plead to this
Indictment.


C. of Ar. What says your Lordship, Are you Guilty of this High Treason, or not
Guilty.


L. Preston. Not Guilty.


C. of A. Culprit, How will thou be Tried?


L. Preston. By God and my Country.


C. of A. God send you a good Deliverance. John Ashton, What say thou? Art
thou Guilty of the same High Treason, or not Guilty?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I have only this to observe, besides what my Lord Preston
has offered, as to the Business of the Act of Parliament, your Lordships have
been pleased to Overruled that Plea; But, My Lord, I am told, That if an
Indictment be faulty, but even in a Letter, we cannot be found Guilty upon that
Indictment. Now, if we never have a Copy of that Indictment, how shall we know
whether there be any such Fault in it; Your Lordships, who are our Counsel, I
suppose have never seen the Indictment, and suppose there be Twenty Faults, we
have not the advantage of them, by not having a Copy, and how shall we come to
have any Advantage, if neither your Lordships, who are our Counsel, nor we our
Selves can see them. It may turn upon that.


L. C. J. Holt. But we will see it when you come upon your Trial.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. That is a Misinformation, for it may be such a Letter as
is not Material, and it may be such as is Material; as, suppose, your Name
being Ashton, the A should be left out, it would then be a Question, What there
would be to Charge you.


Mr. Ashton. We know that it has been so in several Instances.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. It may be such an Omission that may make it no Crime, but
we must not presently conclude that it is so, but you have heard it Read, and
so have we; if there had been any such Letter mistaken, it would have been
taken Notice of.


Mr. Ashton. As to the Reading, there may in the Reading of the Indictment be
many Words not nicely observed; I suppose the Indictment may be Right, I say it
is possible, it may, or it may not; but if your Lordships never see it, who are
our Counsel by Law, nor you will allow us Counsel to look into it; if there be
Forty Faults in it, we can have no advantage of it.


L. C. J. Holt. We must not allow you Counsel to pick holes in the Indictment,
that never was done, If you assign any Reason, we may assign you Counsel to
debate any matter of Law that may arise, but never was Counsel allowed to find
out Faults in an Indictment, when you come to your Trial we shall try you upon
your Indictment, and if there be any thing considerable, you are to suppose we
shall observe it for your advantage.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, We never had a Copy of the Panel of our Jury, I pray we
may have it.


L. C. J. Holt. That you cannot have till you have Pleaded.


L. C. J. Baron. Mr. Ashton, We have Overruled my Lord Preston about a Copy of
the Indictment, Do you think we shall Grant it you when we have denied it him.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I desire we may have a Copy of the Panel.


L. C. J. Holt. You must Plead first.


C. of A. Are you Guilty of the High Treason, or not Guilty?


Mr. Ashton. Not Guilty.


C. of A. How will you be Tried.


Mr. Ashton. By God and my Country.


C. of A. God send you a good Deliverance. Edmund Elliot, How say you? Are you
Guilty of the same High Treason, or not Guilty?


Mr. Elliot. Not Guilty.


C. of A. God send you a good Deliverance.


L. Preston. My Lord, I hope now it may be time to pray that my Trial may be
deferred.


L. C. J. Holt. Why would you have it deferred?


L. Preston. Because of the distance of my Witnesses, and other Things that
would be necessary for me to have to prepare me for my Defense; and besides, we
have not had a Copy of the Panel of our Jury, and the Reason of the Law does
Order, that because it gives us liberty to except against them, and that we
cannot know how to do, unless we inform our selves of the Men; and therefore I
beg, that I may have a Copy of the Panel.


L. C. J. Holt. As for having a Copy of the Panel, the Court grants it. Let
them have a Copy of the Panel.


C. of A. Here is one ready for you.


Mr. Sol Genesis There was Direction given that there should be one ready.


Mr. Ashton. We have demanded it every day since we had notice of our Trial.


L. C. Baron. You could not have it till there was an Issue joined, and that
could not be till you had Pleaded.


L. C. J. Holt. And as to the putting off your Trial, I know not to what time
to put it off.


L. Preston. My Lord, I am willing to have this matter Tried as soon as
possible, for it cannot but be uneasy to me to lie under these Accusations;
but some of my Witnesses live in the Country, at a remote distance; if it may
be next Term my Lord, or the next Sessions; for, if I have a Copy of the Panel
to Night, and am to be Tried to morrow Morning. How can I provide for my
Defense? I cannot be prepared to except against the Jury, and I am sure you
will be tender, and consider the Case of a Man, whose Life and Fortune are
concerned in this Business.


L. C. J. Holt. To put it off till the next Term is to remove it out of this
Court, that we cannot do, and to put it off till after the Term will be too
long a time.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. We cannot sit here after Monday, because the Term begins
on Tuesday.


L. Preston. My Lord, this Term is always a short Term, and if I be Tried to
morrow, it is Trying me without giving me time for my Defense.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, there has been all the care taken that the Nature of
the Thing was capable off, to prevent any complaint of this kind, Order was
given, that my Lord and these Gentlemen should have notice as early as was
possible. As soon as ever Mr. Attorney General had had an opportunity of
looking into the Evidence, notice was given them, that they should be Tried,
and that this was the day appointed for their Trial. But there shall be no
contending in a Matter of this Nature, for a day. If it be desired, and the
Court please to put it off till morrow, we are contented, but there can be no
reason to put it off for a longer time. As there is always a tenderness to be
used, and I know will be, and as far as I am concerned, always shall be toward
Persons in these Circumstances, so there is a regard to be had toward the
Government and the Public. I am sure if the Accusation that is against these
Gentlemen is true, the Government is highly concerned that this Matter should
come to a speedy Examination, and that Persons that enter into such Designs be
brought to Judgment: The Charge in the Indictment is of such a Nature as draws
very great Consequences along with it, it concerns no less then the Life of the
King and Queen, the Destruction of the Fleet of the Kingdom, and the Invasion
of the Realm by the Forces of a Declared Enemy. These are the things that the
Prisoners are charged with, and certainly there ought to be no delay in the
searching into such Matters as these. They have had a Weeks notice of Trial
already, and for many days of that week at least they have had as many Council
to assist them as they desired, and all the Sollicitors that they had a mind
to, have had free access to them, so that they have wanted no opportunity to
prepare for their Trial that Men in their Circumstances could have. As to what
has been said with relation to the Jury, the Law indulges them in the Number of
their peremptory Challenges without being put to show Cause, and the Court has
granted them at the very instant of their Pleading a Copy of the Panel, and
there is a reasonable time between this and to morrow for their making such
Enquiry into the Jury as is justifiable and fit to be made. But if by time to
look into the Jury, it be meant, that there may be a time for tampering, that I
am sure your tenderness of the Government will not permit, you will take care
as much that no such thing be done, as you will, that they should not be
surprised. If your Lordships are pleased, that the Trial be put off till to
morrow, we will be ready to morrow to attend it.


L. Preston. My Lord, it is a very hard presumption that Mr. Solicitor makes of
our asking a Copy of the Panel, that it is with a design to tamper with the
Jury.


Mr. Sol. Genesis I did not say so, but I said till to morrow was time enough to
make a Justifiable Enquiry.


L. Preston. But if I be to be tried to morrow, I am willing to be tried to
day, for I am as ready now as I shall be then.


L. C. J. Holt. It may be so, and as ready as you will be after the Term: But I
know not what your Lordship means by expressing such resentment, that because
you cannot have what time allowed you would, therefore you will have none, but
be tried now.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. You may have time enough to prepare your self as to the
Jury certainly between this and to morrow.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. My Lord, we that are for the King have given these
Gentlemen notice long enough to be prepared, if we should try them now, for
that is the time we gave notice for, but because we would indulge them as far as
we could, we are willing that they should have till to morrow, and intending
them that kindness, are not ready to try them to day, and there can be no
pretense for them to put off this Trial any longer, for there can be no want of
Evidence as to the Fact we charge them with, for all the Evidence that we shall
bring against them was taken from themselves, or the greatest part of it.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, What time will you be ready then?


Mr. Serj. Tompson. To morrow morning.


L. C. J. Holt. Then to morrow at Eight a Clock you are to be tried.


L. C. Pollexfen. My Lord Preston, do but consider you had seven days notice,
and to morrow makes eight.


L. C. J. Holt. You had notice for this day this day sevenight.


Mr. Ashton. But we have had only three days time to consult with our Council,
though we desired we might have our Council come to us that day.


Mr. Sol. Genesis They were told, they must apply themselves to the King for that
at the same time.


Mr. Ashton. We did do so that night to my Lord Sydney then Sunday intervened,
which was no day for Business, and we could not have our Order. On Monday we
could not have it till night; so that it was Tuesday before we could get any
Body to us. My Lord it is a Weighty concern, and all such hasty Proceedings
were thought very hard in the late Times, and particularly the denying Mr.
Cornish time, and it is one of the Reasons given in this Kings Declaration for
his coming here into England, the hardships that the Law laid upon Men in their
Trials, which he came to prevent.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. The hardship that was upon Mr. Cornish was, that he was
taken upon the Tuesday off from the Exchange, and tried before that day
sevenight, and that was hard indeed; but besides, he was taken about his
Business off from the Exchange, I know not whether you were about your
Business, your Lawful Business, when you were taken, God of Heaven knows that.
And pray consider here is a matter of very great consequence on the one side
and on the other: For if Men be Plotting against the Government, to give them
time to carry on their Plots will be mischievous on that side.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, till that be legally proved before your Lordships, that
is but a supposition.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. That will lie upon them to prove.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Ashton, we are to suppose you not Guilty, till you are
proved Guilty.


Mr. Ashton. Then my Lord, the Law says we may except against so many Persons,
what is the end of the giving us a Copy of the Panel, it is not to be presumed
we can do it by their Faces, for what can I say to the Face of one I never saw:
We must enquire concerning the Men, and that is a work of time, for some of
these Gentlemen I presume live eight or ten miles out of Town, Is it possible
for me before to morrow morning eight a Clock to send to 35 Men to enquire
after them?


L. C. J. Holt. No, nor is it intended you should.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Nay, if you intend to send to the Jurymen, we have no
reason to give you time.


Mr. Ashton. I mean to enquire after the Men, their Lives, what Religion they
are of, what sort of Men they are.


L. C. J. Holt. I suppose they are all Protestants of the Church of England,
but suppose they are all Strangers to you, and yet good and lawful Men of the
County, and there be no difference between you and them, then they are fit to
try you.


Mr. Ashton. It Is true my Lord, but if I have liberty to except against 35, I
ought to know something of them.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Yes, and inform your self as well as you can of them, but
not to send to them, that is not to be permitted.


L. Preston. There is another Point to enquire of them, and that is, Whether
they be Freeholders or not?


L. C. J. Pollexfen. We have neither you Lordships Affidavit, nor the Oath of
any other Person, only an Allegation.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, you must expect your Trial to Morrow Morning, we
cannot put it off, we are limited in time, the Sessions can hold no longer than
Monday, because of the Term.


Mr. Ashton. Then will your Lordship please to put it off till Monday?


L. C. J. Holt. No, we shall not have time to do it, it may be a long Trial.


L. Preston. I protest to your Lordships I cannot be ready to Morrow to make
that Defense I desire, and design to make, and which I may make if your
Lordships give me a longer day.


Clerk of Arraignments. Here is a Copy of the Panel for your Lordship.

It was delivered to the Lord Preston, who gave it to his Solicitor.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, we shall not have time to enquire into the Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. Look you, we are not bound to do this, but you have it as soon
as you have Pleaded.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, it will take up 5 or 6 Hours in writing of it out, and we
must each have a Copy.


Mr. Sol. General. They are all joined in one Indictment, and have
joynt-Counsel, and joynt-Sollicitors, as we are informed.


Mr. Ashton. Then I hope you will allow us liberty till Monday for our Trial.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. The Court cannot allow longer time; the Court here can Sit
no longer than Monday, and here must needs be a great deal of Business to do of
the ordinary Business of the Sessions, and when that day comes, perhaps it will
not serve to go through with the Trial, and then it must be Adjourned till
after the Term, and in the mean while some are in hopes the King of France may
come and determine the Matter.


Mr. Ashton. Pray my Lord, Let no Suggestion against us, prepossess the Opinion
of the Court before we be Tried.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. I don't Suggest any thing, but it is in the Indictment
alleged against you, and that you are to be Tried upon, and if such things be
there Suggested, as we would give you all reasonable time for your Defense, so
we must take care that the Government sustain no hurt by delays.


L. C. J. Holt. It is observed by the King's Counsel, that they are Things of
very great Consequence, and therefore they press for the Trial.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. I cannot believe but that you will be as ready to Morrow,
as you can be on Monday.


Mr. Ashton. The Government cannot be prejudiced by putting of it off till
Monday, sure.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. The Evidence that is to Convict you, lies all on their
Side that are for the King, and I cannot imagine, where your Witnesses should
be, unless they are in France; but you had reason to exepect your Trial, being
apprehended in the manner as you were, and to provide for it.


L. C. J. Holt. The want of Witnesses is only a Surmise, and a Pretense, for
there is no Oath of any Witnesses that they want, or who they are; indeed if we
had Oath made that they wanted material Witnesses, and to material Points for
their Defense, that might be occasion for our further Consideration; but shall
we put off a Trial upon a bare suggestion of the want of Witnesses, sure that
was never done.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Name any one particular Man that is your Witness, and the
particular thing that he can prove, for if any of your Witnesses do know any
thing of this kind, it must be particulars and not Generals; If you will not
name them, it is plain, it is only a pretense you insist upon for delay.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I insist upon the point of the Jury, that we have not
time to look after them.


L. C. J. Holt. Then that of the Witnesses is waved.


L. Preston. 'Twas I that desired Time for my Witnesses.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. But you neither name them, nor bring us any Oath about
them, or of any thing they can prove for you.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray don't spend the time of the Court, nor you own time
unnecessarily, you must prepare for your Trial to Morrow.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, there is not a person in Court, I believe, but will think
it hard that we are so straightened in time.


L. C. J. Holt. The time you have had notice to prepare for your Trial, is
sufficient.


Mr. Ashton. Mr. Cornish's Case has been complained of as a very hard Case in
this very respect, and we would hope, the King, that now is, came to Reform
such abuses.


L. C. J. Holt. You have been already told, wherein the hardship of that Case
lay, I am sure yours is not like it; but take notice, we will be Sitting here
punctually at Eight.


L. Preston. Will your Lordship please to let us have our Counsel come to us,
and our Friends.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes sure, you shall have all that is necessary for your
Defense, that we can allow you, but unnecessary Delays must be avoided.


Then the Prisoners were taken away by the Keeper of Newgate to the Goal.

Sabbati xvii. January 1690.
THis Day between the Hours of Eight and Nine in the Morning, the Court being
sat, and those Persons who were returned upon the Jury were called over twice,
and their Appearances Recorded; then the Prisoners were brought to the Bar.

Clerk of Arraignments. You the Prisoners at the Bar, these Men that you shall
hear called and personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord and
Lady our King and Queen, and you upon Trial of your several Lives and Deaths;
If therefore you, or any of you will Challenge them, or any of them, your time
is to Challenge them as they come to the Book to be Sworn, and before they be
Sworn.


L. Preston. My Lord, I beg your Lordship will inform me, whether if I have any
thing to offer to the Court, it is proper before the Jury be impanelled, or
after.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, I don't know what your Lordship has to offer, I think
you have nothing to offer why the Jury should not be Sworn, for now your
Lordship has put your Self upon your Trial, and are going to proceed in that
Trial, and the Jury are going to be Sworn; if you have any thing to offer, as
to them, you may Challenge them.


L. Preston. Truly my Lord, I have something to offer, but it is only what I
did humbly offer yesterday, and that is, that my warning was so short, that I
am not prepared for my Trial. We had not above three or four days wherein we
might consult about it, all the former time we have been kept close Prisoners;
we are now brought here to be Tried, without having time to look into the
Panel of our Jury. The Panel we had not till yesterday, and I humbly beg,
that I may have some time to prepare for my Defense.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, this is that which you insisted upon yesterday. Your
Lordship then said you wanted your Witnesses, and your Lordship did not then
mention what Witnesses you wanted, nor was any Oath made of any one that you
wanted; and therefore the Court overruled you, and wished you to prepare for
your Trial, and would not put it off: For if it should not be to Day, but
should be put off till another time, it must be the putting of it off till
another Sessions; for we are streightened with it in point of time, for the
Session can last no longer then Monday, and you have had convenient Notice.


L. Preston. Truly, my Lord, I think it is hard when my Life and Fortune, and
all are concerned, that I should be hurried on to a Trial, only because the
Court is streightened in point of time; and yet that is the only Reason that I
can perceive, why such haste is made. I desire a little more time to prepare my
self; and I think it very hard I should be denied; I must submit it to your
Lordships: If you will not allow me time, I cannot make my Defense as I would.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, as to the shortness of the time, that is no Objection;
you have had convenient Notice, as much Notice as the Law requires, and as much
time as without particular cause shown, has here at any time been given in
such a Case. If indeed there had been any particular Reason offered for putting
off the Trial, and you had made it appear by Oath, the Court possibly might
have put off the Trial; but because your Lordship only suggested you wanted a
Witness, naming neither Person, nor Place, or Matter such Witness should prove,
they are of Opinion no cause appears for such delay of your Trial.


L. Preston. My Lord, I assure you I am not prepared for my Trial.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, the Court overruled this Matter yesterday, it cannot
be put off.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I would humbly offer your Lordship one thing before the
Jury be called and sworn. By the Law, these Gentlemen at the Bar have the
Privilege to challenge peremptorily to the Number of 35; which is so great a
Number, that if each of them severally take advantage of it, (as they may do by
Law, and God forbid they should be denied any advantage the Law gives them) it
will be next to impossible to have a sufficient Number of Jurors appear so as
that we may proceed in the Trial.


L. Preston. Truly, my Lord, we don't hear what Mr. Solicitor says.


L. C. J. Holt. Do you not? Then I Will tell you what he says when he has done:
Go on, Mr. Solicitor.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, all that I would know of them is, Whether they intend
to take the Advantage that the Law gives them, of single and particular
Challenges; for then they must be tried severally: Or whether they will be
content that the same Persons that are challenged by any one, shall stand
challenged for all three. I leave it to them to take their own choice; let them
do what they please in it.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord Preston, Mr. Solicitor tells you what the Law is, that
every one of you may challenge Five and thirty without Cause; and if the Court
should proceed to try you all together, and every one of you should challenge
Five and thirty, perhaps a sufficient Number will be wanting to try you, the
Number challenged will then amount to 105 in all. If so be you agree in your
Challenges, that what one challenges shall be challenged by the other two, then
the Court will go on, and try you all together, otherwise they will be forced
to sever you; therefore he desires to know, whether you will join or sever in
your Challenges.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Take your own choice, Gentlemen, and do what you think best.


L. Preston. My Lord, the Matter of Challenging is so great an Advantage to a
Man upon his Life, that for my part I must insist upon that which the Law gives
me, to challenge as many for my self as I think fit, to the Number that the Law
allows me.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord Preston says, he will, as it is fit he should, take all
Advantages he can; What says Mr. Ashton to it?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I expect the same Advantage.


L. C. J. Holt. You must have it; it is not proposed to preclude you from any
Advantage that the Law allows you: If you insist upon that Advantage, you must
have it, and then you must be tried severally.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then, my Lord, since they are pleased to declare they will sever
in their Challenges, we must desire to sever them in their Trial, and to begin
with the Trial of My Lord Preston.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I desire the Liberty to be by when my Lord is tried.


L. C. J. Holt. No, no, that is not to be permitted.


Mr. Serj. Tompson. If you had joined in your Challenges, then you had been
tried all together.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. That Advantage you lose by severing in your Challenges;
you lose the Assistance of each other at your Trial.


L. C. J. Holt. That is the consequence; but do as you please; set them by.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. It may be they do not so well weigh the consequence,
therefore call them again. Gentlemen, Do you consider the consequence of your
not joining in your Challenges? You must not be by if my Lord Preston be tried
by himself, but must withdraw, and thereby you will lose the Advantage of
helping one another.


Mr. Elliot. My Lord, I desire to be tried alone.


Mr. Ashton. And so do I, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Then, Captain Richardson, take them away.


Afterward the Court was informed that Mr. Elliot desired to be tried with my
Lord Preston, and thereupon they were called again. L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen,
Do you desire to be tried alone, or with my Lord Preston?


Mr. Elliot. My Lord, if you please, I desire to be tried with my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Does Mr. Ashton desire it too?


Mr. Ashton. No, my Lord, I desire to be tried by my self.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then we will try my Lord Preston by himself.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Elliot, the King's Council do not think fit to try you with
my Lord Preston, without Mr. Ashton; and unless you will all join, you must all
be tried severally.


Mr. Elliot. I can only answer for my self.


Mr. Ashton. I am for being tried alone.


L. C. J. Holt. Then my Lord Preston must be tried alone.


The other two were carried back to Newgate, and the Lord Preston was bid by
the Clerk to look to his Challenges.

Cl. of Ar. Sir Goddard Nelthorpe Baronet. Challenged. Sir Thomas Cook Knight.
Challenged. Sir William Hedges Knight. Challenged. James Boddington Esquire Challenged.
Thomas Johnson Esquire Challenged. Ralph Bucknal Esquire Challenged. Craven Peyton Esquire



L. Preston. I do not except against him.


Cl. of Arr. Then swear Mr. Peyton.

(Which was done.) Lucy Knightley Esquire Challenged. Scory Barker Esquire Challenged.
Thomas Cuthbert Esquire Challenged. Alban Chair Esquire Challenged. John Herbert Esquire
Challenged. Hugh Squire Esquire



L. Preston. I have nothing to say to him.


Sworn. C. of Arr. John Tully Esquire Challenged. George Ford Esquire



L. Preston. I do not challenge him.


Sworn. Cl. of Arr. Henry Whitchcot Esquire Challenged. John Cross Esquire Not
appeared. Thomas Smith Esquire Challenged. William Withers Esquire Challenged. Richard
Cradeck Esquire



Mr. Cradeck. My Lord, I know not how I came to be summoned upon this Jury; for
I am no Freeholder.


L. C. J. Holt. Then set him aside.


Cl. of Arr. John Cane Esquire Challenged. William Jacomb Esquire



Mr. Jacomb. My Lord, I am no Freeholder.


L. C. J. Holt. How long have you not been a Freeholder?


Mr. Jacomb. Near this Four Months.


L. C. J. Holt. Give him his Oath.

(Which was done.) Have you no Freehold in the County of Middlesex in your own
Right, nor in the Right of your Wife?


Mr. Jacomb. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Then you must go on to the next.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Dawson Esquire


Mr. Dawson. My Lord, I am an ancient Man, and not fit to serve upon the Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, now you are here, for this time, serve; we will excuse
you hereafter.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we challenge him for the King.


L. Preston. My Lord, I desire to know when any one is challenged for the King,
whether they must not show cause.


L. C. J. Holt. By and by, if there be not enough, they shall show cause.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. You shall have all that the Law allows you certainly, my
Lord.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Austin Esquire Not appeared. Richard Paget Esquire



L. Preston. Has this Gentleman any Freehold?


Mr. Paget. Yes, my Lord, I have in the County of Middlesex.


L. Preston. I do not except against him.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. My Lord, we challenge him for the King.


L. Preston. My Lord, I humbly desire they may show their Cause.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, Cause is not to be shown by the Kings Counsel till all
the Panel be gone through; and then, if there be not Twelve left to try, then
they are bound to show Cause; that is the Law.


L. Preston. My Lord, it is a thing of a very tender concern to me; I desire to
know, If it be not usual that they should assign the Cause, when they Challenge
any for the King: For if it be not according to Law, it may be a prejudice to
me; and I desire I may have Counsel heard to that Point.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, shall we assign Counsel to dispute Matters not
disputable? Tthere is not any more clear Case in all our Law, than that: If
your Lordship please, you shall have a Book to read, that the King is not bound
to show Cause till the Panel is perused.


L. Preston. Then I don't insist upon it.


Cl. of Arr. Walter Bridal Esquire Challenged. Samuel-Hodgkins Esquire Challenged.
Thomas Elton Esquire



L. Preston. I do not challenge him.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then we challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. Arthur Bailey Esquire


L. Preston. I have nothing to say against him.


Sworn. Cl. of Arr. John Milner Esquire Not appeared. Richard Page Esquire



L. Preston. I do not except against him.


Mr. Serj. Thomson. Then we challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. Richard Marsh Esquire


Mr. Marsh. My Lord, I desire to be excused; I am not fit to serve upon a Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. Why?


Mr. Marsh. I am thick of hearing.


L. C. J. Holt. Methinks you hear me very well.


Mr. Marsh. Truly, my Lord, I do not hear well.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, you may spare him, if there be enough.


L. Preston. My Lord, I do not challenge him; I desire he may be sworn.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Harriot Esquire Challenged. Nath. Wall Esquire



L. Preston. I do not except against him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. Matthew Brown Gent.


L. Preston. I do not challenge him.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Cross Gent. Not appeared. Robert Bredon Gent.



L. Preston. I have nothing to say against him.


Sworn. Cl of Arr. James Partherick Gent. Challenged. John Bailey Gent.
Challenged. William Bourne Gent. Challenged. Henry Gerrard Gent. Challenged.
Richard Cooper Gent.



L. Preston. I say nothing to him.


Mr. Serj. Thomson. I challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. John Bignal.


L. Preston. I do not challenge him.


Sworn. Cl. of Arr. James Firne Gent.


L. Preston. I do not challenge him.


Sworn. Cl. of Arr. Robert Longland Gent. Challenged. Edmund Salter Gent.
Challenged. John H^wlet Gent. Challenged. Richard Fitzgerald.



L. Preston. I do not except against him.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. John Owting Gent.


L. Preston. I do not except against him.


Sworn. Cl. of Arr. Mark Lawne.


L. Preston. I do not challenge him.


Sworn. Cl. of Arr. Thomas Battle. Not appeared. Francis Chapman Gent.
Challenged. Gilbert Vrwin Gent. Challenged. Richard Bealing Gent. Challenged.
Edward Fuller Gent.



L. Preston. I do not Challenge him.


Sworn. Cl. of Ar. John Collins Gent.


L. Preston. I don't Challenge him.


Sworn. Cl. of Ar. Thomas Hollings.


L. Preston. I have nothing to say against him.


Mr. Ser. Tremain. We Challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Ar. William Silcock Gent.


L. Preston. I do not Challenge him.


M. Serj. Tremain. We Challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Ar. John Preston Gent. Challenged. Thomas Wright Gent. Challenged.
Benjamin Boultby Gent.



L. Preston. I do not Challenge him.


Sworn. Then they were counted, and the Twelve Sworn were those whose Names
follow.

JURORS,
Craven Peyton Esquire Hugh Squire Esquire George Ford Esquire Arthur Bailey Esquire Robert
Breedon Gent. John Bignal Gent. James Fern Gent. John Owting Gent. Mark Lawn
Gent. Edward Fuller Gent. John Collins Gent. Benjamin Boultby Gent.
Then Proclamation for Information and Evidence was made, as usual.

Cl. of Ar. Sir Richard Grahme, Hold up your Hand -- ( which he did) --
Gentlemen, you that are Sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his
Cause. He stands Indicted by the Name of Sir Sir Richard Grahme, late of the
Parish of St. Anne within the Liberty of Westminster Baronet, together with
John Ashton, etc. -- prout in the Indictment mutatis mutandis -- and against
the form of the Statute in that Case made and provided; upon this Indictment he
has been Arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial
has put himself upon God and his Country, which Country you are; your Charge
is to enquire, whether he be Guilty of this Felony and High Treason whereof he
stands Indicted, or Not Guilty; if you find that he is Guilty, you are to
enquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements he had at the time of the
Felony and High Treason Committed, or at any time since: If you find him Not
Guilty, you are to enquire whether he fled for it, if you find that hefled for
it, you are to enquire of his Goods and Chattels, as if you had found him
Guilty; If you find him Not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it, you are to say
so, and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Mr. Knapp. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, This is
an Indictment of High Treason against my Lord Preston, who is Indicted by the
Name of Sir Richard Grahme Baronet, and stands now Prisoner before you at the
Bar; and the Indictment sets forth, that the Prisoner, together with one John
Ashton, and one Edmund Elliot, as false Traitors against our Sovereign Lord and
Lady King William and Queen Mary, not weighing the Duty of their Allegiance,
the 29th of December, in the Second year of their now Majesty's Reign, at the
Parish of St. Clements Danes, in this County of Middlesex, did Conspire,
Consult and Imagine to Depose Their Majesty's from the Throne and Government of
these Kingdoms, and to bring the King and Queen to final Death and Destruction,
and to Levy War within this Kingdom, and procure an Invasion to be made here;
and that to bring their Treasons to pass, they did prepare and compose, and
cause to be prepared and composed diverse Treasonable Letters, Notes,
Memorandums, and Instructions in Writings, which were to inform the French King
and his Subjects, and other Enemies of the King and Queen, of the Number, Force
and Condition of Their Majesty's Ships, and how some of them were Manned, and
the Names of several of the Commanders of them, and how the Castles and Forts
of Portsmouth, South Sea and G^sport within this Kingdom were fortified, and
how they might be Seized and Surprised by the King's Enemies; as also to inform
them of the time, places, ways and means how they might Invade the Kingdom,
Depose Their Majesty's, and Fight with their Ships against Their Majesty's
Ships, and cause and procure great Forces to be raised against the King and
Queen, and fend Ships to plague the City of London, and War and Rebellion
within the Kingdom to procure; and that they did knowingly and secretly prepare
and conceal two several Bills of Exchange for the payment of Money to the
King's Enemies, and got these Bills of Exchange, Letters, Notes and Memorandums
into their Custody; and afterward, the 30th day of December, for the Sum of
One hundred pounds, by them, or some of them paid, they did hire a Ship to
carry them and the said Bills of Exchange, Letters, Notes, Memorandums, and
Instructions, into parts beyond the Seas, to, and among their Majesty's
Enemies; and did also prepare a Boat, which was to carry them to the Ship, and
accordingly they went into the Boat, and went on Board the Ship with the Bills
of Exchange, and Papers aforesaid; and being on Board, they set Sail, and made
away toward France with those Bills of Exchange and Papers, with intention to
disperse them, and to perfect their said Treasons. And the Indictment further
sets forth, that there was, and is a War between Our King and Queen, and the
French King, and the People of those parts, under his Dominions, who are
Enemies of the King and Queen; the Prisoner, together with those other two
named before, as false Traitors, did adhere to the Enemies of the King and
Queen, and to bring about this Treason, they did procure such Bills of
Exchange, Letters, Notes, Memorandums and Instructions, and did hire such Ship
and Boat to carry them and those Papers into France, and did go on board the
said Ship, and Sailed away for France, with intention to aid and assist the
King's Enemies in Counsel and Intelligence, by those Papers and Bills of
Exchange, as I before opened unto you, and this is laid to be against the Duty
of his Allegiance, against the Peace of Their Majesty's, Their Crown and
Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in that Case made and provided. To
this Indictment, Gentlemen, the Prisoner Pleaded he is Not Guilty, and for his
Trial has put himself upon his Country, which you are; if we prove him Guilty,
it is your Duty to find him so.


Mr. Sol-Gen. My Lords and Gentlemen of the Jury, the Indictment has been
opened to you at large, and I do not doubt but you have observed it: It
consists of two Parts, which are formed upon two several Branches of the
Statute of the 25th of Edward 3. the one is for compassing and imagining the
Deposing and Destruction of the King and Queen; the other, aiding and assisting
the King and Queens Enemies.


Treason, Gentlemen, consists in the imagination of the Heart, but because that
imagination of the Heart can be discovered no other way but by some open Act;
therefore the Law does require, that some Overt Act, manifesting that Intention
and Imagination, be assigned and proved. I doubt not but you have observed that
there are several Overt-Acts of both these kinds of Treason, assigned in this
Indictment.

Gentlemen, the general Design of the Conspiracy (as will appear by the
Evidence) was this: The King and Queen were to be Deposed, and this was to be
effected by a French Army and a French Fleet.

It will be easily Granted, that nothing more dreadful can enter into the
Imagination of an Englishman, than the destruction of our Fleet, and the
Conquest of the Kingdom by the Arms of France.

But yet it will be part of the Evidence that we shall offer to you, that the
Prisoners, and others of the Conspirators seem to be of another Mind, for
amongst the Papers which were taken with the Prisoners, you will see one, which
is styled, The Result of a Conference, wherein they pretend to show the
possibility of Restoring King James by the Power of the French King, and yet to
preserve the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.
They themselves went no farther than to think it possible, and I believe it
will be hard to persuade any other Englishman, that it is possible, unless one
Instance could be given, that the French King ever employed his Arms for
setting up any Body but himself, his own Religion, and his own Government. I
never heard that he did pretend to Form any part of his Glories upon the virtue
of Moderation, or Self-denial. And there can hardly be imagined a greater
Instance of Self-denial, than for the French King, after he had destroyed the
Dutch and English Fleets, and subdued our Forces at Land, not to make use of
his Success, so as to add these Three Kingdoms to his Conquests, and possess
himself of the uncontested Dominion of the Sea for ever, but only to Entitle
him at so great hazard and Expense, to become a Mediator between King James and
the People of England, and by his Mediation, to establish the Protestant
Religion, and the Liberties of the People; And yet as absurd as this seems, you
will find this to be the Result of one of their Conferences. I did never think
it was the part of any who were of Counsel for the King in cases of this
Nature, to endeavor to aggravate the Crime of the Prisoners, by going about to
put false Colors upon Evidence, or to give it more than its due weight; and
therefore I shall be sure to forbear any thing of that Nature. But I think it
my Duty, to give you some Account of the Nature and Course of the Evidence to
be produced to you, which consisting of several sorts, it will be in some sort
necessary to open it, that you may the more clearly apprehend it, and with more
ease make your Observations upon it.

Gentlemen, we shall produce in Evidence, as well living Witnesses, as Papers
and Writings, which by a strange kind of Providence were taken upon my Lord
Preston, and the other two Persons named in the Indictment when they were
Apprehended; and therein this Design that I have opened to you, will be made
Evident beyond all contradiction.

As to the living Witnesses, the course of the Evidence will be this. One
Nicholas Pratt, is the Owner of a Smack, called the Thomas and Elizabeth, he
does usually entrust his Wife Jane Pratt with the Hiring out of this Smack;
William Paceley is Master of the Vessel, and has of late been made a
Part-owner, to protect him from being Pressed; for it is a Privilege that that
the Owners of Vessels claim, not to be Pressed.

Some time since, (the Witnesses will tell you the precise time) this Jane
Pratt was sent for to one Mr. Burdett's House in the City, where she met with
Mr. Ashton, who desired to know, whether she could undertake to Convey him and
some others, with safety into France. She said, she did not doubt but she could
do so; and thereupon Mr. Ashton told her, That he and his Friends were
Merchants and Traders, and that they should make great advantage, to the value
of a Thousand pounds at least, if they could be there quickly; their Discourse
went no farther at that time, but Mrs. Pratt was appointed by Mr. Ashton to
bring the Master of the Vessel along with her, for he had a mind to Discourse
himself with the Master, and they were to meet at the Wonder Tavern in
Ludgate Street; and because there should be no mistake about the Meeting, Mr.
Ashton gave the Woman a Note of Direction in Writing, ready to be produced.

Accordingly by the 29th of December, Mrs. Pratt and the Master came to the
Wonder Tavern, where Mr. Ashton met them, and there they Treated of the Price
to be given for the Hiring of this Vessel to carry them to France, and I think
150 Guineas was the Sum then insisted upon, but no Bargain was made at that
time, but there was a new Appointment to meet the next day, which was the 30th
of December, at Mr. Burdett's House.

The next day when she and the Master came thither, they found there together
Ashton and Ellyot, the two other Persons named in the Indictment, and there
this Matter was treated of with great secrecy in Mrs. Burdet's Bedchamber.

And they came to an Agreement, that 100 l. should be the Sum to be paid to
Mrs. Pratt for conveying into France Ashton and Ellyot, and two other Persons;
So the Contract was Originally made for others besides Mr. Ashton and Ellyot,
and the Money was actually deposited by Mr. Ashton and Ellyot in Mrs. Burdet's
Hand, and a Sixpence was broken, one half of which was delivered to Mrs.
Burdet to keep, the other half Mr. Ashton was to take along with him, and when
the Master had safely landed them in France, Mr. Ashton was to deliver his half
of the Sixpence to the Master; which being brought to Mrs. Burdet either by
him or Mrs. Prat, upon the joining of the two pieces together, the Master was
entitled to receive the Hundred Pounds.

The next Appointment was to meet at one Mr. Rigby's. House in Covent Garden,
and that was to be on the One and thirtieth of December, when the Voyage was to
be begun: And the Tide not serving to go through-Bridge till late, the
appointment was to meet the later. When they, Mrs. Prat, and the Master came
there, they found only Mr. Ashton and Mr. Ellyot, but before that time care was
taken to provide a Sculler at Surrey-Stairs to be ready to carry them on board
the Smack, and the Waterman was appointed to stay in a little Alehouse
thereabouts to be ready when he should be called.

About Ten a Clock at Night four Persons came down together, and went into this
Scullen with the Master of the Smack, and made what haste they could
through-Bridge till they came to Pickle-herring Stairs over against the Tower,
where the Smack lay, and there went aboard the Master and these four Persons,
my Lord Preston, a Servant of my Lord Preston's, Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyot.

The Smack set sail immediately after they were on Board, and their haste made
them carry away the Watermans Coat which he had lent them whilst they were in
the Sculler, and that accident was the occasion of discovering who the Waterman
was that carried them from Surrey-Stairs.

After they were on Board the Smack, they were possessed with great fear of
being surprised, they knew the nature of the Business they were about, and the
danger they were in if they should be discovered, and therefore when they were
to pass by the George Frigate, a Man of War that lay in the River, they desired
the Master to hide them, which he did by putting them under the
Quarter-Hatches, a place where they could not stand or sit, but must lie along
on the Ballast. When they were passed by the George Frigate, they quitted that
place, but when they were near the Block-House at Graves, they grew
apprehensive, and they desired to be hid a second time, which was accordingly
done.

And they continued to lie in that place till they were taken, and it was a
happy thing they did so, the place was such that they had not any possibility
of throwing away their Letters and Papers, though they had made preparation for
it in case of any Accident, having tied them together, and fixed a piece of
Lead to them, that so if they saw themselves in danger of being taken, they
might easily sink the Packet; But being so close shut up in this place, that
they could not execute their purpose, the Papers were taken, and will be
offered to you in Evidence.

Gentlemen, Captain Billop by the Order of a Noble Lord now present, was
directed to use his utmost diligence to seize some dangerous Persons, of whose
Design of going beyond Sea for some very ill Ends, an Intimation had been
given. He got ready a Pinnace well Manned, and went in pursuit of them down the
River, and both as he went and returned, he took care to search suspected
Vessels; when he came to this, he demanded of the Master what Number of Men he
had on Board, pretending he came to Press Men; the Master told him he had but
three, and for those he had a Protection. But the Captain said he must be
better satisfied, and must search the Vessel, and in the search he found these
four Persons lying concealed in this secret place, under the Quarter-Hatches.

As they were taken out one after another, one of the Seamen observed Mr.
Ashton to take up a Bundle of Papers from off the Ballast, and put it in his
Bosom, and near the place where Papers lay, he took up two Seals, which after
proved to be my Lord Preston's Seals when he was Secretary. Captain Billop
being informed of this by that Seaman, he put his Hand into Mr. Ashton's Bosom,
and took away from him the Bundle of Papers with the Lead fixed to it.

When they were put on Board the Captain's Pinnace, they all pressed him much,
that he would let them go on shore at Gravesend, pretending want of
Refreshment, they not having eaten, and the Night having been cold, but he did
not think that proper, nor safe, but told them, they should go on Board the
George Frigate, and refresh themselves there.

When they came on Board the George Frigate all the three Gentlemen, and my Lord
Preston in particular, were very earnest with Captain Billop to dispose of the
Bundle of Papers, mixing extraordinary Promises, with great Complements.

Not prevailing there, when they were returned to the Pinnace, they renewed
their Solicitations, and one of them told him, it would be easy to remove all
Suspicion by fixing the Lead to some other Papers of little significations,
which were found in my Lord Preston's Pocket, which he might produce, and they
would without difficulty pass for the Papers that were taken.

But the Captain was too Just to comply with this Proposal. When they found he
was not to be moved, you will find from the Witnesses, that their Promises were
turned into Threats, and they used another sort of Language.

When they were brought to Whitehall Stairs, upon their Landing they gave Money
to the Master and the Seamen, desiring them to say, they were hired to go for
Flanders, and not for France.

Gentlemen, these things which I have opened carry a strong Presumption of
Guilt, for Englishmen, especially one of that Quality of my Lord Preston, to go
into the Country of an Enemy without any manner of Passport, and in such a
manner as they could not expect but to be seized for Spies, unless they were
assured, that their Character was so well known there, that they should be
looked upon not as Persons coming to get Intelligence, but to give it, unless
they were well assured of a good Reception, when they came there.

But there is no occasion to leave any thing to Conjecture in this Case, what
is contained in these Papers makes the Design of the Voyage beyond dispute. I
think, Gentlemen, after you have heard the Evidence, you will be very well
satisfied, that my Lord Preston and the other two who stand Indicted, were
equally concerned in the Papers; they were all alike earnest to preserve them
from being seen, they all solicited for the disposing of them, and promised
Rewards if they might prevail.

Gentlemen, these Papers are of various Natures.

One I mentioned before, is Entitled, The Result of a Conference between
several Lords and Gentlemen, both Tories and Whigs, in which it was undertaken
to prove the Possibility and Methods of Restoring King James by a French Power,
without endangering the Protestant Religion, and the Civil Administration
according to the Laws of this Kingdom.

Another contains Heads for a Declaration to be prepared, in order to be
published when the French have had Success at Sea, and are Landing, and that is
filled with such Pretenses as they thought most Specious, and most likely to
amuse and delude the People.

There is another sort of these Papers which consists of Letters. These Letters
are directed in False Names, and are not subscribed, and it is not to be
imagined it should be otherwise. Yet, Gentlemen, (though that is not the
present Business) the Hands of the Writers of these Letters are very well
known, and the Subject Matter of them will easily reveal to you for whom they
were intended, for though these Letters are most of them Written under diverse
Cants, some under the Color of Trade, some of them under the Color of a
Lawsuit for the Redeeming of a Mortgage, others under the Notion of a Match,
and a Settlement to be made upon that Match, yet the real Business is so plain,
that you need but hear them read to see through the Disguise.

Though they begin generally in the Style of Merchants Writing to one another,
or the like, yet toward the end of the Letters you will observe Expressions of
Duty and Reverence (terms which do not usually pass in a Correspondence between
Persons of that sort) sufficient to show, that somewhat else was intended to be
covered in what went before.

Gentlemen, It will appear to you, that some of the Writers of these Letters
were of the Number of those who were secured the last Summer when the French
Fleet was upon our Coasts, and you will observe they complain, that by reason
of that Restraint, the Design was very much hindered, though they have
endeavored to redeem that loss of time since their Discharge, and have carried
on the Business with more vigor than ever.

In short, The design of these Letters is to importune the setting out of the
French Fleet with all possible Expedition: They say they must not suffer such a
fit Season to be spent unprofitably; That the best time is between this and the
first of March to come to a good Market; and if they come not before the 10th
of March, all will be lost. In another of their Letters they say, If the Suit
be well solicited and managed, it may come to a final hearing before the end
of Easter Term.

They complain that there are several indiscreet Letters came from St.
Germains, that turn to the prejudice of the Design. Those Letters are not
enough disguised to deceive the People here, but speak too plainly what is to
be expected from themselves, and from the French. You will take notice, that
the Letters which you will hear, are all Bills with high Characters of the
Bearer: for which reason they write in such general Terms, because the Bearer
was entrusted with the whole. Some of the Letters say, no Particulars are or
need be expressed, because he will inform them of every thing. Others, That
they could not write so much as he could say; and that nothing was wanting but
to allow him a full and a fit Season to give an Account of all the Business;
and that they entirely depend upon his Account of them and their Condition.

And, Gentlemen, in one of the Letters the Bearer is styled a Lord; and to whom
can that be applied, unless to the Prisoner at the Bar.

In another Letter, when they speak of sending the Copper and the Linen (the
Goods pretended for carrying on the Trade) it is added, And what the meaning of
that is, they must refer to the Bearer, who was able to give them a particular
Account.

I have mentioned so much of the Papers, only that you might have a general
Notion of them; that so when you hear them read, you may more readily make your
Observations. I assure you I have been as careful as I could, not to exceed the
Truth in opening any part of the Evidence. But it is your part to see whether
what I have opened be made out in Proof.

There is another Paper that gives an Account of their Majesty's Fleet to be
sent out this Summer; and there is an Observation at the end of it, that it was
hoped it may be out in March. But you will find by other Papers (and
particularly by one of my Lords own Handwriting) that he was of another mind,
that the Fleet will not be out before June.

Gentlemen, the last sort of Papers which I will mention to you, are some
Memorandums and Notes, written by my Lord Preston; wherein he gives an Account
of several. Things of great moment; which as his memory served him, are put
together without connection or method, being only to remind him of them when he
should have occasion to mention them.

He therein gives an Account of the Number and Strength of the English Fleet,
how they are manned, and who are the Principal Officers and Commanders, and in
what time they will be out.

He likewise gives an Account of the Number and State of the Dutch Fleet, and
how that is to be divided and disposed of.

And with relation to the French Fleet, there is a particular Memorandum, That
they must be out at farthest in April; That they must be out so as to separate
the Dutch Fleet and ours; That they must be sure to look in at Spithead as they
come by, and secure what Ships should be in that Harbor from joining the rest.

There is also a hint given of those that were most likely to come in to them.
And there is Advice in what place their Fleet should fight ours. They must not
come so high as Beachy, where they fought the last year, but rather choose to
fight in the Chops of the Channel.

There is an Account of Portsmouth, how fortified and garrisoned, that it had
but 500 men; that Gosport had nothing but Pallisadoes about it; and Southsea
Castle very weak.

There are Memorandums of other Heads proper for a Declaration.

There are the Names of several Persons, some of them with particular
Characters, and some without; and amongst the rest, there is this Character
given of the Clergy of the City of London, that they are the worst of all
others.

Gentlemen, we shall proceed to the Evidence, and first call the Living
Witnesses, and then read the Papers; and when you have heard what the one can
say, and what the other contain, we must leave it to your Confideration, and
submit all to the Direction of the Court.

Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Pray swear Mrs. Pratt. Jane Pratt.

Who was sworn with Seven or Eight more.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Mrs. Pratt, Pray will you tell us what you know concerning
the hiring of a Vessel, and whether it was to go? and by whom it was hired, and
for what? Pray tell your whole knowledge in this Matter.


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Burdet, may it please your Lordship, sent for me to his House,
to hire a Vessel to go for France, and asked me if I could carry them secure; I
told them I could let them have a Smack that would carry them; and if it please
you my Lord, we met several times at his House, and at last there was Mr.
Ashton there, and Mr. Ashton appointed to meet at the Dog Tavern upon
Ludgate Hill; I think they call it the Wonder Tavern.


L. C. J. Holt. Mrs. Pray begin again, and speak out.


Mrs. Pratt, Mr. Burdet sent for me to hire my Smack to go for France, and they
asked me if I thought it would carry them secure; I told them yes, I thought it
would. And I came several times about it to Mr. Burdet's House; the Smack was
not then come to the Tower, as it did afterward; and then after they sent for
Mr. Ashton, and he met me at Mr. Burdet's, and meeting at Mr. Burdet's, he gave
me a Note, to meet at the Dog Tavern upon Ludgate Hill, and there Ashton met,
but Mr. Burdet did not come.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Who was with Ashton when you met at the Dog Tavern?


Mrs. Pratt. None but a Man of his, as Mr. Ashton said; there we sat about an
hour and an half and did nothing: At length we went away, and appointed to meet
at Mr. Burdet's House the next day at Seven or Eight a Clock, and there we met,
and the Bargain was made.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What Bargain?


Mrs. Pratt. I asked a 150 l. and they told me that was too much; says Ashton, I
will give you Fourscore: Says Mr. Burdet, pray encourage them offer them a 100
l. thereupon he did offer a 100 l. and we agreed for a 100 l.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What day was that, can you remember?


Mrs. Pratt. We met on the Monday, and the Tuesday we agreed.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. What Money was paid?


Mrs. Pratt. Ninty three Gnineas and Six pence.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Who was by when the Bargain was made?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ellyot was along with them; Mrs. Burdet and the Master of the
Vessel at the Agreement.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What is the Master's Name?


Mrs. Pratt. His Name is Pasely, and there was Sixpence broken, and Mr. Ashton
took one of the Six-pences, and Mr. Burdet ordered him to give his Wife the
other, and so he did; and when the money was paid, Mr. Ashton brought it in a
Paper wrapped up, and said, we should see it told out, and he told it out there,
and it was Ninty three Guineas and the Sixpence.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Who did they tell you they were to carry into France?


Mrs. Pratt. Truly my Lord they said Three, that was all.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What followed then? Did they give you any Note where you
were to come for them?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton bid Mr. Ellyot write a Note where they should come; it
was at Mr. Rigby's in Covent Garden, at the Seven Stars, and there we were to
meet at a Eleven a Clock at night; and when we came there, Mr. Ashton was
within, and went out and fetched in some Company, Mr. Ellyot came and two other
Gentlemen that I never saw in my Life before.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Mistress, you speak the breaking of a Sixpence, what was
to be done with that?


Mrs. Pratt. My Master was to bring the half of the Sixpence that Mr. Ashton
had, to Mrs. Burdett, and then we were to have the 100 l.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Had Mrs. Burdet the other Piece?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, Mr. Ashton had one half, and she had the other.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Was there any Provision carried on Board this Smack? Yes,
there was a Hamper and a Trunck, which were fetched from Mr. Burdet's House; my
man John Fisher carried the Trunk, and a Porter carried the Hamper, and I took
care to see it put in the Vessel.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. When you came to Covent Garden that Night, what Discourse
had you? and what inquiries were there made, and by whom?


Mrs. Pratt. Mrs. Ashton comes in, as she said, Mr. Ashton was her Husband, and
said there was some News from Court, of having Papers in a Hatt, and that they
had chosen some Lord or other: Something it was I remember, I cannot tell what;
but says one Gentleman that stood by, and said, I was chosen the last year,
that signifies nothing; and another said, I missed it; It is only a Christmas
Gambal, it signifies little.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What further discourse had they?


Mrs. Pratt. Mrs. Ashton said she was afraid they should have no very good
luck, for the Cock crowed.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Was there any discourse what advantage they should get by
going, or you by carrying of them?


Mrs. Pratt. They said they would help us to the earning of 1000 l. before
Lady Day, if they went this time safe.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Pray Mistress recollect your self; were they to go to
Flanders? or where?


Mrs. Pratt. They were to go for France: they were not to go for Flanders.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. What time of Night did you depart from Mr. Rigby's?


Mrs. Pratt. About Eleven a Clock.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. How did they go away from Mr. Rigby's?


Mrs. Pratt. I did not go with them: Mrs. Ashton kept me, and gave me the Leg
of a Goose and some Drink.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Do you know any thing further?


Mrs. Pratt. No; I think I have told all.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Were you hired for France, or Flanders? I ask you once
again.


Mrs. Pratt. We were hired for France; any place there where we could touch.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Was there any particular Port mentioned?


L. C. J. Holt. If you have done with her, will my Lord ask her any question?


L. Preston. My Lord, I desire she may be asked, whether she ever saw me before?


Mrs. Pratt. No; never, my Lord, but in the Tower.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. But, she says, when they were at Rigby's there came in two
Gentlemen with Mr. Ellyot that Night.


L. Preston. I desire to know of her whether I was one of them two.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. My Lord, she does not say your Lordship was one of them.


Mrs. Pratt. No, my Lord, you were not one of them.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Then set up Paseley. Paseley, what do you know about
hiring of this Smack to go for France? I think you are Master of the Smack,
called the Thomas and Elizabeth, are you not?


Mr. Paseley. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Then pray give an account of the whole matter.


Mr. Paseley. The Smack was hired of the Woman, and not of me; and when I came
up to London she told me she had got a Voyage over to France, if I was minded
to go; I said, Yes: and she appointed me to go along with her to this Mistress
what do ye call um's House, this Mrs. Burdet, and when we came to this House
there was no body within but Mr. Ashton: presently after came in Mr. Ellyot;
after they came in they told us the things were not ready yet, but they would
be ready presently to carry on Board; when these things were ready, John Fisher
carried the Trunck down, and the Porter carried the Hamper, and I went with
them along to Billingsgate and carried them on Board; and when I carried them
on Board I went to Billingsgate again, and so we went along to this Mr.
Burdet's House; and so when we came up to Burdet's House, Ashton and Ellyot
were not there present, but we had been there but a little time ever they came
in, and then they came and said to my Owner and me, You shall see the Money
told; it was all in Gold but one Sixpence; there was Ninety three Guinea's:
And, after the Money was told, there was a Six pence that was broken in half,
and the Guinea's he roulled up in a Paper, and gave them to Mrs. Burdet, and
bid her lay them up; and he gave her one half of the Sixpence, and kept the
other half himself; and when I brought that other half that he had, or my
Owner, then she was to give the Money to her or me.


Mr. Ser. Tremayn. Pray what Room of the House was this in at Mr. Burdet's?


Paseley. It was on the Left hand going in.


Mr. Ser. Tremayn. Was it a Bedchamber?


Paseley. Yes, 'twas.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What time of Night was it pray?


Paseley. About Eight a Clock.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What discourse had you with them there pray?


Paseley. They asked me if I thought they might get well over? I told them Yes,
I believed they might.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Did they tell you what part of France they were to go to?


Paseley. No, they named no place, but any part in France.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Well, go on, tell us what they said further.


Paseley. So, Sir, they gave us direction to meet them at the Seven Stars in
the little Piazza's in Covent Garden: when we came there it was Eleven a Clock
at Night, and they were not in the House when we came in, except twere Mr.
Ashton; but presently after Ashton and Ellyot came in, and they sat down; and
so in came two Gentlemen more, but what they were, or who they were, I don't
know, and they discoursed about Papers shaking in a Hat, and said they should
have no good Luck, for the Cock crowed: And after this Ellyot and Ashton came
out of the House and called me to go with them, and after we were gone out Mr.
Ashton leaves Ellyot and went away from him, and Ellyot bid me go along with
him, says, come Master, come along with me; he did not name any place whether
they were to go, but it happened to be Surry-stairs, and going down, he calls
in at the corner House, which is an Alehouse, for the Water-man, and bid me go
before to the Waterside; and when we came thither the Water-man steps into his
Boat, and I after him; and when I was in the Boat I went into the Stern, and by
that time I was seated in the Stern there came down four Men; but I never saw
my Lord and his man before they came into the Wherry.


L. C. J. Holt. Who came into the Wherry?


Paseley. There was all those four, Mr. Ashton, Mr. Ellyot, my Lord, and his
man.


L. C. J. Holt. Where was this do you say?


Paseley. At Surry-stairs, there the Boat was.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Was the Prisoner at the Bar one of them?


Paseley. Yes, he was.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, what did you do then?


Paseley. After we were seated in the Boat at Surry-stairs we put off, and went
down through Bridge, and going through Bridge we came on Board the Vessel,
riding just against the Tower almost, and we went all on Board; and when we
came on Board, my men were all asleep, and being asleep, I called them out of
the Cabin to hale up the Anchor; and there being very little Wind stirring, we
could not go very far, but came just below the halfway Tree, and then we
stopped, and I ordered to drop the Anchor for fear of the Vessels in the River:
and the next morning about Eight a Clock we weighed our Anchor again, and went
on till we came near to the George man of War, and there they all of them hid.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Who?


Paseley. All of them, my Lord. There was Ashton, and Ellyot, and my Lord
Preston, and his man.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. In what place did they hide?


Paseley. In the Quarter-hatches, under the Hatches where we lie.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Did they desire you to hide them?


Paseley. Yes, they did.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. What did they say?


Paseley. They said, that if there should come any Boat on board to press, I
should show them my Protection; and so there came no Boat then.


Mr. Ser. Tremayn. How big is that place that they hid in?


Paseley. It Is in the Quarter under, near the Cabin-hatches.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. I ask you what kind of place it is?


Paseley. They cannot sit upright, nor stand upright, but they are fain to lie
along, or lean upon their Elbows.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Well, go on, what happened afterward?


Paseley. After that we were past the man of War, they came up and sat in the
Cabin where we used to eat our Victuals; and when we came to Gravesend, over
against the Dock-house, they would go down again and hide, and did so till we
passed the Block-house, and then they were for coming up again, and then I saw
a Boat coming about Tilbury which made toward us, and thereupon they ducked
down again, and the Hatches were laid down upon them, and there they remained
till they were taken.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Where were they taken?


Paseley. They were taken between the North Block-house and the little --


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. But I mean in what part of the Ship.


Paseley. They were taken in that little place where they were hid.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Were the Hatches shut down upon them?


Paseley. Yes, they were.


Mr. Ser. Tremayn. How long had they been hid before they were taken?


Paseley. A quarter of an Hour, or there abouts.


Sir W. W. Did they desire to be hid there?


Paseley. Yes, they did and they were hid there.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Now tell us, after such time as they were taken, what they
said, and what you observed.


Paseley. After they were taken they said nothing to me, my Lord, nor none of
them did speak to me after the Boat had taken them.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. But what happened after they were taken?


Paseley. After they were taken, Captain Billop ordered them to go into the
Boat, and us with them; and when we came to White Hall stairs one of them said
to me, Master, when you come upon your Examination, ^ay you were bound to
Flanders, and not for France.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Which was that that said so?


Paseley. 'Twas Ellyot, and he gave me half a Crown to bear my expenses that
Night, and said he would remember to take care of us afterward.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Did they give any money to the Seamen?


Paseley. Yes, Ashton gave one of my men half a Crown, and bid him say he was
bound for Flanders, and not for France; and my Lords man gave my other man half
a Crown.


L. C. J. Holt. Was my Lord Preston by when that money was given?


Paseley. My Lord was upon the Bridge, but not near me.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. If my Lord have any Questions to ask him, we have done
with him for the present.


L. Preston. No, my Lord, I have no Questions to ask him.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Was my Lord Preston by when the direction was given you to
say you were to go to Flanders, and not to France?


Paseley. I say he was upon the Bridge, but was nor near me.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What discourse had you on board with any of them?


Paseley. Very little. They asked me if I thought they should go clear? and I
told them yes, I thought they might.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Clear of what?


Pasely. Clear of the Vessels searching: They examined me that Night I was at
the Seven Stars, if I knew the way of the Swing on the back of the Channel, to
go clear of the Town. I told them I did not know the way by the Back of the
Sands by Margaret's, but the Swing would not keep them clear of the Town.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Was there a Note written whether you were to come?


Pasely. Yes, There was Note written to meet them at the Seven Stars in the
little Piazza's


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Where about is Burdet's House?


Pasely. That is in Queen Street in the City.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. You Pasely, Did the Waterman that brought them on Board,
leave two Coats behind him?


Pasely. Yes, the Waterman did leave two Coats; and I put them into my Chest,
and afterward they broke open my Chest, and took them out, and brought them to
my Lord Chief Justices.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Then we will next produce that Waterman. Set up Charles
Betsworth.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Come, will you give us an Account who you carried on Board
a Smack, and what happened.


Betsworth. I was going over the Water from Surry Stairs about Seven or Eight a
Clock, and a Gentleman at the Stairs called Sculler, and asked me if I would
carry him down the River; said I, how far, says he to the Tower; said I it is
against Tide, and I cannot carry you down so low; he said he would stay till the
Tide turned; said I, if I be out of my Bed so long, I deserve to be well paid
for it; If you will give me Half a Crown I Will carry you down; says he I Will give
it you; so then I came Ashore, and he asked me what my Name was, I told him
Charles Betsworth; says he, will you be sure to stay for us; Yes, said I, if
you will be sure to come: If I be not at the Stairs, I Will be at that Alehouse
there in the Corner; so I staid, and: carried over a Fare or two over the
Water; and about a Eleven a Clock, as I was sitting in the House, a Gentleman
comes, and calls Charles, and so out I went to my Boat, and took them in. There
was one man, as I suppose, in the Stern, and he that called me out followed me
down, and by and by came three more into my Boat; one of them had a whitish
Cloak on, and the other a gray loose Coat, and a red Bag, of the quantity of a
Peck; and so we put off, and rowed away; and just under the Temple Wall, which
was all the Words I heard from them, that I can remember; says one Gentleman,
When do your hear the King goes away? and another made answer and said, a
Tuesday: So we rowed down through Bridge; and when we were through Bridge, they
asked where the Vessel lay; and he that was in the Stern said, it was Southwark
side, over against the Tower, and bid me row over thither. And when we came
just below Battle-Bridge, that man said, that is she that rides a Head of us,
and I looked, and she had a Pennant up; so they were put on Board; and as soon
as they were on Board, she went off, and I rowed up to the Bridge, and went
through Bridge, and came up as far as and there I staid and took my Scull and
my Staff out of my Boat; and when I took them out, I missed my Clothes; says I,
God bless me, I have lost my Clothes; but then I thought it was but a still
Tide, and therefore I would try if I could overtake them; for I thought they
could not be got far, there being little or no Wind; so I went down to the
Place where the Vessel lay, and she was gone; and I enquired of several Smacks
that lay there, but could hear nothing, and I rowed as low as Limas Reach; and
about Black Wall and Limas Reach, I came up to a Smack, that I supposed was
she, and I cried out, Ho the Smack, and they answered me So; I asked them if I
did not bring a Fare a-board that Smack a while a go; then they said no; I told
them I had brought a Fare on Board some Smack that lay about Horsleydown and
Pickle-herring Stairs, and they had got two Coats of mine, which I had
forgotten, and it had a Pennant up when they went on Board, but this had none;
so I rowed on further, till I came as far as Berking Sherf; and I thought there
being so little Wind that none could be gone beyond me; and therefore waited to
see a Smack with a Pennant coming down, but I could not meet with it, and there
I lay all Night in my Wastcoat; and the next day I came back to Greenwich; and
as I came along, I went on Board several Vessels to enquire, because I took her
for an Attendant upon a Man of War, but I could not hear of my Clothes, till
last Friday was Seven-night, two Watermen came, and brought me the Clothes I
lost.


L. C. J. Then you have your Clothes again?


Betsworth. Yes, I have.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray look upon that Gentleman there, my Lord Preston, are
you sure that he was one of them that was in your Boat?


Betsworth. I cannot tell that ever I saw him in my Life before.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. You Pasely, I ask you, was my Lord Preston one of the
Gentlemen the Waterman brought on Board your Smack?


Pasely. Yes he was.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Is that the Waterman?


Pasely. Truly my Lord I cannot tell; but the Waterman's Coat was left on Board


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Then let me ask you another Question, Had you a Pennant?


Pasely. Yes I had when I came on Board.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Did you take in your Pennant?


Pasely. Yes, I did afterward.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Why did you take it in?


Pasely. They asked me if there was a Pennant; and I told them yes; and they
bid me take it in?


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Who bid you take it in.


Pasely. Ellyot did; so we took it down.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Will my Lord ask Betsworth any Questions?


L. Preston. No, I have nothing to say to him.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What did they carry a-board with them, Pasely?


Pasely. They had nothing a-board but the Trunk and Hamper, that were brought
down before from Burdet's House: and there was nothing brought in the Boat but
only a Leather Bag.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Then set up Fisher, I think his Name is John Fisher. You
were one of the Seamen that did belong to the Smack, I think.


Fisher. Yes, I was.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray then tell us, who were brought thither; and what
happened upon it.


Fisher. About six Hours before they came on board us, our Master came himself
on Board, and took me along with him; but whither I was to go then I did not
know. He carried me to a House in the City, and there gave me a small Trunk to
carry, and a Hamper to a Porter; and we went away with them; and he bid us, at
Billing sgate, carry them a-board, which we did.


L. C. J. Holt. When was the Trunk and Hamper brought on board?


Fisher. About six or seven a Clock at night, on Wednesday, I think.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, and what followed?


Fisher. My Lord, and Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyot, and my Lords man, and the
Master came on Board between eleven and twelve: There were no more came on
Board that I know of; but we were asleep when they came on board; and
immediately our Master ordered us to hale up the Anchor. Now there was but
little Wind stirring; and by that time we were fallen down as low as halfway
Tree, it being still Flood, we could go no farther: so there we were ordered to
stop, and we lay by till morning; and about eight in the morning we weighed
Anchor again, and about nine, when we came to the George Man of War they hid,
they desired to go down into the Quarters, and we laid the Hatches upon them.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What kind of place is it that they hid in?


Fisher. They could not stand upright, nor sit upright, but they must lie along
or lean upon their Elbows. So when when we were got below the Ship, they came
up again into the Cabin: And when we came at Gravesend near the Block House,
then they hid again till we were below the Block-House; and then we spyed a
Boat coming, which made them to keep below; and there they continued till
Captain Billop took them.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Were they all four there?


Fisher. Yes all four.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. After they were taken, what said they?


Fisher. After such time as they were taken, and come up to Whitehall Stairs,
Captain Ashton gave me a Half-Crown-piece, and bid me say they were going to
Flanders, and not to France.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. But whether were you going?


Fisher. Truly, I did not know where we were to go, till since we came on
Shore. I understood nothing till they hid; and then indeed I thought we were
going to France.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. When did any Body tell you you were to go to France?


Fisher. Since we came on Shore.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Will my Lord ask him any Questions?


L. Preston. No.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Then the next Witness we call is one Amonds, Pray tell us
what you know of this Matter.


Amonds. May it please you my Lord, I know nothing concerning my Masters
Business, but all that I know of this Business is, That they came on Board
about Twelve a Clock at Night, and I was then asleep in the Cabin, and hearing
some come on Board, and my Master call, I looked out, and there were Three or
four Centlemen and my Master, and he ordered us to set sail immediately, and
make our way down as fast as we could; there was little or no Wind; so that
when we came down to the half way Tree, we were forced to come to an Anchor,
and there we rid at Anchor till it was broad day, when there was a brave Gale
to the Westward, and by that time we got down to Long Reach; about Nine a Clock
we came to the George Frigate, a Man of War, and they understanding that,
desired to hide these Gentlemen.


L. C. J. Holt. What Gentlemen?


Amonds. My Lord Preston, Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyot, and the other Gentleman
that was with them.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Look upon my Lord there, was he one;


Amonds. Yes, that Gentleman was one.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, go on.


Amonds. And so Sir, after we were passed the Frigate, they came up again, and
did not design to go down any more till they see some other danger. When we
came almost to Gravesend, they went down again: When we were past the
Block-house I was at the Helm, and they were resolving to go to Dinner, and bid
that Man, my Fellow, to reach them some Victuals out of the Hamper: And while
he was reaching them some Victuals, I see the Pinnace coming toward us; said
I, here is a Pinnace coming a-board; says my Lord and they, we must go down
again and hide, and so they did go down again; we apprehended that they were
coming a-Board to press us, and they had no mind to be seen. When the Pinnace
came near, they waved to us in this manner, as much as to bid us stay; so we
laid the Sail by, and staid for them till they came up; and when the Captain
came on Board, says he, this is worth our coming on Board, here are a couple of
brisk Seamen will do the King Service; I must have them, I think; says he, I
hope not so, Noble Captain; says he, have you any thing to keep your selves
clear? Yes, says our Master? I am sorry for that says the Captain; what is it?
says the Master, I have a Protection; says the Captain, let us see your
Protection: so the Master pulls out his Protection, and shows it: Well, says
the Captain, I must look a little further, and away he goes into the Cabin, and
takes up the Hatches where these Gentlemen were; says the Captain; Hye, hye,
who is here? Turn out, says he; but I suppose they did not make so much have as
the Captain expected; so he called some of his men on Board; and when they came
on Board, my Lord came out, and the rest of the Gentlemen; and says my Lord to
the Captain, I hope you will be so kind as not to take any thing from us: Says
he, I Will meddle with nothing but Papers, it is Papers I look for, and put his
Hands in both his Pockets, and pulled out Papers, and put them into his own
Pocket, but whether they were new or old I cannot tell; and there was a Watch
likewise, but that he gave my Lord again, and said, I Will meddle with nothing
but Papers: then he searched Mr. Ellyot, and Mr. Ashton was the last that came
out, and there was one of my Lords Watermen in the Cabin with him; and, says
he, an please you Noble Captain, That Gentleman puts something in his Bosom:
Says the Captain, What did you put in your Bosom, Sir; nothing, says he, but my
Handkerchief.


L. C. J. Holt. Who said so?


Amonds. Mr. Ashton, and shows him his Handkerchief, and afterward the Captain
put his Hand in Mr. Ashton's Bosom, and pulled it out.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. What did he pull out?


Amonds. A Roll of Papers with a Piece of Lead to it.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Did you see the Lead fixed to the Papers.


Amonds. I did see it fixed to the Packthred that tied the Papers.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What sort of Place is it in which they were taken?


Amonds. They could not sit nor stand upright in it.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Had you any money given you?


Amonds. I had half a Crown given me by my Lord's man.


L. C. J. Holt. Who was it gave you the money?


Amonds. It was my Lord's man, he that was on Board the Ship; he gave me half a
Crown in Whitehall, and said, I should say we were bound for Flanders, and not
for France; but who the half Crown came from I cannot tell, my Lord said nothing
to me at all.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Did you hear any Discourse as they came down?


Amond. No, I did not mind any thing of discourse, for I never came among them,
unless it were at the Hour of Watching.


L. Preston. Pray did I say any thing to you at Whitehall?


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, your way is to propose your Questions to the Court,
and they will ask them for you.


L. Preston. My Lord I desire to ask him if I said any thing to him at
Whitehall.


L. C. J. Holt. What say you? Did my Lord Preston say any thing to you at
Whitehall?


Amond. No my Lord, he never said any thing to me at all; it was his man that
gave me the half Crown, and spoke to me.


L. C. J. Holt. Will your Lordship ask him any other Questions?


L. Preston. No my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Then call your next Witness.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Swear Captain Billop. Which was done.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Come Captain Billop, Pray will you tell my Lord and Jury,
where you did apprehend my Lord Preston, and the Circumstances of what happened
at their taking.


Capt. Billop. Sir, I met with them at the upper end of the Hope.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray give us an Account from the beginning to the end,
what passed, how you came with the Boat, and all that happened at that time.


Capt. Billop. About Two a Clock, or between One and Two, upon the last of
December, my Lord Danby came to me at one of the Doors of the House of Lords,
and told me his Father would speak with me; and he carried me to my Lord
Linsey's Chamber, where immediately my Lord President came, and told me there
were some Persons that were going for France about Business of dangerous
Consequence, and he desired me to use some means to get them apprehended; I
then proposed what I should have to enable me for the Undertaking. My Lord
Danby said there was such a Boat, that he would procure for me, and my Lord
President gave me a Letter to another Person, who was to instruct me further
about this Matter: My Lord Danby got the Boat ready, and some Men and Arms in
it; but I thought there was not Arms enough, so I borrowed some Arms of my Lord
Lucas, and about Eleven a Clock as near as I remember we put off from Tower
Wharf, it being very calm; I thought we should be swifter than any Vessel, and
should have the advantage of them all; and therefore run down as far as Graves
End; and I brought several Vessels by the Lee, in which time I pressed some
Barkin men, two or three of them; and amongst them, one that knew the Vessels
that lay in the River, having been on Board several; and we did board diverse,
and took out some men, having a Press Warant; and he that I had taken of the
Barkin men, after we had passed by several Vessels, seeing this Vessel sailing,
told me that was the Thomas and Elizabeth; whereupon we made up to them, and
waving toward them, they staid for us: when we came up, there was standing by
the Master two lusty Sailors, and I told him I would take but one of them; he
said he had a Protection; I bid him show it me; when I was come on Board, and
had looked upon his Protection, I told him I must look a little further, and I
went down into the Cabin, and took up the Hatches, and there I found them all
four lying together.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. What four?


Capt. Billop. My Lord Preston I did not know him then, nor till afterward.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Who else was there?


Capt. Billop. Mr. Ellyot was there, and Mr. Ashton, who were both my former
Acquaintance, but my Lord Preston I had forgotten, till one of them called him
my Lord, and I asked them what Lord it was; and they said it was my Lord
Preston; so then I saluted my Lord, so we rowed up.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray Captain tell us what happened in the Vessel before you
went out of it, after you found them there?


Capt. Billop. I handed my Lord Preston up first, and after he came out of that
little place, which he was forced to creep out of on his Knees, I turned my
Lord about, and told him I must search him; he said, he hoped I would not
meddle with any thing; I told him I would meddle with nothing but Papers, so I
put my Hand in his Pocket and took all the Papers I could find, and put them in
my own Pocket, and taking out a Watch, I delivered it to my Lord again. The
next was Mr. Ellyot, and I searched him, and found nothing at all upon him.
After that Ashton came up, and one of my men told me that Gentleman had put
something in his Bosom; whereupon I gave him a sudden turn, his Back being
toward me, and asked him what was that he put in his Bosom? he told me nothing
but his Handkerchief, and plucked his Handkerchief out; with that I clapped my
Hand in and got the Packet, and took it out, with the Lead fixed to it; I have
the Lead now in my Pocket.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Pray will you produce it, Sir. Which he did.


Capt. Billop. This is the Lead, several of my men saw it when 'twas fixed to
the Packet.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. What did you do with the Packet?


Capt. Billop. I put it immediately into my Pocket, as soon as I had searched
Mr. Ashton further, and then commanded these Gentlemen all into my Boat, and
took all the People that belonged to the Smack with me: after I had brought her
to an Anchor, and left two of my men on board of her, and there she rid till
next Day, when I sent two more of my men to bring her up and those two men I
ordered to search all the parts of the Vessel, and take what they could find,
and whatsoever they found they should carry it to the Tower to my Lord Lucas;
which, I supposed, they did.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Well, Captain Billop, after such time as you had taken
these Papers, and brought these Gentlemen into your Boat, pray what discourse
had you with them? What said they to you concerning the Papers?


Capt. Billop. It was a pretty while before we talked of any thing; the
beginning of our talk was, as I remember, they desired to go ashore at
Gravesend to refresh themselves, for it was cold, and they had not eaten any
thing: it was my Lord that desired it; but I begged his pardon for that, and
told him there was a man of War that lay at Long-reach, whereas I believed his
Lordship would be very well accommodated with any thing he wanted.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Well, what said they afterward?


Capt. Billop. My Lord Preston, after I had saluted him upon knowing who he
was, and Mr. Ashton and Mr. Ellyot telling him I was of their acquaintance, he
said he was glad he was fallen into a civil Gentleman, and they said they were
glad they were fallen into the hands of an acquaintance. I told my Lord I hope
he should never find any thing otherwise than Civil from me; my Lord was very
civil to me in Complementing, and assuring me he would acknowledge my favor
and kindness to him.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Ay, what did he say to you?


Capt. Billop. My Lord Preston told me, if ever it lay in his Power to do me
service he would, and he did not doubt but he might, and he used a great many
words and expressions of kindness, and his readiness to do me service; and
amongst the rest, my Lord said once to me, If I would dispose of the Packet --


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray speak that again.


Capt. Billop. My Lord Preston, in one of his discourses of his kindness in
doing me service, had this expression, as near as I can remember, If I would
dispose of the Packet.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What he would do for you if you would dispose of the Packet?


Capt. Billop. He did not come to any particular instance of what he would do,
but he said he would serve me in any thing that lay in his Power; but Mr.
Elliot and Mr. Ashton discoursed me several times about it; they courted me,
and desired me to throw the Packet overboard; but I told them I would not do
any thing of that kind; and Mr. Elliot said that I might take the Papers that I
took out of my Lord Preston's Pocket and tie the Lead to them, and say that was
the Packet, and throw the to'ther overboard. I told him he took the King's
Council to be odd People, and very indiscreet, that could not find out such a
thing as that: After this was over, we had a little interval, and there was a
Hamper in the Boats Stern, and there was some Bottles of Wine taken out, and we
drunk several times; and by and by we had some discourse a little further about
the same thing, and they pressed me to throw the Packet away; and one time
particularly Mr. Ashton I remember, said it would be a generous thing, Billop,
if you would go along with us, I think you may do as well there as here.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. Whether would he had you gone with them?


Capt. Billop. He did not name any place, as I remember.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What promises did they any of them make you?


Capt. Billop. Mun Ellyot whispered me several times, Dear Billop throw the
Packet overboard, what good would it do you to injure so many honest
Gentlemen? And Mr. Ashton and Mr. Ellyot said I had it now in my Power to make
my self as great and as rich as I would be.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. What did any of them say about the Tide turning?


Capt. Billop. Mun Ellyot also said, It was impossible the Current or the Tide
could run long this way, or always this way.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. When you had refused this that they desired of you,
notwithstanding their promises, pray tell us how they turned their discourse
into threatenings.


Capt. Billop. Ellyot told me, when nothing would prevail, that every Dog had
his day; but I answered, I hoped never to see it your day; but however, said I,
pray desist from any such Language, for I cannot bear it. After that they never
asked me any thing about it.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Now tell us what you did with these Gentlemen, and these
Papers afterward?


Capt. Billop. I brought these Gentlemen up to my Lord Nottingham's Office, and
delivered the Packet with the Lead fixed to it, and stood by my Lord Nottingham
in the Room till he had opened the Papers, except while my Lord Preston was
examined, and when he opened the Papers I stood by, that I might see him make
them up again; and, I think, I took some of them in my hand, and said I might
read them, but I was uneasy, and not disposed at that time to read many of
them, so I did not read them all.


Mr. Serj. Tremayn. They were all by when Ashton said you would do generously
to go along with them, were they not?


Capt. Billop. Yes, they were all in the Boat.


Mr. Serj. Trem. Did not one of them say to you, I know if Capt. Billop do
serve us he will do it generously.


Capt. Billop. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Trem. Who was it?


Capt. Billop. It was Ashton.


L. Preston. I desire I may ask Captain Billop a Question.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray, my Lord, put your Question to the Court and they will ask
it him.


L. Preston. I desire to know, my Lord, where it was, I said this to Capt.
Billop, that he would dispose of the Packet.


Capt. Billop. Just after I had first saluted your Lordship, you said, you were
glad you were fallen into the Hands of a civil Gentlemen.


L. Preston. Was it a-board the Boat that I desired you to dispose of the
Packet?


Capt. Billop. Yes, and before we came on board the George Frigate, when we
drunk about, upon the opening of the Hamper, it was in the Boat I am very sure,
and before we came on board the George.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord Preston said to you, you say, he would do you all the
kindness that lay in his Power if you would dispose of the Packet; how would he
have you dispose of it? what did he mean by it?


Capt. Billop. I don't remember he used any other word, but that dispose of the
Packet.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. But Ashton and Ellyot did desire of you a great many times
to throw it over board?


Ld Preston. I desire he may be asked this Question. You said you carried these
to my Lord Nottingham: Did you see them opened?


Capt. Billop. Yes, I did see them opened, and I saw my Lord as he opened, lay
them one by one, and read them over, and put them up again. And I looked upon
several of them, while my Ld Nottingham was reading others; and I stood by the
Fire, and I see my Lord make them up, and he tied them with a piece of Twine,
and he clapped his Seal upon them, and delivered them to me; and I went
immediately and delivered them to my Lord President.


Ld Preston. Were you all the while by, while my Lord Nottingham was reading
the Papers?


C. Billop. Yes, I was by when he opened them, and read them, and staid till he
put them up again; and as they came from his hands, I presently carried them to
my Lord President.


Ld Preston. Are you sure, or can you swear that these are the same Papers
which were taken on board the Smack, that you carried from my Lord Nottingham
to my Lord Danby.


Capt. Billop. So many of them as I looked into, I marked; and all that I
marked I can swear to, and more than them I cannot.


Mr. Serj. Thomson. I think you say all those Papers that you delivered to my
Ld Nottingham, you saw my Ld Nottingham seal up, and all them you carried to my
Ld President. Yes, I did so; all that my Lord opened at that time, were put up
together again, and his Seal put to them.


L. C. J. Holt. But my Ld asks you, Whether you can swear the particular Papers?


Capt. Billop. What I read, I marked, and them I can swear to.


L. C. J. Holt. You say you carried all those Papers my Ld Nottingham sealed,
after he had opened them, to my Lord President.


C. Billop. Yes, my Lord, I did see my Ld Nottingham open them, I see him make
them up again; and when they were made up, he put his Seal to them, and I
carried them to my Lord President.


Jury-man. My Lord, I desire Capt. Billop may be asked one Question.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay; What is it you would ask him?


Jury-man. I desire to know whether the Papers were sealed when he took them
and brought them to my Lord Nottingham?


C. Billop. No; they were all tied up together with a Tape, or a Twine, I think
with both, very fast together.


Jury-man. There was no Seal on them when he took them.


C. Billop. No; but there were several Letters within the Packet that were
sealed.


L. C. J. Holt. Was not the outside of the Packet sealed?


C. Billop. I don't remember the outside was sealed; there was a Cover, but as
near as I remember, they were folds of Papers fast tied together.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. You delivered them as you took them, to my L. Nottingham?


C. Billop. Yes: I never took them out of my Pocket after I had taken them from
Mr. Ashton till I came to my L. Nottingham's Office, where I delivered them to
him.


Mr. S. Thompson. Had you ever opened them, or seen them opened, before they
came to the Hands of my Lord Nottingham?


C. Billop. No indeed.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then set up Johnson. (which was done.) Pray tell us what
you know of this Matter?


Johnson. I was in my L. Dunblain's Barge, and I went down with this Capt.
Billop, and we were on board several Vessels; and we light upon a Ketch, where
we pressed some Men, we thought it had been only some Seamen that were to be
pressed, we did not know of any thing else when we had rowed down as far as you
have heard. We rowed up again, and searched several little Vessels and Smacks
that were in the River; when a Fisherman that we had pressed, said, That that
was the Vessel the Captain enquired after: And then the Captain bid us take
some small Arms; and I took a Pistol, and I went aboard. The Captain read the
Protection, and then said, he must look further: When the Captain looked into
one of the Cabins, and took up the Hatches, I saw a great piece of Roast-Beef,
and my L. Preston by it, and a Mince-Pye, and a Fowl; and we took the Beef out,
but my Lord's Man said, he missed his Knife, it lay upon the Bench: And then
came my Lord up, and his Man, and Mr. Ellyot; and when Mr. Ashton (the Man with
the Pockholes) came up, he went down again and pretended to look for his Hat;
but when he was down, I see him cram something into his Bosom, and I told the
Captain, I had seen him put something in his Bosom; and the Captain took him
hold by the Buttons of his Coat and turned him about, and asked him, what he
put into his Bosom? He said, nothing but his Handkerchief; and pulling it out
of his Bosom, he showed it the Captain: but the Captain put his Hand into Mr.
Ashton's Bosom and pulled out the Packet.


Mr. Serj. Thomson. You say you see him put something in his Bosom when he went
down. Did you observe whence he took it?


Johnson. It was upon the Gravel, and there were a couple of Seals which we
afterward took up lying by, and I believe he took up the Packet, and forgot
the Seals.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray let us see the Seals.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Your Lordship observes the Packet was not at first in Mr.
Ashton's Bosom.


L. C. J. Holt. No, it was not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But he took it up from the place where the Seals lay, and put it
in his Bosom. Pray in what place did this Packet and these Seals lie?


Johnson. Upon the Ballast, for they had shoved away the Board.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was my Lord Preston upon the Ballast?


Johnson. Yes, my Lord lay almost upon his Back, he was the first that we saw,
and he came out first; they were all four lying together there.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who lay next my L. Preston?


Johnson. My Lord's Footman, Mr. Ashton lay next, and Mr. Ellyot lay next.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where were the Seals then?


Johnson. My Lord was the first that I see come up.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But I ask you where the Seals were?


Johnson. The Seals were down upon the Ballast; whether they were my Lord's or
no, I cannot tell, or whose they were.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Now that we will ask Capt. Billop: Are these the Seals?


C. Billop. Yes; these are the Seals this Man gave me.


Johnson. I took them from off the Ballast.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Did my Lord own these to be his Seals?


C. Billop. I did not ask him that I know of.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Well, Johnson, go on, tell what you know further.


Johnson. After we came to Long-reach, a Gentleman that had a long Perriwig, a
black Gentleman, Mr. Ellyot I think they call him, had a pair of Whiskers on
when he was taken; and he took a pair of Siscers and cut them both off; and he
said, if ever he lived, he should remember me, having a Tooth out, because I
was so sharp upon him to make him come out: And when we came on board the
George Frigate in Long-reach, my Lord's Man came to me, and said, he would give
me something to drink, if I would deliver him the Seals.


Ld C. J. Holt. Had you any Discourse with my Ld Preston himself about them?


Johnson. No, it was his Footman that came to me, and said there was no body
there but my self and him; I had them, and he would give me something to drink
if I would deliver them, but I delivered them to Capt. Billop.


Ld Preston. My Lord, may I ask a Question or two of this Witness?


Ld C. J. Holt. Yes, my Lord, if they have done with him. What say you, Brother
Thompson?


Mr. S. Thompson. We shall have done with him presently, my Lord. Pray had you
any Money given you?


Johnson. No, but my Ld gave the Ship's Company ten Shillings to drink, and one
piece was a Brass Half-Crown.


Mr. S. Thompson. What did they say as they went along, as you remember?


Johnson. They had a great deal of Discourse while we rowed; I was at the next
Oar to them, but I cannot tell what 'twas.


Mr. S. Thompson. Who did discourse?


Johnson. Ashton, Elliot, and the Captain.


Mr. S. Thompson. Cannot you remember what they said any of them?


Johnson. They did talk together several times, Elliot said he was a-cold, and
came and rowed at the Oar awhile, and Elliot swore an Oath, says he, they row
all as if they were rowing to Prison; but truly I did not much mind their
Discourse, I minded my rowing. There were some Victuals handed to us which we
did eat.


Mr. S. Tremain. Did Elliot seem to be angry? What did he say?


Johnson. Elliot wished that a Thunderbolt might drop into the Boat several
times, and sink it; and when we went through Bridge, against Tide, he wished
that London-Bridg might have fallen upon our Heads.


Ld Preston. Now I would ask him, if your Lordship please, Did you see Ashton
take up the Packet?


Johnson. Yes, I did, as it lay by the Seals.


Ld Preston. I perceive there seems to be some stress laid upon my lying next
to Mr. Ashton, and my Seals lying by the Packet.


Ld C. J. Holt. My Lord, here has been no Inference made from that yet by the
King's Counsel.


Ld Preston. My Lord, it is in vain to deny we were all together there.


Johnson. You were the first that I see, my Lord.


Ld Preston. We were all together, but there is no such thing to be gathered
from thence as they would infinuate; but I suppose 'twould be deduced from
hence, as if this Packet, because it lay near these Seals, should be my
Packet.


Ld C. J. Holt. We have not yet heard, my Lord, what use they will make of it.


Ld Preston. But I desire to take notice of it, my Lord, and I think it is a
very hard Presumption because we were in one place and the Seals at a little
distance from the Packet, therefore the Packet must be presumed to be mine, I
hope it shall not be presumed against me.


Ld C. J. Holt. Since your Lordship mentions it, I will take notice a little of
it too: It is only a Circumstantial Evidence that is made use of against you;
how far it will weigh, is to be left to the Jury when all the Evidence is
heard. The Packet is found in the place where your Lordship lay, and by it
Seals that belong to you; one is the Seal of your Office, as Secretary of
State, the other is your own proper Coat of Arms.


Jury-man. With submission, my Lord, I desire this Witness may be asked this
Question, Whether he savv Capt. Billop take the Packet out of Ashton's Bosom?


Johnson. Yes, I did.


Jury-man. And, Whether he savv Billop deliver the same Packet to my Lord
Nottingham?


Johnson. No, I did not.


Ld C. J. Holt. You Gentlemen of the Jury, consider this, he was not then by:
Capt. Billop tells you, that very Packet which he took out of Ashton's Bosom
he carried to my Ld Nottingham, and he tells you my Lord opened it in his
presence, and he is sure he put all the Papers together again and set his own
Seal upon them, and then he took them from my Ld Nottingham and carried them to
my Ld President.


Johnson. As soon as I came to White Hall, I was set Sentinel over those three
Men that came out of the Smack, and was not admitted into the Room.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then we must desire my Ld Nottingham may be sworn.


The Earl of Nottingham sworn. Mr. S. Tremain. Where are the Papers?


E. of Nottingham. Mr. Bridgman, I think you have the Papers.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, my Lord, Does your Lordship remember Capt. Billop brought
a Bundle of Papers to you, and what became of them? Will your Lordship be
pleased to give the Court and the Jury an account of it?


E. of Nottingham. My Lord, all that I have to say in this matter is, Capt.
Billop brought to me a Bundle of Papers tied about with a Packthread, to which
was fixed a piece of Lead, I believe the same piece that was now produced, at
least it was one very like it, he brought also a Signet which I presume I can
know again when I see it.


Mr. S. Thompson. Pray show my Lord the Seals.


[which was done.] E. of Nottingham. This is the Signet I presume which he
brought to me, I am sure he brought just such a one, if not the same: those
Papers when he delivered them to me, I opened in his presence, and when I had
so done, I read them and put them up together again and sealed them with my own
Seal, and delivered them to him back again. What the Papers are, and what he
did with them, I suppose, he will give you an account.


Ld C. J. Holt. But your Lordship says the Bundle of Papers he delivered to
you, you sealed up, and delivered to him again.


E. of Nottingham. All those Papers that he brought to me, I did seal up, and
deliver back to him again.


Mr. S. Thompson. Pray, my Lord, were they ever out of Capt. Billop's sight
while your Lordship had them?


E. of Nottingham. Not after they were opened: there was a little Paper that
was tied to the Bundle which fell loose upon the taking away the Lead, and I
opened that while he was by, and the Bundle lay upon the Table while I
examined my Ld Preston, and after my Ld Preston was gone out, I called in
Capt. Billop (who went out while I examined my Lord) and I opened that great
Packet in his sight and read the Papers, and he read some of them, and all the
Papers in the great Packet, and the little Paper that was stuck in, I
delivered sealed up to Capt. Billop.


Mr. S. Thompson. Pray, my Lord, Were the Letters in the Packet sealed?


E. of Nottingham. Yes, there were some of them sealed, and all that I received
from him I delivered to him, and no more.


Ld C. J. Holt. The Gentlemen of the Jury hear what my Lord says.


E. of Nottingham. The very same, all, and no more, I say.


M. S. Thompson. Capt. Billop, when you had them back from my Lord of
Nottingham, pray to whom did you deliver them?


Capt. Billop. To my Ld President.


Mr. S. Tremain. Then we must desire my Ld President would be pleased to be
sworn.

The Marquess of Carmarthen, Lord President of the Council, was Sworn.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We must desire the favor of your Lordship, to acquaint the
Court when Capt. Billop came to your Lordship, what he said, and what he
brought with him.


L. President. Capt. Billop did bring me a bundle of Papers, and he told me he
brought them from my Ld of Nottingham, and they were sealed, wrapped up with a
Packthread, and sealed with a Seal, which I knew to be my Lord's Seal; he
delivered them to me my self; and these Papers I kept till I showed them the
King the next morning. And after I had showed them the King, the King delivered
them up back to me, having read some of them, and commanded they should be
delivered to the Cabinet Council. A Cabinet Council was called, and accordingly
there I did deliver them Paper by Paper, and they were all marked by my Ld
Sidney, and some I think by my Ld Marlborough; and so I delivered them all
together to my Ld Sidney.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then we desire my Ld Sidney would please to be sworn.


The Lord Sidney Sworn. Mr. Serj. Thompson. Will your Lordship please to
acquaint the Court and the Jury what Papers were delivered to you, and by whom,
and where those Papers are?


Ld Sidney. The Papers that were delivered by my Lord President, I have kept
them, my Lord, ever since: As soon as I had them, I read them, and marked them
with a Letter of my own Name, the Letter H. I have kept them ever since, only
one morning I gave them to Mr. Bridgman to be copied out as soon as he could;
and he delivered them me back again, and they have not been out of my Custody
since, only the Night before last Night they were sent to Mr. Solicitor to
read, and brought immediately to me again.


Mr. Sol. Genesis To whom did your Lordship deliver them to be copied?


Ld Sidney. To Mr. Bridgeman, I tell you.


Mr. Sol. Genesis So that they were never out of your Lordship's Hands till now,
but only in Mr. Bridgeman's Hands?


Ld Sidney. No, I kept them in my Pocket ever since, only the Night before last
Night when they were sent to you.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did your Lordship mark them before they were delivered to Mr.
Bridgeman to copy?


Ld Sidney. Yes, I marked them when I received them.


Ld Preston. My Lord Chief Justice, your Lordship does observe that Capt.
Billop swears that they were never out of his possession till he delivered them
to my Ld Nottingham; my Ld Nottingham says he never opened them, but left the
Packet upon the Table while I was examining.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray, my Lord, will you speak a little louder that I may hear
you?


Ld Preston. My Lord, I am saying, my L. Nottingham says. That while he was
examining me, the Packet lay upon the Table unopened, and were never out of
his Eye till he sent them sealed by C. Billop, and so they come to my Ld
President, and they were kept by my Ld President; my Ld President says, my Ld
Churchill saw the Papers, and they were in his possession.


L. C. J. Holt. My Ld Preston, your Lordship does mistake my Ld President, he
does not say that they were in my Lord Marlborough's Hands; but he did
communicate them at the Cabinet-Council where my L. Marlborough was; he said
indeed, they were in the King's Hands, but he was by all the while.


Ld Preston. From that time they came out of my Ld President's Hands, I know
not what may be put in, nor what taken out, these Papers are not sealed, as I
hear of, afterward; and passing through so many Hands, no body knows what may
be done to them: Truly, I think it very hard to swear, after all this, that
these are the Papers that were taken aboard the Smack.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Will you please to ask any Questions to satisfy your self
of any of these Noble Lords?


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, I Will put your Lordship right.


Ld Preston. With all my Heart, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Lordship hears what Capt. Billop says; he says, he brought
them, as he took them out of Ashton's Bosom, to my Ld Nottingham: My Ld
Nottingham opened them before him, and did deliver them to him again, having
made them up. My Ld Nottingham says, the same Papers Capt. Billop delivered
him, he delivered back again, all, and no more; and Billop says, he carried
them to my Ld President; my Ld President showed them to the King, and
afterward carried them to the Cabinet Council; there the same Papers were
opened, and there they were marked, some by my Lord Marlborough, and all by my
Ld Sidney.


Ld Preston. Your Lordship will please to observe this; my Ld Nottingham was
pleased to say, he opened no Papers till I was called in and examined, and then
Capt. Billop withdrew. Now, my Lord, I don't know whether the Captain can say
that these were the very same Papers that he took in the Smack?


L. C. J. Holt. Capt. Billop says, that he saw the Papers opened by my Lord
Nottingham.


Capt. Billop. My Ld Preston observes a thing that is very right, my Lord, that
after I had delivered the Packet to my Ld Nottingham, while my Lord was
examined, I withdrew; but my Ld Nottingham has given your Lordship an Account,
that he had not opened the Packet then, but only the small Letter or Note that
lay apart from the rest: But, my Lord, the Packet was in the same condition
when I came in again, upon the Table, as when I left it; my Ld Nottingham, as I
believe, had not opened that Packet, for I found it just as I left it, upon
the Table.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. My Ld Nottingham says, he delivered back to Capt. Billop
all the Papers that he received from him; they were never out of my Lord
Nottingham's presence; nor were they opened, as my Lord says, but in Billop's
presence, nor opened till after my Lord's Examination, except the little Paper
that was stuck in, and was loose upon taking away the Lead.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray swear Mr. Bridgeman.


(which was done.) Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray, when you received the Bundle of
Papers from my Ld Sidney, to whom were they carried, and to whom were they
delivered?


Mr. Bridgman. My Ld Sidney gave me these Papers to have them copied; and I
copied some of them with my own Hand, the others I delivered to Mr. Poultney,
and were copied in my presence in the Office: They were never out of my sight,
and as soon as ever they were copied, I carried them back to my Ld Sidney, and
delivered them to him my self.


Ld Preston. Were any of them taken from you, Sir?


Mr. Bridgeman. My Lord, I say I copied some of them my self, the others were
copied in my sight and presence, in the Office.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray, Sir, let me ask you one Question; Were the same
Papers that were delivered to you by my Ld Sidney, redelivered back again and
altered?


Mr. Bridgman. I am very sure I gave them all the same back again, because I
read them every one before they were copied.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Did you observe my Ld Sidney had marked them before you
had them?


Mr. Bridgeman. Yes, they were all marked before I had them.


Ld Preston. My Lord, I desire to ask Mr. Bridgeman this Question, Pray Sir,
Were they sealed up when you sent them to my Ld Sidney?


Mr. Bridgeman. No, they were not sealed, they were tied up, but about the
Seals I remember when I was in my Ld Sidney's Office --


Ld C. J. Holt. The Question is asked you, Whether you carried them back sealed
or no?


Mr. Bridgeman. No. They were not sealed when they were delivered to me, but I
can safely swear they were never out of my Custody till I delivered them back
again; for what I did not copy my self, were copied in my sight.


Mr. S. Thompson. But your Lordship is pleased to observe they were all marked
by my Ld Sidney before they were delivered unto him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then, my Lord, we have done with our living Witnesses for the
present, and will read the Papers.


Mr. Bridgeman. One thing, my Lord, I do remember, as soon as my Lord Sidney
received the Papers back again, he looked over every one of them and read them,
and looked upon the Marks.


Ld Preston. If your Lordship please, I would beg the favor to ask one
Question of my Ld Sidney; Pray, my Lord, did your Lordship number the Papers?


Ld Sidney. No, my Lord, I did not number them.


Ld Preston. But your Lordship says upon your Oath and Honor, that those are
the very Marks upon them that your Lordship set there.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We are indeed to produce them, and then we shall ask that
particular Question.


Ld C. J. Holt. My Ld Sidney will see them, and then he will answer your
Lordship's Question.


Ld C. J. Pollexfen. My Ld Preston, my Ld Nottingham is here a Witness, and his
Occasions call him away, have you a mind to ask him any more Questions?


Ld Preston. No, my Lord.


Ld C. J. Pollexfen. What say you, Gentlemen, have you any further occasion for
my Lord Nottingham?


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we must beg his Lordship's Patience, we do not know
what occasion there may be; I desire this Paper may be shown to my Ld Sidney.


(which was done) Ld Sidney. That is my mark, that Paper I know is one of the
Papers.


Mr. S. Tremain. Here are two of them, one of these is the Copy of the other,
both were taken in the same Packet, the one is fairer written than the other.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Gentlemen, the Paper we are now offering to you is that which I
mentioned before, it is the Result of a Conference; there were two of them
taken in this Bundle, the one of them seems to be the first Draught, the other
is a Copy more fairly written; but I think they are both in effect the same;
however they were both taken in the same Packet, and you shall hear them read.


Ld Preston. My Lord, I desire that before it be read, it may be shown to Capt.
Billop, to know whether it be the very Paper that he took.


Ld. C. J. Holt. Ay, let Capt. Billop look upon it.


Capt. Billop. My Lord, I do not remember that Paper.


Ld Preston. Your Lordship observes that Capt. Billop cannot swear that this
was one of the Papers that he took.


Capt. Billop. All the Papers that I looked into I marked, and all the Papers
that I marked I can swear to, and no others.


Ld C. J. Pollexfen. Did you look into all the Papers?


Capt. Billop. No, I did not.


Ld C. J. Holt. But he swears all that he brought to my Ld Nottingham were
sealed up by my Ld Nottingham, and carried by him from my Ld Nottingham to my
Ld President, and my Ld President swears he delivered them all to my Ld Sidney,
and my Ld Sidney swears this is one of those Papers.


Ld Preston. Certainly, my Lord's swearing to a Paper in this manner cannot be
a good Proof: my Circumstances, my Lord, are very hard, and your Lordship, I
have heard, ought to be of Counsel for me in any Point of Law; and, my Lord, I
humbly desire to know, whether this can be a Proof of a Paper, that he says was
taken in a Packet, and yet he cannot swear it?


Ld C. J. Holt. My Lord, he does not swear that this was one of the Papers; but
the Question is, Whether all these Witnesses together do not prove it? You see
how the Evidence runs; All the Papers taken were delivered to my Ld Nottingham:
All that were delivered to him were sent back by him sealed, and delivered to
my Ld President; my Ld President brought them all to the Cabinet-Council, and
delivered them to my Ld Sidney, and this my Ld Sidney says is one of those
Papers.


Ld Preston. My Lord, I have a very great Honor for that Noble Lord, and I am
sure, if he had not been upon his Oath, he would have said that which was
truth; but in this condition that I am in, I must crave leave to observe every
thing I can for my self, and I cannot but say these Papers are very oddly
managed, and delivered up and down from one hand to another; I desire your
Lordship would please to observe that these Papers are here brought after a
very odd manner.


Mr. S. Thompson. My Ld Preston, you are not to sum up the Evidence to the Jury
till we have done, nor to make your Observations.


Ld C. J. Holt. Brother, my Lord opposes the reading of the Paper, as not well
proved.


Ld Preston. I do so, my Lord, and I hope your Lordship will advise me whether
you do think it a sufficient Evidence and Proof of these Papers; they are
Papers that have been copied out, and sent unsealed from hand to hand by some
Mestengers from one to another, and which now appear to be unsealed, and some
of which he that took them cannot swear to.


Jury-man. My Lord, we cannot hear one word that is said.


Ld Preston. That is my misfortune: but I am urging to my Lords the Judges,
whether this Paper ought to be read, and I desire your Lordship to advise me,
whether it can be admitted as Evidence, being thus oddly proved?


Ld C. J. Holt. It is Evidence surely, my Lord: but the Question is, What
Credit the Jury will give to this Evidence, the Jury are Judges of that; but
certainly it is Evidence to have the Paper read.


Ld Preston. I doubt not but your Lordship will do me Justice, and I readily
acquiesce in what your Lordships do appoint.


Ld C. J. Pollexfen. Pray, my Lord, see how the Evidence stands about this
matter; first it is sworn by Billop, that he took a Bundle of Papers, tho it is
true, the Particulars he does not undertake to swear to; Well, what is next?
why, says he, all that was in that Bundle I carried to my Ld Nottingham, and I
received from my Ld Nottingham all that I carried to him. What says my my Ld
Nottingham? he swears I delivered back again to Capt. Billop the same Papers he
delivered to me, and all and no more, sealed up with my Seal. When he has it
sealed up, what does he do with it? why he carries it to my Ld President. Is
there any possibility of creeping out of this Evidence? Well, he delivers them
to my Ld Sidney, and my Ld Sidney says this is one of those Papers: Can there
be a plainer Evidence than this? when he says, all he had he carried to my Ld
Nottingham, and my Ld Nottingham swears all he did receive he sent back sealed
by him to my Ld President, and my Ld President swears all he received so sealed
he gave to my Ld Sidney, and my Ld Sidney swears this is one of those Papers.


Ld Preston. But your Lordship will please to observe they were carried to the
King, and they were in the hands of my Ld Marlborough.


L. C. J. Holt. No, my Lord, not out of the sight of my Lord President. My Lord
President says my Lord Marlborough marked some of them, but they were delivered
to my Lord Sydney, and my Lord Sydney does say they are the same Papers that he
had from my Lord President, and my Lord President says, they are the same that
were brought him by Captain Billop from my Lord Nottingham, and my Lord
Nottingham swears he sealed them, the same Papers, all and no more than he
received from Captain Billop.


L. C. Baron. Your Lordship should observe where the defect of the Proof is,
and then it may be supplied; for truly, put it altogether, I cannot see how
there could be a plainer Proof given.


Lord Preston. My Lord, I desire to be heard as to this my Lord President was
pleased to say, that some of them were delivered to the King.


L. C. J. Holt. No, they were shown to the King, but my Lord President was by
all the while the King did read them.


Lord Preston. My Lord, where a Man's Life lies at stake, and all that is dear
to him, your Lordship will certainly allow him to make what observations he can
for himself.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay, in Gods Name, by all means: You shall have all the Liberty
you can desire.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, we desire my Lord President will be pleased to look
upon those Papers. Which was done.


Lord President. This is one of the Papers that I received from Captain Billop,
and which I showed to the King, and which I brought to the Cabinet Council; and
this is another of the Papers.


Lord Preston. Pray my Lord, was your Lordship by when His Majesty read those
Letters.


Lord President. Yes, my Lord, I was.


Lord Preston. My Lord, I ask it for this end, to know whether they were out of
your Lordships sight.


Lord President. No never; I was in the Kings Cabinet, His Majesty read some of
them, and then put them up again, and gave them me, and I delivered them at the
Cabinet Council to my Lord Sydney.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, we desire this Paper may be read.


L. C. J. Holt. Read it.


Clerk of the Peace, Reads. The result of a Conference between some Lords and
Gentlemen, both Tories and Whigs, in which it was undertaken to prove the
possibility and method of restoring by a Fr. Power, without endangering the
Protestant Religion and Civil Administration, according to the Laws of this
Kingdom.

1. F. Must either Oblige or Conquer us: If the last, he will find few helps
here, but a bloodyer resistance then ever the Romans, Saxons, or Normans found:
It being incredible, how unanimous and obstinate that very thought renders the
People, so that it may make us a heap of ruin, but no Nation that can ever help
or import any thing to F.

2. If K. L. desires to oblige Us, and make the Work easy, that he may be at
leisure to ply the Empire or Italy, or to have an advantageous Peace, he must
take off the frightful Character we have of him, and show us he has no such
design, as returning our Offended K. a Conqueror upon us, but that he can and
will be our Friend and Mediator; upon which terms he will find that many Lords
and Gentlemen will speedily show themselves to his Satisfaction; especially, if
he makes haste, and looses no approaching Opportunity.

3. If he incline to this sort of Sense, he must overruled the Bigotry of St.
G. and dispose their Minds to think of those Methods that are more likely to
gain the Nation; for there is one silly thing or other daily done there, that
comes to our notice here, which prolongs what they so passionately desire. The
Methods thought upon are these.

First, To prevent dangerous and foolish Intelligence by forbidding all in that
Court to write any News hither, and that K. J. only have his Correspondence by
whom to hear from, and speak to People here; since Letters so often miscarry,
and are filled with nothing but what we should not hear; and what we have are
Arguments for the most part against the K's Restoration.

Secondly, Since there is a great Body of Protestants that never defected, and
that many Thousands are returning, and that they are the Natural Weight and
Power of these Kingdoms, by having the Heads, Hands and Wealth of their side,
to the odds and advantage of at least Two Hundred Protestants to one Catholic;
the K. may think of nothing short of a Protestant Administration, nor of
nothing more for the Catholics then a Legal Liberty of Conscience; for much e
mutt is against all other Notions, to which all private Passions, and
artificial Frames in Government must yield or break. He may Reign a Catholic
in Devotion, but he must Reign a Protestant in Government. Cromwell could not,
yet on a broader bottom, with a Victorious Army, subsist or keep what he had
got.

Thirdly, He must give us a Model of this at St. G. by preferring the
Protestants that are with him above the Catholics; one being Loyal upon less
ties of Interest, and to tell the Nation here what they are to hope for when he
comes.

Fourthly, He must give Encouragement to Lords and Gentlemen here to come to
him, at least Seven or Nine for a standing Council, which will make us here
think he is in some degree ours again, and that we have a relation to him, and
some interest and share in him, by the Men of Quality of our own Religion that
are with him. This will incomparably faciliate the matter here, nor will they,
when they come, come empty, and in their own Names, which is still better, and
will be more satisfactory there.

Fifthly, To induce this, English Protestants should be encouraged by an Edict
of Liberty from the K. of F. to have Chapels at their own Costs, in which to
Worship God after their respective ways, by which that K. will make us reflect
upon his Conduct toward his Hugonots, rather to flow from the hazard he
thought himself in by their Antimon. and resisting Principles, then a desire of
Persecution.

Lastly, All other requisite Measures depending upon the acceptance this finds,
an Answer hereunto is impatiently desired by those that have Discoursed the K's
Business to this Maturity. So ended with an Unanimous Consent, both Tories and
Whiggs upon this Occasion, that are in a way of closeing in his Interest.


Lord Preston. I can very safely swear, my Lord, that I never saw that Paper in
my Life.


L. C. J. Holt. Come go on with your Evidence.


Mr. Sol. Genesis This is another Paper of the same, but the Words that are
written short in that are written at length in this.


The Paper was read accordingly, and in the first blank there was written K. J.
in the first Paragraph ( France) twice, in the third Paragraph (St. Germains)
in the Fifth, ( Mathemat. for Much e mutt) the rest are obvious, and need not
be supplied. Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray show my Lord Sidney that Paper, what says your
Lordship to it.


Lord Sidney, This is one of the Papers that I marked, and that I received from
my Lord President.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray will my Lord President be pleased to give himself the
trouble to cast his Eye upon that, and see if that be one of the Papers.


Lord President, My Lord, I remember it well, it is one of the Papers I
received from. Capt. Billop.


Mr. Serj. Tremain, This Paper is what Mr. Solicitor mentioned as heads of a
Declaration.


Lord Preston, My Lord, I think it necessary to offer one thing to your
Lordships before it be read, I desire Capt. Billop should swear it to be one of
his Papers.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If your Lordship pleases, you observe what has been done
already. My Lord President says it is one of those Papers that was sent him by
my Lord Nottingham; and my Lord Sidney, has sworn it is one of the Papers he
had from my Lord President.


Lord Preston, I shall not give your Lordship any more trouble than needs; I
only offer it your Lordship: I wave it.


L. C. J. Holt. There is Evidence enough to have the Paper read.

Clerk of the Peace, Reads.

That the King will return with a design of making an Entire Conquest of his
People, is so ridiculous as well as difficult, that it needs not be spoken to.

That the Kings Declaration be worded in General Terms, That he will Govern by
the Laws, that they shall be the Rule of his Actions, that he will Endeavor to
settle Liberty of Conscience by Law, that whatsoever things were formly done by
him, which occasioned Jealousies in the minds of his People, shall be left to
the determination of a Parliament, to be formerly and regularly called as soon
as is possible.

That he has given sufficient Evidence of his unwillingness to bring an Army of
Strangers into his Kingdom, by refusing the Succors of the King of France
offered him, and which were even ready to be Embarked upon the first Notice of
the P. of Oranges intended Invasion.

That he brings with him such an Army only as is necessary for his own defense,
and for the security of such of his Loyal Subjects as shall resort to him, that
he will dismiss them as soon as he shall have rid the Nation of those
Foreigners who have Invaded it, and trampled upon the Laws and Liberties of
his People.

The Kings large exercising his Dispensing Power gave the great alarm to the
People, and contributed most of all toward General Defection. Yet when that
Power came to be debated in the last Convention, there appeared so many
difficulties in the limiting of it, every Body (even the present Judges
believing it necessary, That a dispensing Power should be in the K.) That it
was let fall, and that point remains as it was. And without mentioning that, or
any other particular, the K. can be in no danger by leaving all things which
have been the occasions of Jealousies to the determination of Parliament, where
besides the Kings professed Friends and Servants, there will not want others
who will be glad of opportunity to ingratiate themselves.


L. C. J. Pollexfin. Gent. of the Jury, If you desire any thing to be read
again, or any thing doubtful in it, should be Explained, tell us, and it shall
be done.


Juryman, No my Lord, There is no occasion for that. I believe we apprehend
these three Papers that have been read.


Lord Preston, My Lord, It is necessary the Gentlemen of the Jury should be
satisfied in this point.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, Ay in any point, and if they desire any scruple should be
cleared, the Court will do it for them.


Juryman, My Lord, I desire to know whether Captain Billop Signed that Paper or
no.


L. C. J. Holt, No, he did not sign half of them, but unless it be proved, you
ought to take it for granted, that it is not Signed by him.


Lord Preston, My Lord, I think it fit the Jury should be satisfied in any
scruple they raise.


L. C. J. Holt, They asked this Question, Whether Captain Billop did sign the
Paper, and I told them Capt. Billop did not say so, and therefore they are to
take it for granted, that he did not.


Juryman, My Lord, We take this last Paper that was read to be a Paper that was
delivered in the Bundle taken from Mr. Ashton to my Lord Nottingham, but not
Signed by Capt. Billop.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, Then you take it right.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then the next Paper that we produce is a List of the English
Fleet that these Gentlemen were carrying over into France.


Lord Preston, That is printed, and to be found in every Coffee-House.


Mr. Serj. Tremain, Show that Paper to Capt. Billop. Which was done. Can you
take it upon your Oath, Captain, That that Paper was in the Packet that was
taken in Mr. Ashtons Bosom.


C. Billop, That Paper I have marked, and that Paper I swear was in the Packet
I took away from Mr. Ashton aboard the Smack.


L. C. J. Holt, You are sure of it.


C. Billop, Yes my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt, Then read it.

Clerk of the Peace, Reads.

SHIPS.
Rates Ships In Repair. Not Building. 1 8 5 3 2 12 11 1 3 35 34 1 4 38 34 4 4 5
14 14 1 6 9 9 Fireships 25 25 8 Bomb. Vessels 1 1 Ketches 1 1 8 143 134 9 21
Brought in by Admiral Russel to the House of Commons, December. 24th. 90. the
Fleet, whereof 60 Dutch. Memorandum, The new Ships Building are Expected, will
be ready to be lanched by the end of March.


Mr. Serj. Tremani, Pray show this Paper to Capt. Billop.


Which was done. Pray was that Paper there among the others that were taken
with these Gent.

Capt. Billop. Yes it was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Can you take it upon your Oath, that that Paper was in the
Packet that was in Mr. Ashton's Bosom.


Capt. Billop, Yes my Lord, I can.


Mr. Serj. Tremani. Pray show him that Paper too.


Which was done. Mr. Sol. Genesis And can you take upon you to say, That that was
one of the Papers in the Packet.


C. Billop, Yes it was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, We desire these may be read.


Clerk of the Peace, Reads, New Years Eve, And it is directed for Mr. Redding.

Sir, Though the Bearer of this will do us the Justice, to assure you, we are
as full of Duty, as unfeignedly, and unconcernedly yours, as your self could
wish; yet this Gentleman has undertaken. You will forgive the Presumption, if I
do my self the Honor to give you this fresh assurance in a few words, which I
hope we do by our Accounts; I shall omit no Occasions, not neglecting the
least, and making Zealous Wishes for the greatest, to show our selves such as
we ought to be.

Sir, I speak in the Plural, because I write my Elder Brothers Sentiments as
well as my Own, and the rest of the Family, though lessened in Number; yet if
we are not mightily out in our Accounts, we are growing in Our Interest, that
is in yours: He that delivers this, will I hope, entirely to your satisfaction,
represent us and me in particular, as with all the Devotion imaginable, and
unchangeable Affection. Yours, God grant the happiest New Year.


Mr. Serj. Tremani. Read the other Paper.


Cl. of Peace. This is dated Dec. 31. 1690. I must not let this Bearer depart,
Madam without assuring you --


Mr. Sol. Genesis Hold Sir, Don't Read that yet. Here show this Paper to Captain
Billop.

Which was done. What say you Captain Billop? Is that one of the Papers taken
from Mr. Ashton.


Capt. Billop, Yes, This is one that I read and marked.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then Read it.


Cl. of Peace, Reads: This is Directed for Mrs. Redding.

As it is impossible for me to express that Extraordinary great satisfaction it
gave me this time Twelve Month, when I had the Honor to receive that Mark of
your Favor and Goodness under your own hand; So I have lived in some pain for
an Opportunity to write you my humblest acknowledgments and truest Duty from
which by the Grace of God, I am no more capable of swerving, than of renouncing
my hopes of Heaven: I say this in behalf of my Elder Brother and the rest of my
nearest Relations, as well as for my self: You may entirely depend upon us, not
only for a constant adherence to so well chosen a Principle, but for our utmost
Activity to promote your Interest, which are inseparable from our own: I need
come to no particulars by this Bearer, who can and will tell you our whole
heart; and I wish you could see them, how sincerely they are devoted to your
Service. God grant you a most happy New Year, and many, very many, and very
happy. Our young Master has all our best Wishes, he daily gains more Friends,
and we get ground of his Adversaries. New-Years-Eve.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now read your other Paper of the 31. Dec. 1690.


Cl. of Peace, Reads, December 31. 1690. I must not let this Bearer depart
Madam, without assuring you of my best respects: I have written by him to a
Friend of yours, but depend upon you to give my Note credit.

Though my Creditors were no Friends to the Match which has been so long in
treaty for your Relations have been very hard upon me this last Summer; yet as
soon as I could go safely abroad, I persued the business, and do beg you to
believe, that no Endeavors of mine shall be wanting to perfect the Settlement.
You once put me in hopes of seeing you before this Christmas: Your Friends are
sorry for the Disappointment, Pray lose no more time than is of absolute
necessity: The Bearer will tell you all things may be now easily sittled, if
the right way be taken. I long to hear how your young Daughter does, she will
find many Friends, and I hope her Portion will be well secured. God send you a
happy New-Year, and that I may be merry with you before it be far spent, and I
beseech you keep me in the good Opinion of your Friend, I will always make good
what I promised to you.

It is directed for Mrs. Charlton.


Juryman, My Lord, I desire to know what that is directed to.


Cl. of Peace, it is Directed to Mrs. Charlton.


Mr. Serj. Tremani, Show Capt. Billop those two Papers.

Which was done. What say you to them Captain?


Capt. Billop. My Mark is on the outside, but there is nothing written in that,
I believe it is taken of from the Inner Paper.


Lord Preston, Pray my Lord is this any proof? I beseech you for Gods sake to
have a Regard to a Man's Life.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray show the Paper to my Lord Sidney.


Which was done. Lord Sidney, This was one of the Papers I received from my
Lord President.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then we must beg my Lord President would be pleased to look on
it.


Which was done. Lord President, This was one of the Papers brought me by Capt.
Billop, from my Lord Nottinghams, in that Bundle.


Lord Preston, Capt. Billop does not know the Paper, though his Mark be to it.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, It is not indeed very material, whether he does or no,
because he did not read all; but I would observe that it is sworn by my Lord
Sidney, that this was delivered to him by my Lord President, and sworn by my
Lord President, that he had it in that Bundle from Capt. Billop.


Lord Preston, But my Lord, It does show that there may be some alteration in
the Papers, because he having marked it, and marking none but what he read, he
does not now own that to be the Paper.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray will your Lordship be pleased to take it as it is: These
are two Papers; the one is only the Cover, the other is the Writing: Capt.
Billop has only marked the Cover, and not the Writing, but my Lord Sidney he
has marked the Paper it self, as delivered him by my Lord President, and my
Lord President has given you an account, that it is one of the Papers he
received in that Bundle from Capt. Billop.


Lord Preston, I only mark, That there may be alterations made in these Papers
since they were taken.


Mr. Serj. Tremani, Pray Read it.


Cl. of Peace, December 31. 1690. It is Directed to Mr. Jackson.

The Bearer can give you so full an account of all things relating to your
Estate here, that I need not have troubled you at this time, but that I am
desirous to lay hold of any Opportunity I think safe to assure you of my
Service, and that I will never quit your Interest whatever the rest of the
Freeholders do: Your Adversary has been so hard to his Neighbors, that he has
extremly disobliged all the old Tenants, and a little matter would redeem the
whole Estate, if you would appear in Westminster Hall your self, the best
Council have a good Opinion of your Title, and will zealously pursue your
Instructions: I only beg you would hasten them to us, and that you will appear
your self as soon as is possible, no time should be lost, and the Cause may be
brought to a final hearing before the end of Easter Term, if it be well
solicited. I heartily wish you a happy New Year, and beg you to tell Mr.
Charlton that I long to know wherein I may serve him, and that I will follow
his Directions to the utmost, while I live, God keep you and yours.


Lord Preston, Pray Sir, To whom is that Letter Directed.


Cl. of Peace, To Mr. Jackson, my Lord.


Mr. Serj. Tremani, Pray show that Paper to my Lord Sidney.


Which was done. Lord Sidney, This is one of the Papers I received from my Lord
President.


Then it was shown to my Lord President. Lord President, This is one of the
same Papers that I received ^n the Bundle from Capt. Billop.


L. C. J. Holt, Read it.


Clerk of Peace, Reads, 31 December.

The Interruption of the former Correspondency had a very ill Effect many ways,
but for that reason, no Opportunity ought now to be lost, and I hope this will
prove a happy one.

In Trade as well as in Government Schemes must be laid, for there is no living
from hand to mouth any more in Commerce than in the Politics. Lay therefore
your designs probably, and pursue them diligently, and with Vigor, though it
be a hazardous time, yet by ventring boldly, where venturing is advisable, it
often returns great profit.

There is nothing more to be said, but to give the Bearer fit and full Seasons
to tell what he knows, both as to Goods fit for our Market, and when and where
to be sent; the Sea will quickly grow so troublesome, that unless you dispatch
what you intend for us, you will loose a great opportunity of advantage. I hope
the account he has to give of our Negotiations here, with the Merchants that
deal with us, especially those that have lately brought us their custom, will
both encourage a larger Trade, and excite the utmost diligence; I will say
nothing of my self, It shall be enough that I can live in the good Opinion of
one I bear so great a reverence and affection for; but for this honest Factor,
I must own I can hardly say enough, Truth and Boldness are excellent qualities
in a Servant, and he has shown both, as Occasion has required him to show them.

I have but one word to add, and pray take it as the truest mark of unalterable
respect, choose well, but have to do but with a few, for a multitude may give,
but can never keep Counsel.

I shall with more impatience then becomes me, wait the result of this, and it
will be a great mark of goodness, to let us have it the best and safest way.

Once more, let not the Season spend unprofitably, for a more likely one can
hardly come than between this and the 1st of March. Interpret this I pray, as
no private Interest of my own, or partial motion of any other Person. It is my
Sense, my Duty, and my Friendship, which will not let me prevaricate, nor
suffer those I love and honor to loose so happy and pressing an occasion of
advantage. With the best Wishes I close up this, and am etc.


Lord Preston. Pray, my Lord, who is that Paper directed to.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. This is directed to no body at all.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Show that Paper to my Lord Sydney.


Which was done. Lord Sydney. This was one of the Papers I had from my Lord
President.

Then it was shown to the Lord President.


Lord President. This is one of the Papers I had from Captain Billop.


L. C. J. Holt. Read it.


Clerk of the Peace Reads. This is Dated December 31. but is not directed to
any Body at all.

IT is a presumption incident to those that are any where upon the spot, to
think that they know better then those that are not, what is fittest to be done
in any Occurrence. This makes me say, That now is the time to make large
advantages by Trading; the Sea being freer then two Months past, or we can hope
it will be two Months hence. This Gentleman is well instructed in our Markets,
and what the Goods are we want, and when and where they should be sent: It is
most earnestly desired that this happy opportunity may not be lost, espeally by
the late Undertakers, and I would not for much, they should receive the least
disgust. They are somewhat positive in their terms; but they also say, they
will be good and constant Customers; and I have more than once seen the
mischief of over-rateing and over-staying the Market. Opportunities are to be
used, they cannot be given by Men.

The Bearer needs nothing from me to recommend him, but he is deserving in our
Opinion here, and many will take their measures by the usage he finds there;
and indeed the pressing posture of our Trading Affairs will not permit more
Experiments. If the several Parcels arrive not, that have been promised, before
the 10th of March at furthest, (especially the Copper and Linen, of which the
Bearer will be more particular) I am satisfied we shall loose this Summers
profit. I am the more pressing, because I am well assured of what I write; and
if ever I judged right it is upon this occasion.

I have said nothing of another Gentleman that takes this Opportunity to see
those parts, but he has shown a zeal and a sincerity in this affair equal to
most. Jo. is not yet gone, by a misfortune, but he will follow with a good
Postscript in this affair. Of my self I will say nothing, I hope I need not,
for no body without Vanity can be more sincerely and affectionately a Friend
and Servant to the Company than my self. I writ at large yesterday, and cannot
write what the hand that gives this can say; and therefore will write no more,
but that with the greatest Respect, I am, etc.


Mr. Serj. Tremani. Pray show this Paper to my Lord Sydney.


Which was done. Lord Sydney. This is one of those Papers I received from my
Lord President.

Then it was shown to the Lord President.


Lord President. This was one of the Papers in the Bundle I received from Capt.
Billop.


L. C. J. Holt. Then read it.


Clerk of the Peace, Reads. SIR, I vow to you, I do not repine at having lost
all for your sake which I got by your favor, but it grieves me extremely that
there is not that left which can secure me from being troublesome to you; for
that is the thing in the World I would not be. I have told my Lord my
condition. What I desire of you he thinks very moderate, I hope you will. Pray
Sir be not backward in settling my little affair, for I have deserved your Care.
Your Daughter and I must starve, if this Government can make us. I hope our
Interests are not divided, that is, you have an equal tenderness at least for
both. If you think fit to speak what I would have you to this Bearer, he will
give me a just account of it. You know he is obliged to be my Friend, and I
believe him grateful, since he ventures so boldly for you. He brings with him
some merry Papers. Adieu, for I dare write no more; but pray send a Messenger
on purpose to me, that I may know exactly what you will do, and would have me
do. If you send upon no other business there will be no danger. Pray Sir ask my
Lord, and he will tell you how I have been used, and upon what account; I
believe you know it not. December. the 29th. Your Daughter is very well, very
tall, and very pretty, as I am told.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. That is not directed to any body neither.


Mr. Serj. Tremani. Pray then show these Papers to my Lord Sydney and my Lord
President; (which was done). They were two.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. These Papers my Lord Sydney swears he received from my
Lord President, and my Lord President swears he received them in the Bundle
from Billop.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. We pray they may be read.


Clerk of the Peace. Dec. 31. 90.

WAs my Condition more desperate and uneasy then it is, I desire no greater
satisfaction then to have done my Duty to so good a Master, I wish it was of
more use to him* that is not my fault, nor of those I have acted with: Let it
be looked into what has been foretold both as to Engl. Scot. and Irel. and see
if most of it is not come to pass already, and the rest will follow if not
prevented. I wish it may also be considered what usage we have met with from
men employed, and how they have left your Business and Friends; how they
managed it, you will know from all hands; things they could not do, nor durst
not undertake were better undone then not done by them. Men in this Place, and
in these Times, must have some Courage as well as Sense to do any thing with
People here. It is not my own ill usage makes me say this, but my concern for
one I wish the best to in the World, and will give my proofs of this upon all
occasions. I need not enlarge, since all our Grievances are known to him that
brings this. For my own part I will stay here, so long as I can be safe, if
with never so great trouble; but it would be some Comfort to know Men (when
driven from hence) may be so; therefore the reports of Peoples usage are
terrible, as well as of the indiscretion of St. Germ. Family, we feel the smart
of it by ridiculous Letters falling daily into the hands of the Government.
Their Master and Mistress are little obliged by it no more then we: If there is
any thing, Sir, you do particularly command me, or depend upon me for, let me
know it. I cannot undertake much, nor furnish more. I have still helped every
Body, and paid to every thing I could; and if a twelve month ago my condition
was what I then represented, you best know if it has been mended. Use, and
considering that of others, makes me grow more contented; and if the prospect
of misery to us all was any satisfaction, that is now plainly seen.

Pray God bless us all, by restoring every Man his own, and you with long Life.

He that gives you this, has furnished for your use to me, etc. Two Hundred
Pounds, which I desire may be repaid.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Read the 'tother, it is in the same hand, and was enclosed in
the former.


Clerk of the Peace Reads. I only beg Madam, no ill malicious Report may take
any place in your Thoughts, in regard to me. I value your good Opinion, and
will endeavor to deserve it. I can do little toward, but wish most heartily
for your Happiness. I know no Interest, Madam, but my Masters and yours, nor do
I think they are to be made two: If you command me any thing, I will faithfully
obey you, as I have ever done him.

We all here depend upon this Bearers accounts of us and our Condition. His
Faith and Courage has been enough experienced.


Mr. Serj. Tremani. Here is another Paper, show that to C. Billop. Which was
done.


Capt. Billop. This Paper I did mark, and this was one that was in the Bundle.


L. C. J. Pillexfen. What is it Brother, pray open it.


Mr. Serj. Tremani. It Is a draught of a Cipher, with an Alphabet of Names for
carrying on the Correspondence.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Your Lordship observes these matters were designed to be
carried on under several sorts of Cants.


L. C. J. Holt. What says Captain Billop to that Paper?


Capt. Billop. That was one of the Papers that I read at my Lord Nottinghams,
and marked it there.


L. C. J. Holt. Then Read it.


Clerk of the Peace Reads. For Mrs. Anne Russell, to be left with Mrs. Richeson
at the Blew Bore in Ryder-street, near St. James's.

A -- the King. B -- the Queen. C -- the Prince of Wales. D -- the Prince of
Orange. E -- Canon and the Scotch Officers. F -- the Duke of Berwick. G -- Duke
Tyrconnel. H -- Major General Sarsfield. I -- Lieutenant General Shelden. L --
King of France. M -- Marshal Luxemburgh. N -- Marshal Belford. O -- Duke Powis.
P -- Duchess Powis.
Amsterdam -- Breast. Rotterdam -- Deip. Hague -- Hauvre de Grace. Brill --
Dunkirk. Harlam -- Callis. Italy -- England. Germany -- Scotland. Spain --
Ireland.

Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then the next Papers we produce are the Bills of Exchange;
Pray show them to Capt. Billop. What say you Capt. Billop, were those among the
other Papers?


Capt. Billop. Yes, they were I remember very well.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. My Lord, they are in French, and therefore we must Swear a
Gentleman that we have here, to Interpret: Call Mr. Humphry Levermere.


Mr. Levermere, Here I am.

(He was sworn. A Londres, le 29 Septembre.
Monsieur,
LEs presante vous sera rendus par Monsieur Orbinet, qui est un de mes bon
amiss, and qui se fera cognoistre par quelque person de vostre Cognoissance.
Vouz m'obligerez tresenfiblemant en de luy render service en tout ce que vous
pouires. Il pourra vouz communiquer quelque Affair en Commission vouz pouvez
avoir Confiance en luy de toutes les manieres je vous pry doncque l'obliger en
tout ce que vous pourriez. Je suis

Monsieur, Vostre tres humble and tres obeissant Serviteur P. du Livier.
A Mon. Mon. Jo. du Livier, Paris.

A Londres le 29 Decembre 8 Janvier 1690.
Monsieur,
AVn jour de veue il vous plaira payer par cette premiere d'Eschange, a l'Order
de Mr. Michel Orbinet, Trois Mill trois cents trente trois Livres valeur, du
dit Sieur suivant l'advis de

Vostre tres humble and tres obeissant Serviteur, P. du Livier.
A Mon. Mon. Jo. du Livier, Paris.

Londres le 29 Decembre 8 Janivier 1690. Pour Live. 3333.
Monsieur,
AVnjour de veue, plaira payer par cette me premiere d'Eschange, a l'Ordre de
Mr. Michel Orbinet, Trois Mill trois cents trente trois Livres Tournois,
valeur du dit Sieur and suis.

Vostre tres humble Serviteur, J. Berionde.
A Mon. Mon. Anthoine Pelletyer, Merchand, a Paris.

London the 29th December.
SIR,
THis present will be delivered you by Mr. Orbinet, who is one of my good
Friends, and who will make himself known by some Person of your Acquaintance.
You will very sensibly oblige me in doing him Service in all that you can. He
will be able to communicate some Affair in Commission; you may have Confidence
in him about all Points: I pray you then to oblige him in all that you can. I
am,

SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, P. Du LIVIER.
To Mr. Joseph Du Livier. Paris.

London the 29th, December 8 January 1690.
SIR,
AT one days sight be pleased to pay by this First of Exchange to the Order of
Mr. Michael Orbinet, Three thousand three hundred thirty three Livres, Value of
the said Gent. according to the Advice of

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, P. Du LIVIER.
To Mr. Joseph Du Livier. Paris.

London, 29 December 8 January 1690. For 3333 Livres.
SIR,
AT one days sight be pleased to pay by this my first of Exchange, to the Order
of Mr. Michael Orbinet, Three thousand three hundred thirty three Livres
Tournois, Value of the said Gent. And I am

Your most humble Servant, J. BERIONDE.
To Mr. Anthony Pelletier, Merchant, at Paris.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray how much do they all come to?


Mr. Levermere. They come to 500 l. wanting but Twelve pence.


Mr. S. Tremain. My Lord, we have shown your Lordship part of the Papers that
were taken in this Packet, but we have reserved three of the Papers till the
last place; and these three Papers, if we had no other, were sufficient to
maintain this Indictment, for they are written all with my Lord Preston's own
Hand, wherein he gives an Account how the French should Invade us, how the
Forts may be taken, how London should be plagued, and what a sort of Rascals
the Clergy of London are; these are the Contents of the Papers among other
things. Pray show them to Captain Billop.


(Which was done.) Capt. Billop. These were two Papers that were in the
Packet, and the other little one with them.


Ld. Preston. My Lord, I would desire your Lordship to observe one thing, to
the best of my remembrance, Capt. Billop said, he only marked six of the Papers.


L. C. J. Holt. How many has he sworn to?


Ld. Preston. I believe he has proved more.


Capt. Billop. I never said so; I marked a great many, though not all, but I did
not say how many.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Were these Papers taken in the Packet?


Capt. Billop. Yes, all three.


Ld. Preston. Just now he said but two.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Have you looked upon them all, Sir?


Capt. Billop. Yes, I marked but two of them, but the other little Paper was
with them, I read them my self, I remember it very well.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Then we pray the Clerk may read them.


(Cl. of Peace reads.) Lady D. 2000 l. And 200 l. for Shop-debts --
Mr. S. Thompson. My Lord, we would open this piece of Evidence before we read
it, that it may be understood, and we shall prove it to be my Lord's Hand
afterward. It consists of many Heads and Particulars, without Order or Method,
and seems to be no more than Memorandums made by my Lord Preston, to put him in
mind what he was to enlarge upon when he came thither.


(Cl. of Peace reads.) Lady D. 2000 l. And 200 l. for Shop-debts.

Pension upon the

14 -- 3 Decked Ships. -- Britania, Ad.

Sovereign out and R -- James.

33 3d Rates, make the 14 and 30 67.

Sundry Hospitals and Fireships, some built on purpose proportionable.

Of Third Rates most manned: 14 not manned, great ones.

Rest in some proportioned Manned, not well Manned, nor will be.

-- Britania not out till March, the rest perhaps in April.

-- The French must be out in April, and in the Downs: Look in at the Spithead
to secure them.

The Dutch Fleet cannot then join them.

Carter and others at Portsmouth, the likeliest Men to come to him -- Dutch
Fleet 36 Sail, 9 from 70, to 60 Guns; -- 12 from 50 to 60 -- the rest betwixt
60 and 70 -- Get to it before the Conjunction, otherways nothing. To fight in
the Chops of the Channel; not to come so high as Beachy -- Portsmouth not
manned above 500 -- One Gibson a Scotch Peddler -- Lands behind South Sea Cattle
-- Nothing but Pallisado's about Gossport -- Jennings, or Strickland, or
Trevannion comes from St. Maloes in one Night -- most of the Gentlemen have
done him most mischief, the Tarpaulins his best Friends, which despirited --
Danby desires to be in the Monk, keeps and fortifies Hull -- King not to be on
Board the Fleet -- Foolish Letters from St. G's taken every day in the D. Post,
and read in Council -- about June -- England 67 great Ships. Dutch 60 --
commanded 36 to us, 24 to act by themselves -- Russel in the Britania Admiral
-- Killegrew the Blue -- the Duke -- Ashby the Royal James -- Delaval the
Sovereign, Vice Admiral Blue -- Carter the Vanguard -- Those who shall not
oppose or resist him to be pardoned -- Not 21 days coming in, or shall not help
the P. of O. 600000 l. to the States of Holland -- No Taxes in his Time -- and
the K. of Fr. will require nothing -- Chimney-Money to be taken away -- not
excepting Outlaws -- Scotland -- let know whether the King will come or not
soon, and acquaint him with the weakness of the Pr. Council -- 3 Dashes -- or
the like of F. of -- That Is some kind Answer -- Mr. East Merchant of Bristol to
be kept till called for William St -- from Amsterdam -- Alexander -- England --
George -- Scotland -- Dorset, Cornwallis, Mountague, Stamford, Shrewsbury,
Macclesfield, Monmouth, Devonshire -- In Feb. the K. come to Scotland --
endeavor to unite the Episc. and Presbit. Parties -- A less sum not interfere
with the Fr. K. from Highlanders -- Campaigns -- land at Leith -- the Scotch
Army not a French one, 5000 good Suedish Foot, the reputation of a Protestant
Ally, two Months to settle Scotland -- a Commission given to me from Mr. P. --
For Fl. hinder Eng. and D. from joining -- two Vessels of 150 l. price for
Pensilvania, for 13 or 14 Months -- Ormond and Brandon disobliged about the
Guards.

To have 1200 Seamen from Denmark and Holland. -- To save Cambell. -- To be
left at the Ship in Sheets Westminster. -- Flanders. -- R -- Scotch Ships in
New Castle Harbor to plague London. -- The Modest Enquiry, the Bishops Answer.
-- Not the Chilling of them. -- But satisfying of Friends -- To tell him that
to Protect Friends, and so soon as Foreigners are gone, he will dismiss his.
-- The Woman that was with the K. in Ireland, and sent Commission to Stafford,
and failing, not to be sent again, her Friends live in Covent Garden. --
Private Letters not. -- Protesting Lords against the Usurper, Three of Five
against the Vacancy of the Crown, Beauford, Newcastle, Thanet, Sawyer, Lutwich,
Pemberton, Levintz, Winnington, Mountague, Shore. -- London Clergy the worst,
we have their Wishes, and they their Oaths. -- K. Betrayed by J. Porter,
Seymour said it. -- Lord Nottingham says there will be a Peace with Fr. and the
K. left out. -- Bring Foreigners to drive out Foreigners, then dismiss them,
leave all to a Free Parliament. -- No Justices of Peace, etc. actually in
Commission to be Criminal.


L. C. J. Holt. Well Gentlemen have you any more Evidence?


Mr. Serj. Tremain. My Lord, we shall now prove these Papers to be my Lord
Preston's own Hand. Pray call Mr. War, Mr. Townesend, Sir Henry Johnson, and
Mr. Bland.


Mr. Townesend sworn. Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray show Mr. Townesend that Paper. (
Which was done. Pray, Sir, whose Handwriting is that?


Mr. Townesend, I believe this to be my Lord Preston's Hand; I did not see him
write it.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, Are you well acquainted with my Lord Preston's hand?


Mr. Townesend. I have seen his Lordship's Hand sometimes.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, How often?


Mr. Townesend, Not very often, but I have seen it sometimes.


Mr. Serj. Thompson, Pray were you a Clark in any Office?


Mr. Townesend, Yes, I am in the Office of the great Wardrobe, where I have had
occasion to see his Lordship's Hand sometimes, and I believe this to be his
Hand.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Look upon the the other two.


Mr. Townesend. I do believe these three Papers are my L. Preston's hand.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Those are the three Papers that have been read last, which
he says are my Lord's Hand.


Mr. Townesend. I do believe it, Sir.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray look upon that Paper, with the little one within it;
Do you know whose Hand that is?


Mr. Townesend. I did not see it written, Sir.


Mr. S. Tremain. Do you believe you know who writ it, by the Hand?


Mr. Townesend. The latter part looks like my Lord Preston's Hand; but I cannot
well say any thing to the other, it is written so small.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then swear Mr. Bland.


(Which was done. Mr. Serj. Thompson. Give him the Papers. We ask you, Mr.
Bland, Whether you were well acquainted with my Lord Preston's Hand?


Mr. Bland. I have seen my Lord's Hand sometimes.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Have you looked upon those Papers, Sir?


Mr. Bland. Yes, I have.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Pray whose Hand are they?


Mr. Bland I do believe these three Papers are my L. Preston's Handwriting.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then we pray Mr. War may be sworn.


(Which was done. Mr. Serj. Tremain. Do you know my Lord Preston's Hand?


Mr. War. I have seen my Lord Preston write, but not very often; most commonly
it was only his Name: but I have seen him write some Letters too.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray, Sir, look upon those Papers; whose Hand are they do
you believe?


Mr. War. This Paper seems to be like my Lord's Preston's Hand; the other I
cannot say much of, because that which I commonly saw him write was a large
fair Hand, and this is a little Hand.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray Mr. War, look upon these Seals; whose Seals were they?


Mr. War. I believe the Seals to be my Lord Preston's; one of them was his
Seal when Secretary of State.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. You were under him in that Office, were you not?


Mr. War. Yes, my Lord, I was.


Mr. S. Tremain. Now my Lord, we have done with our Evidence, and shall rest
here till we here what my Lord Preston says to it.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord Preston, you have heard what has been said concerning
the matter you have been Indicted for; What has your Lordship to say for
yourself?


L. C. J. Pollexfen. If the Gentlemen of the Jury desire to see the Seals, they
may have them.


[The Seals were shown to the Jury. Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we have done for the
present.


L. C. J. Holt. Then if your Lordship please, you may make your Defense.


L. Preston. My Lord, in the first place I must refer myself again to my
Indictment, for I find, my Lord, that the Treasons of which I am accused, were
none of them done in the County of Middlesex, and they are laid to be done
within this County; I find nothing of that kind proved upon me to be done here,
for any Memorandums that they say may be in that hand, I hope the Gentlemen of
the Jury will consider, that there was nothing followed upon any of these
things, that may be found in those Papers: And in the next place, I desire to
know, whether they are sufficiently proved to be mine; that is, whether
similitude of Hands is proof or not against me in such a case. I humbly offer
these things to your Lordship, and hope your Lordship and the Jury will
consider of it.


L. C. J. Holt. Is this your Lordship's Defense, my Lord?


L. Preston. My Lord, I leave these things to the consideration of the Court
and the Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Lordship insists upon it first, that there is no act of
Treason proved in the County of Middlesex; and then, whether similitude of
Hands be a good proof to prove these three Papers, or any of them to be your
hand.


L. Preston. No body saying they see me write them, if I did write them.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. My Lord, have you no Witnesses, nor nothing that you would
use of Evidence for yourself?


L. C. J. Holt. Would your Lordship disprove any thing of the matter that has
been proved against you?


Lord Preston. I must deny the whole Fact; but I have no Witnesses or Evidence
to offer you.


L. C. J. Holt. Then your Lordship has no more to say?


Lord Preston. I have not, I must leave it so with your Lordship and the
Gentlemen of the Jury.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We shall offer nothing farther, but leave it wholly to your
Lordship.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Lordship has done then?


Lord Preston. Your Lordship observes none of the Witnesses have declared that
I was going into France, nor knew any thing of it. I did not hire the Ship, nor
any thing of that kind; though I suppose if they had, it is not Treason; but your
Lordship observes there is no such thing has been sworn.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, as to the first matter that your Lordship makes a
Question upon, Whether there be any act of Treason proved in Middlesex, that
does depend upon the Proof of your Lordship's being concerned in the Papers,
for if your Lordship had an intention in carrying these Papers into France,
which speaks a design to Invade this Realm, your Lordship took Boat in
Middlesex at Surrey-Stairs, in prosecution of that intention, there is an
Overt Act in this County of Middlesex.


Lord Preston. Your Lordship and the Gentlemen of the Jurie observe these
Papers were not found upon me.


L. C. J. Holt. No, my Lord; but if it be proved that your Lordship had an
intention to carry these Papers into France, and took Boat in order to go with
them into France, in the County of Middlesex, wherever your Lordship acted in
order to that design, that is Treason, and there you are guilty. It is a
Treason complicated of several Facts, done in several places.


Lord Preston. My Lord, I humbly desire to know, whether they have been proved
to be my Parpers?


L. C. J. Holt. That is a Question that must be left to the Jurie upon the
Evidence.


L. Pressed. No body swears they are mine, nor were they found upon me.


L. C. J. Holt. But what I am speaking to your Lordship, is in answer to your
Question about the place, for you say, that there is nothing proved done in the
County of Middlesex; now the question is, whether your Lordship had a design to
go to France with these Papers; if you had, and if your Lordship did go on
Shipboard in order to it, your taking Boat in Middlesex in order to go on
Shipboard, is a Fact done in the County of Middlesex.


L. Pressed. It is not proved by any Witnesses that I designed to go into France.


L. C. J. Holt. That is before the Jury upon the Evidence.


L. Pressed. I hope your Lordship, and the Jury will observe it is not proved, and
in the next place, there are no Papers taken upon me, with humble submission,
there is no proof of any such thing.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, how far your Lordship was concerned in these Papers, and
whether you were going with them into France, is to be left upon the Evidence
that has been heard, to the consideration of the Jury.


L. Preston. But I humbly submit that.


L. C. J. Holt. Have you any more to say.


L. Preston. As to what I offer, that nothing has been proved in Middlesex, I
hope your Lordship will take it to be a Point of Law, and then it ought to be
argued; and I desire I may have Council.


L. C. J. Holt. No, it is a Matter of Fact only; but if you please, the rest of
my Lords the Judges may give you their Opinion; for this is a Question upon a
supposition that your Lordship was guilty of a Design of going into France, and
this with a purpose to depose the King, and alter the Government; then the
Question is upon such a Supposition that you were guilty of that Design whether
you were guilty in Middlesex or no.


L. Preston. My Lord, they have not proved that design.


L. C. J. Holt. We do not say, it is taken for granted now, but it is a Question
upon a Supposition. Now my Lord, I Will tell your Lordship in short my Opinion,
the rest of the Judges will tell you theirs, I am of Opinion, if your Lordship
had such a Design to go with these Papers into France, and these Papers were
formed by you, or you were privy to the Contents of them, then it is plainly
proved, that you went into a Boat in the County of Middlesex, in order to carry
on this Design, and that will make it a good Indictment, and here is a plain
Overt Act of High Treason in Middlesex.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. I am of the same Opinion; for your Fact as to this
particular Point in Law stands thus: You are Indicted of High Treason in two
Points; one is, For Conspiring to Depose the King and Queen, and alter the
Government: and the other is, For Aiding and Assisting the French King, and his
Subjects, declared Enemies, and in open War against the King and Queen, and to
invite the Enemies of the Kingdom to invade the Kingdom. Now this Design, and
this Help and Assistance, are written in these Papers; for they are
Instructions for the carrying on of this Design. You my Lord are the Person
that is charged to go with these Papers to help on this Design; you began your
Journey in the County of Middlesex, for according to the Evidence, you took
Water at Surrey-stairs, which is in the County of Middlesex, and every step you
made in pursuance of this Journey, is Treason, wherever it was: So then here
is a sufficient proof of a Fact in Middlesex.


L. Preston. That, my Lord, is a Point of Law, and I humbly desire your
Lordship, that I may have Council in this Case. It is not proved by any Body,
that I said I would go into France; and in the next place, it is not proved
that I had these Papers about me; there has been no Evidence given that I did
take Water with an intention to go with these Papers into France.


L. C. J. Holt. The Jury are to be Judges of that.


L. Pressed. Then, my Lord, what have I done? I have not done an thing within the
danger of any Statute upon which I am Indicted; besides, my Lord, what I have
to offer further, is this, I think I ought to have two credible Witnesses to
prove every Fact, and I hope the Gentlemen of the Jury will consider, there is
nothing but Supposition as to me; and I hope I and my Family shall not be
ruined upon a Supposition.


L. C. J. Holt. Has your Lordship any more to say?


L. Pressed. All the Judges have not given their Opinion.


L. C. J. Holt. The rest will give their Opinions, if you desire it.

My Lord Chief Baron, what say you?


L. C. Baron. My Lord Preston, I am called upon, it seems, to give my Opinion
in this Case, but this I take it must be left to the Jury. What credit they
will give to the proof, your Lordship makes a Question, as the proof stands,
Whether here be any thing done in this County; here are Instructions given to
the French King how to Invade England and Carry on the War against us. These
Instructions are contained in several Papers, and these Papers in a Packet are
carried to the Smack, which Smack was hired to go to France. You are found
taking water at Surrey-Stairs, which is in the County of Middlesex, in order to
go to the Smack: You did go to the Smack; the Papers were taken in your
Company, and were seen lying by your Seals; and the Witnesses swear, they
believe some of them to be your Hand; you took care to desire to have them
disposed of. Now how far the Jury will believe this Matter of Fact, that is
thus testified, is left to them; this seems to be the Proof, and if the Jury do
believe it, here is a Plain Evidence of an Overt Act in the County of Middlesex.


L. Preston. I do insist upon it, with humble submission, It is not proved that
these Papers were taken upon me, or that I did take water at Surrey-Stairs to
go to France.


L. C. Baron. That must be collected out of all the Circumstances; the Credit
of which is left to the Jury.


L. Chapter J. Holt. All the rest of my Lords the Judges are of the same opinion,
as they tell me? Have you any more, my Lord?


L. Preston. I must submit.


L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen of the Jury, My Lord Preston stands Indicted for High
Treason, in imagining and compassing the Deposition, Death, and Destruction of
the King and Queen; and for that purpose, did write, or cause to be writ,
several treasonable Papers and Letters, designed to go into France, and there
to correspond with the French King and his Subjects, who are Enemies to the
King and Queen; and to carry with him those Treasonable Papers and Letters,
containing a Project and a formed Design how this Kingdom should be invaded by
Foreigners.

There is another Treason in the Indictment mentioned, and that is for adhering
to the abetting the King's Enemies, there being open War declared between the
King and Queen, and the French King.

You have heard, Gentlemen, a very long Evidence, Witnesses have been produced
viva voce, and several Papers have been read to you; some of the Papers that
have been produced, though they may seem misterious and canting, yet they are not
so very obscure and unintelligible, but if you consider them well, the meaning
of them will appear. Others of them are more express, and do plainly
demonstrate a Design, that this King and Queen should be deposed, and that
there should be another Prince set upon the Throne, and restored to the
Government of this Kingdom.

Gentlemen, There are two other Persons mentioned in the Indictment with my
Lord, and though my Lord is only now upon his Trial, yet the evidence which does
affect them, does also concern my Lord.

You have heard how there was an Intention of some Persons to go to France, and
how Mr. Ashton, one of the two others that stands indicted with my Lord, did
(...) with one Mrs. Prat, one of the Witnesses, to hire a Vessel for that
purpose, and it was by the means of one Mr. Burdett, that lives in the City;
they had a Meeting at Burdett's House, where they treated about the Price that
should be given for the Hire of this Ship to go to France, but at that time
they did not agree. It was concluded, that the Woman and Ashton and Burdett
should meet at the Wonder Tavern, but Mr. Burdett not being there, nothing was
concluded upon then.

After that the Woman, Mr. Burdett, and Ashton, and Elliott, met at Mrs.
Burdett's; the Woman insisted at first upon 150 l. After they had been treating
for some time, the Bargain was made to go to France for 100 l.

Then the next thing considered was, How this Money should be paid; By
agreement, 93 Guinea's and 6 d. which made up the 100 l. was deposited in Mrs.
Burdett's hand; a Sixpence broken one part Mrs. Burdett had, and the other
part of the Sixpence Mr. Ashton had; and when either Mrs. Pratt, or the Master
of the Vessel did bring back that part of the Sixpence that Ashton had to Mrs.
Burdett, the Money was to be paid.

After this Agreement, they were appointed to go to the Seven Stars in
Covent Garden, to the House of one Mr. Rigby, and there the Woman, Mrs. Pratt,
and the Master of the Vessel, Ashton and Elliot met, and they were that Night
to go away and to take Water at some place near to go on Ship-bord; and having
stayed there till it was about ten a Clock at Night, then they went away into
the Strand and so into Surry-street, and took Water at Surry-stairs.

But before that they came from Mr. Rigby's, some Persons went to Surry-stairs
to see for a Boat and met with that Fellow that was here produced, who was a
Sculler, and did hire him to go through the Bridge when the Tide served, and to
carry some Gentlmen on Shipboard; they agreed with him for half a Crown, and he
was to stay in an House near the Stairs until they came.

And at the time appointed, Mr. Ashton and Mr. Elliot and the Master of the
Vessel came to that place, and my Lord Preston and his Man with them to take
Water. My Lord Preston was not at Burdett's House at the hiring of the Ship,
nor at Mr. Rigby's; but it is proved by the Master of the Vessel, that he took
Water with the rest of them at Surry-stairs, that he went with them on
Shipboard, and was to go along with them.

Being on Board the Ship, they did appear to have some Apprehensions of Danger,
and passing by a Man of War, my Lord Preston, his Man, and the other two went
unto the Quarter-Hatches, where they lay down to prevent themselves from being
taken or discovered; and they hid another time when they came near Gravesend,
and coming up they seeing a Boat coming toward them, they hid themselves
again. Captain Billop, who, it seems, was sent to apprehend them, pretended he
was to Press Seamen, and when he came on Board the Smack he said he would Press
the Mariners, who answered they had a Protection: But he being upon his Search
pulled up the Boards of the Quarter-Hatches, and there was my Lord Preston and
the other Persons lying down: It was not a place that was very proper for
Gentlemen, or indeed for any Passengers, to repose themselves in; it was an
uneasy place, no body could stand or sit upright in it, nay there was no
convenient Place for lying down but they must lean upon their Elbows, which
posture those Gentlemen were in; so that their purpose was plainly to conceal
themselves, and their concealing themselves must be because of some Design they
were about, which they would not have discovered.

They being taken out from under the Hatches, one of the Witnesses tells you he
saw a Packet lying there, and Ashton pretending to fetch his Hat, went down,
took it up, and put the Packet into his Bosom; and the Witnesses informing
Captain Billop thereof, he caused Ashton's Coat to be searched, and from thence
took the Packet and a piece of Lead tied to it, which was produced here in
Court.

When they were bringing away in Custody, they seemed all of them to be very
much concerned about this Packet; some of them, that is, Ashton and Elliot,
would have had it thrown with the Lead overboard. My Lord Preston did not say
so much, but Complimented Captain Billop in this manner, He was glad he was
fallen into the hands of a Civil Gentleman, a Person of worth, and he should
always acknowledge his Kindness, and would do him all the service he could if
he would dispose of the Packet.

My Lord Preston was searched at that time, and Letters of no great moment
taken about him. Ashton and Elliot would have had Captain Billop to take those
Letters which were taken in my Lord Preston's Pocket and tied the Lead to them
and have thrown the Packet overboard, and to report to the King and Council,
That those Letters were the Packet that was taken with the Lead, and so have
persuaded him to be false to the Trust that was reposed in him.

And Ashton and Elliot used many Expressions to induce him to that Compliance;
they told him the Government was unstable, and every Dog had his Day, and the
Tide would turn; and that he would deserve very well if he would change sides
and go with them where they were going, and that he had opportunity to get any
Preferment he would have.


Lord Preston. My Lord, I hope your Lordship observes that I said none of all
this.


L. C. J. Holt. No, my Lord, I do not say you did; my Lord Preston did not say
any thing of all this, but only about disposing of the Packet that his
Lordship spoke of to Captain Billop, and Complimented him, and promised him
Kindness if he would dispose of the Packet.

But, Gentlemen, as there was a Packet taken, so there were two Seals taken at
the same time and in the same place, which have been produced and shown to you;
they lay both of them upon the Balast under the Quarter-Hatches, near the
Packet: the one of them is the Seal of my Lord Preston's own Coat of Arms, the
other Seal belongs to the Secretarys Office, which Office my Lord once held in
the late Reign.


Lord Preston. I beg your Lordship would be pleased to observe that the Papers
were not taken upon me, and it can be no Treason to have Seals, I suppose.


L. C. J. Holt. Good my Lord, I will not do your Lordship any wrong; I do not
say that the Papers were taken about you; no nor the Seals; but only that they
lay upon the Ballast from whence the Packet was taken: And I say further, That
these Seals are not denied by your Lordship to be your Seals; the one is your
own Seal of your Coat of Arms which was taken at that time, and so I do not
your Lordship any wrong, and by the Grace of God will not.


Lord Preston. It is no Crime, I hope, to have Seals.


L. C. J. Holt. I do say, my Lord, the Papers were taken about Ashton and not
about your Lordship; but they lay upon the Ballast where the Seals were, and
where your Lordship lay: But how far my Lord Preston is concerned in this
matter, is to be considered by you of the Jury by and by.

Now, Gentlemen, you have heard how earnest Mr. Ashton and Mr. Elliot were; one
of them, to wit, Elliot, wished a Thunderbolt might strike the Boat under Water
as they were coming back; and when they came through Bridge he wished that
London Bridge had fallen upon them and knocked them upon the head.


Lord Preston. But I hope that is not to lie upon me neither, for I said no
such thing.


L. C. J. Holt. No: But Ashton and Elliot did say these things, and how the
case stands as to that in Relation to your Lordship is to be considered. It is
proved they afterward gave Money to the Seamen, half a Crowna piece, to two of
them, to say they were going to Flanders, and not to France.

Now Gentlemen, that my Lord was on Board this Vessel, that my Lord was under
the Hatches, and that the Papers were taken in this manner, is beyond all
contradiction: So likewise that the Ship was hired for France; that my Lord
took Water at Surrey Stairs, and was taken in this Vessel in that manner that
you have heard.

The next thing Gentlemen is about the Papers: I must tell you though there are
several of them that do seem mysterious, yet they are Papers that do show a
very great design of Deposing the King and Queen, and a purpose of altering the
present Government.

But Gentlemen, I will mention to you those Papers that are very plain, and
leave you to consider what construction to put upon those that are obscure.
There is one Paper that seems to be instructions and heads for a Declaration,
that is to say, That the King of France must not come with a design to make an
entire Conquest.


L. Preston. My Lord, with submission to your Lordship, I hope you will please
to remember and observe to the Jury, that Paper is not proved to be mine.


L. C. J. Holt. No my Lord, I Will do your Lordship no wrong, but I cannot speak
all my words at once.


L. Preston. I am sure you will not my Lord, but I beg leave to put your
Lordship in mind.


L. C. J. Holt. Well then Gentlemen the Paper begins, That the Kings
Declaration is to be formed in general Terms, that he will govern by the Laws,
that they shall be the Rule of his Actions, that he will endeavor to settle
Liberty of Conscience by a Law, and that whatsover was done by him that gave
any occasion of Jealousy, shall be settled by Parliament. That he has given
sufficient Proofs and Evidence of his not being willing to bring an Army of
Strangers into the Kingdom, by refusing the Succors the King of France offered
him, and that were ever ready to be Embarked upon the first notice of the
Prince of Orange's coming. That he brings such an Army only as is necessary for
his own Defense, and securing such of his Loyal Subjects as should come to him;
and that he will dismiss them as soon as he shall have rid the Nation of those
Foreigners that had invaded us, and trampled upon the Laws.

So that Gentlemen, here is a Paper in this Packet, that has plainly laid open
and proved the Design, and shows the meaning of it was to seduce their
Majesty's Subjects from their Allegiance; it was to be in such general Terms,
making general Promises, hoping thereby that People would be the more easily
imposed upon to renounce their Allegiance to their present Majesty's.

But Gentlemen, the Declaration imports farther, that the Realm was to be
invaded by Foreigners; and to palliate it, it is pretended that Foreigners were
only to be brought in to rid the Nation of Foreigners, and you know who are
meant by that: So that this Project was only to color a Foreign Invasion; and
this Declaration was to direct them how and upon what pretenses they should
Invade this Kingdom.

Gentlemen, there is no manner of doubt but this is a Treasonable Declaration,
and if any Person had this in his Possession, and was going into France to
carry, with an intention there to make use of it, that is Treason, though it be
coucht under specious Pretenses of restoring People to their Liberty: It was
plainly a Design to Invade England by a French Army.


L. Preston. My Lord, that Paper was not found about me.


L. C. J. Holt. No, no, my Lord, it was not; but good my Lord give me your
favor, I will certainly observe every thing that is sitting; but I tell you I
cannot do it all at once.

Then Gentlemen, there is another Paper found in the Packet, that is said to
be the result of a Conference that was had between diverse Lords and Gentlemen,
as well Tories as Whiggs as they call them, to prove it possible to restore the
late King by French Arms; and how this may be effected, were Proposals made:
Yet still it was pretended to preserve the Protestant Religion, and the Civil
Administration according to Law.

And that it might be brought to pass, the Credulous were to be imposed upon,
and made to believe that the French King would not conquer England for himself;
no, but he would conquer it for the late King; he would be at that vast Charge,
that great Expense of Men and Arms to restore King James, and make no Profit of
it himself.

And it was proposed how to seduce the People of England into a belief of the
French King kindness; He was to indulge the English Protestants in France, and
let them have the exercise of their own Religion there at their own Charges;
and this to satisfy the English Protestants, that his Persecution of the
Hugonots in France, was not out of aversion to the Protestant Religion, but
only because of their Antimonarchical and Resisting Principles. So that they
were proposing among themselves what they were to do to make the People believe
the French King had no dangerous Design against our Religion and Liberties; and
if they could meet with Persons to believe this, that was a probable way
thought upon in this Conference to get a great many Adherents to the French
King, thereby his Invasion to be facilitated, and the whole Project rendered
more successful.

There is another thing Gentlemen, in this Paper, and that is this; they
complained of the mismannagement of their Affairs at St. Germains; that though
they did earnestly desire the restitution of the late King, yet there was
always some Foolish thing or other that came from St. Germains that obstructed
their Design.

What that Foolish thing is, I cannot say, it does not appear; but whether it
were not too great a Discovery of their Zeal for Popery, and the advancement of
the Popish Religion, is worth your consideration.

And something is to be done for satisfaction of the People as to that; and it
is advised that there should be Seven or Nine, or such a Number of English Men
that should go over, and be received into favor at St. Germains, and they
should be of the Council there, and these were to be Protestants; and that was
to be a color and pretense that the late King was reconciled to the Protestant
Interest, because he chose Protestant Counselors, and had received them at St.
Germans, and was advised by them.

This, says the Paper, will make the World believe, he is ours, and that we
have gained him; which was to delude a great many of the People of England,
that they should not be affrighted in case there should be such an Invasion of
England, but invited rather, and encouraged to join with the French when they
came.

But Gentlemen, the Three last Papers that have been produced to you, are
Papers that do somewhat more nearly concern my Lord Preston.

The First Paper contains several Memorandums; It begins with Lady D. 2000 l.
who that Lady D. is, I must leave it to you to imagine, though perhaps it may not
be hard to guess.

It takes notice that the English and Dutch were like to join; and these
Memorandums do also show a design and purpose of something to be done for the
prevention of that Conjunction. They seem also to be Instructions to be made
use of upon going into France to negotiate or transport some matters of
dangerous consequence.


L. Preston. My Lord, I hope that your Lordship will observe, that these
Memorandums are broken kind of Notes, incongruous and incoherent.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay my Lord, they are so, they are but broken things; but I say
still, they are Memorandums that were to be used for some purpose: Now I leave
it to the Jury to consider of the matter of them: What can be plainer than what
is there expressed? The French are to come in time, before the Dutch and the
English join; they are to watch their opportunity and come betimes, and they
are to fight at the Chops of the Channel, and not to come so far as Beachy.


L. Preston. This is all but presumptive Evidence, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. I appeal to your Lordship if it was not in the Paper, and I
appeal to the memory of the Jury whether I misrepeat it or not.

The Paper mentions Gennings and Strickland and Trevannion, that they were to
come from St. Mallo's in one Night; the King (meaning the late King) was not to
be on Board; and there were Ships to lie at Newcastle, to plague London: It is
easy to understand what they meant. Among these Memorandums, it is made as a
remark, that the London Clergy are the worst. It gives an account how
Portsmouth was fortified, and Gosport, and what number of Men were in them; and
of the state and condition of our Navy; what rates our Ships were, and how
many, and who were to be the Commanders.


L. Preston. I beg your Lordship to observe this is not Treason.


L. C. J. Holt. I shall tell you that my Lord, by and by; I am now stating the
Evidence.

Gentlemen, my Lord Preston insists upon it, that these Papers were not found
about him: It is true, they were not, but it does not therefore follow that
they were none of his Papers: But you have Three Witnesses, Mr. Townsend, Mr.
Bland, and Mr. War, produced to prove these Papers to be my Lords Hand; Mr.
Townsend says he was acquainted pretty well with my Lord Preston's Hand; he was
one of his Clerks in the Office of the Wardrobe; he says he has seen my Lord
write several times, and does believe the Writing to be his Hand; and to the
same purpose says Bland; and Mr. War swears to one of the Papers, that he
believes it to be my Lord Preston's Hand.


L. Preston. I hope your Lordship will please to observe to the Jury, That this
is only a proof of Similitude of Hands, no body see me write them.


L. C. J. Holt. They only say they do believe it to be your hand, no body says
they saw you write them; if I omit any thing, pray tell me when I have done.

Gentlemen, there are other Papers which have been produced and read, that are
writ in Canting Terms, which yet plainly show the general Design; they tell the
Party that Council are of Opinion, he has a very good Title; they hope he will
appear himself, and if the cause be well solicited it may come to a hearing
before the end of Easter Term.

There is another matter mentioned in another Letter which is under the
disguise of Trade, That the Goods must come before the first of March. And
another of them says, That unless the Copper and the Linen come before the
tenth of March they should lose this Summers Profit.

Gentlemen, what can be the meaning of all this?


Lord Preston. I know not indeed, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. In another of the Papers it is said, It Is thought our Fleet
will be ready by March or April, but they believe not till June.

Truly, Gentlemen, I have not been able to take the particulars of every
Letter, but I must leave it to your Observation; only there is one of them that
makes mention of acquainting my Lord with condition of the Writer, and
direction is therein given to speak to the Bearer; and what other Lord was
there, but he in the Company?


Lord Preston. I desire to observe, my Lord, that I was not the Bearer.


L. C. J. Holt. Truly, my Lord, I cannot tell who was meant; I must leave it to
the Jury to judge of that; but there was no other Lord in that Company.


Lord Preston. I give your Lordship thanks for observing that it was not proved
that they were taken upon me before; but I beg your Pardon for interrupting of
your Lordship.


L. C. J. Holt. Interrupt me as much as you please, if I do not observe right;
I will assure you I will do you no wrong willingly.

Now, Gentlemen, the Question is in the first place, Whether this be Treason?
and I told you before, without question, if any Persons do go into France to
Negotiate such a design as this, or do purpose to go into France, and do any
Act in order thereunto, that is High Treason; and these Letters do import High
Treason as great as can be committed, a Treason againg the King and Queen, a
Design to invade the Realm, to subvert the Government, to restore another
Prince to the Throne by the assistance of Foreign Force.

There was a Design to delude and impose upon a great many People, and those
that would not be deluded into a belief by these fair Pretensions of
Friendship, they were to be subdued by an Army of Foreigners.

Then, Gentlemen, the next Question will be, how far the Lord Preston is
affected by this Evidence, and whether you have sufficient proof from what has
been offered, to satisfy you, that he is Guilty of this Treason or no.

First my Lord tells you, there has not been a clear proof that these are the
Papers that were taken; for (says he) they have been conveyed from hand to
hand, and therefore possibly there might be some Alteration made in them. You,
Gentlemen, are to consider, notwithstanding this objection, whether the
Identity of the Paper be not proved.

Captain Billop tells you he took them, and in what manner; and afterward
carried them to my Lord Nottingham, who laid them by for a little while upon
his Table, and Captain Billop withdrew (that is part of my Lords Objection)
while my Lord Nottingham examined my Lord Preston: after that, my Lord
Nottingham called in Billop again, and Billop swears the Packet was not
opened, but remained entire in such manner as they were delivered to my Lord
Nottingham; and so says my Lord Nottingham. Then Captain Billop saw my Lord
Nottingham open it at that time, and he saw all these Papers every one put up
again by my Lord Nottingham; so that he could not be deceived: and my Lord
Nottingham delivered them to him, and he carried them to my Lord President all
sealed up with my Lord Nottingham's Seal: And my Lord President tells you he
opened them, and brought them to the King, and had them back from the King; but
they were never out of his sight while the King read some of them, but he took
them all and brought them to the Cabinet-Council, where my Lord Sidney received
all these Papers that have been read, and marked them. You have my Lord
Sidney's Oath that these are the Papers he had from my Lord President; you have
my Lord Presidents Oath that he had them from Billop sealed with my Lord
Nottingham's Seal; you have my Lord Nottingham's Oath that he had them from
Billop; and Billop swears that they were taken in the Smack.

So that it is plain, if you believe this Evidence, that they are the same
Papers. Besides, as to several of them, Billop marked them, and swears directly
to them. If you believe these Witnesses, as you have no reason, I think, to the
contrary; It is plainly proved these are the very Papers which were taken from
the Bosom of Ashton, and taken up by him from under the Quarter-Hatches in the
Smack.


Lord Preston. I beg your Lordships pardon for one thing.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, what say you, pray? Say what you will.


Lord Preston. With humble Submission, there is one thing that I think the Jury
ought to take notice of, That when the Papers were sent from Mr. Bridgman to my
Lord Sidney, they were sent by a Messenger.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, you are mistaken as to that Objection, for my Lord
Sidney did not send them to Mr. Bridgman by a Messenger, but he delivered them
with his own hand, and after he had set his own Mark upon them; and Mr.
Bridgeman says they were never out of his sight, he copied them all but two or
three, the other Mr. Poultney copied in his presence, and so he swears he
redelivered them to my Lord Sidney.


Lord Preston. With humble submission, my Lord, if I remember right, they were
in a third hand.


L. C. J. Holt. Never, never.


Lord Preston. Did not my Lord Sidney say so, or Mr. Bridgman?


L. C. J. Holt. No: neither my Lord Sidney, nor Mr. Bridgman said so; I suppose
the Jury are apprehensive of the matter; I would not mislead them, I Will assure
you, nor do your Lordship any manner of Injury in the World.


Lord Preston. No, my Lord, I see it well enough that your Lordship would not;
I am for my Life, and beg your Lordships pardon for my interrupting of you.


L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen, the next thing is to consider, Whether my Lord
Preston be answerable for these Papers, or a Party in this Treason.

First, Gentlemen, I would have you to consider that there was the hiring of a
Vessel for France: It is true, my Lord Preston was not present at the bargain;
but you observe that my Lord Preston, his Servant, Ashton and Elliot took Water
at Surry-stairs on purpose to go on Board that Smack.

Now, Gentlemen, Whether or no you can intend any other ways than that my Lord
Preston was privy to the hiring of this Vessel, though he was not present at
the hiring of it; for how should my Lord Preston be ready to take Water with
them at Surry-stairs? Can you imagine my Lord came there by chance, and took a
sudden Resolution? If you can imagine that he came only to go on Shipboard
without knowing the Previous Design, truly you imagine a very great thing for
my Lords advantage.

It is plain he went voluntary without Compulsion; truly, I think the Evidence
is very strong to induce you to believe he was privy to this design, and that
he did know of hiring the Vessel.


Lord Preston. I hope your Lordship will observe at the same time, that I was
never seen before we took Boat.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord I have observed it, and I lay that weight upon the
Evidence, that I think it will naturally bear, and no more; and leave it to the
Jury to consider, whether your Lordship was privy to the Design or no, when
they weight the Circumstances of the Evidence together.


Lord Preston. I hope I shall not be condemned upon Presumption and Argument.


L. C. J. Holt. What weight the Evidence has they will consider.

And then, Gentlemen, there is another thing that I would observe; Why should
my Lord Preston, a Noble Man, a Person of his Honor and Quality, put himself
in such a place as he was found in, and that twice? It must sure be out of an
Apprehension of some Danger As for the Seamen they were secure enough; they
were not frightened, because they thought they were protected, and my Lord
Preston knew he was not liable to be Pressed; the Master of the Vessel tells you
they were fearful, and therefore hid themselves in a place they could not stand
in, nor sit in; there was the the Gravel and Ballast, it was uneasy to them,
dangerous to their Health to be there.

Gentlemen, why do Men avoid the light and put themselves under covert, unless
they have some evil design? Persons that are innocent seek not obscurity.

The Seals were found there, and my Lord does not deny they were his Seals.


Lord Preston. I do not deny that, I hope it is no Crime to have such Seals.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay, but says my Lord, that does not affect -- because the
Papers were not found about me, but were found about Ashton. Gentlemen, if you
can imagine my Lord Preston had a different Design from the rest of the Company
that were with him, then you may acquit my Lord, and find him Not Guilty. But
it is left to you to consider whether he had not the same Design with them.
Besides there is mention made in one of the Letters, My Lord, and there was no
other Lord but he; and here are Papers proved to be my Lord's own hand,
containing several of the matters of which he stands Indicted, and he would
have had the Captain to have disposed of the Papers.

Now, Gentlemen, what account does my Lord give you where he was going? it
seems they did pretend at the time they were taken, and they would have had the
Master of the Vessel said, that their design was for Flanders; but the
Witnesses tell you positively, That the Vessel was hired for France.

Truly, Gentlemen, I must leave the matter to your Consideration whether my
Lord be Guilty of this Design or Not Guilty.

There is another thing that my Lord has urged (for I would not willingly omit
any thing material on the one side or the other) he says his Indictment is laid
in the County of Middlesex, but the Papers were not taken there, the Ship they
went on board lay at Anchor in Surrey; and when they were taken it was in the
County of Kent, and so there is no Proof of Treason in Middlesex.

Ay, but Gentlemen, give me leave to tell you, if you are satisfied upon this
Evidence, that my Lord was privy to this Design, contained in these Papers, and
was going with them into France, there to excite an Invasion of this Kingdom,
to Depose the King and Queen, and make use of the Papers to that end, then
every step he took, in order to it, is High Treason, wherever he went; his
taking Water at Surry-Stairs, in the County of Middlesex, will be as much
High Treason, as the going a Shipboard in Surrey, or being found on Shipboard
in Kent, where the Papers were taken.

Gentlemen, I have failed of recollecting several of the Particulars of the
Evidence, because they are many; and you will not depend upon my Recollection
of things so very incoherent as some Parts of the Evidence in the Papers are,
but upon your own Notes and Observations.

If you do think, having heard this Evidence, That my Lord was not concerned in
this Matter, That my Lord had no Design to go into France with these Papers,
but that he was an utter Stranger to all these things, then you are to acquit
my Lord. But if you believe my Lord was privy to, and knew of the hiring of
this Vessel, and that he went to carry on the Design, contained in these
Papers; and that he wrote some of these Papers, and with the others, he was
acquainted, then you are to find him guilty.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. My Lord, if you please, I would observe one thing, to the
Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay, by all Means my Lord.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Gentlemen of the Jury, I shall say but a few Words to you,
because indeed my Lord has summed up the Evidence very fully, for matter of
Law: I am fully of Opinion there never was a more Black nor Horrible Treason
than is in this Plot that is now discovered; for I think Englishmen have no
greater Enemies than the French and the Papists, and you see this is a Plot to
bring in both; and therefore I think there was never any thing of greater
Consequence to the Government and the Nation than to have this Plot detected
and punished; though perhaps never any thing was more improbable than this same
Plot, that it should ever take effect, whatsoever they promised to themselves,
and their Desire of having it effected might persuade them to the contrary.

But, Gentlemen, the thing that I would mention about the Matter before you
now, is this; Here are three Papers that by three several Witnesses, acquainted
with my Lords Handwriting, are testified, as they believe to be his
Handwriting; if so, then there is an End of all, for therein is a horrid deal
of Treason contained. If these Instructions, these Memorandums, these Heads
that were written down were my Lords, and he did intend to go with these in a
Voyage toward France, that will be sufficient of it self, if there were
nothing else in the Case, to maintain this Indictment.

But, Gentlemen, you have in the rest of the Papers, that were taken, a great
Character of the Bearer; that the Bearer had done great things; that the Bearer
could inform them fully of every thing; and there should be full and entire
Confidence put in the Bearer, and a great many such Phrases.

But, says my Lord, I was not the Bearer, it was Mr. Ashton that the Papers
were found about; it does not appear directly who the Bearer was; and they were
not found about me.

Now, Gentlemen, pray let us look a little how this Evidence stands: Pray where
was this Bundle found? even upon the Gravel, where my Lord Preston and Mr.
Ashton lay; there was it found, and my Lord's own Seal with it.

How, in the Name of God, came my Lord's Seals to be found with other Peoples
Papers, if they did belong to any body else? How came they together in that
place? It may be he had a mind to leave his Seals behind him, because they
would discover his Quality. But why should my Lord Preston have all this fear
upon him? Why should two Men go and take a Ship for themselves and two others;
and when they come to take Boat, take in my Lord and his Man, if they were not
the two others that were designed? and this to be done at Night in the Dark?
Why should my Lord be under such terrible Apprehensions as to creep into a hole
so unfit for one of his Quality?

Why do you not hear from my Lord some good Account upon what occasion my Lord
and his Man were going to France? Or whether else my Lord was really going? for
somewhere or other it was plain he was going.

Gentlemen, no Man goes into an Enemies Country without some License, unless he
go upon some ill Design: Fear seldom is without some Guilt; and there appears,
throughout the whole management of the Story, that there was a great deal of
Fear upon these Gentlemen.

Besides afterward, when he is taken, and the Letters taken with him in the
same Company, you hear what endeavors there were to suppress the Truth, even
by my Lord's desiring, to have the Packet disposed of; and my Lords Man gave
one of the Seamen half a Crown to say they were going to Flanders, not to
France. I suppose the Man knew how unfit it was to be known that they were
going to France: And my Lords two Companions spared for no Pains to get the
Packet thrown overboard; though all that my Lord said was what great kindness
he would do him when it lay in his Power, if he would dispose of the Packet; I
suppose that is very easily intelligible.

Gentlemen, there is one thing which is mentioned in one of the particular
Letters that I desire particularly to observe to you, and that is all I shall
say to you; Here is a Letter in my hand that in diverse places has somewhat
remarkable, it says, Your Daughter and I must starve, if this Government can
make us: That the Party did net repine at all for having lost all for your
sake, which your favor had bestowed. And in another place this Letter does
say, Your Daughter grows very tall, and very pretty, as I am told. But that
which I chiefly mention it for, is, it is twice mentioned, My Lord will tell you
all my Condition, how I have been used; and I have told my Lord my Condition:
what I desire of you, he thinks very Moderate.

And pray consider and remember, that the first Article of my Lord's Paper,
that is taken to be under my Lord's own Hand, there is two thousand pound to
the Lady D.

Now if any body should put these together, do they lack any great Interpreter
for? for my part I leave them to you.

Then in aother place, toward the end of the Letter, it is said, Pray, Sir,
ask my Lord how I have been used.

Now this Letter being thus taken, and there is never a one of the rest that
was a Lord, do you think any of the rest was meant? I must leave it to you.

If my Lord Preston had produced any Testimony to prove his own good Carriage
and Behavior toward the present Government, it had been very much for his
advantage, and might have had great weight with you; but when things appear
only in this manner as they do now, I must leave it to you.

Gentlemen, it is a Great Matter, and of great Moment; if those that Conspire
against the Kingdom, against the Protestant Religion, and against the present
Government, may do it with impunity, it will be worth the considering what the
Consequence of that may be. Your own Consciences require you to do Right and
Justice on both sides; and if you are satisfied he is Not Guilty, you will find
him so; if you are satisfied that he is Guilty, you will find him so.


L. Preston. My Lord, may I have the liberty to say any thing before the Jury
go out?


L. C. J. Holt. You Lordship should have said what you had to say before. It is
contrary to the course of all proceedings in such cases to have any thing said
to the Jury after the Court has summed up the Evidence, but we will dispense
with it. What has your Lordship to say?


Lord Preston. My Lord, I humbly thank your Lordship; I am not acacquainted
with such Proceedings.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, you know I permitted your Lordship to interrupt me as
much as you would, which was never done before in any such Case.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. It is contrary to the course of the Court: But yet if you
have any thing to say to the Court or the Jury, for this once we permit it.


Lord Preston. Gentlemen, of the Jury. --


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, what you have to say pray direct your self to the
Court that we may hear what it is.


Lord Preston. My Lord, I only desire the Jury may be informed that I am a
Protestant, that I was baptized in the Religion of the Church of England, and
have always lived in it, and hoped to dye in it. My Lord, it is true, things
have been urged with Severity against me that are a little hard in making, that
which I hope will amount to but a Presumption, to be a Proof; as in the case of
the Letters that are written in a Cant, and my Intention to go to France, and
those words in the Letter, where my Lord the Bearer is named. But your Lordship
observes, That that Letter is not directed to any body, and that is full of
Cant as well as all the rest: Why should I be supposed to be the Bearer any
more than either of the others, and they were found about one of them? But, my
Lord, for the reason of my going beyond Sea, it was this; I designed to go to
Flanders or any place I could be driven to, and that ought not to be wondered
at; for really I who had lived quietly after the loss of my Places, upon this
Revolution, and suffered great Inconveniences in my Estate, and was retired to
my own House, with a Design to live a retired life, was imprisoned twice in the
Tower, and proclaimed a Traitor in every Market Town, without any Indictment;
and my Imprisonment tendded greatly to the impairing my Health and my Fortune;
all this made me very uneasy here: and, my Lord, I went under a fixed
Resolution to go to Flanders or any place where I thought I could be quiet.


L. C. J. Holt. My Lord, your Lordship should have said all these things
before, for it is not the course to reply upon the Court; if you had had any
thing to say, you know we heard you out of Course, and I let you interrupt me
as much as you did think fit, though that has not been allowed at any time
before. But, my Lord, pray let me say one thing more: Suppose your Lordship did
think your self hardly used, though I know not any reason you had to think so;
yet your Lordship must remember it was in a time of Danger that your Lordship
was taken up before, and you had showed your dissatisfaction with the present
Government, and therefore they were not to be blamed if they secured themselves
against you; but (...) you had a mind to retire into the Country, or to go
abroad, was Fran^^ the only Country you could choose? a known declared Enemy's
Country at open War with the Government?


Lord Preston. My Lord, I beg your Lordships pardon, if I give any Offense.


L. C. J. Holt. No, my Lord, you give me no offense at all; but your Lordship
is not right in the course of Proceedings; I acquaint you with it not by way of
Reproof, but by way of Information.


Lord Preston. Then I hope the Gentlemen of the Jury will consider, that all
that is alleged against me is but Presumption; my Life and Fortune, my
Posterity and Reputation, are all at stake; I leave all to the Jury's
Consideration, and the God of Heaven direct them.


L. C. J. Holt. If you go on thus to Reflect upon the Court, you will make the
Court to reflect upon you. The Jury hear how the Evidence has been stated: I
think it has been done very impartially, and without any severity to you: Why
should you think we would press the Evidence further than it ought to go
against you? You are a Stranger to most of us, and I am sure we do not desire
your Life; but still we must take care that Justice be done to the Government
and the Kingdom, as well as to any particular Person; and Evidence that is
given must have its due weight and Consideration: If any one can design
Innocently to go into France, at this time of day, with such Papers, and in
such a manner, that I leave to the Jury's Consideration.


Then the Jury withdrew, to consider of the Evidence, and the Court Adjourned
for a little while, and returned in half an hour; and the Jury came in and were
called over, and appeared. Cl. of Ar. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Ar. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Cl. of Ar. Sir Richard Graham, hold up your Hand, (which he did) Look upon the
Prisoner. How say you? Is he Guilty of the Felony and High Treason whereof he
stands Indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. of Ar. What Goods and Chattels had he?


Fore man. None at all that we know of.

Then the Verdict was Recorded.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. I think, truly, Gentlemen, you have done according to your
Evidence; and though it be a hard Case upon particular Men that have brought
themselves in to these inconveniences; yet it is necessary Justice should have
its due course, or else there is no longer living for any Man in any Society or
Government.


Then the Prisoner was carried back to Newgate, and the Court Adjourned till
Monday Morning following at seven a Clock. THE ARRAIGNMENT, TRIAL, CONVICTION,
AND CONDEMNATION OF John Ashton, Gent. FOR HIGH TREASON Against their MAJESTY'S
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, In Conspiring the DEATH and DEPOSITION OF Their
MAJESTY'S, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Heyrick and Thomas Cockeril, at Grays-Inn-gate in
Holbourn, and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. M.DC.XCI.

Die Lunae, xix Januarii, 1690.
The Court being Sat, the Jury was called over, and the appearance of those
who answered Recorded, Then Mr. Ashton and Mr. Ellyot were brought to the Bar;
but Mr. Ellyot was ordered to be carried back to Newgate, the King's Council
resolving to try Mr. Ashton by himself.

Cl. of Ar. JOHN ASHTON, hold up thy Hand.

[Which he did.] Those Men that you shall hear called, and personally appear,
are to pass between our Sovereign Lord and Lady our King and Queen, and you
upon your Trial of your Life and Death. If therefore you will challenge them,
or any of them, your time is to speak as they come to the Book to be Sworn, and
before they be Sworn.


Mr. Ashton. Pray stay a little.


L. C. J. Holt. What say you, Mr. Ashton?


Mr. Asht. My Lord, I humbly desire your Lordship will allow me the benefit of
Pen, Ink, and Paper.


L. C. J. H. Pray let him have Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Mr. Asht. And likewise that you would give my Solicitor leave to be as near
me as possibly he can, only to refresh my Memory, if I should forget any thing.


L. C. J. H. That is a thing you cannot of right demand, the other of Pen, Ink,
and Paper you may.


Mr. Asht. My Lord, I shall acknowledge it as a very great Favor.


L. C. J. H. That is an Innovation that ought not to be, the Court cannot allow
it.


Mr. Asht. I acknowledge it a Favor, but if the Court thinks it not fit to
allow it, whatsoever your Lordship shall order I readily submit to.


L. C. J. H. You shall have Pen, Ink, and Paper; and what is fit for the Court
to do they will do it.


L. Chapter Bar. If the Witnesses say any thing that you do not hear, you must
speak to the Court, and you shall have them say it over again.


Pen, Ink, and Paper was given to the Prisoner. Cl. of Arraign. Sir William
Hedges, Knight.


He appeared. Mr. Asht. My Lord, I would not trouble your Lordship and my self
with unnecessary Challenges; I intend to put my self with an entire dependence
upon the first Twelve Men that appear, be they who they will.


L. C. J. H. What you please for that matter, you have your own choice.


Mr. Asht. Whoever they are, I submit to them; I know them not.


Cl. of Arr. Swear Sir William Hedges.


Which was done. And so were the Eleven next succeeding in the Panel; and the
Names of the Twelve Sworn follow.

Jur.
Sir William Hedges, Knight. John Wolstenholm, Esquire James Boddington, Esquire Thomas
Johnson, Esquire Ralph Bucknall, Esquire Lucy Knightley, Esquire Thomas Cuthbert, Esquire John
Herbert, Esquire John Tully, Esquire Thomas Smith, Esquire William Withers, Esquire and Daniel
Thomas, Esquire
Then the Jury were Numbered, and Proclamation made for Information and
Evidence in the usual manner.

Mr. Asht. Gentlemen of the Jury, if your desire Pen, Ink, and Paper, I hope
the Court will take care to provide them for you.


L. C. Just. Holt. Ay, ay, let the Gentlemen of the Jury have Pen, Ink, and
Paper.


Which was done. [Which he did. Cl. of Arr. John Ashton, hold up thy Hand.
Gentlemen, you that are sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his
Cause: He stands Indicted by the Name of John Ashton, late of the Parish of St.
Paul's Covent Garden, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. For that he, together
with Sir Richard Grahme, late of the Parish of St. Anne, in the Liberty of
Westminster, Barronet, who stands Convicted of High Treason, and Edmund Ellyot,
late the Parish of St. James, in the said Liberty, Gent. For that they as false
Traitors, etc. (Prout in the Indictment, mutatis mutandis,) and against the
Form of the Statute in that Case made and provided. Upon this Indictment he has
been Arraigned, and thereunto has Pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial has
put himself upon God and the Country, which Country you are; your Charge is, to
enquire whether he be Guilty of the Felony and High Treason whereof he stands
Indicted, or not Guilty; If you find him Guilty, you are to enquire, what Goods
or Chattels, Lands or Tenements he had at the time of the Felony and High
Treason Committed, or at any time since; If you find him Not Guilty, you are to
enquire whether he fled for it; If you you find that he fled for it, you are to
enquire of his Goods and Chattels, as if you had found him Guilty; If you find
him not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it; you are to say so, and no more, and
hear your Evidence.


Mr. Knap. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; This is
an Indictment of High Treason against John Ashton, the Prisoner at the Bar, and
the Indictment, Gentlemen, Charges him, That he, as a false Traitor against
their present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, his Supreme and Natural
Lord and Lady, not weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, did upon the Twenty
Ninth of December last past, together with Sir Richard Grahme, who stands
Convicted, and one Edmund Ellyot, and diverse others ill disposed Persons
unknown to the Jury, did Conspire, Imagine, and Intend to depose, and deprive
the King and Queen, and to bring them to Death and Destruction, and to subvert
and alter the Government; and to cause War and Rebellion within this Kingdom
against their Majesty's; and to bring these Intentions and Purposes to pass,
the Prisoner, with the rest of them, did prepare diver Notes, Papers, Letters,
and Memorandums in Writing, which were to instruct the French King, and other
Enemies of the King and Queen, of the number of their Majesty's Men of War, how
they were Manned, and the Names of the Commanders of several of them, and to
inform them how the Castles and Forts of Portsmouth, Southsea, and Gosport were
fortified, and how they might be surprised by the King's Enemies, and of the
Times, Ways and Means how they might invade the Kingdom, in order to depose
the King and Queen; and to Procure and Incite such an Invasion, and further to
bring these Purposes to pass, the Prisoner and the other Traitors did secretly
conceal, and detain in their custody several Bills of Exchange for the payment
of Money to the King's Enemies, and the several Letters, Notes, and Memorandums
before mentioned, which were for the purposes I before opened to you; and
further to bring these Purposes, and Treasonable Intentions to pass, they did
for one Hundred Pound hire and prepare a Ship, which was to carry them secretly
out of this Kingdom into France, with an intent there to deliver these
Instructions, and Memorandums, and Bills of Exchange into the Hands of their
Majesty's Enemies; and did hire a Boat to carry them to the Ship, and did enter
into it at St. Clements Danes, within your County, and rowed to the Ship, and
went on Board the Ship, and there with the Bills of Exchange, Notes, and
Memorandums, they set sail to go to France, in order to deliver them to the
French King, and other Enemies of the King and Queen; and the Indictment does
further set forth, that there has, and still is a War between the French King
and our King and Queen, and that he and his Subjects are Enemies to the King
and Queen and their Subjects; and that during this War, the Prisoner, together
with the rest that were before named, were adhering to the King and Queen's
Enemies in this War; and in pursuance thereof, did prepare such Letters and
Instructions before opened, and had, and concealed in their custody, and hired
a Ship and a Boat, and went into the Ship, and set sail in order to go for
France, to aid and assist the King's Enemies there with Money, Intelligence,
and Counsel; and this is said to be against the Duty of his Allegiance, against
the Peace of the King and Queen, their Crown and Dignity, and against the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided. To this he has pleaded Not
Guilty; if we prove him Guilty, you are to find him Guilty.


Mr. Serj. Thomps. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
The Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted of a very heinous Offense, no less than
High Treason, the greatest Offense that can be committed against any Humane
Law. You have heard the Particulars in the Indictment read. I will not trouble
you with any Repetition, but go to open the Evidence according to the Steps
that are obvious in the case. You have heard in general the Design was to
depose this King and Queen, which the Law expounds to be to bring them to Death
and Destruction: You have heard it was to alter the Government, and cause a
Rebellion in the Kingdom, and to bring in Foreign Power; and these are laid to
be the Heads of the Offenses that the Prisoner stands charged with.


Gentlemen, the first step that was made in this matter was by the Prisoner at
the Bar; for there was one Mr. Burdett, which it seems had been one of his
Acquaintance, and had undertaken to bring him acquainted with a Person that
could furnish him with a Ship; and in order to that, one Mrs. Pratt, that had
the management of the Smack which belonged to her Husband, she, by Burdett's
means was brought to Burdett's House, where met Mr. Ashton, the Prisoner at the
Bar, and they had some Treaties about the hiring of a Ship; the purpose
declared by the Prisoner then was to hire a Ship to go to any part of France,
and he would give a considerable Reward for it; he said it was for himself and
Three more. They did not come to any conclusion about hiring the Ship then; but
there was an Appointment made to have the Master of the Ship to meet with them
at the Wonder Tavern in Ludgate Street, and in order to that, Paseley that is
the Master, and the Woman came there, and met with Mr. Ashton; but because Mr.
Burdett was not there, they came only to this proposal, one Hundred and Fifty
Pound was demanded for the Hire of this Vessel; but there being no conclusion
then made, they thought it better to do it at Burdett's House; and about a day
after they came to Mr. Burdett's, and then it happened that Ellyot, one of the
Persons that is Indicted, but not one before you, came thither too; and at that
time it was agreed to give one Hundred Pound for the Hire of the Ship. Ninety
Three Guineys were deposited in Mrs Burdett's Hands; and there was a Token past
betwixt them by the breaking of a Sixpence, one part whereof was to lie with
Mr. Ashton, and the other with Mrs. Burdett; and whenever the Master of the
Vessel brought back the broken piece of Sixpence that Mr. Ashton had, then was
she to pay the Money, that being the sign that they had attained their Ends,
and were safely landed in France.

The next step they take, is this, They appoint to meet at the Seven Stars in
Covent Garden, thither the Master of the Vessel and the Woman were to come, and
that was near the time, that very day that they designed to go dow^ and there
was Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyot, but the other Person did not appear as yet,
there the Seamen were Ordered to go along with them, and thence they went down
to the Water side, to Surrey Stairs, and the Waterman was called, and in the
mean time came my Lord Preston and his Man to them, and they four did go in
that Boat, by the Direction of the Master, and were carried on Board his Smack.

After they came on Board (for I would note the particular Circumstances) they
were very apprehensive of Danger, for they knew what they went about, their own
Guilt gave them Reason of Fear, and when they came near a Man of War, which lay
at Anchor in Long-Reach in the River, they desired the Master to hide them,
that they might be safe from any Search, and they were hid and put close under
the Hatches for some time; afterward when they came to another place of
Danger, it was by the Block-Houses at Graves-end, (as they apprehended) there
they desired to be hid again, and so they were put in that place where they
were in very difficult Circumstances under the Hatches, and there they remained
till a Pinnace, that had been sent to enquire after them, came and Boarded this
same Vessel.

Upon its Boarding of them, the Captain made a search, and found these
Gentlemen, My Lord Preston, Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyot, and I suppose his Man
also, all hid under the Hatches.

Then the next thing which is observable, Gentlemen, and the Great Matter that
will show where the Treason was, is this, there was a Bundle of Papers that was
on Board, ready prepared, if they had not been surprised, but could have had an
Opportunity for it, to have been cast Overboard, and there was Lead fixed to
it, to have sunk it, and Mr. Ashton the Prisoner at the Bar, was the Person
that concealed this Bundle of Papers, betwixt his Body and his Coat, and from
thence it was taken by the Captain that took them.

When they were so taken, the Captain, according to his Duty, was bringing the
Prisoners to Whitehall, they desired to go on Shore at Graves-End, but the
Captain did not think that so fit, but carried them on Board the George Frigot,
and then you will hear these Gentlemen did fall into a Treaty with the Captain,
to suppress these Papers, and one Instance I remember they did tell him, that
since there were a parcel of Papers that he had taken out of my Lord Preston's
Pocket, he might take off the Lead and fix it to those Papers, and sink the
others; and what should he have for it? they promised him great Rewards, they
told him he might be a Great Man, he had an Opportunity of making his Fortune;
and when that would not do, they used many Threatenings to him, all which will
appear in the several Circumstances that the Witnesses will tell you of.

I come, Gentlemen, in the last place to show you, That all the whole
Conspiracy, all this Treason, did lie hid under this Bundle of Papers that were
taken from Mr. Ashton, and so he might very well be afraid of having them
opened, for there you will find a formed Design, to alter this Government by a
French Power and Assistance; and they contain so many Particulars, that in
regard, I would not do the King's Evidence injury on the one hand, nor the
Prisoner on the other, I will forbear repeating the Particular Instances.

Gentlemen, You will have all the Letters and Papers Read, but in the General,
I must needs say, you will find it manifest, that there is a black and wicked
Conspiracy to introduce a Foreign Power, to Establish the Protestant Religion,
and that by a Popish Interest, and to settle our Laws, Liberties, and
Properties, by a French Army. And let them pretend what they will for the
Protestant Religion, when you hear these Papers read, no body will imagine it
was to any other purpose, (if the Plot had taken Effect,) but to have what
Religion, what Laws, the French King had pleased to impose upon us.

If the Prisoner be Guilty, Gentlemen, of these Matters, I know you will do
your Duty; but if he be not Guilty, God forbid that you should find, him Guilty.

L. Chapter J. Holt. Call your Witnesses, Brother.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. We begin with Mrs. Pratt.


She was Sworn. Sir W. Will. Look you, Mrs. Pratt, here is now another Gentlemen
at the Bar to be Tried, against whom you are called as a Witness.


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, my Lord.


Sir W. Will. Pray hear what we ask you. Pray do you give the Court and the Jury
an account, what Treaty you have had with that Gentleman, about a Vessel to go
to France, and what was done in it.


Mrs. Pratt. If it please you, my Lord, I was sent for to Mr. Burdett's House
in Queen Street by Cheap Side, to know whether he could have a Smack to go for
France; I told him yes, I could help him to one; he told me, there were two or
three Gentlemen bound for France, as Merchants to fetch Silk, and I was at Mr.
Burdett's two or three times, and at last Mr. Ashton met me there.


L. Chapter J. Holt. Look upon the Gentleman, is that he?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, that is the Gentleman, and he met me there, and meeting with
Mr. Ashton, he hired the Vessel; but first of all, he desired us to meet at the
Dog-Tavern upon Ludgate Hill, to make the Bargain, and we did meet there, and
were there about an hour, or an hour and a half, and Mr. Burdett did not come;
and the next Morning, Mr. Ashton desired me to meet him at Mr. Burdett's again;
and the next Morning I met at Mr. Burdett's, and there we made the Bargain for
100 l. and there was Sixpence broke in two pieces.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Was the Hundred Pound paid?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, but we agreed on the Tuesday Morning, and there was a
Sixpence broken in two, and Mr. Ashton had both the Six-pences in his hand, and
the Tuesday night the Hundred Pound was paid at Mrs. Burdett's.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who was by?


Mrs. Pratt. There was one Mr. Ellyot, and the Master of the Smack, and Mrs.
Burdett.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did they pay the Money in Gold or Silver?


Mrs. Pratt. This Gentleman, Mr. Ashton, told the Money, there was 93 Guineys
and a Sixpence, and Mr. Ashton gave one half of the broken Sixpence with the 93
Guineys to Mrs. Burdett; and when the Master of the Vessel brought the other
half of the Sixpence, or I, either of us, we were to have the 100 l.


Sir W. Will. Pray to what Place did they hire the Ship to go?


Mrs. Pratt. To France.


Sir W. W. Who hired the Ship?


Mrs. Pratt. That Gentleman.


Sir W. W. Who paid the Money?


Mrs. Pratt. That Gentleman, Mr. Ashton.


S. W. Will. To what hand was the Money paid?


Mrs. Pratt. It was paid in Mrs. Burdett's Bedchamber, into her Hand.


S. W. W. Who broke the Sixpence?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton, that day the Bargain was made.


S. W. Will. Who carried it away?


Mrs. Pratt. When the Money was paid, Mr. Ashton had one, Mrs. Burdett had the
other part.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. To which part of France were you hired to go?


Mrs. Pratt. To any part where they could touch.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray did they give you any Note about any thing?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, they gave me one Note to meet at the Dog-Tavern, and another
to meet at the Seven Stars in Covent Garden.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Who gave you the Notes?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton and Mr. Ellyot.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Look upon that Note.


Which she did. Mrs. Pratt. This to my best remembrance Mr. Ashton wrote, I
cannot well remember the Hand.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did Mr. Ashton desire to meet at the Dog-Tavern?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, and he did meet at the Dog-Tavern, but Burdett did not.


L. C. J Holt. When did you meet at the Dog-Tavern?


Mrs. Pratt. On the Monday Night before New-Years-Day.


L. C. J. Holt. When was the Money paid?


Mrs. Pratt. On Tuesday Night, at Mrs. Burdetts.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. After the Money was paid, what did you do the next day?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton Ordered a Note to be written, to meet at the Seven
Stars in Covent Garden, at one Mr. Rigby's.


L. C. J. Holt. At what time were you to go to Rigby's?


Mrs. Pratt. A Wednesday Night.


L. C. J. Holt. But at what time?


Mrs. Pratt. Some time about Ten a Clock, and we came there accordingly?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who was with you at Rigby's?


Mrs. Pratt. There was the Master of the Vessel, Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyot,
and two Gentlemen more, that I never saw before, nor since.


Sir W.W. I ask you again, who first Treated with you about Hiring this Vessel?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Burdett first Treated with me about it.


Sir W.W. Who next?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton.


Sir W.W. Who made the Bargain with you?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton.


Sir W.W. Who paid the Money?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton.


Sir W.W. What can you say more?


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray let me ask you, when you came to Mr. Rigby's, in what
manner did you go away from his House, and what was said at parting?


Mrs. Pratt. Mr. Ashton was not there himself at first, but he and Mr. Ellyot,
and two other Gentlemen were there afterward, and Mr. Ashton's Wife said
something about Papers hove in a Hat at Court, and about some bodies being
chosen; and one of the Gentlemen said there was nothing in that, I was one that
was Chosen last Year.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did Ashton and Ellyot go out together from Mr. Rigby's?


Mrs. Pratt. I did not see them go.


Mr. Trevor. Had you any directions from Mr. Ashton, to send for a Hamper or a
Trunk?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, that was at Mr. Burdett's House.


Mr. Trevor. When was that Hamper and Trunk to be sent for?


Mrs. Pratt. On the Wednesday Night before we went to Rigby's House.


Sir W.W. Do you know one William Pasely?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes.


Sir W.W. Was he with them?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, he was with them.


Sir W.W. What occasion brought him thither?


Mrs. Pratt. I carried him to Mrs. Burdett's House.


Mr. Trevor. Pray did the Prisoner desire to see the Master of the Vessel, or
speak with him?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, and when I brought him, he said he liked him very well.


Mr. Trevor. What is the Master's Name?


Mrs. Pratt. William Paseley.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Had you any Discourse with Mr. Ashton's Wife after they
went away?


Mrs. Pratt. We had little discourse, only she gave me some Victuals and
Drink; and she said she hoped I would not tell of her Husband.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. What else did she say?


Mrs. Pratt. She hoped God would deliver them out of the Lyon's Mouth.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did she say any thing about Cock Crowing.


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, she said she thought she should have no good Luck for the
Cock crowed.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Who was by in the Chamber when the Money was paid?


Mrs. Pratt. There was the Master of the Vessel by, and Mrs. Burdett.


Juryman. My Lord, I heard her say somewhat of some Papers, which I do not very
well understand. Does she know of any Papers that the Prisoner had?


Mr. Serj. Tremain. That was only about the Two Notes.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. She talks of Papers being shaken in a Hat, but nothing can
be made of it.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. If you would ask her any Questions before she goes, now is
your time to do it.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I desire she may stand up again. Mrs. I ask you a
Question, not so much in kindness to my self, as Justice to another Gentleman.
You say Mr. Ellyot writ one of the Notes.


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, as I remember, it was that to meet at Mr. Rigby's.


Mr. Ashton. I do it to justify that Gentleman, I take that Note upon my
self; and you say I hired the Ship, and Mr. Ellyot was by.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. Look you, Mr. Ashton, Mr. Ellyot is not now upon his Trial,
it concerns you only to ask such Questions as relate to your self. What is said
now concerning Mr. Ellyot, goes for nothing against him.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I do it only to do him Justice.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. But you are to ask Questions only for your self.


Mr. Ashton. Remember, good Woman, you are upon your Oath; and have a care of
forswearing your self; my Blood is at stake.


Mrs. Pratt. I am sure I say nothing but the Truth.


Mr. Ashton. Did I ever speak to you of going to France.


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, you did.


Mr. Ashton. As I hope for Salvation I did not.


Mrs. Pratt. And another thing you told me more; if I helped this well away,
you would help me to the earning of a 1000 l. before Lady Day.


Mr. Ashton. Gentlemen, as to what was said of that kind, of helping her to a
1000 l. is no great matter to the thing in Hand; for if I was minded to go out
of the Kingdom, it was necessary to use all Arguments I could, to persuade her
to help me to go away.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. Mr. Ashton, you must stay your time before you speak to the
Jury* make your Observations upon the Evidence to your self, you shall be heard
at large all that you can say in your proper time.


Mr. Ashton. I do assure my self, my Lord, of all the favor that can be shown
to a Man in my Circumstances.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. You shall have all that is just, I do assure you.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I am glad in the Circumstances I am in, that I am to be
tried before your Lordship. But, good Woman, by Virtue of the Oath that you
have taken, did I ever speak to you directly or indirectly of going to France?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, and you asked for a hole to hide what you might have occasion
to keep secret.


Mr. Ashton. But I ask you, about going to France; did I speak to you about
going to France?


Mrs. Pratt. Yes, you did.


Mr. Ashton. Then, as I hope to be saved, I never spoke directly or indirectly
of going to France to her.


Mrs. Pratt. You were not to go for Holland nor Flanders, I am sure.


Mr. Ashton. Nay, I did take it for granted, that you did know before I met
you, that we were to go to France; but I never spoke to you of it in my Life,
that I am sure of; but I only urge this to let your Lordship know, that Woman
has forgotten her self.


L. Chapter Just. Pollixfen. Mr. Ashton, You will have all lawful favor; but your
time for arguing upon the Evidence is not come.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. You must ask your Questions now, and make your
Observations afterward; you must reserve your self for that, till after we
have done.


Mr. Ashton. But then, my Lord, I shall have too many things for my Memory to
retain; and therefore I beg leave, as they occur to my Memory now, and as the
Witnesses go along, to make my Observations.


Mr. Ser. Tremain. Mrs. Pratt, Pray, when the Vessel was hired, and you were
told it was to go to France, what Persons did Mr. Ashton say were to go with
him?


Mrs. Pratt. Three Persons he said were to go, but he did not name them.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then set up William Paseley.


(Which was done.) Sir W. Williams. What can you say of any for the hiring of a
Vessel?


Paseley. I did not know the Vessel was hired before I came thither.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Prithee tell us what thou does know.


Paseley. The Woman came to me when I was at Billingsgate, and said I must go a
little way along with her: and as we were going she told me it was to go to Mr.
Burdett's in Queen Street; and when we came there, Ellyot and Ashton were not
within: But by that time we had been there a little while, in came Mr. Ashton,
and presently after him Mr. Ellyot; and Mr. Ashton bid the Woman give him the
Money out of the place where it was.


Juryman. My Lord, we do not hear him.


Sir W. Williams. Pray begin again, and speak out.


Pasely. I met with this Woman at Billingsgate, and she told me I must go a
little away along with her.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. That Woman, name her.


Pasely. Mrs. Pratt; and I went along with her, and asked her where she was
going; she said up into Queen Street: And coming to Queen Street, we went to
Mr. Burdett's House, I was never there in my Life before. When I came there
Ashton nor Ellyot were either of them there; after a little while in came
Ashton, and presently after in came Ellyot, and he went up Stairs into the
Bedchamber; and being in the Bedchamber, they brought the Money out, rolled
up in a half sheet of Paper, set up an edge, and told it out at the Window.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. Who told it?


Paseley. Ashton told the Money out; and after the Money was told, he pulled
out two pieces of a Sixpence, and when he had pulled out the two pieces of
Sixpence, he gives one half to this Mrs. Burdett, and the other half he kept
himself; and he bid her pay this same Money, when the other half Sixpence that
Ashton kept came to this Woman, to match that which she had; and after the
Money was told, we stayed but a small while there, and came down Stairs; and
when we came down Stairs we went down to Billingsgate. I think John Fisher was
there, and we carried away with us a Trunk and a Hamper; John Fisher carried
the Trunk, and another Man the Hamper; and after that we had carried the things
on Board, I came up to the House again; and after I came up to the House, they
directed us to go to the Seven Stars in the little Piazza, there was a Note
written to direct us, which ordered us to go thither betwixt 10 and 11 at
Night. When we came there, I think there was neither of them there at present,
but by that time we had been there a small space, in they both came, and sat
down; and a Gentleman came in and said the Cock crowed; and therefore they
should have no good luck. And then they talked about Papers being tossed in a
Hat, I don't know what, and in came two Gentlemen more, just before we went
away, to see them; and after those Gentlemen had seen them, they staid but a
little while. Says Ellyot to me, Master, come along with me; so I went along
with him, and we came to Surrey Stairs; and on the Corner on the left hand,
there was an Alehouse. He called the Waterman out of the Alehouse, and he bid
me go before, and I went down; and by the time that I had gotten down, the
Waterman came and halled his Wherry to, and I went in; and by that time I was
gotten to the Stern, down came Ashby and Ellyot, and my Lord, and his Man.


L. C. Just. Holt. You mean Ashton, not Ashby?


Paseley. Yes, my Lord, that is the Man. And after they had got into the
Wherry, and were seated, they bid the Waterman put off from Land, and so we
went through Bridge; and after we were through Bridge, we got on board the
Smack, and they got into the Cabin; and when they were got into the Cabin, I
called my Men, and bid them hale up the Anchor, and they did so; it proved to
be but little Wind, but that Tide we got below halfway Tree, and were forced
there to drop our Anchor, and stay till the next Morning: the next Morning we
weighed Anchor, and by that time it was Nine a Clock, we got to Long-Reach,
where lay the George Man of War, and there they hid.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And how was the hiding, pray?


Mr. Paseley. It was down in the Quarters under the Hatches.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Why did they hide?


Paseley. We reckoned they would come on Board a Pressing, and they bid me show
my Protection.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did they desire to be hid?


Paseley. Yes, and after we came by the George Man of War, they came up again,
and remained afterward in the Cabin, till we came almost to Gravesend: a
little before we came to Gravesend, they all hid again; and, when they were
hid, remained hid all, I think, but only Ellyot; I think, he popt up; and they
were resolved to go eat their Victuals; but then I told them, there was a Barge
a coming, and so he went down again, and there they remained, till they were
taken, for the Barge was on Board presently, and found them there.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. What kind of place was it, that they were hid in?


Paseley. They could not sit, nor stand upright in it, but lay all along, or
leaned on their Elbows.


L. C. Just. Holt. What did they lie upon there, pray?


Paseley. There was Ballast, and slit Deal a top of the Ballast.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Well, what happened when the Captain came on board?


Paseley. When Captain Billop came on board, Master, says he, you have got a
couple of stout young Men, I must press them, or to that effect. I hope not so
Captain, said I. Why, what have you to show, says he? I told him, I had a
Protection. Let me see it, says he: So I show him my Protection, and he looks
in it. Well, says he, Master, I must look farther, and went to rights to the
Place where they lay, and found them lying all together. After they were taken,
and were come out, Captain Billop commanded them into his Boat, and commanded
me, and my two Men, to go into the Barge; afterward he set his Man on shore at
Hungerford Stairs; and when we came to Whitehall Bridge, the Gate was not
opened, and we stayed a little while at Whitehall Bridge; and when we came a
shore, Ellyot gave me half a Crown, and bid me say, when I came upon my
Examination, that we were bound for Flanders, and not for France.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Where were you bound for, pray?


Paseley. They examined me in the Chamber, when they paid the Money, if I knew
they went to France; and I told them, yes, very well.


M. S. Thompson. Did they desire you to go to any particular Port in France?


Paseley. No, we were to touch at any Place we could.


Sir W. Williams. Did they mention any thing of Flanders to you?


Pasely. No, they did not.


L. C. Just. Holt. Did any body mention going to France to you?


Paseley. Yes, they did. They asked me, whether I could carry them to France
safe.


L. C. Just. Holt. Who did ask you that?


Paseley. Ellyot or Ashton, one of the two, I cannot directly say which; but if
I be not mistaken, it was Ashton.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. When you came from Rigby's at the Seven Stars, Who came
away with you?


Paseley. Ashton and Ellyot.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did Ellyot and Ashton both come out with you?


Paseley. Yes, they did.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. And did they part, after they were come out?


Paseley. Yes, Ashton did go away from us presently after we were come out.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. When you came on Board, had you any Discourse with Ashton,
about going to France?


Paseley. No, not that I remember.


L. C. Just. Holt. Did you go on foot, from the Seven Stars?


Paseley. Yes.


L. C. Just. Holt. And did they part, after you came out?


Paseley. Yes, they did.


L. C. Just. Holt. And who went with you, did you say?


Paseley. Ellyot came with me.


L. C. Just. Holt. Whither went Mr. Ashton then?


Paseley. I cannot tell, my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis What did he say to you, when he went from you?


Paseley. He bid me go along with Ellyot.


L. C. Just. Holt. Was Mr. Ashton there as soon as you?


Paseley. Not quite; but by that time the Waterman had got the Boat to the
shore, and I in the Stern, they were all come down.


L. C. Just. Holt. When Ashton came, who came along with him?


Paseley. I saw them all upon the Stair-head; I was in the Boat when they came.
I never saw my Lord, till he was upon the Stairs.


Juryman. My Lord, I desire to ask him, What the Sum of Money was, that was
paid at Burdett's?


Pasely. It was 93 Guineas and six Pence.


L. C. Just. Holt. Who brought it?


Paseley. It was laid down in the Window.


L. C. Just. Holt. But I ask you, who brought it?


Paseley. I did see Ashton bring it, and lay it down in the Window, and he told
it out, and put it up again, and gave it to Mrs. Burdett.


Juryman. My Lord, I desire to know, what is the usual Rate to go to Flanders;
What may a Smack and three Men deserve?


Paseley. Truly I cannot tell, I never went upon my own account in my life.


L. C. Just. Holt. Mrs. Pratt, what say you, what is the usual Rate to go to
Flanders or Holland?


Mrs. Pratt. I believe they may go for a matter of 20 l. or 30 l.


L. C. Just. Holt. You hear them, Gentlemen, what they say.


Juryman. Yes; but, my Lord, he says, he gave them notice the Barge was a
coming. I desire to ask him. Did he know there was a design to search him or no?


Paseley. Sir, I knew that there was a search for Seamen.


L. C. Just. Holt. But did you know there was to be a search, in order to the
taking these Gentlemen on board you? For that is the Question, I believe, the
Jury would ask you.


Pasely. No, I did not know it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis But you say, these Gentlemen desired to be hid?


Pasely. Yes.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And you hid them according to their desire?


Pasely. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Before you went on Board, had you any discourse of hiding?
did they ask you for a place to hide in?


Paseley. Yes, they did.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Who did?


Paseley. Ashton and Ellyot both asked if there were a place in the Ship to hide
them, and I told them, yes, there was.


L. C. Just. Pollexfen. Mr. Ashton, will you ask him any Questions?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I desire to ask him this Question. Did we desire you to
come and hide us, or did you desire us to go down?


Paseley. You desired this of us, that if we saw any Man of War's Boat we would
tell you, that you might be hid.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray repeat that over again, did they desire you to give
them Information when any Boat was coming, that they might hide, or did you
desire them to hide your Self?


Paseley. They desired it of me.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Then set up Charles Betsworth.


Mr. Serj Tremain. Before Betsworth is examined, I would ask Pasely one
Question? was there any Coat left on board you?


Pasely. Yes, there were two Coats of the Waterman's left on Board, and I took
them and locked them up.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Is that the Man that owned the Coats?


Paseley. Yes, it is.


Sir Will. Williams. Then, Betsworth, will you give an Account of what you know
against the Prisoner at the Bar?


Betsworth. I cannot tell, my Lord, I never saw the Gentleman in my life
before, that I know of.


Sir Will. Williams. Prithee hear, Friend, tell what you know of carrying any
Gentlemen on Board the Smack.


Betsworth. If it please your Lordship, I was going home from our Stairs about
7 or 8 a Clock in the Evening; that is, from Surrey-Stairs, and a Gentleman
called Sculler. Said I to him, Sir where do you go says he? As far as the
Tower, said I. It Is against Tide, I cannot go; it will be ten a Clock before it
be high Water. Says he, will you go with us at that time? Said I, what will you
give me? Will you give me half a Crown? then i will carry you down, for I cannot
stay out so late for nothing. Yes, says he, I will give it you. Then I came and
brought my Boat to the Shore; he asked me then what my Name was; I told him
Charles Betsworth. Says he, will you be sure to stay till we come? Yes, said I,
if you will be sure to come; and if I be not here, I will be at such a House,
an Alehouse, that was there by; the sign of the Swan: So I staid, and carried
a Fare or two over the Water, and about 11 a Clock comes a Gentleman down, and
calls Charles; and I went out a doors down toward my Boat, and there comes one
Gentleman down, and a kind of a Seaman, as I thought; and the Seaman went into
the Stern, and the Gentleman sat at the Back-board, and there was three
Gentlemen more came down the Stairs into the Boat; one had a whitish Cloak, and
the other a loose Coat; and they brought a leather Bag that would hold about a
Peck; so I put off with them, and rowed down the River, and all that I heard
them say, was when we came under the Temple; says one of the Gentlemen, when do
you hear the King goes away? Says another of them, he goes away a Tuesday; and
when we got through Bridge, one of the Gentlemen asked where the Vessel lay, and
the Man in the Stern said on Southwark side, over against the Tower, and when
we came a little below Battle-bridge near Pickle-Herring-Stairs, the Master
said, there lies the Vessel, and it had a long Pendant and a top Sail loose; so
they paid me before they came on Board, and when they were got a Board, away
rowed I; and when I came to Land, and take out my Sculls and things, there I
mist my Cloths; and I rowed after them, thinking they could not be got far; but
when I came to the place where they went on Board, the Vessel was gone, and I
rowed down as low as Limehouse-Reach, and in Black-Hall-Reach I overtook a
Vessel, which I thought was the Vessel. I asked them who they belonged to, and
they said they came from Horseliedown, and I made answer I brought two Fares on
Board a Vessel at Pickle-Herring-Stairs; and had forgot to take my Cloths that
they had; they made answer, I brought no Fare on Board them, so I rowed on
farther beyond Barkinshelf, and because there was no Wind, I thought none could
have gone beyond that Place, and therefore resolved to row back again when it
was Flood; and I rowed up to Greenwich, but could not meet with the Vessel; and
I heard nothing of my Cloths, till last Friday was Seaven-night I had my Cloths
brought me.


Sir Will. Williams. Can you say this Gentleman Mr. Ashton, the Prisoner at the
Bar; was one of them that you carried on Board the Smack?


Betsworth. No, I know never a one of them.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. But you say the Persons that you took in at Surrey-Stairs
carried away your Cloths with them?


Betsworth. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then I ask you, Paseley, Is that one of the Persons that he
brought on Board your Smack?


Paseley. Yes, he was.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. How many came on Board the Smack?


Paseley. Four; My Lord Preston, Mr. Ashton, Mr. Ellyot, and my Lord Preston's
Man.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did you take in your Pendant?


Paseley. Yes, I did.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. When did you take it in?


Paseley. As Soon as we weighed Anchor.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. How came you to take it in?


Paseley. Ellyot spoke to me, to take it in?


L. C. Just. Holt. Look you, Pasely, you were by when the Ship was hired.


Paseley. Yes, I was by when the Money was paid.


L. C. Just. Holt. Did they mention how many were to go in the Smack?


Paseley. He said, they were three of them, not four, as I remember, that were
to go.


Sir Will. Williams. Will you ask him any think Mr. Ashton.


Mr. Ashton. No, Sir: But I desire the Woman may not go out of Court.


L. C. Just. Holt. No, no; she shall stay.


M. S. Thompson. Then call John Fisher, and James Amonds.


( Fisher stood up.) Sir Will. Williams. Pray do you acquaint the Court and the
Jury what you know of this matter, whether you carried any things on Board the
Smack, and what; and who came on Board, and what happened.


Fisher. My Lord, a matter of six Hours before they came on Board, my Master
carried me a Shore, and brought me to Mr. Burdett's House, and gave me a Trunk,
and I went with it, and another Man with a Hamper, and brought them on Board;
and about 11 or 12 a Clock, my Master comes and brings Mr. Ashton and the other
aboard; and he bid me go forward, and heave up the Anchor, and so I did, and we
went down the River; but we could go but a little way because there was no
Wind; and when we came to Half-way-tree, the Tide Turning, we were forced to
cast Anchor again, and stay till the Morning; and in the Morning we weighed
Anchor again about 8 a Clock, and about 9 we came into Long-reach, where lay
the George Man of War, and then Mr. Ashton and they hid; and when we came below
them again, they came up again till we came almost near the Block-Houses at
Gravesend, and there they hid again; and Mr. Ashton I think came up afterward,
and bid me go down to the Hamper, and fetch them up some Victuals for their
Dinner, and I went down and fetched up some Beef, and Mr. Ashton took hold of
it; and I took a Bottle of Wine or two out; and just before I brought all the
Victuals up, the Barge was spied a coming to us; and then he went down again:
And there they hid, and the piece of Beef was a top of them. Captain Billop,
when he came near, waved his Hat, to bid us lie by; and we did lie by, till he
came up to us; and when he came up to us, says he, Master, you have gotten a
couple of good likely Men, worth the coming on Board for, says the Master. I
hope Captain, you wont press them, says he. What have you to keep you clear,
says he? I have a Protection. Have you, says the Captain? Let me see it: So he
showed him the Protection, and he read both our Names in it. Then, says he,
Master, I must look farther; and he went down to the Quarter Hatches, and took
them up, just where they lay. First my Lord came out; and he searched them all,
as they came out. Mr. Ellyot came out next, and Mr. Ashton stayed within, being
the last Man. And after he had searched them, and done what he pleased; he got
all the Papers and Writings: then he commanded us all to go into the Barge; and
they came on Board the George Frigate in Long-Reach. And at the Ship, Mr. Ellyot
came to us; and bid us say, we were going for Flanders. And after we came to
Whitehall, Mr. Ashton gave me a half Crown Piece, and bid me say, we were bound
for Flanders, and not for France.


L. C. Just. Holt. Was that after they were taken, or before?


L. C. Just. Pollexfen. When was the first time, that they would have you say,
they were bound for Flanders?


Fisher. It was on board the George Frigate in Long-Reach.


L. C. Just. Holt. Who was it that bid you say so?


Fisher. Mr. Ellyot and Mr. Ashton both, in the Ship's Steerage, where they
came to us.


L. C. Just. Pollexfen. Where was the next Place, that they bid you say so?


Fisher. At Whitehall Bridge Ashton gave me a half Crown Piece, and bid me say
so.


Juryman. Did he speak that aloud, or softly at Whitehall?


Fisher. He whispered it in my Ear.


L. C. Just. Holt. Did they ever say they were bound for Flanders, till after
they were taken?


Fisher. No.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. What manner of Place was this that they hid in?


Fisher. An ugly hole* where a Man has no room to lie along at ease; he can
neither stand upright, nor sit upright.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did you see the Waterman that brought them on Board?


Fisher. No.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Was there any Waterman's Coat left?


Fisher. Yes, there was two.


L. C. Just. Holt. But did thou see the Boat?


Fisher. We were a sleep when they came on Board, and the Boat was put off
as soon as ever they came on Board.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Then as soon as ever they were on Board, you got up the
Anchor, and pulled in the Pendant?


Fisher. Yes, We immediately hove up the Anchor, and took in the Pendant.


Mr. S. Tremain. Did any Sculler hale you afterward, as you were going down?


Fisher. Yes, as we were going down there did.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. What did you say to him?


Fisher. I was not steering then; but this other Man made answer.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. Mr. Ashton, Will you ask him any thing?


Mr. Ashton. When I gave you the Half Crown that you speak of, what did I say
to you?


Fisher. You bid me when I came to be examined, say we were going to Flanders,
and not to France.


Mr. Ashton. What did I say else?


Fisher. You bid me take that Half Crown for to Night, to help to bear Charges,
and to Morrow you would take farther care of us.


Mr. Ashton. I told you you were Prisoners now, and I gave you that; and told
you I would take farther care of you.


Fisher. You did not say we were Prisoners, but you said you gave me that to
help bear Charges for that Night, and on the Morrow you would take farther care
of us.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Then set up James Amonds.


Sir W. Williams. Are you sworn Friend?


Amonds. Yes, Sir.


Sir W. Williams. Then let the Court and the Jury know what you can say in this
matter.


Amonds. My Lord, they came on Board about 11 or 12 a Clock at Night, I was a
sleep in the Cabin, and heard a Boat coming on Board, and I turned out, and
before I could get out of the Cabin, they were got aboard, and I see no Boat,
nor nothing. So, says the Master, go forward and heave up the Anchor; and after
we had heaved up the Anchor, I goes into the Skip to tow the Vessel down,
because there was no Wind, and we would not let the Vessel go foul on the Ships
that were in the River, and a little after we came on Board again; and when I
came on Board again, they were all on Board, all four. After that comes a
Water-man, and I was at the Helm steering, and he called out to us! Oh hoe,
says he; did not I bring a Parcel of Gentlemen on Board this Smack? Not as I
know of, said I, Says he, I carried a Parcel of Gentlemen on Board some Smack,
that had a Pendant out, and I know not where it is; they carried my Clothes on
Board with them. Said I, I know nothing of it, nor I did not; for I saw neither
Water-man, nor Boat; so away the Waterman goes, and we went down the River, and
when we came to Halfway Tree, we came to Anchor, and my Master went and laid
himself down, the Tide being almost done, and there being no Wind, and Mr.
Ashton and they lay in the Cabin; and says Mr. Ashton to me, take care of us
now, and we will take care of you hereafter; says he, we shall help you to many
a Freight, and many a Pound. Ay, ay, said I, you will be taken care of to be
sure at Day break, or when the Day comes on; about 8 a Clock, we hove up the
Anchor again, and fell down as low as Long-Reach, where the George Frigate lay;
and when we came there, they went down to hide in the quarter Hatches. I
steered it down still; and when we were got past that Man of War, the Hatches
were taken up, and they came up again out of the Quarters, and sat in the
Cabin again, and we had a fresh Gale of Wind, and run down to Gravesend
quickly, and when we came near the Block-houses, said I, we are almost at the
Block-houses; then said they we will go down again and hide a little; and so
they did till they were past there, then resolving to go to Dinner.


L. Chapter Just. Holt. What time a day was this?


Amonds. About 11 a Clock, as near as I can guess.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Well, they did go down to hide then, did they?


Amonds. Yes, they did go down and hide, and came up again, I am sure some of
them; I heard some of them in the Cabin.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Well, what followed?


Amonds. After they were gotten up, and past Gravesend, this Man was sent for
Victuals for them, and so he fetched them some Roast Beef, and some other
things; and just as the Roast Beef was going into the Cabin, said I, Here comes
a Barge off, to press. So when I cried, The Barge was a coming, they took the
Victuals down into the Quarters, and there lay they, and the Victuals a top of
them. And when the Barge came near us, the Captain waved his Hat to command us
to lie by. Said I, We must lie by, for the Barge is coming up to us. And we
clapped the Hel^^-a-lee, and lay by; and after we were laid by, the Barge came
on Board us. Says the Captain of the Barge, You have got a couple of likely,
good Men, Master, said he Ay, says the Master; but I hope you will not press them.
Says the Captain, Have you got any thing to keep you clear? Yes, if it please
you, noble Captain, I have got a Protection. I am sorry for that, says he, and
comes on Board, for he stayed all this time in the Barge; and smiling upon him,
he comes on Board, and, says he, Come, let us see your Protection. And the
Master showed it him, and he read it. Says the Captain, I must look a little
farther. And he goes into the Cabin, and took up the Hatches, and there lay all
these Gentlemen. They were something longer a coming up than he would have had
them; so says the Captain to his Men in the Barge, Come on Board, and see who
is here. And so some of his Men did come on Board; and, to the best of my
remembrance, my Lord was the first Man that came up: And when my Lord came up,
the Captain run his Hands into his Coat-Pockets, to feel for Papers, as I
suppose; and my Lord desired the Captain to be kind, and take nothing away.
Says he, I Will take nothing but Papers; it is Papers I look for: And he pulled
out a Watch, and gave it him again. After that, Ellyot came out; and whether he
found any thing upon Mr. Ellyot, or no, I cannot tell. Mr. Ashton was the last
that came up; and when he came up, a Water-man of the Captain's calls to him,
and says, That Gentleman that came up last has put something in his Bosom, but
what I cannot tell. So the Captain took Mr. Ashton by the Arm, and turned him
about; and, says he, What did you put in your Bosom? Says Mr. Ashton, Nothing
but my Handkerchief; and pulled out his Handkerchief, and showed him. Then the
Captain put his Hand in, and pulled out Papers, with a piece of Lead tied to
them. And that is all that I saw.


Mr. S. Tremain. But tell us what happened afterward.


Amonds. When that was done, the Captain commanded us all into his Barge; and I
rowed, and some of the rest rowed, it being cold Weather, till we came up to
London. After we came up to London, they did not say any thing to me, because I
was a rowing till then. It seems they did give them some Money, but they gave
me none, not till I came into Whitehall; and then my Lord's Man came to me, and
called me a one side; says he, Here Is Half a Crown, will serve you to Night;
and be sure, when you come to be examined, that you say, you were bound for
Flanders, and not for France, and you will be taken farther care of to Morrow.


Mr. S. Tremain. What manner of place is that Quarter-Hatches?


Amonds. They could neither fit, nor stand upright in it.


Mr. S. Thompson. What did they lie upon?


Amonds. There were three or four flit Deals that were laid over the Ballast,
but it seems they had shuffl'd 'em on the one side when they were taken, for
the Ballast lay open.


Mr. S. Tremain. Did the Water-man that brought these Men on Board you, leave
his Coat there?


Amonds. I did not see the Boat, nor the Water-man; and therefore I am not able
to say any thing about it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How came the Pendant to be taken down?


Amonds. I cannot tell that, I was in the Skiff when it was taken down.


Jury-man. My Lord, I do not very well understand how the Papers came to be
taken away from Mr. Ashton.


L. C. J. Holt. He tells you, Mr. Ashton was seen to put his Hand with
something into his Bosom; and being taxed with it, he said it was his
Handkerchief; and the Captain put in his Hand, and pulled out a Bundle of
Papers.


Jury-man. Did he see Ashton take away the Papers from any other place?


Amonds. No, an't please your Honor, I did not see them till they were taken
out of his Bosom.


L. C. J. Holt. Did you see Captain Billop take the Papers from out of Mr.
Ashton's Coat?


Amonds. Yes, I did.


L. C. J. Holt. Where were they before they spied the Barge a coming?


Amonds. If it please your Honor, I heard 'em talk; I thought they had been
up, but it seems there was but one of 'em up when they said, The Barge was
coming a-board: I was at the Helm, and heard 'em talk.


L. C. J. Holt. Then you knew nothing of these Papers, but when you saw 'em
taken out of Ashton's Bosom?


Amonds. No, my Lord.


Sir Wi. Williams. If you will ask him any thing, Mr. Ashton, now you may.


Mr. Ashton. Pray Friend, Had not I been up first, and searched before the
Papers were taken?


Amonds. Not as I know of.


Mr. Ashton. Did not I go down into the Hold to take my Hat, and call to you,
and desired that I might go down for my Hat?


Amonds. I cannot tell; for when I saw the Papers taken from you, I was in the
Stern; I was not down.


Mr. Ashton. Had not I been searched first?


Amonds. Not that I know of, till you were in the Stern.


Mr. S. Thompson. Then swear Captain Billop.


Which was done, he standing up by the Sheriff. Mr. S. Tremain. Captain, I
suppose you may be heard from that place.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I desire the Witness may come down, else I shall not be
able to distinguish what he says: It is the proper place for him, I think.


L. C. J. Holt. Let him come down.


Mr. Ashton. I humbly desire, my Lord, that the Witnesses may all be obliged to
stay in Court.


L. C. J. Holt. Let them all stay.


Sir Wi. Williams. You are sworn, Sir: Are you not?


Capt. Billop. Yes, I am.


Sir Wi. Williams. Then, pray, will you give an Account where you took these
Persons, how you took 'em, what you found, and how you disposed of it.


Capt. Billop. Must I begin from the Beginning?


Sir Wi. Williams. Yes; Tell your whole Knowledge, in Order of Time, as it fell
out.


Capt. Billop. What, from the Time I went out?


Mr. S. Thompson. Make it as short as you can.


Sir Wi. Williams. Yes, you must tell all; for you speak now to a new Jury, and
here is another Prisoner at the Bar to be tried.


C. Billop. The last of December, about Two-a-Clock, or between One and Two, my
Lord of Danby came to me at one of the Doors of the House of Lords, and told
me, his Father must speak with me; and he carried me up to my Lord Linsey's
Chamber; and in a little time my Lord President came there, and told me, he
heard there were diverse Persons that had Papers of dangerous Consequence, and
were going to France, and desired me to use my Skill for my seizing and
securing of the Papers. I began then to talk of what was proper for such an
Undertaking; and I told my Lord, I thought the best way, was to go to Woolwich
or Dep^ford, and to take a Man of War's Pinnace with us: Upon that, my Lord of
Danby being by, said, he knew of a Boat that he could have, which was my Lord
Duke of Grafton's; and my Lady Duchess had lent it him, and he would go, and
get it ready: Upon this my Lord President said, he would give me a Note of the
Name of the Vessel, and where she went out; and likewise a Letter to another
Person, that would instruct me farther, and show me the Vessel; accordingly my
Lord President gave me the Letter, and I went away to look for the Person, but
could not find him. My Lord Danby came to Tower-Wharf himself with the Boat;
and I left a Man there to bring me word, when the Boat came up at the Place
where I was; and Captain Stringer, and Sir Thomas Tailor came there to me.
After my Lord of Danby had told me what I had in the Boat, I told him, I
thought there were not Arms enough; and therefore it were best to go to the
Tower, to borrow some Arms from thence: When we came to the Tower, my Lord
Lucas was not come in; and when I had staid a little time, he did come in: And
when I had acquainted him with my business, he sent for an Officer of the
Guard, and there we borrowed some Arms, a Blunderbuss of his, and a Carbine,
and the like; and about Eleven-a-Clock, or somewhat past, we put off from
Tower-Wharf. It was calm, and we rowed down toward Gravesend; and we went
aboard a Vessel or two, but was not willing to lose much time, because I was
resolved to take them before they were gotten too far: So we rowed away for
Gravesend, where I refreshed my Men, and afterward went down into the Hope;
and I did judge, that no Vessel that could come from London that Tide could be
ahead of me. I went on board several Vessels that lay in the River, in order
unto the pressing of Men; and I went on board all sorts of Vessels, because I
would give no Suspicion of what I was about; and having been on board of
several, I pressed two or three Barkin Men; and one particularly, that knew all
the Vessels upon the River; and I made him to row very near to me, that I might
talk to him; I had got the Names of a great many Smacks, and gave it out, that
I would press a Smack to carry for a Tender to my Ship, when the Fleet went
out; and naming this Smack that I was to go to search, I told him, I heard such
a Smack sailed well, and I had Thoughts of pressing her; he told me, She was
old; but said I, She will serve a Summer well enough; and that is it I intend
to press, if I can find her. Says he, I Will show you her, I know her when I see
her; so we went on board several Vessels, as we went along. And as we were
rowing along before, we came to the Nest Point by Tilbury Fort, we saw several
Smacks coming down the River; and when we came about the Point, the headmost
Smack of all, the Fellow, looked out, and said, Yonder is the Thomas and
Elizabeth. Then I called to one of my Men to wave, and bring them to lie by,
which they did, and they lay by till I came on board. When I came on board, I
saw two lusty Men stand by the Master; said I, Master, you have got two good
lusty Fellows that would serve the King; but I Will be kind and civil to you,
I Will take but one. Says the Master, I hope not so; for I have a Protection; and
with that, I came on board, and took his Protection in my Hand, and read it. As
soon as I had read it, I asked him, if he had no more Men upon Deck than what I
saw. He said, No; then, said I, I must look a little farther. And I went into
the Quarters, and took up the Scuttle, and the Hatches, and I saw some
Gentlemen lie. Oh, said, I, What a pretty Posture is this? Where are we a
going? Gentlemen, you must turn out. The first that came to hand was my Lord
Preston; but I did not know him then, nor some time after I was in the Boat
with him: So I took hold of him, and helped him up; and when he was up, said I,
Sir, I must search you. Says he, I hope you will take nothing from me. Nothing,
said I, but Papers: So I searched all his Pockets; and as I found any Papers, I
put them into my own Coat-pocket. And I took his Watch, and pulled it out, and
gave it him again: After that I had searched him, came up Mr Ellyot the first
Man, and the next was Mr. Ashton, who crowded up while Ellyot came up, in his
Nightcap. I think, Mr. Ashton, you had your Nightcap on. So Mr. Ashton goes
down again, and puts on a Periwig, I think; but coming up again, one of my
Seamen sees him take something, and put it into his Bosom: He follows Mr.
Ashton quick, and pulls me by the Coat; and, says he, That Gentleman has got
something in his Bosom: So I took hold of him, and turned him round; said I,
Mr. Ashton, what have you got in your Bosom? Nothing, says he, but a
Handkercheif; and immediately he put his Hand into his Bosom, and plucked out
the Handkercheif, and showed me. As soon as he had pulled out the Handkercheif,
I put my Hand into his Bosom, and there I met with the Packet that had the
Lead affixed to it; and pulling it out, I clapped it into my own Pocket; for I
thought that was the Matter of Moment that I was to secure. So I ordered them
to go into the Boat, and the Master of the Vessel to let go his Anchor; and two
Men I left in the Vessel, whom I ordered to search, and to secure what they
found till farther Order; and I left two Muskets with them. And after we were
in the Boat, they desired to have somethings handed in, which I gave Order for,
a Hamper, and a Night-bag; and away we put off from the Vessel, and rowed up;
it was against Tide, and very cold Weather. In a little time Mr. Ellyot called
one of the Gentlemen, My Lord; then I whispered him, and asked him who that
Lord was, and he told me, It was my Lord Preston. Then I saluted my Lord; and
my Lord was pleased to say, he was very well satisfied they were fallen into
the Hands of a Civil Gentleman. So rowing up against Tide, and it being a
Westerly Wind, which blowed very fresh, My Lord desired that I would let them
stop at Gravesend, till the Tide turned, that they might refresh themselves. I
begged his Pardon, and said, there was a Ship in Long Reach, the George-Frigot,
and we would stop there; and I did not doubt, but I would command the great
Cabin for his Accommodation; and there he might have any thing that he wanted.
My Lord seemed contented with it; but before we came on Board the Man of War,
there happened a great deal of Discourse betwixt us of several things.


Sir Wi. Williams. Pray repeat it as well as you can remember what Discourse
happened.


Capt. Billop. Truly my Lord Preston being cold, and the Hamper standing by,
says he, Captain Billop, we have not eaten, we will eat if you will. and there
was a piece of Bief at the top of the Hamper, and Bottles of Wine; and I opened
the Hamper, sitting fairest for it, and handed out the Beef, the Bread, and the
Bottles; and after we had eaten what we would, my Lord ordered the rest to be
given to the Men that were the Boats Crew, and after we had done this, and
taken out a Bottle or two, and shut up the Hamper again, my Lord Preston drank
to me once or twice, and seemed very well satisfied and pleased with his Usage.
He told me he was sensible of my Civilities; and if ever it lay in his Power,
he would not forget me. So we drank again, and talked again; but before we came
to the Ship, My Lord Preston told me, that if ever it lay in his Power, he
would be sure to make an acknowledgment of the Civility I had showed him. And
to the best of my Memory, he had this Expression, If there ever was any thing
he could serve me in, he would do it with all his Heart, if I would but dispose
of the Packet.


Mr. S. Thompson. What would Mr. Ashton have had you done? What did he say to
you?


Capt. Billop. Mr. Ashton said, it would do me no good to injure so many
Gentlemen; and desired me that I would throw the Packet overboard.


Mr. S. Tremain. What did he mean by so many Gentlemen?


Capt. Billop. My Lord, I cannot tell, but that was his Expression.


Mr. S. Tremain. Who desired you to throw the Packet overboard?


Capt. Billop. Mr. Ashton did several times.


Mr. S. Tremain. What did he say to you? What Arguments did he use?


Capt. Billop. My Lord, it was so many times over, and so much mixture of
Discourse we had, that I am not able to tell the Particulars.


L. C. J. Holt. But what Arguments did he use?


Capt. Billop. I don't know that he used any more great Arguments, more than
what I have told you already.


L. C. J. Holt. Say that again that you said before.


Capt. Billop. He said, 'twould do me no good to injure so many Gentlemen.
Prithee, Captain Billop, says he, throw it overboard.


Mr. S. Tremain. What did he say farther?


Capt. Billop. I Will tell you, if you will give me leave. Mr. Ashton did say, a
little after this, with a great deal of Insinuation, Captain Billop, What if
you should turn about, and go along with us? No, Mr. Ashton, said I, that I
cannot do. Says Mr. Ellyot, Prithee, throw the Packet overboard. This they did
as we came up the River; and it is the most that I can remember, till we came on
board the George; and when we came on board the George, Ellyot called me into
the Steerage, and desired me, of all Love, that I would dispose of the Packet:
And he said, that now I had an Opportunity to make my self as rich, and as
great, as I would, and no body could see it, if I did throw it away. While I
was in the Ship, Mr. Ashton, my Lord, and Mr. Ellyot, were with me, in the
Steerage. Said I, I shall be taken notice of, to be whispering; pray forbear.
Ashton then spoke to me again, to desire me to throw the Packet over board; by
this time the Victuals was handed in, and there we eat and drank, and my Lord
smoked a Pipe of Tobacco, before the Tide turned; and when the Tide made, we
went into the Boat again, and rowed up toward London, and they were using
these sorts of Arguments over and over again. And once Mr. Ellyot, I think
'twas, to the best of my remembrance, told me, Now you have it in your Power to
make your Fortune, and may be as great a Man, and as rich a Man as you can
desire. And Mr. Ashton said some Words something to the same purpose; Prithee,
said he, throw it overboard: What Good will it do you? So I refusing of it, as
I did many times, Mr. Ellyot told me, that I might take the Letters that were
taken in my Lord Preston's Pocket, and tie the Lead to them, and throw the
Packet overboard. No, said I, Mr. Ellyot, Sure, you would take the King's
Council to be a very odd sort of Men, that they cannot find out such a thing as
this. Prithee, dear Billop, said he, throw it overboard. Many times whispering
me in the Ear; and so did Mr. Ashton many times, saying, You may do us a great
Kindness in it. And we drank, and had several Intermissions; and they at me
again, and I denied them, and they desisted; and then they at it again: And Mr.
Ellyot then told me, Prithee, dear Billop, throw it overboard. Said I, Mr.
Ellyot, If I should be so great a Villain to do such a thing, if ever it was
your Day, would you trust me again? Put it to be your own Case. Says he, You
have Gentlemen to deal withal. But, said I, I will never put it into your
Power. Mr. Ellyot seemed to be angry at this, and said, Every Dog had his Day.
Said I, I hope never to see it your day: But I pray, forbear this Discourse;
let me beg that of you; for I do not desire to be provoked to use you otherwise
than a Gentleman. And after that, they never urged me more to throw the Packet
overboard: But Mr. Ellyot was angry, and very much disturbed, and wished a
Thunderbolt might strike the Boat, and sink it. So I brought them up, through
London Bridge, and they said no more about the Packet; but Ellyot wished, that
London Bridge might have fallen on our Heads. At length, I brought them to
Whitehall; and I put my Man ashore at Hungerford-stairs, that he might get
before, and give the Porter notice at Whitehall-Bridge, that he might open the
Gate. I brought my Lord Preston, and the rest, to the Bridge; and while I was
arming my Men, to guard them up to my Lord Nottingham's Office, I suppose they
then took the Opportunity to give the Men Money, getting near to them; I know
nothing of that: But I carried them up to my Lord Nottingham's, and there I
delivered them, and the Packet to my Lord. After some time, the Packet lay upon
the Table, and my Lord Nottingham sends me for my Lord Preston. When my Lord
Preston came in, I withdrew without bidding, and the Packet lay upon the Table,
unopen'd: And when my Lord Preston came out, I went in on my self, and the
Packet lay in the same Place and Posture, and not opened. And I stayed while
Mr. Ashton was called in, and my Lord Nottingham asked him a great many
Questions.


Mr. Ashton. Pray repeat those Questions, Captain Billop; and what Answers I
made.


Capt. Billop. Truly, my Memory does not serve me to remember all of them, and
I was in a very uneasy Condition at that time, and would much rather have been
in my Bed, than any where else: For the Night before I went down, I had a
Plaster of Spanish Flies ^ut to my Back, and they had raised a great Blister,
and it had not been dressed so long, that the Napkin that was applied stuck so
to it, that the Flesh was jagged, and I was in a great deal of Pain, so that I
did not mind, so much as I should have done at another time, what was said.


Mr. Ashton. But pray, Captain, remember as much as you can what passed.


Capt. Billop. But I Will tell you what I remember; I remember my Lord Nottingham
asked, who I took the Packet from? And you owned, I took it from you.


Sir Wi. Williams. Pray Mr. Ashton, give us leave to have done with him, and
then you shall ask him what you please. Pray go on, Captain Billop.


Capt. Billop. Then my Lord Nottingham sent for Mr. Ellyot in, and asked him
whither he was going? And he said, For Flanders. My Lord asked him, what he was
going there for? He said, He was going to seek his Bread; he was turned out of
all at home, and he had rather go abroad to seek his Bread, than stay at home
to starve.


Mr. S. Tremain. Was this the Lead, that you took fixed to the Packet?


Capt. Billop. Yes, Sir; that is the Lead.


Mr. S. Tremain. Did you take that Lead, with the Packet, out of Mr. Ashton's
Bosom?


Capt. Billop. This was tied fast to the Packet that was taken out of Mr.
Ashton's Bosom. These honest Men saw me take it.


Sir Wi. Williams. Now, if you have a mind to ask him any Questions, you may.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, Captain Billop, Did not you search me before you took the
Packet upon me?


Capt. Billop. No, not that I remember.


Mr. Ashton. Had not you taken some other Papers from me before?


Capt. Billop. No, Sir; I took none from you but the Packet.


Mr. Ashton. Pray recollect your self, for perhaps my Life may turn upon it:
You are as much a Witness for me, as for the King; you are to swear the Truth,
and the whole Truth.


Capt. Billop. And I will do you all the Justice I can, I will assure you.


L. C. J. Holt. Answer his Question, Captain Billop.


Mr. Ashton. Was not I the first Man that spoke to you after we came up?


Capt. Billop. No; Mr. Ellyot was the first Man that spoke to me, that I knew.


Mr. Ashton. Did not I ask you to give me leave to go down for my Hat?


Capt. Billop. Truly, I don't remember that.


Mr. Ashton. Did not you reply, That the Man should go down and fetch my Hat?


Capt. Billop. It Is likely I might, but I don't remember it.


Mr. Ashton. Had not you searched me then, and taken Papers from me?


Capt. Billop. No, Mr. Ashton; for, upon the Oath that I have taken, I took no
Papers that I remember, but the Papers that I took out of my Lord Preston's
Pocket, and the Packet that I took out of your Bosom; for my Lord Nottingham
asked me, if that Packet was all the Letters I took? I told him, No; and showed
him the Papers I took out of my Lord Preston's Pocket, and they proved to be of
no Consequence, and my Lord Nottingham gave them me again, and I carried them
to my Lord Preston.


Mr. Ashton. Did not I go down into the Hole for my Hat?


Capt. Billop. I believe you might.


Mr. Ashton. And was it not after that, that you took the Papers out of my
Breast?


Capt. Billop. Yes, I believe it was.


Mr. Ashton. Where is your Man that called to you, and said, I put something in
my Breast?


Capt. Billop. Here he is, by me, if you would ask him any thing.


Mr. Ashton. You say, I spoke to you about disposing of these Papers: Pray,
from the Time that we came into your Boat, before we came on Board the George
Man of War, did I speak to you?


Capt. Billop. Yes, of the Packet you did: You said, What Good would it do me
to injure so many Gentlemen?


Mr. Ashton. There passed no more than general Discourse before we came on
Board?


Capt. Billop. Yes, Mr. Ashton; I Will tell you another thing you put me in mind
of. When you saw that, though you were so eager with me, nothing would prevail,
you said, I know Captain Billop, and have known him many Years; and nothing
will prevail on him, if he have no mind to it: And I know, if he will serve us,
he will serve us generously, and like a Gentleman.


Sir Wi. Williams. Speak that again.


Capt. Billop. He said, I know Captain Billop; if he will serve us, he will do
it generously, and like a Gentleman.


L. C. J. Holt. Who said so?


Capt. Billop. Mr. Ashton.


Mr. Ashton. Did I speak to you to dispose of the Papers after we came from on
Board the Ship? I suppose you remember it was cold, and the Tilt was called
for, to be laid over us, and I fell asleep; and you know I never waked, nor
spoke, till I came to London Bridge.


Capt. Billop. Yes, yes; we had the Tilt over us.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray speak your Questions out, that we may hear 'em, Mr. Ashton.


Capt. Billop. Mr. Ashton did go to sleep a great while, but he had many times
urged me, and spoke to me to throw the Papers overboard.


L. C. J. Holt. Who was it that told you, Every Dog had his Day?


Capt. Billop. That was Ellyot.


Sir Wi. Williams. Was there any Discourse about Turning of the Tide?


Capt. Billop. Mr. Ellyot said, You have now an Opportunity to make your own
Fortune, and you may be as great, and as rich as you please; for it is
impossible the Tide can run long this way.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Did Mr. Ashton say any thing about going along with them?


Capt. Billop. Yes: You may remember, Mr. Ashton, that you said, Come, go along
with us; you may do as well there, or better than you do here.


Mr. S. Tremain. Did he tell you, where you were to go with 'em?


Capt. Billop. No, Sir; nor I did not ask him the Question.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, When did you give my Lord Nottingham these Papers?


Capt. Billop. Do you mean that Bundle that I took out of your Bosom?


Mr. Ashton. Yes.


Capt. Billop. As soon as ever I followed my Lord Nottingham into his Room, I
pulled 'em out, and gave 'em him.


Mr. Ashton. Did not you go out of my Lord Nottingham's Room, and give my Lord
Nottingham some loose Papers?


Capt. Billop. Yes.


Mr. Ashton. After this, Was not my Lord Preston called in to be examined?


Capt. Billop. Yes.


Mr. Ashton. How long was my Lord Preston in the Room, while you were out?


Capt. Billop. I cannot tell very well.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, Sir, answer that Question.


Capt. Billop. I believe it might be half a quarter of an Hour: I do not think
it was much more.


Mr. Ashton. I believe you must remember some sort of Discourse that was
betwixt you and Captain Ellyot, even to a Quarrel almost. And did you not speak
to my Lord Nottingham's Servants, to fetch your Hat out of my Lord Nottingham's
Room.


Capt. Billop. Yes, I do remember that.


Mr. Ashton. This must be a good considerable Time: It was all the Time that my
Lord Preston was within with my Lord Nottingham, that you were out?


Capt. Billop. Yes, it was.


Mr. Ashton. And all that while was not the Bundle of Papers out of your sight?


Capt. Billop. It lay upon the Table.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, answer my Question: Was it not out of your sight?


Capt. Billop. Yes, it was.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, yes; it must be, for he was out of the Room.


Mr. S. Tremain. When you came into the Room, did you find the Papers in the
same Condition?


Capt. Billop. Yes, they were unopen'd, except that my Lord had taken off the
Lead, and a little Paper fell loose from the rest.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, take notice of that, Gentlemen.


L. C. J. Holt. But pray don't infer more from thence than it will bear.


Mr. Ashton. It seems some of the Papers were taken out.


L. C. J. Holt. He does not say any such Thing, that some of the Papers were
taken out.


Mr. Ashton. He says, Something was cut, and some Papers fell out.


C. Billop. There was a little Paper or two tied to the great Packet.


L. C. J. Holt. What became of them?


C. Billop. They we cut loose, but not opened.


Mr. Ashton. How can you tell they were not opened?


C. Billop. Because I stood by when they were cut.


Mr. Ashton. But how can you tell that; for you see the little Papers taken,
and they were loose from the others?


C. Billop. They were taken from the great Bundle before I went out.


Mr. Ashton. Had not my Lord opened those Papers before you came in?


C. Billop. No.


Mr. Ashton. How can you tell that?


C. Billop. I tell you, as near as I can judge, they lay in the same Posture
that I left them in.


Mr. Ashton. Was the Packet sealed when you took it?


C. Billop. No; but it was tied. There were several Letters in it that were
sealed; it was tied up very hard.


Mr. Ashton. I do not Question but my Lord Nottingham will do me the Justice to
say how long he was in the Room.


L. C. J. Holt. You must not Comment, nor make your Observations till your
proper time.


Jury-man. Pray, my Lord, I desire he may be asked who was with my Lord
Nottingham when my Lord Preston was there.


C. Billop. There was no Body else then.


Jury-man. Then it is not probable they were altered before Capt. Billop came in.


Mr. Ashton. But I hope Probabilities shall not be Evidence to condemn any Man.


Jury-man. Those Two little Papers you speak of, were they severed from the
Packet?


C. Billop. I cannot tell whether they were or no; they seemed loose upon
untying the Bundle.


L. C. J. Holt. Were they cut in your presence?


C. Billop. Indeed, my Lord, I cannot say that I did see them cut.


Mr. Ashton. Pray take notice of that, Gentlemen of the Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. They are Twelve honest Gentlemen, they will do you right.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Observe what the Witness says; he says, That he does not
remember that they were cut in his presence, but he does not say, they were not.


Mr. Ashton. If he does not swear they were, it is reasonable to conclude they
were not cut in his presence.


L. C. J. Holt. He says, the great Packet was not opened, the Two little
Papers were loose from the rest of the great Bundle.


C. Billop. There might be Two or Three of them, less or more, I cannot tell.


Mr. S. Thompson. You will be further satisfied in this Matter upon my Lord
Nottingham's Evidence, I suppose.


Mr. S. Tremain. We have done with Capt. Billop for the present. Pray call
Johnson.


(Who was Sworn.) Sir W. Williams. Were you at the taking of that Gentleman,
and the others in the Smack?


Johnson. Yes, I was.


Sir W. Will. Then pray give an Account of the Matter how it was.


Johnson. We went down in a Pleasure Boat and went to the Tower, went set
through Bridge against Tide, my Lord of Danby was with us; and when we came to
Tower Wharf there they went to the Tower for Arms, and we stayed till Ebbing
Water, and Rowed to Graves-end; and when we came to Graves-end we went on Board
several Ships, and I thought we were going a Pressing; and we stayed at
Graves-end the time of the writing of a Letter, and then we went both into the
Boat again, and Rowed after a Smack that had gained of us, but that not being
the Smack we turned back again, and then it was high Water: And when we came to
the upper end of the Hope we saw several Smacks coming, and there was a
Fisherman on Board that said, that was the Smack the Captain enquired after,
that was coming down there; and when they came on Board the Captain said there
were two or three brave Men, and he hoped he could spare one of them; and the
Master said he hoped he would take none of them because they had a Protection,
which he showed to the Captain. Then the Captain went in and bid me take some
small Arms and go on Board with him, and told the Master he must look a little
further; and the Boards were taken up, and I saw a great piece of roast Beef,
and under that my Lord Preston, and Mr. Ellyot, and this Gentleman Mr. Ashton:
My Lord Preston came up first, and Mr. Ellyot next to him; and I see this
Gentleman take up something and put it into his Bosom, and I told the Captain
of it, and he asked him what it was, and he said nothing but his Handkerchief,
and plucked out the Handkerchief; but the Captain put his Hand into the Bosom
and pulled out something else.


L. C. J. Holt. What was it?


Johnson. It was a parcel of Papers tied up with a piece of Lead tied to it,
for I came up close after him and see him take it up.


Sir W. Will. What else were there found with the Papers, was not there some
Seals?


Johnson. That was afterward; but when the Captain asked him what he had
gotten in his Bosom, he pulled out his Handkerchief, and said nothing but his
Handkerchief; but the Captain took the other Papers out of his Bosom and so I
went down and there were the Two Seals, and I took them up; and when I came up
Ellyot had a pair of Black Whiskers on, and he borrowed a pair of Scissers and
cut them off, and said he should remember me again if ever he lived, he should
know me by my Tooth being out. And coming up into Long-reach, Ellyot was a
cold, and got to the Oar and Rowed, and said you row as if you were Rowing to
Prison; and he wished that a Thunder Bolt might drop into the Boat, and that
London Bridge might drop down upon his Head. And when we came up to Whitehall I
stood a Guard over them.


Jury-man. Did you see Captain Billop take the Packet of Letters from that
Gentleman's Breast?


Johnson. Yes, I did.


Jury-man. Did you belong to Captain Billop?


Johnson. Yes, I was one of the Boats Crew.


Mr. Ashton. Had not I been up and searched before?


Johnson. Yes, I think you had been up before.


Mr. Ashton. And then you saw me take up the Packet off from the Ballast?


Johnson. Yes, I saw you take it out of the Ballast and put it into your Bosom.


Mr. Ashton. Gentlemen, I hope, you will be pleased to take notice of that.


L. C. J. Holt. No doubt of it they will.


Mr. Ashton. Did not that bundle of Papers that was taken out of my Breast, did
not they lie near to the place where the Seals lay?


Johnson. Yes, it lay just by them.


Mr. S. Thompson. Pray set up Capt. Billop again.


(Which was done.) When you brought these Papers to Whitehall, Capt. Billop,
who did you deliver them to?

C. Billop. To my Lord Nottingham.


Mr. S. Thompson. After he received them, what did he with them?


C. Billop. After he had examined all these Gentlemen he went to opening of the
Papers, and he desired me to stay in the Room till they were opened, which I
did; and my Lord upon looking on some of the Papers said, if this Packet had
gone we had quickly been visited by the French. With that I took them up, and
looked into them. My Lord said, I might look into as many of the Papers as I
pleased; but I was very Uneasy and full of Pain, and had more mind to be gone,
and be a Bed, than a looking into Papers; but several of the Papers I did look
into, and several I put my Mark upon; and the next at the Council, what of them
I did know I did put my Mark upon.


Mr. S. Thompson. After my Lord Nottingham had perused them, what did he do
with them?


C. Billop. My Lord put them up in a Cover, and tied them with a Piece of
Twine, and put his Seal upon them, and gave them me, and desired me to carry
them to my Lord President; which I immediately did, and without stopping
carried them to my Lord President.


Mr. Ashton. When was this, Sir? Was it that very Night that we were brought to
Whitehall?


C. Billop. Yes.


Mr. S. Tremain. Then we must desire my Lord Nottingham to be Sworn.


The Earl of Nottingham Sworn. Mr. S. Thompson. Will your Lordship please to
give the Court an Account how these Papers came to your Lordship, and how your
Lordship disposed of them.


E. of Not. Capt. Billop came to my Office --


Mr. Ashton. I humbly desire your Lordship would please to speak louder; for I
cannot hear your Lordship, and I fear the Jury cannot.


E. of Not. I speak as loud as ever I can, but I have a great Cold.


L. C. J. Holt. You may hear my Lord very well, if the Court be but silent.


L. Not. Capt. Billop brought to me a Packet tied about with a Packthread, to
which there was a Piece of a Leaden Pipe fixed, in which Packet there was
stuck in another Paper, I think there was but that one besides the Cover, but
what it was particularly I do not remember, this Packet was laid upon the
Table while he was by; and I called in my Lord Preston, not being willing to
make him stay, and after I had some Discourse with my Lord to examine him what
Account he could give of these Proceedings; then I called in your self Mr.
Ashton, and Capt. Billop was by also, but the Packet so tied with the
Packthread I cut open in Billop's presence with a Pair of Scissers; the same
Papers that were in that Packet, together with the little Paper that was stuck
in, I tied up, I am sure I sealed them in a Sheet of Paper, and gave them back
again to Capt. Billop to carry them to my Lord President.


Sir W. Will. Capt. Billop, you have already declared that all you received
from my Lord Notingham you carried to my Lord President.


C. Billop. All the Papers that I received from my Lord Nottingham, just as I
received them sealed with my Lord's Seal, I went directly to my Lord
Presidents, and gave them him.


Sir W. Will. Pray, my Lord, did your Lordship deliver to Capt. Billop all the
Papers that you received from him?


E. of Not. My Lord all the Papers that Capt. Billop brought to me that were
in the Packet (for he brought some Letters that he took out of my Lord
Preston's Pocket that were of no Consequence) but all the Papers that were in
the Packet I delivered back to Capt. Billop Sealed as I received from him, and
no more and no others; for the other Letters they being from my Lord Preston's
Children, and not relating to the Public, I gave them to him to give my Lord
Preston again.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I humbly beseech your Lordship to tell the Court how long
my Lord Preston was with your Lordship in the Room.


E. of Not. Truly I am not able to tell you particularly how long it was, I
believe it might be about a quarter of an Hour, or scarce so much.


Jury-man. Was there no body with your Lordship, when Capt. Billop was out, but
only my Lord Preston?


E. of Not. No, not that I know of.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I have one Favor more to beg of your Lordship, I humbly
pray your Lordship will please to tell the Court and Jury what Answer I gave to
your Lordship, when you asked me how I came by those Papers.


E. of Not. As near as I remember the Account that you gave of them was, That
you went down again after you were come up, as you said, to fetch your Hat; and
that when you did go down into the little Hole to fetch your Hat you brought up
these Papers with you.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, this was the Account I did give. Now this very well
corresponds with that Man's Evidence, that says he saw me take up the Papers
and put them into my Breast.


L. C. J. Holt. He does say so, and this does all very well agree.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Now we desire my Lord President would please to be Sworn.


The Lord President Sworn. Mr. S. Thompson. Pray, my Lord, will your Lordship
please to declare to the Court what Papers Capt. Billop brought to your
Lordship, and how your Lordship disposed of them.


L. Pres. Capt. Billop did bring me a Packet tied with a Packthread, and that
was sealed with my Lord Nottingham's Seal, I knew it to be his Seal; and he
told me that my Lord Nottingham commanded him to bring that Packet to me. I
opened the Packet, and perused all the Papers; it was very late and I locked
them up till Morning, and I then carried those very Papers to the King, and in
the King's Closet, at Kensington, the King read some of them, and in my sight,
for I never parted from the King, but was by all the while: The King put up all
the Papers again, and commanded me to call a Cabinet Council, and to let them
be delivered there to the Council; accordingly I did deliver them Paper by
Paper, and they were all marked there by my Lord Sydney, who is here present;
and they were then delivered into the Hands of my Lord Sydney.


L. C. J. Pollex. Will you please to ask my Lord any Questions, Mr. Ashton?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, if your Lordship will be pleased to pardon me, I would
ask your Lordship, Did any of your Lordships Servants, or Family read any of
these Letters?


L. Pres. No, not one.


Mr. Ashton. Were they locked up where any of your Lordships Secretaries, or
Servants could come to them?


L. Pres. No, I locked them up in a strong Box in my Closet.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I only desire this Favor further of your Lordship. Your
Lordship at the Committee of the Council was pleased to ask me, how I came by
those Papers; I presume you may remember, and I pray your Lordship to declare,
what answer I gave.


L. Pres. Truly, Mr. Ashton, to tell you the Truth, I do not remember the
Particulars, I remember you denied every Thing; I can only say that in the
general, but what you said in particular I cannot remember.


L. C. J. Pollex. Do you put my Lord in mind, if you can; See whether he does
remember it.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I only desire to ask my Lord President, whether I did not
tell him I went down after I had been fearcht into the Hold, and there I see
the Papers lie, and brought them up, and put them into my Breast; and they were
no sooner in my Hands but Capt. Billop had them in his; for the Man called and
said, This Gentleman has Something in his Breast, and the Captain put in his
Hand and pulled it out.


L. Pres. Truly, Mr. Ashton, I do not remember the Words that you used, but
remember you said Something to which I made answer, What makes it matter, They
were found upon you, and taken out of your Bosom, do you look to it how you
came by them. I do not remember what you said, for I cannot remember particular
Words, but I believe you might say some such Thing.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then, pray my Lord Sydney, will you be pleased to be Sworn.


The Lord Sydney Sworn. Mr. S. Thompson. Will your Lordship be pleased to
declare what Papers you received from my Lord President?


L. Syd. At the Cabinet Council my L. President delivered a Packet of Papers,
I received them every one there, and marked them, and put them in my Pocket.


Mr. S. Trem. Did your Lordship deliver them to any Person afterward?


L. Syd. The next Day, or the Day after, I gave them to Mr. Bridgman to Copy
out, and he delivered them back to me again.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray, my Lord, give me leave to ask this Question --


Mr. S. Thomps. Your Lordship had marked them before you delivered them to Mr.
Bridgman to Copy?


L. Syd. Yes, I marked them at the Council Table, at my L. Nottingham's Office.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, those Papers that you marked were they the same Papers
that my Lord President brought, and delivered in at the Council?


L. Syd. Yes, the very same.


Jury-man. My Lord, shall we have leave to ask my Lord Sydney a Question?


L. C. J. Holt. Ay; What is it?


Jury-man. Pray, my Lord, did the Packet come to you Sealed? That which was
taken from this Gentleman, was it Sealed when it came to you?


Mr. Soll. Genesis No, it had been opened by my Lord Nottingham, and my Lord
President.


L. C. J. Holt. Sir, you are under a Misapprehension of the Matter. My Lord
Nottingham after he had opened them sealed them up again, and delivered them to
Capt. Billop; Capt. Billop carried them sealed to my Lord President, my Lord
President opens them and lays them up, they were never out of his Possession,
he carries them to the King, the King read some of them in his Lordship's
presence, he delivers them at the Cabinet Council to my Lord Sydney, and my
Lord Sydney swears he read them there, marked them, and, when he had done, put
them in his Pocket.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord Sydney, will your Lordship be pleased to look upon
these Papers, and see if these be part of them.


L. Syd. I know them very well, I have read them Ten times, I marked them at the
Council, and that is my Mark.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray, my Lord, are those Two Papers that you have in your Hand,
Two of those Papers that my Lord President delivered at the Cabinet?


L. Syd. Yes, that they are.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord President, will you please to look upon them?


(Which his Lordship did.) L. Pres. These are Two of the same Papers that Capt.
Billop brought me.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Now we shall desire to have them read, but give me leave to
observe to you, That one of them is a Copy of the other; only in the one some
Words are written short, that are written out at length in the other.


Jury-man. Pray, my Lord, I desire to ask, Are they of the same Hand?


Mr. Soll. Genesis No, they are of different Hands.


Mr. S. Thomps. Pray, Gentlemen of the Jury, take notice, and observe these
Papers, for there is a great deal of Matter of great Moment in them; for you
cannot expect the King's Council should repeat every Thing that is in so many
Papers as we shall read; it is impossible we should take notice of all.


L. C. J. Holt. Or I either; therefore pray, Gentlemen, observe what is read,
for I shall be able only just to state the Evidence to you.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I hear them say one of those Papers is a Copy of the
other; I desire the Original may be read, and not the Copy.


Mr. S. Thomps. Who knows which is the Original?


L. C. J. Holt. Look you, Mr. Ashton, we don't know which is the Original, or
which is the Copy, they are both found together, they contain the same Matter
and the same Words: It may be you can tell which is the Original.


Mr. S. Thomps. You may look upon them your self, and tell us which is the
Original if you please.


Mr. Ashton. That is very well observed, Sir. That is throwing Water upon a
dead Mouse. Then I desire both of them may be read.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Indeed, Mr. Ashton, I think there is a particular Reason why
you should not desire to have the Copy read, because least it should prove to
be your own Hand writing.


Mr. Ashton. Pray let both be read.


Cl. of Peace reads. The result of a Conference --


Mr. S. Trem. Pray attend, for this is the Scheme of the whole Work.


Cl. of Peace reads. The result of a Conference, etc.


And the other was likewise read as before. L. C. J. Pollex. Pray let Mr.
Ashton see that Paper.


The Paper was handed to Mr. Ashton, being one of the Papers before read. L. C.
J. Pollex. Mr. Ashton, look upon that same Paper a little, satisfy your own
Mind a little whose Hand that Paper is in. Look upon it well, I would have you
be satisfied about it. Look particularly upon the latter part of it.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I have looked upon it, I have seen it all.


L. C. J. Pollex. Come then give it me back again, and think of it a little in
your own Heart.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord Sydney, pray, will your Lordship look upon this Paper.


L. Syd. This is one of the Papers that was among the rest, delivered by my
Lord President at the Cabinet.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray show it my Lord President; What says your Lordship to it?


L. Pres. This was one of the Papers I gave my Lord Sydney, and was brought me
in the Packet by Capt. Billop.


Cl. of Peace reads. That the King would return with a Design of making an
entire Conquest of his People --


Mr. S. Thomps. Pray, my Lord, give me leave, before it be read, to acquaint
the Jury what this is, that they may make the better Observations upon it.
This, Gentlemen, is the Heads of a Declaration that was intended to be
Published when the French came; and you will see what it is when it is read.
Pray observe it.


Cl. of Peace reads. That the King will return, etc.


As before. Mr. S. Trem. The next Paper is an Account which they had taken with
them of the Force of the Kingdom, of the Ships, particularly how many in
Number, what Rates, what were in Repair, what out of Repair, and what a
Building, Pray show it my Lord Sydney.


L. Syd. This is another of the Papers that I received from my Lord President,
and Marked at the Cabinet.


Mr. S. Thomps. Then show it my Lord President.


L. Pres. This is one of the Papers that were in the Packet, that Capt. Billop
brought me.


Cl. of Peace reads. Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray, my Lord Sydney, look upon these
Papers, and tell where your Lordship had them.


The Papers was shown both to the Lord President and the Lord Sydney. L. C. J.
Holt. My Lord President says he received them from Capt. Billop, and gave them
to my Lord Sydney; and my Lord Sydney says they are the same he received from
my Lord President.


Jury-man. Are those the Papers that have been read, my Lord?


Mr. J. Eyres. No, but they both say the same as to those that have been read.


Jury-man. They pray, my Lord, What are those Papers that are going to be read?


Mr. S. Trem. These are Two Letters, Gentlemen, that are written, giving an
account how the Affairs in England stood, with reference to the Persons
Concerns that they are written to; and there is a particular Passage in one of
them, How their young Master prevailed in its Interest, and got ground of his
Adversaries. If you observe them, you will easily understand what is meant by
them.


Cl. of Peace reads. This is directed for Mr. Redding, New Years Eve, Though
the Bearer of this, etc.


As before. Cl. of Peace reads. This is directed for Mrs. Redding. As it is
impossible for me to express, etc.


As before. Mr. Soll. Genesis Now we desire my Lord Sydney and my Lord President
would look upon these Papers.


Jury-man. My Lord, I desire the former part of that last Letter may be read
again.


Which was done. L. Syd. These I had from my Lord President.


L. Pres. And I had them out of the Packet that Capt. Billop brought me.


Mr. S. Trem. If your Lordship please I will open them to the Jury. Here are
Two Letters, in one of them there is an Account given that they were heartily
sorry they were disappointed, and that they had not been here already, but
hoped they will be here as fast as they can; that the Match was concluded, the
Settlement prepared, and no doubt but the Daughters Portion would be well
Secured, if they would come quickly.


Cl. of Peace reads. Dec. 31. 1690. It Is directed for Mrs. Charlton. I must not
let this Bearer depart Madam, etc.


As before. Mr. S. Trem. That Letter tells you that the Daughters Portion would
be well Secured; this that we now produce will tell you, how it shall be
Raised. It says, the old Tenants are weary of their Master, and a little
Matter, if he would but appear in Westminster-ball, would redeem the Estate;
and the Cause might be brought to a final hearing before the end of Easter
Term, if they made haste, and it were well Solicited.


Cl. of Peace reads. This is directed for Mr. Jackson. Dec. 31. 1690. The
Bearer hereof will give you, etc.


As before. Mr. Soll. Genesis We must desire my Lord President and my Lord Sydney
would be pleased to look upon these Papers.


L. Pres. I received these from Capt. Billop in the Packet, and gave it to my
Lord Sydney.


L. Syd. These are some of the Papers I had from my Lord President.


Mr. S. Trem. The Letters we now produce to be read seem to be written by a Man
that was involved in a great Trade, that had great Projects in his Head, and
drawn many Schemes in his own Brain how to carry on the Trade, he directs what
sort of Wares he would have sent, what was proper for their Markets, that he
had got many a new Customer, and hoped they should not be disobliged; that all
must be sent before the First of March, at least before the Tenth, or the whole
Summer Profits would be lost.


Cl. of Peace reads. 31 Dec. --


L. C. J. Holt. Read the Superscription first.


Cl. of Peace. There is no Subscription, my Lord, at all.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, read on.


Cl. of Peac reads. 31 Dec. The Interruption of the former Correspondence had a
very ill Effect many ways, etc.


As before. Mr. S. Trem. Gentlemen, doubting that that Letter might not be
pressing enough, here is another to the same effect.


Cl. of Peace reads. Dec. 31. It is a Presumption incident to those that are
any ways upon the Spot, etc.


As before. Mr. S. Trem. One would imagine this Letter were written by some
Person that used to talk Cant, that he is so ready at it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray, my Lord President, what says your Lordship to these
Papers?


L. Pres. These Two Letters were in the same Bundle that Capt. Billop delivered
to me, and I delivered them to my Lord Sydney.


L. Syd. These are some of the Papers I had from my L. President, at the
Cabinet.


Mr. S. Trem. That first of these Papers is a Letter wherein the Party gives an
Account of his own Condition here, and how he would Venture to bring about what
was desired.


Cl. of Peace reads. 31 Dec. 1690. Was my Condition more desperate and uneasy
than it is, etc.


As before. Mr. S. Trem. This little Paper was enclosed in the other.


Cl. of Peace reads. I beg, etc.


As before. Mr. S. Trem. Now show this Paper to my Lord President, and my Lord
Sydney.


Which was done. L. C. J. Holt. My Lord President, and my Lord Sydney, swears
the same for this Paper, as for the rest.


Mr. S. Trem. This Paper shows they were going about a Deed that they did not
desire to have known; it is a Key how to explain their Meaning.


Cl. of Peace reads. For Mrs. Anne Russel, etc.


As before. Then Three other Papers were shown to and sworn by the Lord
President, and the Lord Sydney, to be part of the same Papers. Mr. S. Trem. The
Papers that we now are going to read are these. Gentlemen, here is a Letter of
Recommendation in behalf of one Mr. Orbinet, which is a Name they pretended of
some Person that was at Paris, or to go there; and it is written by one Mr.
Dellivere to his Correspondent there, and he tells him, the Bearer had
Something to disclose to him, and that he might have an entire Confidence in
him: But the Letter of Recommendation alone, without a Sum of Money, they
reckoned would meet with a bad Welcome in France, and therefore they take 500
l. with them, and here are Two Bills to pay it.


Then Mr. Humphrey Levermere was sworn to interpret them, being in French,
(which he did) and read them as in the former Trial. Jury-man. Were these Bills
found in that Packet?


Mr. S. Trem. Yes, Yes; they are sworn to by both those Lords.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Now, pray my Lord, will you please to look upon these Papers.


The Lord President, and Lord Sydney both, testified, That those were part of
the Papers. Mr. S. Thomp. This next Paper that we give in Evidence is very
short. It seems to be a Table for the Memory of the Person that was to carry
it; They are short Heads for the Memory, consisting of a great many
Particulars; You will make your Observations upon them, and what Judgment you
think fit of them.


Mr. S. Trem. My Lord, I desire to take Notice of these Papers that we are now
going to read; you will observe these Things in them, which are worth your
remarking, Gentlemen; because these Papers that we now read to you are of
themselves sufficient to prove every Article in the Indictment: For these
Papers give an Account of the Ships, their Number and Force, the Forts of the
Kingdom, how they are Manned, how they may be Surprised, where the French Fleet
should Fight, where they should Assault us, how they should hinder the Dutch
and English Fleets from Joining, what Number of Soldiers would be sufficient,
and what Number of Ships in Newcastle to plague the City of London, how to
manage this whole Affair; and it gives Characters of the Clergy of England, and
particularly of the City of London, and says, they are the Worst of Men.


Mr. Serj. Thomson. No Brother, it is the worst of all the Clergy.


L. C. J. Holt. Come, read them.


Clerk of the Peace reads. Lady D. 2000 l. etc.


(as before.) The Jury desired to see the last Papers, and had them delivered
to them. Mr. Soll. Genesis Then we rest it here, to see what the Prisoner will say
to it.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Ashton, the Kings Council have done their Evidence for the
King, what have you to say for your self?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I humbly desire to know of your Lordship, whether all the
Letters are read, that were read at the Trial of my Lord Preston?


L. C. J. Holt. What is that material to you, whether they be or not?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I am informed that there were several Letters, that
particularly name my Lord, implying him to be the Bearer, and I desire those
Letters may be read.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. With all my heart, if you do desire it, it shall be read,
we do not think it material.


Mr. Ashton. I do desire it, it will be plain, I believe, from thence, that I
could know nothing at all of this matter; and if your Lordship please, my Lord,
to observe it, three or four of these last Papers, as Mr. Serj. Tremain
observed, were the Groundwork of all this Business, which refers to Portsmouth
and South Sea, and some other Papers; these I think, with Submission, were
proved to be the Hand of another Gentleman, and I desire it may be proved again
to the Jury, by which I think it will be plain, that they do not affect me.


L. C. J. Holt. Look you, Mr. Ashton, it is not proved to be your Hand, nor
pretended to be so.


Mr. Ashton. But positively proved to be another's Hand, as I am informed, and
it is that which Mr. Serj. Tremain observed was the Groundwork for carrying on
the whole Design, I presume the Witnesses are in Court that proved it then, and
I hope your Lordship will be so kind as to let it be proved now; they did prove
it to be another Persons Hand upon a Trial not long ago.


L. C. J. Holt. If you have a mind to call any Witnesses to prove the Papers to
be another's Hand, you may call them.


Mr. Ashton. I hope the King's Witnesses are now in Court that did prove them
to be his Hand Writing, and they will prove it now I suppose.


L. C. J. Holt. If you have a mind you may call them, they have not a mind to
produce them for the King.


Mr. Ashton. I know not where they are my Lord.

Pray Mr. Aaron Smith, be you so kind as to call them.


L. C. J. Polexfen. You should have sent and Subpena'd them to be here.


Mr. Ashton. Mr. War is there, my Lord, I desire he may be asked the Question;
and I believe Mr. Blane is in the Court, pray let him be ask*d.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. War, you are called by the Prisoner, as a Witness, to
prove my Lord Preston's Hand.


Mr. Ashton, Mr. War, Mr. Townsend and Mr. Blane, I desire may be all asked.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Ashton, you have insisted upon it, that these Papers were
my Lord Preston's own Writing.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I do insist upon it, to know whether they were not proved
to be his hand.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Yes, they were so, it is agreed.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. We do grant the King's Witnesses proved, that they did
believe them to be my Lord Preston's Hand.


L. C. J. Holt. The King's Council do admit, that these three last Papers were
not your Hand, but they admit them to be my Lord Preston's Hand, and it is very
well done of them to admit it; so that now it is to be taken for granted, that
those three last Papers were my Lord Preston's Hand.


Mr. Ashton. Then, my Lord, I desire the Substance of those Papers may be the
^ore pressed upon the Jury, because Mr. Serj. Tremain observed that the (...)
Design in the Scheme of it lay in those Papers, and they are not my (...), but
another's; and for what is in them, I know nothing, nor am concerned.


L. C. J. Holt. What have you farther to say, Sir?


Mr. Sol. Genesis You mentioned another Letter which you did desire should be read.


Mr. Ashton. Ah! two or three where my Lord is named.


Mr. Sol. Genesis This is the Letter I suppose you mean, the Clerk shall read it.


Clerk of the Peace reads. Sir, I vow to you, I do not repine at having lost
all for your sake, etc.


(as before) Mr. Ashton. Gentlemen, I hope you will observe, in that Letter my
Lord is called the Bearer; and it tells that he brings Papers with him, by
which it is plain, that you cannot imagine I could know any thing of these
Papers. And Gentlemen, it has not appeared by any Evidence that has been given,
that I knew any thing more, than that they were unfortunately found upon me:
But with Submission, I believe there is another Letter, if I am informed right,
wherein my Lord is named, and called, my Lord the Bearer.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Sir, I do assure you now, we have, to my Observation, read every
Letter, and every Paper, that was read on Saturday.


Mr. Ashton. Mr. Solicitor, I am satisfied, for I am confident you would not
affirm it if it were otherwise.


L. C. J. Polexfen. There is not any Letter that says my Lord the Bearer, but
my Lord will give you an account, so and so; the Bearer will tell you these and
these things; will you have it read again? You shall if you will.


Mr. Ashton. I am unwilling to take up your Lordships time, unless the Jury
desire to have it read again.


Jury-Man. Pray my Lord, when that Letter was read on Saturday, how was it
construed by the Court? How did they take it then?


L. C. J. Holt. We did take it then, because my Lord was mentioned, that he
might possibly be the Bearer.


L. C. J. Polexfen. It is very probable, and so it was understood then, that
the Lord mentioned in the Letters was my Lord Preston, and so that my Lord was
the Bearer that could give an account of the Countesses Condition; and in the
beginning of those Papers that are of my Lords Hand, there is mentioned so much
Money for the Lady D -- which is my Lady Dorset I suppose, that is there meant,
and that writ that Letter.


Mr. Ashton. No, my Lady Dorchester.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Dorchester, I cry your mercy; and it is probable the same
reason is a reason still to make it believed that my Lord Preston was meant.


Mr. Ashton. I think my Lord Chief Justice was pleased to observe, as I have
been informed, in giving his Charge to the Jury, that these Papers, some of
them naming my Lord, must be meant of my Lord Preston, there being no other
Lord but he; and he likewise gave another reason, says he, they lay by my
Lord's Seals that were produced, and therefore it was plain, they could not be
Ashton's nor Elliot's.


L. C. J. Holt. No not so, but my Lord might be concerned, because my Lord's
Seals were there where the Papers were found.


Mr. Ashton. I am wrong informed if those were not the words my Lord Chief
Justice Polexfen used.


L. C. J. Polexfen. What do you say were the words? if you will repeat them,
I Will tell you as near as I can.


Mr. Ashton. Your Lordship seemed to infer, that my Lord being named, and the
Bearer in the same Paper, that of Consequence that must be my Lord Preston, and
the Papers must be his; and you did give another reason for it, to enforce it,
that the same Man that saw me take them up, saw them lie by the Seals, which
were proved to be my Lord Preston's, from whence your Lordship did say, it is
plain they were my Lord Preston's, and that Ashton or Elliot could not be
concerned in them.


L. C. J. Holt. You mistake that matter, sure there was not any such word said,
for that Evidence that tended to convict my Lord Preston, did by no means tend
to acquit you; the question then was, how far my Lord Preston was concerned; my
Lord insisted upon it, says he, They were not taken from me but from Mr.
Ashton; there the Question was not about you.


Mr. Ashton. I humbly hope, my Lord, you will forgive me for ins^^^^^^ upon
these Matters, because I am for my Life.


L. C. J. Polexfen. I would do you all the right I can, I assure you, Mr.
Ashton; but certainly there was no such thing said as you have mentioned.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I do not question but you will do me right, and I thought
so, when I chose the Jury out of the first that appeared, without challenging
any.


L. C. J. Holt. Well Sir, pray go on to your Defense.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, my own Defense will be very weak upon the whole, for I am
very Illiterate and Unskilled in the Laws, but where I do fail of taking
Advantage, to observe what may be for my Advantage, I hope your Lordships will
be so kind to me, as well as just (I may call it) to your selves, being upon
your Oaths, as to take notice of it. My Lord in the first place --


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Before Mr. Ashton proceeds, I would observe one word in a
Letter that has been read, which is one of these Papers, it says, I say nothing
of another Gentleman that takes opportunity to see those parts, but he has
shown a Zeal and Sincerity in the affair equal to most.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. You hear, Gentlemen, that there is notice taken of another
Person besides the Bearer.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, my Lord, is it any Consequence that I must be the Person
that must be meant, or that I must know what the Contents of the Letters was?
There was another besides me, and so it is not plain who was meant, or if I
were the Man meant in this Letter, it must not therefore follow that I must
know of it.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. I did not mention it as a Proof that you were the Person
meant, but only to show that there was another Person besides, my Lord, taken
notice of in them.


L. C. J. Holt. I must confess, I think Mr. Ashton observes right, it does not
concern him, for as well as he was there, there was another, and it is
uncertain whether it relates to him or the other, and so it signifies nothing
at all; that is my mind.


Pray go on, Mr. Ashton Mr. Ashton. My Lord, upon the whole I have this to
observe, first as to my business of going into France, I must ingenuously own
it, though I protest to you I never owned it nor named it to the Woman though
she had sworn it, but yet I do now. My design was to go to France, and I had
very great and good Reason for it, I think, I had endeavonred all ways I could
in the World to procure a Pass to go to France, it is very well known, I did
business under Lieutenant General Worden that died half a year ago, his
Accounts are now depending, and such Accounts as may be prejudicial in some
points to his Family to whom I have always owned and must a great Obligation,
and would be very glad upon all occasions to serve it, and all the Branches of
it; this was not the whole nor the only design I had in going thither, but I
had likewise some business of my own, I have a considerable Sum of Money owing
me, if it be necessary to prove it, I can prove it by a Bond from a Person that
is there; a great Sum it is, a very considerable one to me at least. And, my
Lord, I did think if I did not go my self it was impossible for me to do any
thing in that Affair, and that was the true and only Reason of my design in
going to France, having been out of hopes of getting any other Convenience
otherways; this was not a Design just now formed, as if I were just now upon
some Plot concerning the Public, but it has been my design ever since
Lieutenant General Worden died, and he upon his Deathbed engaged me to do it;
and I once went down, hoping to have gone from Dover, and there I was
apprehended and taken. And, my Lord, I have used all manner of Endeavors to go
other ways, but they have always failed me, and this way I hoped would have
taken: my Lord, I do own I did hire the Boat, and I did pay the Money, but with
Submission, I think that is not any manner of Treasonable Act, my Lord; perhaps
it is an ill Act, but it does not amount in least to Treason going to the
King's Enemies, suppose I went upon that account, that is no manner of Treason
in the World, carrying Papers to the King's Enemies, except it be proved that I
was privy to them, and knew the Contents of them, if Lawyers inform me right,
is not Treason; then what remains? It Is true, I must own the Papers were found
upon me, and I believe there is no body that has heard the Evidence that has
been given, but must readily conclude that I found them in the place where the
Seaman says I took them up; and besides, my Lord, there is not any manner of
proof so much as aimed at by the King's Council in all their Evidence, that I
was privy to any one of these Papers; so that, my Lord, I think there is very
little proved upon me at all; I had the misfortune to be taken in this Company
that was going where these Papers were taken, it is true, but they have not
attempted to prove that I was privy to or knew any thing of them at all, nor
that I was more concerned than that they were taken in my Stomach; this is all
I have to observe upon the whole; as to the business of the Indictment there
are great and grevious Aggravations in it, and such as I am not able to
comprehend the meaning of, the Words confound me; and therefore I humbly desire
your Lordship to tell me upon what Statute I am Indicted.


L. C. J. Holt. I Will tell you, Mr. Ashton, you are Indicted upon the 25th of
Edward the Third, for conspiring, compassing and imagining the Death of the
King and Queen, and for that purpose going into France, and endeavoring to
incite the French King to invade the Kingdom, and telling him how he should do
it, and letting him know in what State and Condition the Kingdom was, and how
fit to be invaded.


M. Ashton. Pray, my Lord, is that at all proved upon me?


L. C. J. Holt. That is the Question that the Jury are to judge of upon the
Evidence that has been given.


Mr. Ashton. As to that of compassing the Death of the King and Queen, I am
ignorant of dealings in Law; but I conceive there are several Species of
Treason mentioned in that Act of the 25 of Edward III. and as to the imagining
the Death of the King, that is only to be proved by some Overt Act: Now I think
nothing at all has been proved of any open Act conducing to prove the imaginary
or compassing the Death of the King or Queen, no manner of Consultation or
Treasonable Act at all, and therefore, my Lord, I do not see that there is any
great matter that is proved upon me, and I hope you are of that Opinion too.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Ashton, that you may not go away with a Mistake, any that
designed the Deposition of the King and Queen, and the Invasion of the Kingdom,
which is proved by any Overt Act it is sufficient to prove that they compass
and imagine the Death of the King and Queen.


Mr. Ashton. I presume it may be so, I believe that may be the Construction of
the Law.


L. C. J. Holt. And I make no question but those that you have consulted with
have told you as much.


Mr. Ashton. Truly as to Counsel my Trial has been as hard as ever Man met
withal.


L. C. J. Holt. Why do you say so, Mr. Ashton? the Court has not been hard upon
you.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I do not complain of the Court, but as to the matter of
time, I had notice by that Gentleman, Mr. Bale, to prepare for my Trial, and
that was on Friday, and not before.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Friday was Sevenight, you mean, I suppose.


Mr. Ashton. Yes, I do mean Friday was Sevenight I was then a close Prisoner, I
had not the opportunity or liberty of seeing any Christian Soul, I spoke to him
then, and told him, Mr. Bale, this is very short notice; pray be so kind as to
move my Lord that I may have Council; truly he was Civil enough, and said, he
would do all he could; says he, will you give me the Names of your Council? so
I gave him the Names of four, and of a Solicitor; but I never heard more of
him in the matter: I did with all my Industry and Skill give my Friends notice,
but I was under great difficulty, for I had not the liberty of Pen, Ink, nor
Paper, nor a Man to send upon a Message on Saturday; I gave my Friends notice
of it, upon Sunday, which was no very good Day for business, they applied
themselves to my Lord Sidney, whose Favor and Kindness I shall always own as
long as I live, he gave me all the dispatch possible, and got me an Order to
see my Wife that day, though it was Sunday; the next day I made Application to
have my Council come to me, that was Monday, he with the same readiness
procured that, but it was Tuesday in the Afternoon before I could see any
living Soul but my Wife and some of the Council that I desired would not
readily come to me, and it was Wednesday before I did see any body of them, and
so I had but Wednesday and Thursday to consult with them in. On Friday I was
brought here, and I endeavored to procure a Copy of the Panel, that I might
inform my self of the Characters of the Men that were to be my Jury; and my
Lord, I would desire you to give me leave to clear one Point, which through
Inadvertency slipped from me about the time that I desired to send to enquire
about the Jury. I did not mean as was apprehended, to send to them to take them
off, but I only meant to enquire after their Characters; this was done upon
Friday; I had not a Copy of the Panel till last Friday, when we were Arraigned
in Court, it was Two of the Clock before the Panel was given us, it was
between Three and Four when we came to Newgate; we were to come upon our Trial
the next Morning by Eight of the Clock; so that before the Copies could be
transcribed for us, there were left but six Hours for us to enquire into the
Morals of so many Men, of whom some lived eight, some ten, some fifteen Miles
out of Town; for my part I was not able to enquire after any one, and that your
Lordship may think by my taking the first Twelve that appeared, and believing
my self Innocent of this matter, I resolved to put my self upon my Trial by any
twelve indifferent Englishmen; I only beg if I have omitted any thing in
reference to my self, or misbehaved my self, with respect to the Bench, that
you would please to set me right, and consider that I stand here for my Life;
and to grant me your Pardon for any thing wherein I have offended your
Lordships, to whom, and to the Jury, I refer my Cause; only I beg leave to call
two or three Witnesses, I know it has been allowed before in such cases, to
give some short account of my Life and Conversation, because it has been
reflected upon me that I was a Papist, because I designed to go into France;
but I believe there is not any Man, whose Devotion to the Protestant Religion
established by Law, is greater than mine has been, or to whom that Religion is
Dearer than to my self.


L. C. J. Holt. You are not accused of any such thing, no body pretends you are
a Papist, but call whom you will.


Mr. Ashton. Pray call Dr. Bursh, Dr. Lake, Dr. Fitz-Williams and Dr. Davenant.
There is Dr. Fitz-Williams; I beg the Favor of you Dr. Fitz-Williams to give
the Court an account of your Acquaintance with me, and particularly about my
Religion.


Dr. Fitz-Williams. Will your Lordship give me leave, my Lord?


L. C. J. Holt. Ah! Come, what do you know of Mr. Ashton?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I suppose, my Lord, that he calls me in as a Witness to his
Religion, and to his Morality, I think so; with my Lord's Permission I will
give the truest Testimony I can: I have known him some time, he used to be
frequently at the Service of the Church in the Protestant part of the Family,
at St. James's, where I was Chaplain; during the time I was there, I observed
him to be a frequent Receiver of the Holy Communion; and as far as I could
observe, lived answerable to what he professed to be, a Sincere Member of the
Church of England, and a Serious Christian for his Sincerity and Zeal for the
Protestant Religion: I can give this Instance, he had an Aunt that had a
Relation to that Family, one Mrs. Du-pee, whom he thought did warp a little
toward Popery, and he desired me, about five Years ago, to have recourse to
her, and desired to know if she were dissatisfied with any Point of Religion in
the Church of England, in Communion with which she lived visibly, and I would
do my endeavor to satisfy her, as I do not doubt but I could. She was
desirous to know who was the Person that sent me: I told her I came of my own
Head in the greatest part; but I suppressed the Interposition of Mr. Ashton for
several Reasons, and told her, I had great Suspicion of her inclining the other
way; and I had great reason for it, because of her Husband, who was a Papist,
and the great Resort of Popish Priests to their Lodgings. She told me then, she
was satisfied in every thing, and if she had any Dissatisfaction she would send
for me and give me an account. Some Months after I came to St. James's to wait,
and observing her to be absent more than usually before, from Prayers in the
Chapel, I went to her, and asked her the reason: She told me, it was because
she was making some Linen for her Master King James, which was to be made in
haste: But she then designed to go for Flanders quickly; and Mr. Ashton about
that time, or two or three days after, told me his Aunt was gone to France, and
spoke it with very great concern, and that he believed, under the Pretense of
calling over her Younger Son, she was gone to declare her self a Papist, and he
was very much troubled at it. This I know for his Zeal for the Protestant
Religion.


L. C. J. Holt. When was this, Doctor?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. This was, my Lord, about five Years ago.


Mr. Ashton. That is, as to the business of my Aunt I suppose, I know not how
he comes to mention it, but as to my Life and Morals, you can give a later
account.


Dr. Fitz-Williams. My Lord, I have Administered the Sacrament to him.


L. C. J. Holt. What Questions do you farther ask him, Mr. Ashton? or can you
say any more, Doctor?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. No, my Lord, I can say no more, but that he received the
Sacrament about half a Year ago.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. We have not objected any thing, as to his Religion, at all.


Mr. Ashton. But I know it has been a Reflection that has gone about of me,
that I am a Papist, therefore I beg leave to prove my Religion and Conversation.


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, call whom you will, you shall not be hindered, take what
Course you please.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray, Doctor, you say he has received the Sacrament lately;
when was that, and where?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. It was at Ely Chapel within this six or seven Months.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Have you been lately conversant with him?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. Truly, my Lord, I have not been very lately.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Pray what have you heard him say, concerning his Affection
to King William and Queen Mary?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I do not remember any thing at all of that.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Have you heard him say any thing to the contrary?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. No, I cannot remember that.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. What have you heard him say about his Affection to K. James?


L. C. J. Holt. Do not ask him that, there may be a Snare in that Question.


Jury-M. You say, Doctor, that he received the Sacrament six Months ago in Ely
Chapel; Did you deliver the Sacrament to him there?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. No, I did not.


Jury-M. Pray, Doctor, were the Prayers that were used at that time altered* as
they are now in the Common Prayer Book?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I cannot say they were.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Did you ever see him Drink King James's Health?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I do not use to Drink Healths, I came here only to do an
Office of Justice and Kindness to Mr. Ashton, to testify about his Religion
and Conversation.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. But answer the Question, Did you ever see him drink K.
James's Health?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I cannot remember I ever did.


Jury-M. Was King William and Queen Mary Prayed for in those Prayers?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I cannot say they were.


Mr. Just. Eyres. But the Jury-M. Question was, whether King William and Queen
Mary were Prayed for? and whether the Prayers were as they are now altered?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. My Lord, I say I don't remember there was any Names
mentioned, as the Prayers are now altered.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. That Is very well.


Dr. Fitz-Williams. I did neither read the Prayers, Sir, nor Administer the
Communion at that time.


L. C. J. Polexfen. But you were not at the Prayers as they are now altered, I
perceive.


Dr. Fitz-Williams. Yes, I have, several times.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Not with that Gentleman, Mr. Ashton.


Dr. Fitz-Williams. But I have been an hundred times at the Prayers as they are
now altered.


Mr. Ashton. I desire Dr. Lake, who is there upon the Bench, that he may be
asked what he knows of me.


Mr. Ser. Tremain. But I have one question to ask of Dr. Fitz-Williams before
he goes.


L. C. J. Holt. What will you ask him?


Mr. Serj. Tremain. I would ask you, Sir, one question, Have you taken the
Oaths to this King and Queen?


Dr. Fitz-Williams. No, I have not, Sir, that is my Unhappiness, but I know how
to submit and live peaceably under them.


Mr. Ashton. But there is one Dr. Lake that has taken them, he will give you an
account what he knows of me.


Dr. Fitz-Williams. If any one can say I have done or acted any thing against
the Government, I will readily submit to be punished for it.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, Dr. Lake, what say you?


Dr. Lake. My Lord, I have known Mr. Ashton above these sixteen Years, we lived
together in the same Family several of them; I always observed him to be a
Person of exemplary Piety and singular Devotion; he duly came to the Prayers of
the Church twice a day, and to the Sacrament once a Month; he has taken
occasion, that I know several times, both at St. James's and at Edinburgh, to
testify his Zeal against Popery; and I am apt to think, that he has suffered
sometimes for doing so.


Mr. Ashton. Dr. Bursh, Pray, as to my Religion, I beg you to give an account
what you know of me, particularly something you may remember of me, of my
perhaps over-heat against Popery.


Dr. Bursh. My Lord, I have long known Mr. Ashton, the Prisoner at the Bar, and
till within these two years frequently conversed with him; and while I did so,
I believed him a good Protestant, and I have so many Instances of it, and
particularly before some upon whom his Fortune depended; but as to any thing of
late, I can say nothing, because our Conversation has ceased.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Dr. Bursh, have you known any thing of Mr. Ashton's
Conversation for two years past?


Dr. Bursh. No, Sir.


L. C. J. Holt. Have you any thing more, Mr. Ashton?


Mr. Ashton. No, my Lord, I have nothing more, unless your Lordship desire any
thing more of this Nature.


L. C. J. Holt. Call whom you will.


Mr. Ashton. Here is one Mr. Tomlinson.


L. C. J. Holt. Come, what say you, Sir?


Mr. Tomlinson. My Lord, I waited upon Major Genesis Worden when he was Sick, and
there read the Prayers of the Church, and Mr. Ashton was a constant Attender
upon the Public Prayers at the Visitation of the Sick, and was very Devout;
that is all I can say.


L. C. J. Holt. When was this?


Mr. Tomlinson. It was in the Sickness of Major Genesis Worden.


L. C. J. Holt. How long ago was that?


Mr. Tomlinson. It was about half a year ago.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Were those Prayers as they are altered now or not?


Mr. Tomlinson. It was only the Visitation of the Sick, and the Collect for the
Morning and Collect for the Evening, because the General's Sickness was such,
that he could not bear long Prayers.


L. C. J. Holt. Sir, have you been acquainted with the Prisoner any time?


Mr. Tomlinson. About eight Months.


L. C. J. Holt. Have you any more Witnesses, Mr. Ashton?


Mr. Ashton. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Then I would have you to answer me this one thing; why were you
so desirous, and used such Importunity, that the Papers should be thrown over
Board.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, that is a Point I ought to have spoke to, to clear my
self.


L. C. J. Holt. It seems material, and I would not have it forgot, if you can
answer it.


Mr. Ashton. I humbly thank your Lordship, and whatsoever my Fate is, I cannot
but own I have had a fair Trial for my Life, and I thank your Lordship for
putting me in mind.


L. C. J. Holt. And take this other thing with it, why did you desire Captain
Billop to go along with you where you were going?


Mr. Ashton. He has Sworn it, my Lord, that I did so, but as I hope for
Salvation, if I were to dye immediately, I do not know that I spoke to him of
any such thing; how was it possible that I should prevail with him? or how was
it likely that I should force him to go along with us, when he had about twelve
or fourteen Men with him Armed, and we unarmed?


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, it was not Forcing, it was but Persuading him to go.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I do not know any thing of it, I Will assure you; but as
for endeavoring to persuade him to throw the Packet overboard, I must own I
did endeavor to persuade him to it; and I do presume there is no body in
Court, that had been engaged with a Person so Unfortunate, that would not have
done the same thing for any common Friend, not knowing what the Contents of
those Papers were, seeing them in that Posture, especially when I saw some body
else so near me, so uneasy and concerned to have them seen.


L. C. J. Holt. Then, Mr. Ashton, there is another thing which you opened, which
I would have you prove; you say you were to go into France upon the Affairs of
Col. Worden's Family; first you say Col. Worden had a great account to make up;
how will you make that out?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I will prove here in Court,
though it is a sort of surprise upon me; that there is a great Account
depending, I believe I may appeal to Mr. Solicitor himself, who knows that
there is a Petition in the House of Commons, now depending, from the Queens
Tradesmen and Debtors, whom she owed 68000 l. she did Assign the Arrears of
some growing Rents for the Satisfaction of this Debt; but the King and
Government have not thought fit to let it be applied to her use, or to the
paying of those Debts she assigned it to. Nay it has gone further, I can appeal
to several Persons, there is one Man by chance in the Court, that I believe
does know that I promised and engaged, and actually have paid a great part of
this Debt; for believing that the Money was good upon the Assignment, I have
actually paid some of these Men out of my own Pocket, and perhaps more than
became me to venture; I think it may very well call my Discretion into question.


L. C. J. Holt. Who will you have called, Mr. Ashton?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, here is Mr. Spalding,


L. C. J. Holt. That the late Queen does owe People Money, that I believe is
true.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, Mr. Spalding, will you give the Court an account, whether
there is any Money due from the Queen to you.


Mr. Spalding. My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I have a Debt due to me
from the late Queen, as her Coach-Harness-maker, it is 470 l. or something
thereabouts, and Mr. Ashton has paid me part of this Debt; this I do own.


Mr. Ser. Tremain. Pray, how long have you been acquainted with Mr. Ashton, Sir?


Mr. Spalding. A dozen years, Sir.


Mr. Ser. Tremain. Have you had any Intimacy with him?


Mr. Spalding. He and I have been very well acquainted.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Have you seen Mr. Ashton write at any time?


Mr. Spalding. Yes I have.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Do you know his Hand?


Mr. Spalding. Yes, I think I do.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Pray how came Mr. Ashton to pay you that part of your Money?


Mr. Spalding. I pressed Mr. Ashton, and told him my Necessities, and he did
advance me this Money.


L. C. J. Holt. How much did he advance?


Mr. Spalding. Almost 400 l.


L. C. J. Polexfen. When was it he paid it you?


Mr. Spalding. Almost a Year ago.


L. C. J. Holt. Did he pay it out of his own Pocket?


Mr. Spalding. I believe so.


L. C. J. Holt. I believe so; or was it Money that he had returned to him?


Mr. Spalding. I believe it was out of his own Pocket, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Why do you believe so?


Mr. Spalding. Truly I believe it was out of his own Pocket.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Pray who was to repay him?


Mr. Spalding. About that very time we were Petitioning the House of Commons,
that we might have our Debts secured, and our Money out of the Arrears of Rents
due to the late Queen, according to her Assignment; and we so far pressed the
matter, that there was a Clause inserted into the Bill for the securing of our
Debt; but upon the next day, or the day following, the Parliament was Prorogued.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Which way did he expect to be repaid?


Mr. Spalding. I Will tell you which way, I suppose, my Lord.


L. C. J. Polexf. Did he not tell you which way?


Mr. Spald. No, he never told me.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Mr. Ashton, did you never tell him how you should be repaid?


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I hoped to be repaid, and concluded I should, out of the
Arrears of Rent in the Tenants Hands.


L. C. J. Holt. But you were very kind to pay Money out of your own Pocket upon
such Hopes.


Mr. Serj. Tremain. Pray Sir will you look upon that Paper; do you know the
Hand?


Mr. Spalding. No, Sir, I do not.


L. C. J. Holt. I suppose he did compound with you.


L. C. J. Polexfen. This does show an extraordinary kindness toward some sort
of People.


Mr. Ashton. If he Discounted the Interest to the time that we reckoned it
would be paid, you know that Prejudice would be to him, and not to me; it may
indeed prove a Prejudice at last, if the Debt be not paid, because the Receipt
is Conditional; if it be not allowed him, she shall Discount to me again.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Was there no Money returned over from the Queen, K. James'
Q -- n that was?


Mr. Ashton. No my Lord directly nor indirectly, not one Penny, I believe they
are not in a Condition to return Money.


L. C. J. Holt. Well Mr. Ashton, what have you more?


Mr. Ashton, I have nothing more to say, I submit my Cause to your Lordship.


L. C. J. Polexf. Look you Mr. Ashton, as to some things that you have
mentioned: First, there is no body questions but you are a Protestant; nay, as
far as I discern, so they are all that are concerned in this Matter. The whole
design shows that they are all so careful of the Protestant Religion, that they
design to restore and establish it by the King of France; so that it appears
they are all Protestants concerned in this Project.


Mr. Ashton. Pray, my Lord, who is it that proposes that?


L. C. J. Polexfen. The Papers that were carrying to France, Mr. Ashton, you
have heard them read.


Mr. Ashton. I hope, my Lord, that no doubtful Insinuations or Suggestions are
to effect me?


Mr. S. Tremain. There is a Gentleman that was called to by the Prisoner, it
may be, he knows his Hand; pray Dr. Fitz-Williams look upon that Paper, you
have been acquainted with him many years, do you know his Hand?


Dr. F. Williams. No Sir, I do not know his hand, I never did see him write, I
cannot say I ever received a Letter from him.


Mr. Ashton. I entirely submit my Cause to your Lordship and the Jury.


L. C. J. Holt, Then you have done Mr. Ashton?


Mr. Ashton, Yes.


Mr. Just. Eyres. Mr. Ashton, because you cannot reply again upon my Lord Chief
Justice, after he has summed up the Evidence. There Is another thing that I
would put you in mind of, that you may give an Answer to it. Captain Billop
swears before the Papers were found upon you (and it seems to stick upon you)
when he was informed by the Seamen, that you had put something in your Bosom,
and he asked you what it was, you said nothing but your Handkerchief? Now, if
you knew not what was in the Papers, how came you to deny you had any thing in
your Bosom?


Mr. Ashton, For the same Reason that I would have endeavored to have had them
thrown overboard, out of kindness to the Person with whom I happened to be taken.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Consider Mr. Ashton, what a strange many of things you run
upon: First, you would have it believed, That you had a mind to go into France
upon your own account.


Mr. Ashton, I do own that.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Next then, That you hired a Vessel for you and Ellyott. Why
would you have Ellyott to go with you into France?


Mr. Ashton, I would not have him, he desired the Favor of going.


L. C. J. Holt, Who desired my Lord Preston to go, or did he desire to go with
you?


Mr. Ashton, I had not seen Mr. Ellyott of Three Months before I went into the
City to hire the Boat.


L. C. J. Polexfen. Why would you have my Lord Preston go with you?


Mr. Ashton, Why would I have my Lord Preston go with me? My Lord, I hoped to
have got my Passage free with a Person of my Lord's Quality.


L. C. J. Holt, Then you hired this Vessel for my Lord Preston?


Mr. Ashton, No my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Was it my Lord's Money or your own that you paid?


Mr. Ashton, The Money I paid, but how I should be repaid I cannot tell.


L. C. J. Holt, Would you for your own Convenience pay a Hundred Pounds for a
Boat to go to France, and yet hope to get your Passage free by taking in my
Lord Preston.


Mr. Ashton, Truly my Lord, I cannot tell how it would have been, at the
utmost, we could but have paid our share of it.


L. C. J. Holt, But you can tell me if you will, I ask you, how it was agreed
among you?


Mr. Ashton, Truly my Lord, as I hope to be saved, I cannot tell.


L. C. J. Holt, Then there is another thing, why did you desire one of the
Seamen to say, That you were to go to Flanders and not to France, and give him
Half a Crown to say so?


Mr. Ashton, I presume your Lordship knows that it is a Fault, though it be not
a Treasonable Fault to go into France.


L. C. J. Polexfen, But Mr. Ashton, Truth is the thing that we are enquiring
after; and, that is the thing we would have prevail, and I hope shall in all
Cases: If you are not Guilty, we hope it will prevail of your side, if you are
guilty we hope it will prevail on the other side. Now how likely is it that you
should get into this same Company by chance without a Previous Agreement; you
sent something from Burdet's, a Hamper and a Trunk, and afterward some other
things went from Rigby's, who is your Father-in-Law.


Mr. Ashton, No, There was nothing at all carried from Mr. Rigby's.


L. C. J. Holt, Yes, the Leather Bag, I believe, but another thing is this,
That if it be possible you will do well to give an answer to, why did you
enquire for a hiding Place? Why did you ask the Master of the Ship whether
there was a convenient Place to hide in?


Mr. Ashton, As to that Matter, my Lord, I had heard of diverse People, that
actually had Passes, and were going to Flanders, yet were stopped and brought
to Town again. I believe my Lord Nottingham has bailed many a One, and your
Lordship knows it to be so, and has bailed many your self; and therefore I had
great reason upon that account to endeavor secrecy as much as I could.


L. C. J. Polexfen, Mr. Ashton, as I remember, you said your self you were once
before a going over, and had the Misfortune to be stopped, now to venture the
Second time without a Pass, was something strange, why had you not gone and
applied your self to the Secretary for a Pass?


Mr. Ashton, I had made all the Application, I could to my Lord Nottingham, I
cannot say in my own Name, because I was sure before hand, I should be denied;
but I did by other hands endeavor to have got a Pass to have gone into
Flanders, because it was of extraordinary consequence to me, as I tell your
Lordship, to go quickly.


L. C. J. Holt. If you had such an occasion to go, and had made it out to the
Secretary, and given Security, you might have got it sure.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, One word further, Why should you be so much concerned to
have these Papers thrown Overboard?


Mr. Ashton, Perfectly out of Friendship, and had I been Traveling with your
Lordship or any Man else that had been so unfortunate, I would have done the
same.


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Well, Have you any more to say for your self.


Mr. S. Tremain. Mr. Ashton, call what Witnesses you will, and speak as long as
you will for your self, you shall be heard at large.


Mr. Ashton, Mr. Sergeant, I thank you heartily, I have no more to say at
present.


L. C. J. Holt. Then the King's Council desire to speak a Word to the Jury.


Mr. S. Thompson. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury:
It falls out to be my Duty to Sum up the Evidence that has been given, I opened
the Cause at the beginning to you, and I opened it at large, and many
Particulars there were mentioned, and truly, I do not think we have failed in
the Proof of any one; I know you are Men of that Observation, that I need not,
nor shall take upon me to repeat all the Particular Circumstances, but as near
as I can, I shall touch upon the Heads of the Evidence, and do it with as equal
regard to my Duty, and as much tenderness to the Prisoner as any one can do.

Gentlemen, In the First place, you see what the Indictment is for; it is for a
High Treason of a very Great Nature, no less then the Deposing the King and
Queen and Subverting this Government, and that by a French Power and Interest:
If Inviting an Invasion, and giving an Account of the Weakness, and where the
Strength of the Government lay, carrying Papers to Solicit the French to come
and to incite this Nation into Rebellion, that so they might depose this King,
and set up the late King James again. If these be High Treason, as doubtless
they are, then Gentlemen, how far forth the Prisoner at the Bar had a share in
it, I must refer to you from what we have proved.

He is the Man, it seems, that made the first step, for you may remember it was
proved that he met this Woman at Burdet's in the City, for the hiring of this
Ship, and after Two or Three Meetings more, they come to a Conclusion, and 93
Guinies and Six Pence are deposited to make up a 100 l. which was the Price
agreed upon, and that was actually paid by Mr. Ashton, this is Sworn to be so.

The next thing is, to what purpose this Money was paid, and the Ship hired,
that is directly Sworn, it was to carry Mr. Ashton and Two or Three more of his
Friends, not naming of them, and they were to go to France, one of the
Witnesses says, to any Port in France, it was not directly declared to what
Part. This I say was the purpose, for which the Money was paid, and the Vessel
hired, and this was to carry you Mr. Ashton and Two or Three more Friends of
his into France.

It is true, Mr. Ellyott afterward did meet Mr. Ashton, and I think was by at
the Bargain making, or at leastwise, when the Money is paid, I will not be
positive in that, because I would do him no wrong, he being to make his Defense
hereafter.


Mr. Ashton, No, he was not by, I made the Bargain my self.


Mr. S. Thompson. Then afterward I remember one Circumstance when he hired
this Ship, he was to hire a Ship that had a Place to hide in, and so he must
needs know upon what Design, I say, by that he must needs know, that there was
a Matter of great Moment which he was to transact, for he was to have such a
Ship as he might hide in.

After this Ship was hired then they met in Covent Garden, and there they take
Order with the Man to go down with them to the Stairs, where the Watermen was
called, indeed Mr. Ashton did part from them in the Way, but presently after
came to them at the Stairs, and there came my Lord Preston and his Man, who
together with Ellyott, that was there before, I think before, all Embark't in
the Boat, and were carried to the Ship, and made all the have away they could
for France.

When they were there, and came to a Place of Danger, near a Ship of War, there
was care taken, according as they had enquired of the Master of the Ship
before, that they should be hid, and hid they were.

Afterward, when they were past that Danger, when they came to the Block-House
at Graves-end, there they thought fit to hide again, and did so, and there they
concealed themselves, till they were surprised in that Place by Captain Billop.

My Lord, after such time as Captain Billop had surprised them, he tells you,
how he came down after this Smack, you see what happened; my Lord Preston first
came up, and after he had Searched my Lord Preston, Ellyott came up and he was
searched, and after Mr. Ashton was once come up, he went down to fetch his Hat,
and there was seen to take up this Bundel of Papers, and there the Papers upon
search were found in Mr. Ashton's Breast.

This being so found in his Breast, you have heard what applications were made
by this Gentleman, to get these Papers cast Overboard, and what Promises were
made to the Captain, and what likelihood there was of making his Fortune, if he
would go along with them or throw away the Packet.

You hear, Gentlemen, that after they came to White Hall, one of the Men Swear,
that this Gentleman gave them Money, that they should say, they were not hired
for France; but for Flanders.

These, Gentlemen, are the several Circumstances that do appear in this Case,
which show the mighty care and diligence that was used to get those Papers
suppressed that had been thus taken, or to get them again into their own
Custody, and that is a Matter that shows how far this Gentleman was concerned
in this Design, and taking all these things together, I think there can no
greater Evidence be given, that Mr. Ashton was in this contrivance, that he was
concerned in the Message, that he was to be sent, and all this business that
was thus to be done, was as much Guilty, as my Lord Preston, who now stands
convicted for it.

And the Court will tell you, Gentlemen, there are no accessorys, in Treason,
all are Principals, though it be not actually proved, that this Gentleman did
not know all these Papers what they were, yet in Case he hired a Ship for
himself, and the Lord, whose Papers they were to go in, and take such notice of
the Papers as to take care of them, to suppress and conceal them, that is an
Evidence of his knowledge of the Importance of them, and if so; he will be
equally Guilty of the High Treason.


L. C. J. Holt. I doubt that.


Mr. S. Thompson. My Lord, I would not willingly press any thing further, then
the Nature of the thing will bear.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray go on, Brother, we are only talking among our selves.


Mr. S. Thompson. The next thing is this, that is to be considered, that after
such time as these Papers came to be laid open, what is it that appear among
them? Truly I shall not take upon me to repeat so much as the substance, much
less the Particulars of the several Papers, but, (...) must say, that there
does appear to be a Formed Design of Subverting the Government, of deposing
this King and Queen, and of bringing us all into War and Rebellion and
Bloodshed, all this under a pretense of Establishing the Protestant Religion,
and our Legal Government again (tho I can see no means they had to depend upon
for it) but by a Popish Interest and a French Power, and how far that is
possible or probable to promote such an end by such means, I leave to your
consideration.

Gentlemen, you have heard all the Particular Papers read, here was the
Resolution of a Consult* and Conference, where this Project was designed, here
were Heads of a Declaration, that was to be framed to make the Credulous
believe, what mighty things should be done upon their New Revolution, you see,
what Letters have been produced, and cannot but easily apprehend what is the
Import and Meaning of them. I resolve, as I said, not to mention the
Particulars, but there is scarce One Line among them, but what is Treason, for
it all tends to this Purpose and Design, to depose the King and alter the
Present Government.

Now upon the whole Matter, Gentlemen what this Gentleman has said, I confess
to me seems strange, he said indeed at first, that he had no Defense at all, or
that which was very weak, and so it should seem, the Truth was, for you see
what his Defense has been.

He says, that he went into France, that he owns that he was going thither, but
what was it to do, it was to settle some Accounts with the Family of Colonel
Worden, and to receive a Sum of Money that was owing to him by a Person there.

Gentlemen, if the Design had so much Innocence in it, certainly he might have
had a Pass, at least, there was no need of hiring a Vessel at such an
extravagant rate, there was no necessity of hiding in this secret manner, and
no necessity of impossible suggestions, and prefering Great Rewards for the
disposing of, and concealing, these Papers.

Gentlemen, You will remember many Particulars more, which have not slipped your
Observation, I shall not take upon me to repeat them, but leave them to your
consideration.

Only this, I must say, That this is a Treason of a very high Nature, a Treason
to depose a King that has ventured all he had, (...) his Life has been in
Danger, and his Blood has been spilt to Establish this Government, and our
Religion, and our Laws, and yet it seems there are Men that think this may be
better done by a Popish Interest and French Power, which I think no body of
either Wisdom or Honesty can imagine, or will engage in, and therefore I leave
it to your determination.


L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen of the Jury, you understand, that Mr. Ashton is now
Tried for High Treason, it is mentioned in the Indictment, to be for Conspiring
the Death, and Deposing of the King and Queen, and for that purpose, he did
endeavor to go into France, and to carry diverse Proposals in Writing, and
several Memorials to show how this Kingdom might be Invaded by the French.

To prove this, the Evidence that has been produced and given by the King's
Council has been long, and consists of Two Parts, Witnesses, Viva Voce, that
have told you how Mr. Ashton designed a Voyage to France, and that he hired a
Ship for that purpose, and several Papers were taken out of his Bosom.

In the first place, the Witnesses tell you, that about the latter end of
December last, Mr. Ashton, and Mr. Ellyott came to Bardett's House, where they
met with Mrs. Pratt, and Burdett having before that spoken to her about a Smack
that she called the Thomas and Elizabeth.

Then there was a Meeting appointed between her and Mr. Ashton at the Wonder
Tavern, where they did Treat and Debate about the hire of it, afterward they
came back to Burdett's again, and there the Agreement was made betwixt the
Woman and Mr. Ashton, the Prisoner at the Bar, to have a Hundred Pounds. Ninety
Three Guinies and Six Pence was fetched down by Mr. Ashton and told out, and
deposited in the Hands of Mrs. Burdett, then there was a Six Pence broken, and
one part Mrs. Burdett had, and the other part Mr. Ashton had, and when either
the Master or Mistress Pratt should bring the part of the Six Pence that Mr.
Ashton kept, to Mrs. Burdett, the Hundred Pounds was to be paid.

And this Agreement being made, it is possitively Sworn, that they did ask,
whether there was a Hiding Place in the Vessel? an Answer was made, There was
one, and thereupon a Note was given, that the Master and Mistress Pratt should
go to the Seven-Stars in Covent Garden.

Upon Wednesday Night, they went there according to the Direction, where meets
Ashton and Ellyott, but before that, there was a Boat hired at Surrey-Stairs to
carry them down to the Ship through Bridge, over against the Tower, but the
Tide not serving till about Ten a Clock at Night, they had agreed with a Water
man for Half a Crown to carry them, and he was to stay till the Tide served.
And when they went out from Rigby's they parted, Ellyott and the Master went
together, Mr. Ashton did not go with them, but came near about the same time to
Surrey-Stairs, where they took Water.

Being aboard, it was observed that all these Gentlemen were very timorous, and
seemed to be much frighted at the sight of any Vessel, from which there was any
apprehension of their being taken notice of; and, therefore they went down
under the Quarter-Hatches, which is a Place very inconvenient for such Persons,
where none could stand or sit upright, but they were forced to lie upon the
Boards, or upon the Balla^^^.

It seems some intimation was given that some Gentlemen had an intention to go
into France to prosecute some Treasonable Design; And Captain Billop being
employed to pursue them, which he did in a Pinnace, when he came near the
Vessel where they were, he called to the Vessel, and under pretense of Pressing
Seamen, he went on Board; The Master of the Vessel said he had a Protection
from the Admiralty; so that there was no cause for them to fear pressing, nor
indeed was there any for Gentlemen to fear it, they being not liable to be
pressed.

When the Captain came near the Ship, and declared his intent of coming on
board, these Gentlemen were gone under the Quarter-Hatches again, Captain
Billop coming on board, and speaking about pressing of the Men, and saying,
there was a Couple that would make good Seamen for the King; the Master showed
his Protection, and then the Captain said he would search further in the Ship,
and so he did, and then he pulls up the Boards, and there he finds all these
Gentlemen, who were called up one after another, and searched by the Captain.

Gentlemen, There is one of the Witnesses tells you, that when they were come
up, he saw a Packet that lay in this very place under the Quarter-Hatches,
unto which was tied a piece of Lead, which Mr. Ashton takes up and puts in his
Bosom, with which the Captain being acquainted. Inquiry is made by him, what
Mr. Ashton had there? Mr. Ashton said it was his Handkerchief, and nothing but
that which he pulled out: But Captain Billop puts his hand in his Bosom between
his Coat and his Body, and takes out the Packet, and carried these Gentlemen
on Board the George Frigate, where they stayed till the Tide served to bring
them to White Hall.

But before they came on board the Frigate, Mr. Ashton was very importunate with
him to throw this Packet into the Water; when they were on board the George
Frigate, and in the Cabin alone, they continue their importunity. Now, say they,
we have you here, and you are alone, pray will you throw this Packet
overboard; and particularly, Mr. Ashton said it would do the Captain (...)
good to injure so many Gentlemen, and Mr. Ellyott would have per^^ded the
Captain to take the Lead that was tied to the Packet, and ty^ ^^ ^o some
Letters that was taken out of my Lord Preston's Pocket, and throw the Packet
overboard; and then have informed the King and Council, that those Letters was
the Packet taken out of Ashton's Bosom: But the Captain very honestly rejected
all their Motions of that kind.

Truly, Gentlemen, my Memory will not serve me to repeat all the Particulars,
but I question not your Notes will bring them to your Minds. Mr. Ellyott, it
seems, was so mightily concerned at their being taken with these Papers, that
when they shot London Bridge, he wished the Bridge might have fallen upon them
and knocked them on the Head; and, when they were got through, he wished a
Thunderbolt would fall down into the Boat and sink them: That, indeed, was Mr.
Ellyott, and not Mr. Ashton; but Mr. Ashton was as much concerned about
disposing of the Packet as Mr. Ellyott.

At White Hall this Packet is opened, and you have several Papers produced in
Evidence and read to you, you have heard what Evidence has been given, that
these are the very Papers that were in the Packet thus taken.

First of all Captain Billop tells you he carried them to my Lord Nottingham,
and that they lay there in his Office; he withdraw indeed while my Lord
Nottingham examined my Lord Preston, but the Packet was not opened in the
interim, but there was only a Paper stuck on the outside that my Lord had
taken off before the Captain returned into the Room, and there the Packet
remained entire. He says, my Lord Nottingham opened the Packet and put up all
the Papers that were in the Packet in his presence into a Cover again, and
sealed them up with his Seal. My Lord Nottingham says positively, he did put up
all the Papers that were in the Packet again, all and no more, except the
Cover, and that he sealed up and delivered it to Captain Billop.

Captain Billop says, he took these very Papers from my Lord Nottingham, and as
he received them, carried them without opening to my Lord President.

My Lord President says; he locked them up unopened in a close Cabinet in his
Closet-room, where no body comes; there they were that Night, and the next Day
he carried them entire to the King, and some of them were read by the King, in
the Presence of my Lord President; and, they were all taken away again by his
Lordship, no more nor no less; and, my Lord President brought them all to the
Cabinet-Council, where they were read, and were delivered to my Lord Sidney.

My Lord Sydney swears, these Papers now produced, are the same Papers he had
from my Lord President, and my Lord President swears, that they are the same he
received by Billop from my Lord Nottingham, and my Lord Sydney marked them.

So that there can remain no doubt of these being the same Papers, that were
contained in the Packet, that was taken out of the Bosom of Mr. Ashton.

Then, as to the Matter of the Papers, I think it is plain beyond all
contradiction, that the Import of them is Treasonable: They show a Design of
invading the Kingdom by a Foreign Force, and of Deposing the King and Queen
from the Government, and of setting the late King upon the Throne.

It is agreed, as it is mentioned, at a Conference, between several Noblemen
and Gentlemen, that were of the Whigg and Tory Party, as they call them, that
the late King was to be restored, though by a French Power.

It was impossible for them to effect it, by going plainly to work, and saying
in plain Words, the French should invade us. It was to be done in this manner.

The French King must pretend by all means to be our Friend and a Mediator,
betwixt the late King and the People of England, and this was out of design,
plainly to get a Party of the Kingdom, to join with them; the most credulous
and inconsiderate sort of People; who when they should be seduced into a Belief
of the French King's great Kindness. It was not doubted but there would be a
Conjunction between them and the French Forces, to restore the late King.

And to procure such a Persuasion in the People; the French King was to show
himself kind to the English Protestants, to appear and act another part than he
had formerly done; he was to permit them the Exercise of the Protestant
Religion, thereby to persuade many, that his Persecution of his own Subjects,
the Hugonots, was not out of any Aversion to the Protestant Religion, but only
to their Antimonarchical and Resisting Principles.

Then an Inconvenience is to be removed; for they complain, that they are too
full of Bigottry at St. Germains, and too barefaced: For they make an open
Profession of Popery, and speak truly what they do intend; but say they, if
they will have the Design take effect, they must be more Close and Secret: For
the Folly and Bigottry at St. Germains, was a very great Obstruction.
Therefore, they proposed, that some Persons might be substituted as Agents to
Correspond here, that understood the Temper of the Nation, and what would
easiliest prevail with the People: And a Model was to be framed at St.
Germains, the Protestants are to be seemingly caressed, Seven or Nine to be of
the late King's Council, that so we might believe, that he was ours in Interest
again, and that we have a Relation to him.

And if things were carried with such cunning and subtilty, they hoped to
delude a great many People over into the Interest of the late King; but, if
they went barefaced, it would cause such great Jealousies, that they must
totally despair of Success.

Yet they did not hope by these Artifices to obtain so many Friends here, as
might have been sufficient to accomplish their Design; but they must have
recourse to a foreign Force, particularly a French Force. For says one of the
Papers, Use Foreigners to expel Foreigners; that is, Use French Foreigners to
expel Dutch Foreigners, who are our Allies, and are falsely accused by them to
have trampled upon the Rights and Liberties of the Nation.

There is one Argument used to encourage People to assist the French in the
Invasion of their own Country, which I cannot omit, namely, That as soon as the
French, with a considerable Expense of Men and Money, had restored the
Protestant Religion, the late King to the Crown, and the People to their
Liberties, then he would withdraw all his Forces, and reap no Profit or
Advantage by his Success. I must confess, this carries so little of Persuasion
in it, that it is ridiculous to think thereby to impose upon any number of Men.
But notwithstanding the weakness of their Arguments, it is apparent they were
in good earnest; the Papers give an account to the French, in what state and
condition our Forts were, Portsmouth not manned with above 500. and Gosport how
weakly fortifyed.

It was a happy juncture between this and the first of March, when Advice is
given to make use of the Opportunity. For Men cannot give, but Men may use
Opportunities, and something was to be done forthwith, and the Goods must be
got in readiness, particularly the Linen and the Copper are mentioned, which
are mysterious and dark Expressions, and you may put a Construction upon them
as well as I; for they are written in a style of Trade, as if there were a
Correspondence between two Tradesmen, and the Linen and the Copper are ordered
to be brought before the 10th. of March.

But however obscure some of these Expressions are, there are others that are
more plain, That the French Fleet must be out in April at farthest, and are to
come before the Conjunction between the English and the Dutch, and Jennings,
Strickland, or Trevannian are to come from St. Mallo's in one Night, and to
fight the English Fleet in the Chops of the Channel, and not to come so high as
Beathy, where they came the last Year.

And there is an account given, in what condition and state our Navy was, how
many Ships, what Rates, how Manned, and who the Officers; and then as the French
were to be in readiness to come in April, so they say our Fleet was not to be
out till June.

Gentlemen, There are a great many other Particulars; but these are enough, nay
half of them were enough to make any Man guilty of Treason, that was concerned
in them, or that had a hand in carrying or making use of them.

Besides, there are other Letters which can import nothing, but the Writer was
of the late King's Interest; one directed to Mr. Redding, the other to Mrs.
Redding; and these were to go to France to let them know how zealous he was in
his Duty, and how the interest of the young Master increased. The Letters have
these Expressions: That though the Family were decreased, yet our Interest is
increased, which is yours, and I speak in the Plural Number, because I speak
the Sentiments of my elder Brother, and the rest of our Relations, and desire
them to believe they were zealous and cordial in their Duty to Mr. Redding. Now
what Interpretation you will make of this, I Will leave to you.

Then there is another Letter to Mrs. Charlton, and another to Mr. Jackson, and
diverse other things that have been read, and amongst the rest, has been read
the Heads of a Declaration at large, showing what should be done, and what
Methods should be taken in order to the restoring the late King, and deposing
this.

And there is also mention made in a Paper, how diverse Persons, who were to be
pardoned, as particularly, all Justices of the Peace actually in Commission are
not to be excepted; Outlaws are to be pardoned; Chimney-Money to be taken away;
and all that come in within One and Twenty Days are to be forgiven.

So that it is plain, these Letters import a Design to depose the King and
Queen, and the Kingdom to be invaded by Foreigners, only a little to color the
matter, not to lose the pretense of a Protestant Interest altogether, there was
to be 5 or 6000 Swedes to be made use of in the Invasion.

Gentlemen, if there was a Design of an Invasion, be it by Papists, or by
Protestants, if any Act was done tending thereunto, it is High Treason within
the Statute of 25 E. 3. For purposing and intending to depose the King and
Queen, manifested by any Overt Act, has been always held to be High Treason.

This, Gentlemen, is the Sum and Substance of the Evidence that has been given
at the Bar.

Mr. Ashton says for himself, it is true, says he, my Design was to go to
France, I was so unfortunate as to have the Papers taken about me. I did take
them up; but, says he, it is not at all proved that any one of the Papers that
are now produced are my hand: Which is true: There is no such Proof.

The next thing is, that Mr. Ashton being asked, What occasion he had to go to
France? He says, he had formerly a Relation to Coll. Worden, and did transact
and had the Management of his Affairs, which were very great. Coll. Worden died
half a year ago, and he enjoined him upon his Deathbed to go into France about
settling some Accounts of his, and he was desired by the Family of Coll. Worden
so to do.

This Mr. Ashton alleges; but he has not proved it. It Is very strange, that if
Mr. Ashton was to go to France to negotiate that Affair for Colonel Worden's
Family, none of that Family should be produced to prove, that Coll. Worden gave
him such Directions, or that the Family desired him to go into France upon that
account.

Then Mr. Ashton has endeavored to give another reason for his Voyage into
France; he affirms, he had some Affairs of his own with relation to the late
Queen, he was concerned for her, and she did owe Moneys here, and he paid
several Debts to Tradesmen, particularly 400l. she owed to the Coach Harness
Maker; and he having paid it, went over to reimburse himself: The Tradesman was
produced, and he says, Mr. Ashton did pay the Money a Year ago; but whether Mr.
Ashton had Effects from the late Queen, or paid it out of his own Pocket, does
not appear; Mr. Ashton says, he paid it out of his own Pocket, which is very
extraordinary, that he should be so kind to pay what he was not obliged to pay,
and have no security to reimburse himself.

So that, Gentlemen, you had best consider whether there be any thing at all
said or proved, that can justify Mr. Ashton's going to France, or whether
there be any good reason offered for it.

Then Ashton has called Witnesses to prove, that he was always a Protestant,
though he did live in a Popish Family, where they did encourage Papists and
discountenance Protestants; for which he had the ill will of those he did
depend upon.

Gentlemen, all that is agreed, and it is not a question in this Case; whether
Mr. Ashton be a Protestant or a Papist; but the Question is, whether he be
guilty of High Treason, from which the being a Protestant does not secure a Man.

But Gentlemen, if Mr. Ashton had no Knowledge upon what design the other
Persons were to go into France, though he had actually gone into France, it had
been a Crime in this Juncture of Affairs, yet not High Treason; but to go on
into France, and carry a Treasonable Scheme of a Design and Project of an
Invasion, that is Treason.

Now the Question is, whether Mr. Ashton went with such a Purpose or not, you
are to consider; I would not lead you into any strain of the Evidence, but only
state it how it stands. It is plain he was concerned all along in hiring the
Smack, and as the King's Counsel observed to you, the Price was something
extraordinary, they were to pay 100l. for the Voyage, to which was added some
Encouragement to the Woman, that if she performed this Voyage well, she might
get 1000l. before Lady Day, and the Money was paid by Mr. Ashton, and he was
taken aboard the Vessel.

Mr. Ashton was much concerned to secure the Papers, by taking them out of the
place where they lay, upon the Ballast under the Quarter-Harches, and after
they were taken out of his Bosom, he was very importunate, and so often with
Captain Billop to throw them overboard.

And why should he be so earnest and concerned, unless he very well knew and
was acquainted with the contents of those Papers.

And he gave one of the Seamen 2s, 6d. to say they were bound for Flanders:
Unless it was a matter of great Importance he went about, and that was not fit
to be known; why should he deny it, or labor to have it concealed? An 100l. to
be paid for this Voyage, was, upon a joint Account, as well for my Lord Preston
as for Ashton and Elliot; Mr. Ashton did pay the Money, and he does not make it
appear whose it was.

Gentlemen, it rests upon you to consider the Evidence you have heard, whether
it is sufficient to induce you to believe Mr. Ashton was going into France with
these Papers, to carry on the Design of Deposing the King and Queen, and
invading the Kingdom: If you are not satisfied in your Consciences that he i^
(...) then; find him not Guilty. On the other side, if you are satisfied that
he is Guilty, I do not question but you will find him so.


L. C. J. Pollixfen. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, My Lord has rightly
repeated and stated the Evidence to you, I shall only say but a very few Words
to it.

Mr. Ashton, as at first he did, so in his Defense has complained of a very
speedy Trial, and would insinuate something of Favor that he might find for
that Reason. It does appear he had notice of his Trial sufficient, and had Time
enough to prepare for it: But there is one thing extraordinary has happened to
his Advantage, which I would desire may be taken notice of. If he had been
tried on Saturday, perhaps he had had more reason to complain than now he has;
for he has now (and you see he uses it, and wisely enough too) the Advantage
that happened to him upon my Lord Preston's Trial; and he has had time since
Saturday to prepare for this days Work, so that there is no hard Point upon him
as to that Matter, but he has had pretty good Fortune therein.

Next he does insinuate that he is a Protestant: Gentlemen, the Law does not
distinguish between a Protestant Traitor and a Papist Traitor; if he has
committed such an Offense, as by the Law is High Treason, the Law does not
distinguish, nor may we. And Protestants may serve Papists Designs, though they
do not directly intend it. Therefore the Evidence to prove him a Protestant is
nothing before you; for the Matter is only whether he be guilty of this Crime
or not.

In the Trial of my Lord Preston, then the Labor was, that My Lord was not the
Man that was concerned, as the Bearer of this Packet of Letters or Writings
wherein the Treason is contained; but then it was Mr. Ashton, the Pacquets were
found about him; but now it is not Mr. Ashton, but my Lord Preston, and this is
now the Question before you, that he stands upon.

But if so be they were all concerned in the Carriage and transporting of this
Business, then they are all alike guilty of Treason, and therefore they cannot
shuffle it from one to another.

Now there appears some Reason why they would not all agree to be tried
together; for now it is but turning it from My Lord Preston upon Ashton, and
Mr. Ashton upon my Lord Preston, and Elliot upon either of them, and so by this
means all might escape, if this were sufficient to serve their turn.

But the Question before you, is, whether all these Persons are not all in all
equally concerned, and it is the Evidence that must be your Guide and ours; for
it is not Mr. Ashton's Affirmation, that he had Business to go into France, and
he happened unluckily to fall into these Men's Company, that will be a
sufficient Excuse, unless he prove it.

It had been an easy matter for him to have proved, if he had been going into
France upon Business for Colonel Worden; but at length that is turned off, and
then the pretense for going is, to recover some Money he had owing to him there,
and that he had paid for another Person. Had he Paper of Instructions of this
kind? Had he any one Witness of this thing?

The Merchandise that he carried out with him is of another import. Where were
the Notes or Bonds that he was to recover? Where is the Account that he had to
make up with any body beyond Sea? There is no manner of Evidence of any such
thing.

Next Gentlemen, do but consider, if the Man were so innocent as he would
insinuate, as if he had not gone with the rest upon this Errand, how came the
Man to have so heavy a Concern upon him? Why should he go to take up these
Papers, if they were not his Brats? Why should he clap them into his Bosom, if
he knew nothing what was in them? Why was his concern so great to have them
thrown overboard?

Gentlemen, if you expect that the Hearts of Men should be proved otherwise
than as Men, guess by one another meanings; by their Actions it is impossible
to convict any Man of a Crime; for if his own Affirmation shall be a Defense,
he will never want a Defense to keep himself from being convicted: But that is
not what the Law gives credit to; it must be Proof and Evidence that you are to
judge upon. But of all he pretends to he proves nothing.

How came he acquainted with my L. Preston? Sure he was a Man sufficiently
known in the World? Why should he go with him and Mr. Ellyott? Are they not all
known? Are they not Persons much of the same Disposition, and much in the same
Employment?

He had been taken a little before, he says himself, and was hindered from
going; and he had strange ill luck, if there was nothing else in the business
than what he pretends.

Gentlemen, in short, if you do find by the Evidence, that he was going upon a
good and an honest Design, and that he knew nothing of the Danger that was in
these Papers, and that these Persons were in, by reason of these Papers, and
yet would go about to have these Papers concealed, and endeavor to have them
thrown away, without knowing what was in them: These are Evidences that will be
good for you to go by, if you have any such; but to take his Affirmation,
because he says it, when he proves nothing, that is no Evidence to go by.

I leave it to you, as my Lord has done. If you are satisfied upon that
Evidence that he is guilty; I doubt not you know and will do your Duty, and
will find him so; and if you have no such Evidence, or any to prove the
contrary, that he is not guilty, then you ought to find him so too.


Mr. Ashton, I beg your pardon for one word.


L. Chapter J. Holt, What would you say?


Mr. Ashton, My Lord, I shall reckon it a particular Favor, if you will pardon
me one word, after your Lordship has given the Charge.


L. C. J. Holt, Well, what say you?


Mr. Ashton, I think, with Submission, that there is no proof I knew or was
privy to the Contents of any of these Papers.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, Pray Mr. Ashton, show any Man any Reason, if you can, why
did you go down and catch up these Papers, if you did not know what was in
them; they might be for your Advantage to be shown, for any thing you pretend
to know.


Mr. Ashton, I did it for my L. Preston's Sake, whose Hand was proved, and he
stands convicted as the Bearer of those Papers.


Mr. J. Eyres, But you forget one thing that was plainly proved, Mr. Ashton,
that when you importuned Capt. Billop to throw away the Papers, you used this
as an Argument, It would do him no good to injure three honest Gentlemen.


Mr. Ashton, I did not say so, my Lord, that I know of, tho indeed he has sworn
it.


L. Chapter J. Holt, Look you, Mr. Ashton, you have been heard as long as you did
desire to speak, and were asked over and over again, whether you had any more:
You are not now saying any new Matter; if you could urge any thing that had
been omitted, which made for your Advantage, I believe the Court would indulge
you, tho it (...) against the Course.


Mr. Ashton, My Lord, I say (...) ^^thing under my Hand, there is no Privity
proved; does Supposition (...) a Man? And is there any thing but Supposition
against me? There is not my Hand proved in any of the Papers. I beseech your
Lordship and the Jury to observe that.


L. Chapter J. Holt, Your being in the Company, and being so concerned, and
importunately endeavoring to have them thrown overboard; the hiring the Vessel
to go with these Treasonable Papers to an Enemies Country, and the Papers found
about you, is Fact proved, and is left to the Gentlemen of of the the Jury to
consider of.


Mr. Ashton. But does all this amount to more than Suspicion?


L. C. J. Holt. Look you, Mr. Ashton, if you speak after we have charged the
Jury, you will give us an Occasion of speaking to answer you; the Gentlemen of
the Jury are Men of Understanding, they have very well observed the Evidence,
and I perceive they have been very extraordinary intent upon it, they will be
able to make a right Judgment, no Question of it.


Mr. Ashton. All that I desire, is; there is nothing proved upon me, of my
knowing what was in these Papers.


Mr. J. Eyres. And there is that which is very considerable too, that it is
plain, what you say about Coll. Worden's Account, is but a Pretense, for which
you were searched, there was not one Paper nor one bit of Account found about
you, nothing but this Bundle of Treasonable Papers and Letters.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I humbly beg you will observe what is for me, as well as
what is against me.


L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen of the Jury, do you think you shall stay out any
Time, the Court desires to know it, because they will order themselves
accordingly.


Juryman. My Lord we do not know till we come together.


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, take your own Time, only the Court would comply with your
convenience in the Adjournment.


Then the Jury withdrew, and the Court adjourned for half an Hour, and when
they were returned, the Jury came in to give their Verdict, and being called
over, answered to their Names. Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen, are you all agreed of
your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Cl. of Arr. John Ashton hold up thy hand.

[Which he did] Look upon the Prisoner; How say you? Is he Guilty of the High
Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. of Arr. What Goods or Chattels? etc.


Foreman. None that we know of.


Maj. Richardson, Look to him, he is found guilty of High Treason.


Cl. of Arr. Then hearken to your Verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You
say that John Ashton is guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted,
but that he had no Lands nor Tenements, Goods nor Chattels, at the time of the
High Treason committed, nor at any time since to your knowledge, and so you say
all?


Jury, Yes.


L. C. J. Pollexfen, Gentlemen, I think truly you have gone according to your
Evidence, which the Law requires you to do, and that is it which will preserve
us all. And tho it be truly a thing that falls hard upon the particular Men
that are concerned in such things; yet notwithstanding, we must have more
consideration of the general Good, and Preservation, and the Support of the
Government, and that the Law have its due Course, than of any particular Man's
Case, as to the hard Point of it* We must look to these things, or there will
be no living in the (...)


Sir W. Hedges, My Lord, we (...) of your Lordship that we may be dismissed from
further attendan^^ (...)


L. C. J. Pollexfen. Ay.


Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen, you are dismissed, and the Court thanks you for your
Service.


Then the Court adjourned for an Hour, and then the Lord Mayor and Deputy
Recorder, with several of the Justices and Aldermen returned into the Court,
and after Proclamation for Silence, Order was given to bring the Lord Preston,
and Mr. Ashton to the Bar. [ which was done] The Lord Preston standing without
the Bar, and Mr. Ashton within. Cl. of Arr. Sir Richard Grahm, hold up your
hand.


[Which he did.] John Ashton, hold up your hand.


[Which he did.] My Lord Preston, You stand convicted of high Treason, for
conspiring the Death of the King and Queens Majesty's, for adhering to the
King's Enemies, and endeavoring to subvert the Government: What can you say
for your self, why the Court should not proceed to give Judgment against you of
Death according to the Law?

Lord Preston. It Is true, my Lord, the Jury have found me guilty of the Treason
assigned in the Indictment. My Lord, it is a Treason of a very heavy and black
Nature, it is of such a Nature, that if I had been conscious to my self to have
deserved, I should be very willing to undergo that Judgment that is like
presently to pass upon me. It is to endeavor to bring in the King of France to
Conquer and Invade this Kingdom; it is a thought I always abhorred; I love my
Religion, my Family, my Country too well to attempt or endeavor any such
thing; I must appeal to your Lordship, though now perhaps it is too late,
whether the Treason that is laid against me has been perfectly proved; for in
the Case of proving Hands, and particularly in the Case of Colonel Sidney, It
was disallowed that comparison of Hands should be Evidence; there ought to be
at least one if not two Evidences to prove the writing of it. My Lord, I know
this is too late, I should have offered this to the Jury before, but being in
the Crowd and in great disorder by standing so long, I had not strength or
ability enough to urge it as I should. I have nothing more to say in the Case
but submit to that Judgment that the Law has assigned.


Mr. D. Recorder. My Lord Preston, Your Lordship knows the proceedings of the
Law in such Cases; there is no averring against the Verdict of the Jury, they
have found your Lordship guilty, and the Law says, that Judgment must be given
upon you according to that Verdict.


Lord Preston. Mr. Recorder, I do not aver against the Verdict. I own it is too
late, I should have offered it before, and I submit to the Judgment of the Law.


Cl. of Arr. John Ashton, hold up thy hand.

[which he did.] You are in the same Case with the Prisoner last before you.
What can you say for your self, why Judgment should not be given against you,
to die according to Law.


Mr. Ashton. My Lord, I would humbly desire I might have a sight of my
Indictment; I have some reason perhaps to believe that I am found guilty upon
an Erroneous Indictment, and if it be so, I would desire to have Council to
argue the Errors of the Indictment.


Mr. D. Record. You have heard it twice read in English, and once in Latin, and
that is all that is allowed to any one in Your Case, I never knew the Record of
any Indictment shown to any Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Ashton. Suppose there be any Error in it.


Mr. D. Record. I am not to suppose any such thing, if there is any, it has
been read to you, assign it and the Court will consider of it.


Mr. Ashton. If I can assign the Errors in the Indictment, may I have the
advantage of it then?


Mr. D. Record. If there be (...) you will have the advantage of them: If you
will assign them; if there be none, you can have none.


Mr. Ashton. Then I say, if there be words in the Indictment that there are no
such Words in Nature, then, Sir, I am told it is a Vicious and Erroneous
Indictment, and that is enough to viciate the Indictment.


Mr. D. Record. No such Words in Nature? It is hard to tell what you mean by
that; perhaps there are terms of Art in the Law, which though you are not
acquainted with, we are.


Mr. Ashton. Then there are such Words in Nature.


Mr. D. Record. That is an insensible Expression, Words in Nature!


Mr. Ashton. I am informed that even a Letter in an Indictment is enough to
viciate it, or if it be false Latin, that will make it an Erroneous Indictment.


Mr. D. Record. No, that is not so; but if you will tell me what that Letter
is, I Will tell you what I say to it; it may, or it may not be material.


Mr. Ashton. We know it was lately disputed in a Case of this Nature at this
Place, and I am informed the Court were of Opinion, if it had been in the Body
of the Indictment, it had been an Error.


Mr. D. Record. If you please to tell me wherein the Error in your Indictment
consists, I may be able to give you a good Answer to it, or you will have the
advantage of it.


Mr. Ashton. I say it consists in this, the Word Cymba is written with an S in
the Indictment, whereas it should be with a C.


Mr. D. Record. How do you know it?


Mr. Ashton. It is no matter how I know it, I have some reason to know it, it
may be.


Mr. D. Record. Mr. Hardesty, look upon the Record.


Mr. Ashton. With Submission, that is an Error, for there is no such word as
Cymba with an S.


Cl. of Arr. It is a long Indictment; will you please to ask him where about it
is.


Mr. D. Record. Mr. Ashton, will you tell me where it is written.


Mr. Ashton. In the Indictment when you come to speak of Cymba a Boat.


Mr. D. Record. By the sound I cannot distinguish whether it be S or C.


Mr. Ashton. Sir, I hope you will do me the Justice to examine the Indictment
it self.


Mr. D. Record. The Clerk is looking upon it; how is it Mr. Hardesty? Is it
with an S or a C?


Cl. of Arr. It is with a C.


Mr. D. Record. The Clerk has read it, and he certifies me it is in both places
with a C which is true Latin.


Mr. Ashton. Is it in all places with a C?


Cl. of Arr. I have looked in two places and it is right; I Will look further, if
you please.


Mr. Ashton. Pray do.


[which he did.] Cl. of Arr, It is with a C. in all places.


Mr. D. Record. The Clerk tells me it is the same, and right in every place,
and he has looked over all the Indictment, as to the matter.


Mr. Ashton. Then Sir I submit to it.


Mr. D. Record. Make Proclamation for Silence;


[which was done.] Mr. D. Record. My Lord Preston, or rather Sir Richard
Grahme, and Mr. John Ashton, Ye have been Indicted, Arraigned and Convicted of
High Treason against their present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, whom
God preserve. Ye have had a long, and a fair, and favorable Trial as any
Persons that ever have been tried at this Bar.


The Jury that has passed upon your Lives and Deaths has convicted you; and the
Court are now to do their last Act* which is to pronounce that Sentence that
the Law does inflict upon (...) as ye stand Convicted of.

It is a great trouble to me to (...) Judgment that is so heavy upon you; but I
must say, the Evidence (...) has been given against you, was so clear, and I
suppose not only convincing to the Twelve Men that tried you, but to all
Bystanders, that I can do it with that satisfaction that becomes one who is
entrusted with the King's Justice, that the Law may obtain, and that there
should be no Interruption of Justice. And the Sentence that the Law has
declared should be pronounced in this Case, is this:

That Ye do respectively go to the place from whence Ye came; from thence to be
drawn upon a Sledge to the place of Execution, to be there hanged up by the
Neck, to be cut down while Ye are yet alive, to have your Hearts and Bowels
taken out before your Faces, and your Members cut off and Burnt, Your Heads
severed from your Bodies, Your Bodies divided into four Quarters, Your Heads
and Bodies respectively to be disposed of according to the King's Will and
Pleasure; and the Lord have mercy upon your Souls.

Then the Prisoners were conveyed away to Newgate, the Place from whence they
came.

AN ACCOUNT OF TWO LETTERS; One of which is from the Late King James TO THE
POPE, As it is Extracted out of the Register taken at Dublin, July 4. 1690.
With a Marginal Note, That it was all written with His own Hand. THE OTHER IS,
An Original LETTER FROM THE EARL OF MELFORT, (The late KING's Principal
Secretary of State) TO The Late Queen, Taken also at DVBLIN at the same time.
IT is thought proper, upon this Occasion, to expose these Letters to public
View, which would not have been so seasonable at another time as now, when the
Enemy has given open Proofs of those Designs which by these Letters will appear
to have been long concerted by them: and although, by the Providence of God,
they have been hitherto prevented; yet since hereby, and by the late Discovery,
the Industry of those who endeavor to Subvert this Government, is not only
manifest, but that they give themselves great encouragement to believe they
shall be able to effect it; It is hoped, that these warnings will stir men up
to such a degree of Vigilance, as will make them careful to prevent any future
Designs against the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom.

Beatissime Pater,
GAudium ex Vestrae Sanctitatis in B. Patris Cathedram elevatione conceptum,
literis nostris per Comitem de Melfort primum Secretarium nostrum missis
expressum. Literae S. V. manu scriptae sinceri amoris paterni and tenerae
compassionis ob ea quae Patimur testes adeo auxerunt, ut malorum sensum
minuerint, and nos vere consolata sint. Unica turbarum contra nos excitatarum
origo est, quod Catholicam Fidem amplexi simus, and eamdem in tria Regna and
late sparsas per Americam nostrorum subditorum Colonias reducere statuisse
nuper neutrum negamus. Posterius quae fecimus in hoc Regno probant, ubi enim
divino auxilio, parvas quidem, sed frequentes victorias de Rebellibus
reportassemus (magnam impedierunt isti, decretoriam pugnam pertinaciter
declinantes) iis in Religionis bonum usi sumus, quam hic spero brevi firmiter
stabilitum iri. Idem in aliis ditionibus nostris factum, ubi divina open iisdem
restituti fuerimus. Hoc non ita difficile videtur, modo subsidio aliquo
juvemur, adeo aegre ferunt grave usurpationis jugum, and nostri reditus tam
sparsum est desiderium. Juvabit Pax Catholicos inter Principes inita, aut si
pacem temporis angustiae vetent, Induciae, quae etiam finem imponent Tragoediae
in Germania inchoatae, ubi Heretici in ipsis Ecclesiae visceribus haerent eaque
rodunt. Nihil opus verbis, ubi res ipsae tam clare loquuntur, and opem
implorant. Apostolicus S. V. zelus aliquam providebit malis parem, and a
fiducia pleni Deum veneramur, Beatitudini vestrae longum and prosperum regimen
largiatur, atque pedibus ejus advoluti, omni cum debito sanctitatis vestrae
filiali amore atque observantia, Apostolicam Benedictionem postulamus.

Datum Dublinii, 26 November. 1689.

Dublin, 26 November. 1689. Translation of a Latin LETTER, whereof the Copy is
annexed, which was then writ by King James to the Pope, as it is extracted out
of the Register taken at Dublin; with a Marginal Note, That it was all writ
with His own Hand.
Most Holy Father,
WE did by the Earl of Melfort, Our Principal Secretary of State, signify to
Your Holiness the Joy We had in Your Promotion to the Sacred Chair. And those
Letters which Your Holiness did with Your own Hand write Us, were such
Testimonies of Fatherly Love, and of Your Tender Compassion for what We suffer,
that they have lessened the sense of Our Calamity, and have proved of real
Consolation to Us. The only source of all these Rebellions against Us is, That
We embraced the Catholic Faith; and do not disown, but that to spread the same
not only in Our Three Kingdoms, but over all the dispersed Colonies of Our
Subjects in America, was Our determination. To manifest this, there will need
no other proof, than to see how lately We have proceeded in this Kingdom; for
as We have frequently beaten the Rebels in small Parties, (which might have
been one complete Victory, if they had not obstinately declined to give Us
Battle); so We have still turned all to the advantage of Religion, and hope
very soon to see it here firmly established: Nor will it look hard, if but
aided by some Subsidies, to compass the same in Our other Dominions, as soon as
by God's favor We shall be restored, seeing Our People do so ill bear the
Usurper's Yoke, and so universally long for our Return. It would promote this
Work, if a general Peace were settled among the Catholic Princes, or a Truce
at least, in case the time be too short for the other: for this would put an
end to those Calamities begun in Germany, and where the Heretics lie now
gnawing in the very Bowels of the Church. But what need We speak on this
Subject, where the things themselves are so loud, and implore Your Aid? The
Apostolic Zeal of Your Holiness must find out Remedies fit for these Evils;
and in full confidence hereof, We beseech God to give Your Holiness a long and
happy Reign: And We being, with all Love and filial Observance prostrate at
Your Feet, do beg Your Apostolical Benediction.

Given at Our Castle of Dublin, this 26th of November, 1689.

May it please your Majesty,
SInce the last Post, not having had any new occasion of demanding Audience of
the Pope, I went to the Cardinal Ottoboni, whom after four or five
disappointments, I at last found, and informed him of the matter, and begged
his assistance with the Pope, for all those Reasons which your Majesty has
already seen, and what else I could invent.

The Cardinal seemed much more willing to enter into the Matter than formerly;
was very glad at the News; told me, that he had seen Your Majesty's Letter to
the Pope, all of your own hand; That it was all their concerns; that he was but
the Pope's Minister, and so could answer for nothing, but informing him Right,
and that he promised to me he would do with as much affection to your Majesty's
Interest, as I could do if I were there. He complained (in confidence) to me,
that the Pope had some about him who were not so affectionate, and that so he
often left him well inclined, and found him changed at next meeting; but that
in this he would do all that was in his Power. He said, he doubted not that I
was informed of the Emperor's proceedings, how angry he was at the Pope, etc.

I told him, That for those about the Pope, if any of them contradicted his
inclinations, I humbly conceived it to be his fault, who having the double
Authority of Minister and Nephew, might easily make the Palace too hot for any
who would oppose him, especially in things so just, and, indeed, so necessary
for his Interest. That I was, indeed, informed of the Emperor's H^ffing; but
withal, knew how little that would signify, if he took the right way, which was
to assist the King to his Throne, who would be in a condition to bring Europe
to Peace on just terms, and not only to assist the Pope, but to profit his
Eminence and all his Family; That I knew what a King of England could do, and
what the Generosity of this King would do to such as obliged him, as his
Eminence might do in this Conjuncture; That the Emperor was lost however to
them, and that made it the more necessary to hold in with same, so as to have a
Friend in time of need; That if this was true, I informed him of the nearest
way to put himself above what the House of Austria could do, was to push on the
Wheel that went easiliest, and then the King on his Throne, that Family would
not talk so high.

I had all the satisfaction in words I could desire; but in effect, I believe
nothing will be done till the news of the Rising come, and then I am very
confident something will be done; so I pray God we may have the news of it
speedily: And if it be not dispatched hither before this come to your Majesty's
hands, I would humbly beseech your Majesty to get the M. C. King to send an
Express with it hither, that we may make the greater impression with it; in the
mean time, I shall (after the Post comes) endeavor another Audience, that I
may still be keeping them in mind of what it is so much their duty to do however.

I am sorry, that on this important occasion, I should be so little useful to
so good a Master; but it is God's will, and I must submit to it. I am told, how
true I know not, that in Ireland they begin to be sorry for their injustice to
me; pray God it be true, and that my Example may hinder them from falling in
the like with Mr. De Lauzune, who will certainly carry higher than I did with
them; and therefore I have some Reasons to fear, from the Humors he has to do
with. I have written to all my Friends to do their best to keep peace; and that
all may prefer the King's Service to their own private Interest, which I hope
in God they will do, and that all shall go well. I am sorry to hear that there
was not preparation made for the reception of the French; the King could do no
more but send a Lieutenant General, E. Dover, to take Order; but alas, the
negligence of the Servant makes the Master suffer; and it will never be well
till these (...) be punished as they deserve, as I doubt not this has been, if
the Story be true, that the fault was so great; and the worse the matter is
represented in France, the more the King's Honor is concerned, not to suffer
it to pass unpunished; one Example or two is necessary for the recovering of
the Kingdoms; for there is not one thing I stand so much in fear of, as
negligence in executing the King's Orders. Forgive me, Madam, for meddling in
this matter, but I Will swear I cannot help it; I must be concerned, when I hear
of any thing by which the King is prejudiced, either in his Reputation or
Service.

I humbly Pray, That Almighty God may send his best Blessings upon the King,
your Majesty, and the Prince; and that you may happy together for many years in
your own England; and that all (...) Subjects may rejoice at it as heartily as
I, who am,

May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and
most Obedient Subject and Servant. MELFORT
Rome, May 2. 1690. Lady Melfort has her most Humble Duty presented to your
Majesty; for which presumption, she begs Most Humble Pardon.




FINIS.

