ARISTOTLE's MANUAL Of Choice SECRETS, SHOWING The Whole Mystery of GENERATION.

WITH Receipts to prevent BARRENNESS, And Cause CONCEPTION.

Very Necessary to be Known and Practiced by all Midwives, Nurses, and Young
Married Women.

Translated out of Latin by J. P.

LONDON, Printed for John Back, at the Black-Boy on London Bridge, 1699.

a wealthy woman is attended by midwives, one of whom holds her newborn baby,
in her bedchamber

Here the good Women do attend,
The Child-bed-womans Throws,
Till God a safe Deliverance sends,
And turns to Joy her Woes.
ARISTOTLE's MANUAL Of Choice SECRETS.
CHAP. I. The Office and Duty of an Expert Midwife, in giving a right Judgment
whether a Woman has Conceived or not.
A Midwife, when she is required to give her Judgment, must not do it hastily,
but be very Circumspect and Deliberate in determining whether a Woman has
Conceived or no, because many have Discredited themselves by Judging too Rashly
in this Case, which has been very detrimental to their Practice; for there is
nothing more Disappointing, and Ridiculous, than to assure a Woman she is with
Child, and afterward it proves the contrary: For, though there may be some
appearances, by the rising of the Belly, and a kind of motion, yet this may
proceed from something else, as from Wind or Water, etc. which breaking away,
causes a sinking of the Belly, and has indeed deceived many, especially Women
in years.

CHAP. II. Of True Conception, with the Signs of it.
THe Signs of Conception are, If the Woman Receive an Extraordinary Delight in
the Company of her Husband, and her Menses are stayed. If she has a kind of
Yauning and Stretching, and feels within her (at certain times) a Shaking or
Quivering, with a kind of Chilliness felt chiefly between the Back and
Shoulders, attended with some Pains there and about the Navel; a Rumbling, or
Disquietness about the Nether Belly, which happens upon the closing of the Neck
of the Matrix on Conception, and the Shrinking of the whole Frame of it, to
Embrace the Closer and Warmer the Materials of Generation; and thereupon she
feels a kind of Tickling, yet in few days is afflicted with Squeamishness, much
Spitting, Dullness, and a decay of Appetite, if not with Reaching, and
Vomiting, Longing for one sort of Diet more than another, contrary to her
wonted Inclination at other times. If she finds her Belly fall or grow flat,
and soon after Swell again, and grow bigger, her Hips and Reins enlarge, Then
there is an undoubted Conception.

Again, some indeed have, in some Measure, their Menses after Conception, but
these are of a very Cold and Moist Constitution; yet, over and above the other
signs, toward the second Month, their Eyes grow hollow, the Lids loose and
Limber, the Veins in the Corner of the Eyes more swelled and bigger then at
other times, the Whites of the Eyes turned Bluish, the Veins and Arteries of
the Neck puffed up, and more apparent than usual; the Breasts grow Big, Hard,
and are subject to small Pains and Prickings, and contain Milk. If the Urin be
White and clear, mingled with little Moats, and on the top, after settling, it
appears in colors Clouded, as it were like a Rainbow, or of an Opal color,
and there appears at the bottom a thick sediment or settling, which shaken
spreads it self into particles, Swiming up and down in the Urine like Carded
Wool. Toward the end, the Urin thick and Redish, by reason of the long
retention of their Natural Courses.

These Signs and Symptoms being seriously Enquired into, by a Sober Judicious
Midwife, will give such a Light, that Joined with her own Experience, she cannot
easily be mistaken, because all the Learned in this Mystery, aprove them as
True Signs of Conception.

CHAP. III. Of False Conception, and the Signs of it.
FAlse Conception has deceived many, and sometimes proved more painful and
dangerous than True ones. Therefore I shall give an account what they are, with
their Signs, etc. viz. It is sometimes a Lump of Flesh gathered together like
the Gizzard of a Fowl, sometimes greater and sometimes lesser, according to the
continuance of it; for Nature commonly Expels in the third or fourth, if not
the Second Month: sometimes it is caused by a thing called a Mole, exceeding
the other in bigness, with which some Women have been troubled a Year or two,
and sometimes more. And of these there are two kinds. The one is a Mass without
Shape or Form, though fleshy, hard and firm, bred within the Matrix, cleaving
to the side of it, and this is called a true one. The other, called a false
one, is of three kinds, viz. A gross collection of Windiness, Water a massed in
Films, or a heaping together of Humors, and have their Places within the Womb.
These are often bred together with the Child, and are frequently the Death of
it, because the Child is deceived of its Nourishment which is carried to the
Mole, or being Incumbered, cannot grow to Perfection.

There are in these some Common Signs with the True one, as suppression of the
Menses, depraved Appetite, Loathing of Meats, Peukings, Swellings of the Belly
and Breasts; and thereby many, even Midwives, have been deceived. However in
these they differ, viz. In a false Conception or Mole, the Face is usually
puffed up, the Breasts fall after Swelling, grow Limber and are without Milk.
The Thighs, Arms and Legs grow Lame, the Face Wan and Meagre, though toward
Night they puff out again suddenly and very hard, the Belly being for the most
part of an equal roundness, with diverse continuing Pricking Pains in the bottom
of it; an uneasiness in going, and a Rumbling Windiness.

As to the Motion, the false Conception not being animated when it moves, which
is heavily, it proceeds rather from the Expulsive faculty of the Mother, than
of it self, which having no Living Soul, endeavors not to come forth. If the
Woman lies on her Back and Crushes her Belly, it will lie in the same form
without Touching.

CHAP. IV. Showing by the Signs, whether a Woman shall be delivered of a Boy or
a Girl.
THe Midwife having given her Opinion the Woman is certainly with Child, many
times a Nice Question is started, viz. Whether it be a Boy or a Girl? For
Mothers are very desirous to know what they carry, if it be possible for them
to be certified in it: Then as before, she must Deliberate, and not Determine
by Guess, for so, notwithstanding she may some times be in the right, but
oftener in the Wrong, and be accounted of no knowing Experience in this Nice
Point.

If it be a Boy, the Nipple waxes Red and sometimes Blackish, especially about
the third or fourth Month, when the Woman begins to quicken, and the color in
the Mothers Face rather grows more Lively and fresh, than decreasing or
declining to Paleness. The right Breast is harder and firmer; and the Milk
grows whiter and thicker, and being spirted against a Looking-glass, or smooth
Steel, the small Sparkles continue round like Pearls, and in Water mingles not,
but sinks directly to the bottom; and if you make a Cake with Milk, it will in
the Baking continue firm and very close, if the Milk of a Boy; if not, it will
be Spungy. The Right Side of the Belly will be bigger and more Coppid than the
Left. The stirring of the Womb is oftener and more lively. The Male Child lies
above the Navel, by reason of it is heat. The Mother will be quick and Nimble,
and of a healthful Constitution in her condition, etc.

If it be a Girl, it lies low in the Belly, as it were at the bottom, because
of the Coldness and Weight of the matter that forms it. The Mother at sundry
times has a Pale, Heavy, and Dusky Complexion, her Eyes not bright and
sparkling or Lively. She is Froward, Fretful, and often Pained in the Back and
Shoulders. Her Left Breast bigger than the Right, the Milk thin and bluish,
her Belly often flatting, and the Motion lies on the Left side; and is seldom
quick till the fourth Month: The Veins of her Thighs and Groin are bigger and
knottier on the Left side than on the Right. To make a further Experiment, take
an equal quantity of Claret, and the first Urin in the Morning, put them in a
Urinal, and let them stand twelve hours, and if a gross Cloud appear in the
middle, it denotes a Girl, but if at the bottom, a Boy; if nothing, that she is
not with Child.

CHAP. V To know whether a Woman shall have Two Children at a Birth.
THe Signs of having two Children at a Birth seldom appear before the third or
fourth Month, and then the Motions must be carefully observed, as also the
Swelling of the Belly: For if the Motion be strong and forcible on either Side
at one Instant, it denotes two Children in the Womb. Likewise if the Belly
appear more swollen and bigger than in other Childbearing, and the Sides rise
higher than the Middle of the Belly, so that there seems a kind of a valley or
Line of separation from the Navel downwards; if the Burden be born with
difficulty, and the Belly often fall on the Thighs and Hips, there is no great
doubt of giving Judgment as to the premises; and whether they be Boys, or
Girls, or both, I refer you to consider and compare the former observations.

CHAP. VI. How a Woman, during her going with Child, ought to be Dieted; and
what kind of Meats and Drinks are most proper and conducing to her Health and
safe Delivery.
THIS much concerns childing Women to be careful in observing, if they would
enjoy perfect Health, and bear strong and healthful Children; and in this I
shall observe what things are particularly required, and what to be Avoided.

In the first place, let her Dwell in a good and temperate Air, neither too
hot, cold, or waterish; not subject to Foggs, Mists, cold North-Winds, or to
moist South ones. For Hippocrates is of the Opinion, That bad Airs, or Cold, or
Moist Winds blowing strongly, frequently cause Miscarriage, especially to those
of nice and tender Breeding, by afflicting them with Rheums, Distillations, and
troublesome Coughs. All ill Scents and Noisome Vapors are subject to do the
like, so that Aristotle forbids Women with Child to come within the smell of
the Snuff of a Candle newly put out, lest it cause Abortion, Miscarriage, or
untimely Labor.

Diet must be so chosen as it may be seasonable, and properly nourishing on
this occasion, breeding good juice, and moderately drying, the Quantity
sufficient for more than her own proper Nourishment at other times. Nor must
she give her self to Fasting, especially to any Considerable degree, for if the
Child wants it is due Nourishment in the Womb, it will either not increase to
the purpose, or dwindle away when it is increased; and being Born, will become
Weakly and subject to Diseases.

Too great a Quantity is however to be avoided, for that many times stifles a
Child through too much abundance of Nourishment, or makes it so unweildy it
cannot keep in its Place, and therefore is constrained to come forth before
it is time, or grow Sickly in the Womb.

All Meats which are eitheir too Hot, too Cold, or too Moist, must be avoided,
especially in the beginning of Meals, Salt Meats, and those heated with Spice,
are hurtful. Aristotle forbids all manner of Baked Meats to Childing Women. Her
bread must be good Wheat well Kneaded and Baked; and the most agreeable Meats
are Pullets, Chickens, Capons, Young Pigeons, Pheasants, Turtle Doves,
Partridges, Larks, Veal, Mutton, and Broth; with a mixture of Hot and Cooling
Herbs. For Sallads, Lettuce, Endive, Borrage, Bugloss, Sorrel, or in lieu of
these, to close the Stomach after Dinner, and temperate the Heat, cooling
moderate Fruits, as preserved Pears, baked Wardens, Quinces, or Marmalades,
Damisons, Plumbs, Apricocks, Ripe Grapes, Goosberries, Currants, but of none of
these too much, least they Create Phlegmes, and they cause offensive Coughing,
etc. And though I may here prescribe, notwithstanding all, a Woman with Child has
sometimes such a disorderly Appetite, by reason of a full and sharp Humor
which is contained within the Membranes of the Stomach, that many times they
desire things against Nature, as Couls, Chalk, Charcole, white-wall, etc. that
can be no manner of Nourishment, but certainly offensive. These, though unruly
Appetite Crave, or make them, as they say, Long for them, yet be ruled by
Reason. Let a Woman consider she is a Rational Creature, and ought to be guided
by Reason, and not run into Extravagancy to hurt her self where that
contradicts it. When any Impatient Longings happen for things that are hurtful,
the Mind must by degrees be turned from that, to something that is more
agreeable, and so by degrees, they may wean themselves from all Extravagancies.

As to Drinks, good nourishing Wine, not too strong, nor too much at a time, as
Canary, Malago, Sherry, Claret; also Ale that is not Foul or Mudy, Beer not too
Stale, Rasberry, Cherry, or Current Wines, new Milk, but very little either of
Whey, Cider or Gooseberry Wine, or any sharp things, by reason they cause
Gripings, and do much harm to Childing Women.

CHAP. VII. Of Sleep, Exercise, Labor, and great Noises, as they tend to the
Advantage or Prejudice of Women with Child.
AS for Sleep, it must be Moderate, and in seasonable times in the Night, lying
soft and easy, shifting sides as often as she wakes.

Exercise Moderately performed helps the Birth by Loosing the Cotiledons or
vessels of the Matrix, whereby the Infant acquires it is Nourishment; going a
moderate Pace, or riding softly is well, but Jolting in Coaches, Wagons, or on
Horseback, is very much to be avoided, by reason they frequently occasion
Abortion.

Too much Labor is hurtful: Yet, as Aristotle observes, moderate Labor
contributes to a safe and easy Delivery, because thereby those Excrements are
Consumed, which Sloth and Idleness would retain, or rather Engender. And to
keep her Belly, soluble, which in this Case is required, she may take some
Broth wherein Pruins are boiled; stewed Apples and Sugar, with a little Butter;
Buglos, Borrage, Purslain and Lettuce, with a little of the herb Mercury shread
into Veal Broth.

Great Noises are very hurtful, as sound of Trumpets, Bells, beating of Drums,
and shooting of Artillery: Also Thunder, or the violent roaring of Water, for
upon any Frights, or sudden Starts, a Woman may easily Loose her Burden,
especially the first Month, for then the Embrio is not firmly fastened and tied
to the Womb; and though in the succeeding Month it grows faster and bigger, yet
the weight may so press it on the Neck of the Womb, that it may come forth
untimely.

CHAP. VIII. Of Purges to be Taken: And of the Passions of the Mind.
A Gentle Purge may be convenient, given on any occasion that requires it, from
the Fourth to the Seventh Month, but after that, it is neither Practicable, nor
by many held safe. All things that violently provoke Urin, and consequently
will have an Influence in provoking the Courses, are forbidden. As also
Phlebotomy or Blood Letting, unless some great Necessity require it; as, the
Woman being so full of Blood, that it is feared it may stifle the Child with
the over great quantity; or in dangerous Diseases, as the Plurisie, etc. For
otherways, the Blood being taken away when the Child is grown, it causes a
Leanness and decay of it for want of a due Nourishment, it requiring now much
more than when it was very little.

The Passions of the Mind are, in this Case, to be considered, as either Good
or Hurtful, therefore the Childing Woman must prevail with herself, as much as
possibly she can, to be Pleasant and Merry, avoidding Melancholy, Musing,
Thought, or Vexing, Grieving, Freting, falling into a sudden Anger, Scolding
or Exclaming; neither ought she to be too violently Transported with Laughing,
Coughing, Sneezing; with sudden Joy at any surprising News or Accident: Or, on
the contrary, Fear; she must therefore have a settled and quiet Mind, not
subject to any Passions or Surprise that may be Injurious to what she carries
in her Womb. She must not give Ear to Lamentable Tales, sad and frightful
Stories, etc. Nor see Fighting, Fencing, Bear-Baitings, Executions, or any
Cruel and Unnatural Sights, Avoid the Company, as much as may be, of Deformed
Persons, Antic Pictures, etc. Least the Imagination prove Strong, and make
some Impression or Similitude on the Faetus or Embrio. And lastly, as to these
particulars, when a Woman perceives herself with Child, she must let out her
Lacing, and lay aside her Busk, not only for her own ease, which is proper
enough, but least the Child being straightened in the Womb, become Writhed,
Crooked, or Misshapen.

CHAP. IX. How to prevent Diseases, and other Griefs, in a Childing Woman, by
Oils, Ointments, Fomentations, and Internal Medicaments; with the several
Receipts to make and apply them.
HAving laid down Rules how a Childing Woman, in sundry respects, ought to
manage herself, I now come to other particulars of as near a concern,
requisite to be taken notice of, and done, in the Ninth Month, viz. To preserve
Health, Beauty, and give a safe and easy Delivery. In the first place then,
that her Breasts after her Delivery may not be too much puffed up, and hang
down like Bags; hang, during her Childing, a little piece of Steel between
them, by a String, or Chain, fastened about her Neck; and wash them with this
Decoction, or Fomentation, pretty warm and often.

Take Sage, Perriwinkle, the herb Ground Ivy, of each a handful; Hemlock as
much as you can hold between your forefinger and Thumb, bruise them, and boil
them in two quarts of water and one of Whitewine, till a fourth part be
consumed; then put thereto a little Rose Vinegar, and wash your Breasts.

This prevents them from Soreness and breaking after Delivery; and from many
other ill conveniences. That the Belly, when the Child Quickens, may be kept
in order, from Swelling or growing too Unweildy, a Swathe is requisite, made fit
for the purpose, to support it, and to keep the Skin from Furrowing, growing
Knottey, or full of broken Veins wrinkled, Anoint it with this Pomander.

Take the Suet of a Young Kid, and Hog's-Lard, each three Ounces, Goose-Grease
and the Grease of a Capon each an Ounce and a Half, melt them in an Earthen
Vessel, strain them when very hot into fair Water, and Temper them in it till
they become very White, then melt them again, adding an Ounce of Stags Marrow
or Suet, wash them in Rose Water, and Anoint the Belly warm with it.

Or take Oil of Roses an ounce and a half, Oil of St. John's Wort and sweet
Almonds each two ounces, May-butter and Oil of Jessamin each half an ounce,
Sperma Ceti a quarter of an ounce; melt these together, and take a soft washed
Leather Skin, either Dog or Sheep, made fit for the Belly, Anoint it with these
Ointment. This is usually required to be begun in the Fourth Month. In the
Ninth Month, The Woman being Healthy, it is convenient that she walk gently
before Meals, for the first twelve or fifteen Days; and after that, undertake
some moderate Business, or convenient Exercise; and if any Pains or Weakness
happen, make the following Bath, viz.

Take Marshmallows with their Roots, and Motherwort, each two handfuls, white
Lilly Roots three ounces, Cammomile and Mellilot flowers each a handful,
Linseed, Quince-seed, and Fenigreek-seed, each an Ounce, Boil them in running
Water till a fifth part be consumed, and let the Party Pattle in it, and being
well dried, put into a warm Bed, her Belly, about an hour after, being supled
with Oil of Roses, Cammomile, and sweet Almonds.

CHAP. X. Of unreasonable Longings, Hicup, and Vomitings; their Cause, and
Remedy: Also Pains in the Stomach, Belly, Flanks, etc. Back, Hips and Groin;
Difficulty of making Vrin, Palpitation of the Heart, and Swoonings; Cough, Sore
Throat; Costiveness and Laxativeness; Swellings in the Legs and Thighs, etc.
UNreasonable Longings are allayed frequently by eating Olives or Capers,
boiled Sallads, Meats that are Fat and Sweet, with Verjuce, Orange, Pomgranet,
Citron, or any sharp Juice in their Sauces. Some commend much Toasted Cheese
and dried Amillium, and hot Spices in Meats or Drinks, but no great quantity,
for then they are hurtful; as also is much Drinking. And for Drinks, a Glass of
Wormwood-Wine, or Hidromel, is very good: And for this a gentle Purge may be
given, of Senna or Rhuebard boiled in Whitewine; about a quarter of a Pint
being drunk warm Fasting.

The Hickup, and distastefulness of Meats, are very Incident to Women with
Child, and prove uneasy to the Child, especially by weakening the Mother, and
thereby it being deprived of sufficient Nourishment, causing her either to be
Delivered Untimely, or produce a Weakly Child.

Take, to Prevent or Remedy these, the Yolks of Eggs, Veal Broth, or Chicken
Broth, wherein Endive, Succory and Lettuce have been shred, with Beets and
Winter-savory; Anointing the Stomach and Belly with Oil of Sweet Almonds and
Oil of Violets. If the cause proceed from a sharp bitter Humor, a gentle Purge
is requisite to carry it downward, that may occasion no great Straining, and an
hour after take Syrup of Violets an Ounce, in a quarter of a Pint of warm new
Milk.

Vomiting, is another defect, but must not however be too suddenly stopped,
because if it be not violent it does some good, by avoiding the abundance of
humor amassed together in the Stomach, which is indeed the cause of it, or
else some sharp and biting humor, that does stir and provoke it. But it
happens oftentimes that this Vomiting is so violent, that even the Sustenance
that should Nourish the Mother, and Child, cannot remain a convenient time for
digestion, but is cast up; and therefore to Remedy this,

Let the Person so afflicted, see that she use wholesome Diets, eat Moderately,
and by degrees, not much, nor over-hastily. Take a gentle Purge, but in it
neither Diagridium nor Colloquintida, but rather Rhue or Rhuebarb, infused in
White Wind over a gentle fire: The compound Syrup of Cichory, with Syrup of
Rhuebarb, which not only Evacuates but Strengthens; or the Syrup of Damask
Roses, with Manna dissolved in it. These are so harmless, that the Niceness of
the Dose need not be disputed.

Pains in the Stomach, Flank, or Belly, often happens to Childing Women, and
therefore let them know, these are in this case much occasioned by Windiness,
the parts being Lax, or sometimes the Wind is shut up in the Womb. To take away
this cause therefore, the party must shun all manner of Moist and Windy Meats.
Take a grentle purge if it be requisite, and then apply this Fomentation, viz.

Flowers of Cammomile and Featherfew, each two handfuls, Red-Roses half a
handful, Anniseeds and Fennelseeds, each two Drams, Lawrel-bark, and
Bay-berrys, each a dram, Bruise these grossly, and Boil them in three Pints of
Clarret, till a fourth part be Consumed; dip into the Liquor a Linen Cloth,
and Foment the parts grieved as hot as may be; and lay on the sollid matter
Poultis-wise; and let the Party chew Fennel, Anniseeds, and eat first in a
Morning a Toast soaked in Hypocras, or Drink a little Dram of the distilled
Water of Citron or Limmon-Peels, infused in good Spirits.

Pains of the Back, Hips, and Groine, and difficulty of making Urin, are
likewise incident to Childing Women; and this happens many times according to
the carrying the Child in the Belly, viz. High or low, more backward, forward,
or sidelings; and indeed the carrying very low is the occasion of most of these
Pains, especially in the Hips and Groine, they proceeding more from the
heavyness of the Children, than from any humor; for the Womb then being great
and thick, on which side soever it rests, it draws and strains the Ligatures
on the other Parts.

To prevent which, the Party must not be extraordinary stirring, especially not
Jolted, nor attempting to Jump; Eat but little at a time, though the oftener,
and of such Meats as are light and easy of Digestion, for the Stomach being
overpressed by fullness, presses the Matrix by stretching the Belly. In this
Case Swathes Anointed with Oil of Marshmallows and Cammomile, are proper to
shrink and keep up the Belly, Anointing her Back with Vnguentum Comitissae, or
take Mastick and Mirtle-Berrys, half an ounce each, Powder of Red Corral a
dram, sealed Earth two drams; beat them unto fine Powder, then add three ounces
of melted Beeswax and Oil of Roses, with Deers-Suet, as much as will make them
up into a Plaster, and lay it to the Reins of the Back so that it may a little
incline upon the Fla^ks; and Bathe the Thighs and lower part of the Belly, with
the Decoction of Marshmallows, Watercresses, Pellitory of the Wall,
Pimpernel, and bruised Linseed, each a little handful, boild in a gallon of
Water, to the Consumption of a third part.

Palpitations of the Heart and Swoonings are to be considered in the next
Place. The first of these being extraordinary, many times proceeds from Vapors
arising from the Womb, and other parts nearer enclosed in the Arteries, and
through them conveyed to the Heart, whose offensiveness disorders the pure
Spirits, and causes those Unnatural Palpitations; the Heart Laboring by motion
to expel those Vapors that make it Sicken, and occasion many Evils if not
timely prevented or removed. And this is to be perceived by laying your hand on
the Woman's Breast; for if it rise strongly, and the Ribs as it were are lifted
up with it, keeping time to the Palpitation, then it proceeds from Vapors.

To remove them, take a gentle Purge, and Bleed moderately; take such Powders,
or Cordials, as fortify the Heart, fasting in a Morning, as Aqua Mirabilis,
Dr. Stephens's Water, Powder of Bezars-stone, and the Powder of the Bone of a
Stags Heart mixed together, half a dram at a time; and these will not only
dissipate the Vapors, but prevent Swoonings, Faintings, and cold Sweats.

The Heart must likewise be outwardly Fortified, by laying a soft quilted
Stomacher to the Stomach and Region of the Heart; and lay a cooling Cataplasme
as Mallows, Grounsil, Cammomile and Orpin, beaten together with Oil of Roses
and the white of an Egg. Then for a Fomentation, let her use the Water of
Bugloss, Burrage, Baum, Orange-flower, Roses, Cardus Benedictus, and Scordium;
infusing in them Saunder, Coriander, or Angellica seeds, or any Cordial Flowers.

The Cough is a very troublesome thing to Women with Child, and very dangerous
if it be violent, causing Pains in the Head, Flanks, Sides and Belly;
Vomitings, Unrest, and many other Miseries; with frequent Miscarriages and
Abortions: And to keep from this Grievance, all Salt Meats, Spiced Meats, and
all sharp and biting things, especially if the Cough be caused by Vapors, or
distillation of a thinn or serous Humor.

To Remedy this, boil a quart of Ale, that has well worked and settled, till a
third part be consumed; then fill it up again with White Wind, and put into it
four or five slices of Licorice, as many Blew-Figgs, a few Cammomile Flowers,
Anniseed and Coriander seeds, each a quarter of an ounce, let them sees about
a quarter of an hour, strain and press out the Liquid part, and Drink a quarter
of a pint three times a day very hot. And to make it more Pallatable, it may be
sweetened with white-Sugar Candy.

If the Throat be Sore or Swelled with it, take Oil of sweet Almonds an ounce,
White-Sugar in Powder half an ounce, Rose Water half an ounce, mingle these
over a gentle Fire, with a quarter of an ounce of Alum disolved in the
Rose Water. Sleeping well, without any Medicines to enforce it, mainly
contributes to the staying the Defluxion of Rheums that occasion the Cough. And
after you have taken the former, going to Bed, take of the Syrup of Jubebs and
Violets, each a quarter of an ounce, mixed with two drams of Diascordium.

Costiveness is another accident afflicting Childing Women, causing them to
strain themselves, and put themselves thereby in danger of Miscarriage. To
prevent, or Remedy this, a good Diet must be had, eating Meats that moisten and
keep the Bowels slippery and open. But this must be done with Discretion, least
too much moisture loosen the Ligatures of the Womb, and hasten the Delivery
before it be convenient: And among other Meats I recommend Veal, Necks of
Mutton, Place, Flounders, Baked Apples, Pruens, Salads of Lettuce, Pursleaine,
Endive, and all strengthening Broths, without Spice or Saltness. Then

Take half an ounce of the Tops of Senne, bruize it with three Scruples of
Antimony, infuse them in half a Pint of Sherry over a gentle Fire; and Drink it
hot.

Laxativeness immoderately, is as hurtful as the other; for it puts the Woman
very much in danger of Coming before her Time; and if it be not in time stayed,
it is in likelihood to turn to the Bloody Flux, and there it often proves
fatal. To stay this,

Take Conserve of Red-Roses half an ounce, Baum and Mint tops Conserved, each a
quarter of an ounce, Syrup of Sloes an ounce; put these into a pint of
Red-Wine, mingle them well over a gentle Fire, and drink it Morning, Noon and
Night, pretty hot: And for greater assureance, Administer a moderately
astringent Clyster, viz. Of Plantain, Camomile, Mellilot, Borrage and Burglos
Decocted in Whey or Skim-milk; adding two ounces of the Oil of Violets.

Swelling in the Thighs and Leg, are many times incident to Women with Child,
especially to those that before were wont to have strong Purgations; for the
Blood being more than is required for Nourishment, alters and converts to
Waterish or Dropsical Humors: But Women of Chollerick Constitutions are seldom
subject to this, because their great Heat dries up this Moisture; and these
accidents usually happen the first four Months; yet if not removed, they many
times remain to the Delivery.

A good wholesome moderate Diet in this case must be used, rubbing the parts
afflicted often with a warm Wollen-cloth, wrap them up hard and warm with Ash
Leaves, or Vine Leaves, applied next, Anointed with Oil of Roses, dissolved
Camphire, and the Juice of Sage, Marjorum, and Oil of Rosemary.

CHAP. XI. To prevent a Woman's Coming before her Time, Signs of Abortion, or
Miscarriage: With proper Remedies against them.
COming before the Time, is called a Shift, or Sliping away; and Abortion in
many Cases, though the Women call it a Mischance. The Slip is before the Womb
can properly be said to be shut, or it may be afterward, till such time the
Child receives some manner of Form or Shape. Abortion is that which happens
after Forty days, and sometimes to the beginning of the Ninth Month, it being a
violent Expulsion, or Exculsion of the Child Formed and possessed with Life,
before the time Nature has prefixed.

This happens sundry ways, by Accidents, as Agues, Frights, Flux of the Blood
or Belly, Vomitings, violent Sickness, over Stiring, or the like. Also from
excess of Venery, Passions of the Mind, Choler, Sadness, excessive Longings,
or strong Potions or Purges; or from the Weakness of the Child, wanting
Nourishment, and sometimes from its being too Big and Unweildy, so that the
Womb can no longer contain it, whose struggling causes the Womb to Relax, and
Dilate it self, and so it forces it is Way: Sometimes from Leanness, and at
other times from too much Fullness or Fatness, a Medium being the best for Women
in Childbearing.

Signs of Abortion, viz. When the Milk flows abundantly in the Breasts, and
comes much out without any Compression; yet they remain Soft and Limber; if
there be a bad Color on the Nipple, as Blew, Yellow, Duskey, etc. When Water,
then Blood and Slimy matter; and lastly, Blood flows from Natures Secrets.

To Remedy these, there must be a respect had to the Causes; in Sickness of
timely care must be taken for suitable Remedies; all excess of Labor or
Exercise must be avoided, and wholesome Diet taken, with some gentle Purges;
and, if occasion require it, especially in those that are Sanguine, a moderate
Bleeding; for too much Blood, or too much Nourishment is mainly Prejudicial, as
well as too little. The Mother must be of as Merry a Temper as she can; nay
seek for occasions to Divert, avoiding occasions of Grief, Fretting, or Pining,
especially near the time of her Delivery; Let her keep her Chamber, if not her
Bed, using Nourishing Meats easy of Digestion; and drinking Cordials or
strengthening Liquors. Take Syrup of Borrage, Burdocks, and Roses in Red-Wine
warm. The The Syrup of Citron and Mirabolans in Milk, sweetened with
Sugar Candy. The distilled Water of Comfery, Sage, or Clary. And Anoint the
Belly with Oil of Dill, Lavender, and some drops of Oil of Cloves, Binding or
Swathing it moderately. Oil of Myrtle and Mastick is very good, where the Party
is of a Cold or Phlegmatic Complexion or Constitution.

A Sear-cloth of Oxcycrotium Diaculum; sprinkled over with a little Mirrh and
Nutmeg finely Powdered, is a great Strengthener for the Back and Flanks; helps
the Womb to retain the Infant; and prevents untimely Birth.

Thus having proceeded all along, by such easy Methods as brings a Woman to
the true time of her Delivery, I shall now Treat of what is requisite in that
Nature.

CHAP. XII. How a Woman is to be Ordered when she comes to her Delivery; and to
know when it is Labor or not.
THE Time of Delivery hastening, no delay must be made for such things as are
convenient. A Midwife ought to be attenting, sometime of waiting is required
before she can perform her Office, there being many things to be done in order
to cause an easy, and safe Delivery. The Woman must be kept waking; for too
much Sleep or Drousiness, to which they are prone, causes Nature to be less
Active: And this may be done, if she be not weak, by walking up and down her
Chamber, and lying down by turns to rest. There being a good Fire, and all
things necessary to prevent her catching Cold, and to Fortify her to undergo
the Travel: Yet not so much but that she may Sleep moderatly, to ease the
tirements of Nature; and waking, take some refreshing Cordials, and
strengthening Broths.

The time of Delivery being come, which is known by these Signs, viz. The
Midwife must consider whether the upper part of the Belly seem as it were
Empty, and the lower very Big and full stretched. Enquire of the Childing Woman
how she stands affected as to Pains; and in what manner they come and go,
whether Little, or Great, or Frequent: Whether they begin at the Back, and
proceed to run down the Belly, not staying at the Navel, but pass to the Groin,
and end in the bottom of the Belly inwardly or the inner Neck of the Womb; and
from these she may gather how near a Woman is to her Delivery; for they are
Signs of her speedy falling in Travel, especially upon the dilating the outward
and inward Orifice. If the Water descends, or there be any Flowings, then the
Midwife must place herself conveniently near the Woman; and proceed in her
Office, in which (for Manners sake) I shall not give here Directions, as
knowing there are many Judicious Midwives who need them not, my Main Scope
being rather to direct the order of a Woman in Childbed for her own safety and
that of her Child.

CHAP. XIII. Of Natural and Difficult Births: And how the Child ought to be
Ordered when drawn forth: With Receipts for many Cordials; and Directions for
other things, useful on this Imergency.
IF there be a Natural Birth, That is the Child coming with it is Head forward,
the Arms on the Side, and the Throws increasing, there is little Difficulty or
Danger: Yet she must have great Courage herself, and Encourage the Woman,
giving her Wine wherein Saffron has been infused, or such things as Comfort the
Heart, as occasion requires, yet in little Quantity. Nothing must be done in
Delivery hastily or rashly, but Nature must have its course in a good measure,
it being the greatest helper in these Cases. And because the Child does come
Naturally into the World with the Face downward, when it is taken forth it must
be turned on its Back, to prevent Suffocation, or drawing the Air too heavily.
And if the Navel-string, as often happens, be twisted about its Neck, let her
take it off gently.

If it be feeble or faint, that it scarce can Breathe, spurt a little Canary
into the Mouth of it, which, by its striving will open the Pipes. She may do
the like into the Nose or Ears, but very gently, and but a very small quantity.
When it begins to Cry, draw the Navelstring gently, that the Afterbirth may
follow in its due time, the Woman Coughing or Straining a little, and holding
Salt in her Hand fast grasped, recollect her Breath, and blowing hard, the
Midwife, or her Assistant, stroaking her Belly down gently. And the Child being
separated, to prevent Fits, give it a little Spoonful of Black-Cherry-Water,
with two or three drops of the Blood that proceeds from the Navel-string when
cut, which must be done about two handful from the Belly, especially of a Boy,
making a Knot before the Incision. Then dip Linen clothes in a warm Bath of
Rose-Leaves, Penny royal, or any Comfortable Herbs or Flowers, wrap it up warm,
and keep it near a Fire, but not in a place where a free Air cannot come to it,
because the Lungs at first are weak and cannot draw strongly. Cover the Head
however with a thin Linen Cloth, and let it not come too near a great Light
suddenly, for fear of hurting and weakening the Sight. Then Swathe it gently,
and give it some little Food, or let it Suck some Woman whose Milk is of the
same Sex, but not the Mother, because here is is not as yet proper for it, for
many Reasons which I willingly omit.

The Woman being thus safely Delivered, her Legs must be laid gently straight,
and a fine Linen Cloth or Rapper diped in warm Water and applied, all cold
Airs excluded. And after some Refreshment, she may Slumber a little to recover
Natures strength. Then take Candle, Panada, Water Gruel, or what is most
agreeable to stretch out the Bowels, fill in some measure the Vacancy, and
prevent Windyness, which is very offensive to Women new Delivered. And if she
find herself Faint, and Uneasy, let her take the following Cordial Drink.

Take the Syrup of Maid-hair one ounce, Pellitory Water, Cardus Water, each
half an ounce, mingled in a quarter of a Pint of warm White Wind. And Anoint
the parts with Oil of Almonds drawn without Fire.

As for the Child, when it has well Breathed, and taken some refreshing
Nourishment, give it three scruples of Mithridate or Venice Treacle in a
Spoonful of White Wind, or any proper Cordial Water.

If the Woman be weak in her Parts, and Pains continue in her Back, Flanks, or
Groin, take a Sheepskin that is newly pulled off, clap the Fleshy side about
her, and wrap her up warm in it, and and it will wonderfully strengthen her, if
it be repeated every two days. Or for want of this, lay a Hares Skin or Rabits
Skin taken off warm on her Belly. But in my Opinion, the former is a great deal
better. And to Lenify the distended parts,

Take Oil of Hyperion and St. John's-wort, each an ounce, an ounce of the Oil
of Roses, and two whites of Eggs finely beaten together, and apply it as a
Lineament and Pessary. Then let her gently raise up her Thighs, that her Knees
may lie up to ease her Back. When the Skin is taken off, chafe her with Oil of
Roses, Almonds and St. John's-wort. Swathe her with soft Linen three or four
times doubled; and beware she takes not Cold, suppling het Breasts, if given to
Chaping, Hardness, or subject to Knots, Tumors, or the like, with Oil of
Olives and Sweet Almonds. And above all things keep the Chamber close and warm,
that she take not cold in any part; for the parts distended by the force of
Travel, will easily contract Cold Airs: And when she is desirous of Sleep,
before she goes to it, let her take a refreshment of some strengthening Broths,
made of Veal, Chickens, or if she be more desirous of it, a couple of Poached
Eggs.

Difficult Deliveries require something more than what I have mentioned; and
the Midwife must be yet more Careful herein, because not only her Reputation,
but the Life of her Patient is mainly concerned in it. There are many Births
that require great Skill and Labor to bring them forth, because they come
Preposterously, or contrary to the Natural one; as lying side-ways in the Womb,
coming Stradling with the Feet forward, or the Arms spread over the Head, the
Buttocks forward, or the like; and these must, by the Midwifes Skill, be
reduced to their proper form if it may be, and so drawn forth, before the Woman
be too far spent, the Vital Spirits wasted, or Nature enfeebled: And if a
Midwifes strength or Skill prevail not, a Skillful Surgeon must be sent for
before it is too Late. Some Midwives fancying in doing this their Reputations
would suffer, have kept their Patients in Pain and Hope, till at last finding
themselves Constrained to send, when the Case was desperate, they have been
obliged to part with Woman, or Child, or both, to the Grave.

CHAP. XIV. What ought to be done if a Woman come before or after her Time; and
to bring away dead Children. Also to stay the Flux, and Remedy diverse other
Accidents happening to those newly Delivered.
TRavel may likewise prove Painful or Difficult when the Woman is Delivered
Before or After her Time. The First of these is, when it comes in Six, Seven,
or Eight Months, which happens when the Womb is too Weak, or Moist, which
softens the Neck of it, and makes it dilate and Emit the Child before the due
course of Natures Expired. As also the Vessels to the Orifice, whereof the
After-Burthen is fastened, begin to Relax, by which means the Infant cannot be
supported, or remain in it is Natural Situation.

This Pain and Troublesome times happens when the Child grows so bigg, that it
stretches, or Extends the Womb in every part, by a great increase, or
overstaying the time, some times in the Tenth or Eleventh Month: For the Matrix
and Muscles of the upper Belly being extended beyond measure, do enlarge the
Fibers, which cannot be Easily drawn together again, having lost their Natural
Strength and force.

To help this defect, the cause being rightly understood, such Medicines must
be used as are proper to Mollify and Strengthen the parts, especially the
Membranes, that they may further dilate and stretch themselves, by being made
more supple and Gentle. Anointing the Cartilages that Join the Os Pubis Sacrum
Coceygis, and Ilium at the time of Delivery. And let the Woman take of
Pellitory-Water two ounces, Oil of Sweet-Almonds one ounce, well mingled
together, and pretty warm; and after this, some strengthening Cordials: And
this likewise much avails where there is any Calosity, or hardness in the
passage of Nature.

There are also other Accidents which must be provided against, as the Flux of
Blood and Convulsions in time of Labor. These are very dangerous to the Mother
and Child, and often destroy both, especially the former, if of long
continuance: Because the Blood being the treasure of the Life, the Spirits and
Heart are carried away with it. And again, the Convulsions hurt the Brain, that
it cannot Communicate so much Spirit as is needful in this imergency, for the
Respiration of the Mother, and the Child, who Breathes only by the means of the
Spirits that are Imparted by the Arteries of the Mother, for want of which it
is many times suffocated. And these happen single, or both together. Make what
haste you can to Deliver the Woman, after having fortified her with
strengthening Cordials, which cannot however be conveniently done but by a
Skilful Midwife of Courage and able Body, or Surgeon. For if it be not soon
done, the Child will be brought forth Dead, or if Alive, hardly it lives long
after. But it must in this Case be considered, whether the Woman be at her full
Time, and a necessity of Delivery requires it; for some have Fluxes of Blood at
four or five Months, and then it is not practicable, but rather to divert it by
breaking a Vein, or using such Medicines that may turn the course of it. But at
the full time, though some are of Opinion to let Blood, in such Cases is
requisite, yet what I propose always proves much more effectual, the Woman being
happily Delivered, of either the one Birth or the other, there yet remains a
great deal more to be Considered, in order to restore her to an Uprising.

Diet, in this Case, must be prepared that may be suitable to the Weakness of
the Woman's Constitution: For soon after Labor, the Stomach cannot suffer, or
at least well Digest strong Meats; and many that unadvisedly Eat such, fall
into Feavours; and from them to the Grave. Broths, Panada's, Jellys, Poached
Eggs, and Gruels, are the most proper for the first four or five days. Then
Barly-broth; and so to stronger things by degrees, as Gellys, Chickens, or
small Birds. And take a Drink between whiles, viz. French Barley,
Corianderseeds, and Cinnamon boiled in spring Water, straind and Sweetened with
Sugar. And for a Strengthening Liquor, or Cordials,

Take a Capon, parboile it, then cut it in pieces; and take of Baum, Borrage
and Bugloss, each a Handful: Put them with the Flesh of the Fowl into a
Glass-Alimbec; sprinkle them over with a dram of the Powder of Pearl, and break
in small pieces two or three Leaves of Gold, then pour in some of the Water the
Capon was sodden in; Distill these in a double Glass, or Balneo Mariae, till
there Issues a quart of distilled Water; and let the Woman take an ounce of it
twice or thrice a day. This strengthens the Heart and Brain, prevents fainting,
cold Sweats; and much fortifies Nature. If she be not Aguish or Feverish she
may Drink a little White Wind, or Clarret, wherein Borrage and Limon-Peel have
been infused, mixing with them some Syrup of Maidenhair, or other Astringent
Syrups. At eight days end, the Womb being well Purged and Cleansed, she may
take stronger Meats: But must be kept quiet from great Noises, and close from
too free an Air, avoiding all Sadness and Grief that may afflict or depress the
Spirits.

CHAP. XV. How her Belly, etc. must be Ordered after Delivery: And what Physic
and Cordials are proper, from her Lying down to her Vprising. Which many other
things needful to be known and Practiced.
CAre also must be taken of her Breasts and Belly, for the first, anoint them
with Oil of Cammomile, and Myrtle, and Roses, well mixed together: Swathe, or
bind them up gently; and beside a strengthening Sear-cloath laid to the Back,
apply to the Navel, a Plaster of Galbanum two or three fingers broad. And to
keep the Milk from Curdling, anoint the Stomach and Breasts with Oil of Roses
and Populeum.

A Bath upon this account is very convenient to strengthen the Delivered Woman,
which you may make by boiling Mother-wort, Pennyroyal, Agrimony, Rose Leaves,
Cammomile, Mallows, and flowers of Mellilot, in three parts Water and one of
White Wind, in which she may Bath herself all over, or the Liquor warm applied
with Linen Clothes to her Body; and before, she may take conserve of Roses,
Bugloss, and Candyed Citron Peel, finly bruised and mixed in a Glass of Wine.

Griping Pains are many times troublesome to Women after Delivery. To Remedy
this, let her take an ounce of the Oil of Walnuts, and half an ounce of Sweet
Almonds drawn without fire, in warm Ale or Wine. And foment the Stomach, Belly,
and lower parts, with the Decoction of Cammomile, Marshmallows, Melilot,
Pelitory, Linseed, and Mugwort boiled in Milk, and apply the Herbs warm
Poultis-wise.

If the Matrix fall down, Bath and Foment the Parts with the Decoction of
Red-Roses, Cammomile and Lavender boiled in Milk; put it up gently, followed by
a Pessary dipped in Red Wine, wherein Plantain, white Muller, and red Roses have
been concocted.

If Hurts, or Excoriations happen in the lower parts by Child bearing, take Oil
of St. John's-wort and Oil of Roses, beat them up with the White of an Egg, and
apply a Linnen-cloath diped in this mixture, to the afflicted part; and lay a
strengthening Plaster of Mirrh, Mastick, and white Beeswax to the lower
Region of the Belly.

If the after Purgings come not away kindly, or in over abundance, they must be
helped or Restrained; and by these a Woman's Health or Sickness is guessed at,
during the time of her Lying-in. For if they be of the Natural Color, and soon
congeal, it is in a sign she is in good Health, and will continue so to her
Uprising. But being little in quantity, I Will colored, and do not congeal
suddenly, then Nature is out of order, and proper Remedies must be given to
prevent or remove Sickness. If the Purgings be excessive, then moderate letting
Blood is held necessary; and taking such astringents as may in some degrees
restrain them; for there is no means that makes better revulsions, and draws
the Blood sooner from the place to which it flows, than the opening of a
Vein. And at the same time apply the following Cataplasme to the lower parts of
the Belly, viz. Bole Armenick and Dragons Blood, each an ounce, Gum Tragacanth
half an ounce, Myrtle Berrys and dried Rose Leaves beaten to Powder, each a
dram; the Juice of Plantaine an ounce, make them into the thinness of a
Plaster with Vnguetum Comitissae.

To make the Purges come freely, boil a little Senna in White Wind with a blade
or two of Mace, Rosemary Flowers, or Tops, and a little slice of Rhuebarb;
drink the Liquid part twice a day, two spoonfuls at a time, and apply to the
Navel a Poltis of Featherfew, Groundsil and Melilot; drinking ever and anon a
Glass of old Mallago wherein blew Currants have been boiled with some slices of
Licorice. Eating such things as are Moistening and opening, to dilate the
Orifices of the Veins, which are much stoped by the long restraint of their
wonted Flowings. Sometimes the stayings proceed from sudden Griefs, or Anger,
or other Passions of the Mind, which must be avoided, because they thicken and
Vitiate the Blood.

Taken then Succory, Burnet, Endive, Agrimony, Violet-Flowers, boil them in
Sweet-Wine, and let the Woman drink a little Glass of it warm, with the Syrup
of Maidenhair dissolved in it: and use a warm Fomentation of opening Herbs, as
Cammomile, Mlliot, Parsley; let her Eat Green Peace, Asparagus, etc.

To bring away a false Conception after Delivery, viz. If it be large and came
not away with the usual Purgings, it may be thought to stick to the side of the
Womb, and in danger of turning into a Mole, which will prove yet more
troublesome and painful. To bring them away, First she must use resolving
Baths, to loosen and moisten the whole Body, that the Matrix may be enlarged,
and the passage dilated. Secondly, Clisters of cooling and supling Herbs.
Thirdly, Gentle Purges, to cause the excrements to avoid; as also to renew the
Natural Courses. Fourthly, By Injections, which may provoke and stir up the
Expulsive Faculties of the Womb, and with them move and bring away the False
Conception.

If the Neck or Sides of the Womb be Glutinated, or Joined together, the Woman
must be Purged and let Blood, yet moderately; as also Bathe are succesful, made
with Emolient Herbs, Barks, or Roots; and Fomentations of the like, used to the
lower parts, to soften and moisten the affected Places.

And thus much may suffice for the Ordering a Woman from her Lying in, to her
going a broad again. And If I have passed over any Accident that does not
usually, or by the course of Nature, etc. happen, no doubt but a Skillful
Midwife or Nurse will find a means to Remedy it, or for defect of Skill, timely
apply themselves to some able Surgeon or Physician. And so from hence I haste
to the Child, which I have left so long, to give Directions for the well
Ordering it, as to its Health and Thriving, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Of Nurses, How they ought to be Qualified and Dieted.
IN the first place, if you take not the care of bringing it up your self, make
choice of a good wholesome cleanly Nurse, whose Complexion and Constitution is
agreeable to the Child's. See that her Milk be of middle Substance, neither too
Thick or inclining to Curdling, or too Thin or Waterish; for the first clogs
the Lungs and Stomach of the Child, being of a bad and hard digestion; and the
latter Causes Scourings, Gripings; and yeildeth but little Nourishment. As for
the quantity of Milk, a Nurse should rather have too much than too little, that
the Infant may draw it the more freely, without hard Sucking, to gather
windyness in the Stomach, She must also be of a Merry Temper, not Peevish or
Fretful, given to Anger, or any Violent Passions; for these tiring the Humors,
have a great effect on the Child, in as much as the Natural Temperature of the
Milk is in some measure altered or changed by it. And this is known by the
Color; if it be blew, it denotes the Woman given to Melancholy; if Yellowish,
to Choler; if something inclining to Red, it is not well digested, and denotes
a weakness in the Breasts through Cold, Hurts, or the like defects, or an Ill
Quality or defect in the Blood. Therefore that which is Nourishing and
wholesome, is very White; in a Medium between Thick and Thin; and this may be
tried on a Looking-Glass, or any other smooth Body, for a little being spurted
on it, if (when the Glass is reared a little sloaping) it run off presently,
then it is too Thin; if it sticks, and is hard to move, then it is too Thick,
or Fat; but if it slide away leasurely, then it is between both.

As to the Age of the Nurses Milk, I am of opinion it is the best at two Months
Lying-in; and so may continue pretty well till the eighth Month, but then it
continually declines. It is also to be considered, that to breed good Milk, her
Meats and Drinks, must be wholesome and Seasonable. She must avoid hot Spices,
Strong Water, Spirits, and Sweet Wines, at least not take any great quantity
of them, or little quantities often. And by reason the Sex of the Nurses Child
is likewise to be considered, I hold that the Milk of a Male Child is to be
preferred; and for this Reason, viz. Because it is hotter, better Concocted,
and not so excrementious as of a Girl. And further, an enquiry ought to be
made, whether the Nurse you propose went her full time, for this is of Moment;
because, if she did not, she may happen to be of a Sickly weak Constitution,
though she may at sundry times appear outwardly to be Healthful.

Further, as to Diet, all Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Mustard, Strong Cheese, and
Baked Meats with hot Seasonings, ought to be forborne. And Veal, Mutton,
Chickens, Nourishing Broth, and such Meats, as breed good Juice, chosen. Fish
is too cold and moist, unless she be of a hot Constitution. Then let her put
into her Pottage Purslain, Sorrel, Borrage, Bugloss, Letuce, Succory Endive,
etc. And drink Beer, Ale, or Wine and Water mixed; Mead, Metheglin, but not too
much Cider, because it sharpens the Milk, and Gripes the Child. Her exercise
must be moderate; and her hours of Sleeping seasonable; and take special Care
to keep her little charge Clean and Sweet in all parts, viz. The Nose, Ears,
Eyes, and Mouth, as well as the lower parts. If she perceives any part of the
Child to Warp, or incline to Crookedness, she must be careful to Swathe it in
time, whilst it is tender, that by degrees it may return to straightness; or if
it seem difficult to her to Acomplish it, let her Advise the Parents, or some
able Surgion, before it be gone too far; for this has been a misery to many in
growing Crooked, that might at first have been prevented, with a little Care and
Cost, when the Bones and Ligatures were more Flexible.

CHAP. XVII. How to Order the Child in it is Dressings, Lying, Sleeping, Diet,
etc.
WHen the Child is opened to be Dressed, before a Fire, Rub and chafe the Back,
Belly and Hips gently with your Hand, sometimes rubing your hand over with Oil
of Roses or sweet Almonds. This loosens the Skin, and supples the Flesh, stirs
the Humors from settling too much in the Joints or any of the outward parts,
and makes it grow. And above all, beware not to Swathe it too hard, yet so that
it may not Lax, or warp in any of it is Members. And when it is placed in the
Cradle, take care it lies not too long on the Back, or on one side, but shift
and turn it, the Head being kept a little raised, that the Excrements may more
easily flow from the Brain through the Emunctories. Let the Cradle be placed in
a convenient warm Room or Chamber, not subject to too great a Light, or too
much Gloomyness, for a great Light is offensive to the Eyes and Brain of a
Child, they being but weak for a considerable time after the Birth; and too
much dark keeps them so, and oppresses it by stiring up the Melancholy Humor.
Too much Heat is apt to make it catch cold when it comes into the Air. And cold
cause phlegmatic Humors, which glutination occasion stuffings or stopping in
the Head; and therefore the Medium is to be preferred. Set not the Cradle or
Bed too near a Window or Fire, least the Light of either, attract its Eyes; and
by straining awry to look at it, becomes squinting: But let it be placed rather
right against the Light, that it may look directly forward.

And as for Sleeping, until he be two Years Old, there need be no restraint of
it; but rather, when it is Froward or Restless, means used to provoke Sleep;
unless imoderate Sleep, as sometimes it happens, be occasioned by a defect in
Nature, as too great a Moisture or Wateryness of the Brain, etc. Then such
Remedies must be used as may Remedy it, viz. Boil Cinnamon, Mace, or Nutmeg, in
the Milk, or give it some of the distilled Water of these in a little Wine.

Suckling the Child must be had a regard to, as to the Manner and Quality. As
to the first of these, sometimes spirt some Milk either upon its Lips, or into
its Mouth; and if it is drawing be strong, gently squeez the breast with your
finger, that the Milk may flow and become more easy, so that it may rather
seem a Pleasure than Pain, but so that it may not swallow too fast, for fear of
a suffocation, or too great an oppression of the Stomach. As to the second, the
quantity cannot easily be set down, some Children, according to their stronger
or weaker Constitutions, requiring more than others; and therefore the Nurses
discretion must proportion it; for too much is almost as bad as too little, for
this breeds gross Humors, as the other on the contrary causes a Pining, or
Wasting: And it is held for the first five days, Suckling twice a day is
sufficient; and so as it gathers strength the times may be increased, but not
too many, as many Foolish Nurses do, claping the Child to the Breast every time
it Cries, and seems froward.

Sweetness and Cleanlyness about Children, much contributes to their Health and
Growth; and this must be observed often, especially when it Wakes, or is taken
up: And above all avoid Frighting them, for that makes them many times fall
into Fits, and Epilepsies, or falling Sickness, and indeed intimidates their
Spirits, by making so early an impression on them, that growing up with them
they are apt to sudden Frights, Startings, and fears at the fancy of Goblings,
Specter, and such Old Wives Tales as they have been Bug-bear'd with in their
Infancy.

But not to dwell longer upon what every Skillful Nurse cannot but understand,
I shall proceed to what is more Material, viz. To Treat of the Diseases
incident to Children; and prescribe proper Remedies, which a Nurse by these
directions may give them for the restoring Health, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Diseases Incident to Children: With their Cure.
HUrts and Bruises often happen to a Child coming out of the Womb, especially
in hard Labor; and when any such appear, immediately make a Fomentation of
Roses, Melilot, Cammomile Flowers, and St. John's wort, in White Wind, and
bathe the parts with it warm: Anointing it afterward with a mixture of the Oil
of these. Give it a little Black-Cherry-Water, or Canary wherein Saffron has
been tempered, and let it rest; laying a Lenitive Plaster of White-bread and
Bole-Armoniack boild in Milk.

Swelling of the Head has sometimes it is beginning from the Womb; for the
Mother being with Child, and not careful of her Diet, Crudities, and Raw
Humors are thereby gathered, and breed a Waterish Blood, which the Child
feeding on, and not able to digest or evacuate during it is being in the Matrix,
it settles in the Head, and causes Swellings; and sometimes from other Causes,
viz. Windyness, etc. If it proceeds from Water, it subjects the Child to
Vertigo's and Epilepsies, little Sleep, much Fretfulness, and Crying. Wind
causes Pains and Drowsiness, for these let the Child have pleasant Scents to
refresh the Brain, as Flowers or Spices, but not any strong Perfumes. Give not
any thing that breeds much moisture, or Phlegm, or any ways subjects it to
Windyness. Wash the Head with the decoction of Sage, Bettony, Agrimony,
Calamint, Anny-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Flowers of Cammomile, Red-Roses boiled in
spring Water. And lay to the Crown of the Head and Temples a Plaster, viz.

Beeswax an ounce, Oil of Cammomile and Roses and Vnguentum Comitissae, each
half an ounce; Sage and Bettony Dried to powder, each two dreams; and give it a
little Manna disolved in Milk, that may gently move the Humors. Children have
sometimes excrescences of Flesh on the Roofs of their Mouths: The Lips cleft,
commonly called a Hare-Lip. And to Remedy these, it is properly a Surgeons
business, and beyond the Sphere of Nurses, by reason they require Incision; and
therefore I forbear to give directions in them, and require the Nurse or
Parents, as soon as the Child is of strength to endure the operation, to send
for an ingenious Artist to Remedy these defects.

Diseases in the Eyes, Ears, and Nose, often happen; and for the first, if
there be a Dullness of Sight, Redness, or Watery Rheums in the Eyes, wash them
with Plantain and Eyebright Water Morning and Evening, beat up a Yolk of an Egg
with some Oil of Roses, a Rotten Apple, some Crumbs of White-bread, and a
little Bole-Armorick, spread it thinn upon a fine Cloth, and clap another very
thin Cloth upon it, to prevent it is going into the Child's Eyes, and so bind it
over them when it is laid down to rest; and renew it every six hours, and the
effects will answer your Expectation.

If the Nose be stoped with Slimy or Tough Matter, so that there is a great
difficulty in Breathing, then dip a Lint in Vnguentum Rosatum and thrust up the
Nose; and when it is taken out spurt up a little White Wind to make it sneze,
and keep it very warm.

If the Ears run, or are stoped up, drop in a drop or two of the Oil of bitter
Almonds once or twice a day, cleansing them with Lint twisted at the end of a
small Bod-kin or Wire, diped in Bettony-water. If the Ears be Fretted behind
or Galled, take Nut Oil half an ounce, the like quantity of White Beeswax, and
a little of the Juice of Housleek, temper them over a gentle Fire till they may
be spread like a Plaster, and apply it to the Sore part.

If an Ulcer or Thrush happen in the Child's Mouth, disolve a quarter of an
ounce of Allom in an ounce of honey, made thin with White Wind, and Gargle the
Mouth with it. Then Cool the Mouth with Honey of Roses, Syrup of Violets, and
Plantain Water, well mixed together.

Inflammation, or Sweling in the Gums, to Remedy it, Rub the Nape of the Neck,
the Jaws, and Temples, with Oil of Roses; as also the Gums with Honey of Roses,
and then the Juice of St. John's-wort, well Incorporated over a gentle Fire;
laying a hot Figg flit in sunder to the Swelled place.

The string under the Tongue sometime comes from the bottom, and reaches to the
tip. This requires only to be cut with a very small Instrument to a convenient
proportion, that the tongue may neither be straightned, nor loll out to hinder
the utterance of words; and to cure the pain it may occasion, rub it with honey.

The Cough is dangerous to little children, by making them Strain and cast too
much. To remedy it, take a little Licorice Aniseeds, Figs, and a blade or two
of Mace, boil them well in Ale, sweeten it with white Sugar Candy, and give the
Child a spoonful or two at a time pretty warm.

The Navel swelling is another Grief Incident to Children; wherefore, when it
is any ways Inflamed, anoint it with Vnguentum Rosatum, and Populeon mixed
together; and give it cooling things, so the swelling will abate by swathing
gently with a Linen Cloth, and laying on a Poultis of Mallows, Cammomile, and
Hoggs-Lard.

Griping and Fretting of the Bowels, occasioned by too much Moistness or
Saltness, is not only Painful but Dangerous to Children. For this, a Clister of
cooling Herbs boiled in Milk, and seasoned with Sugar, is a seasonable relief,
taking immediately after it, a dram of Venice Treacle disolved in a spoonful of
Treacle-water.

Worms are very frequent and troublesome in Children, Taints their Breath, and
makes them Pine away, whether in the Belly or Stomach. Therefore to remove
them, with the slimy cold Humor they are bred of, Boil some Tops of Rhue in
White Wind, sweeten it, and give the Child Morning and Night very warm. Then
Cummin-seed, Navel-wort, mix with them a little Oxgall and grated Nutmeg, lay
them between two thin Clothes, and apply them warm to the Belly, and Stomach.

Teeth in Breeding cause Pain, and many times Feavours. To make them breed
easily, beat Corral to Powder, mix it in a little dissolved Allom and Honey,
rub the Gums hard with it, and it will make way for the Teeth to come out the
easier: And if, notwithstanding, they come not forward kindly, an incision may
be made in the Gums. And to assuage and ease the Pain in breeding Teeth, string
the small Roots of Smallage like a Neck-lace, and tie it about the Child's Neck.

Convulsions, or Fits of the Mother, are very dangerous and troublesome. For
this anoint the Stomach and Temples with Oleum Ireum, or with Oil of Lillies;
give it agrain of Bezor in a spoonful of Plantain-water; and Bathe the Forehead
with the distilled Water of sweet Marjorum.

Ruptures, or the falling down of the Tail-gut, must be taken speedy care of.
This happens sometimes to come into the World with them. To remedy this, the
parts swelling Out, or falling Down, may be bathed with the Decoction of Roses,
Melilot, Flowers of Cammomile, Knot-grass, in fair-water. Then apply this
Plaster to the Part, or as near as may be, viz.

Take Powder of Mastick, Olibanum and Sarcocol, each a dram, Syprus-Nuts two
drams, beeswax and Oil of Mastick each half an ounce, make them into a
Plaster over a gentle fire by well mixing, bind and keep up the parts; and let
the Feeding for sometime be sparing; especially give nothing that causes
Windyness or Cold afflicting Humors, that Lax the Parts, and mainly occasion
these defects; but rather take such things as are Drying and Restringent.

To retain Urin, and not Piss a Bed, Take the Powder of a dried Acorn, and that
of the Inner Skin of the Gizard of a Capon, give a dram at a time in a spoonful
of White Wind.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Small Pox in Children: It Is Cause, Symptoms and Cure.
THe Small Pox is a Disease very incident to Children, and is so generally
known that I need not use many words to describe it: It proceeds from adust
Blood mixed with Phlegm and Choler; and always begins with a Fever, soon
after which there arises small Pustula's upon the Skin throughout all the
Body, which do not suddenly come forth, but by intermission, in some more or
less, according to the quality of the Body infected therewith.

If these Pustula's appear red, with general pain, and great heat in the Body,
it is a sign it proceeds from Blood. If they come from Choler, they will
appear of a Yellowish Red and Clear Color, with a Pricking Pain in all the
Body. But if they come of Phlegm, they will appear of a Whitish color, and
scaly. And if they come of Melancholy, they will appear Blackish, with a
pricking Pain.

When they appear in a short time, and look red in their coming out, and white
after they are come forth, growing speedily to Maturation, and that the Child
draws its Breath easily, and the Fever leaves it, there is great hopes of its
recovery. But when the Pox lies hidden within, and appears not outwardly; or if
after they are come out, they strike in again, and Vanish away; or if they look
of a Black Bluish, and Green color, and are attended with difficulty of
Breathing, and a Flux or Lask; also when the Pox run together in Blisters, like
scalding Bladders, and then on the sudden do sink down, and grow dry, with a
hard black Scar or Crust, as if it had been burnt with a hot Iron, all these
are very ill signs, and denotes Death.

In the Cure of this distemper, the usual way is to let Blood, in the Basilica
Vein in the right Arm: But in Children, and those that are very weak, I hold it
better to let it alone, and leave the work to Nature, especially in Sucking
Children: For when we see Nature endeavoring to expel the Malignity, we ought
not to use any means at-all, but leave the whole Operation to Nature; which we
must only help by keeping the Body in a reasonable heat: But if the Pox is slow
in coming forth, you must help Nature with Cordials, and by sweat to thrust it
out from the interriour and Principal Parts: For which purpose the following
Drink is excellent good:

Take a quart of Posset-ale and a handful of Fennel-seed, boil them together
till a third part be consumed, then strain it, and add thereto one dram of
Treacle, and one scruple of Saffron in Powder, mix them together, and give two,
three, or four ounces thereof to drink Mornings and Evenings, as the case
requires,

But if the Child be so weak that it cannot expel the Disease, in convenient
time, then Epithemate the heart with the following Epithemation.

Aquarum ros. Melissae, Card. B. 6. Bugloss, Morsus Diaboli, vini alb, of each
4 ounces, Aceti Ros. two ounces and a half, Pull. Ros. Rub. Trium Sanal.
Cinamoni, Elect. Diamorg. frigid. of each half a dram, Mithridate one ounce,
Treacle four drams, mix all these together, and let them boil a little, and so
warm, Epithemate the heart. When you have done this, give some expulsive Drink,
or Electuary, as the Cause requires, and cause him to sweat upon it.

When the Pox are come out, to prevent Dis-figuring the Face, as Pitting,
besure let them alone till they grow white, and come to maturation; and then
open every Pustula on the top with a Pin, and then thrust out the Matter very
gently with a soft Linen Cloth; and if you perceive them to fill again, open
them as you did at first, for if you suffer the Matter which is in them to
remain overlong, it will fret and corrode the Flesh, which causes those Pits
that remain after the small Pox is gone. When you have done this, anoint the
place with the following Ointment:

Take Elder-leaves one handful, Marigolds two handfuls, French Mallows one
handful, Barrows Grease six Ounces; bruise the Herbs in a Mortar, and then boil
them with the Grease in a Pewter Dish, on a Chafing Dish of Coals, until the
Juice of the Herbs be consumed; then strain it, and anoint the face therewith:
The best time to make it, is in the middle or latter end of May. You must
anoint the place grieved with a Feather, and as it dries in, anoint it again;
and so continue it, and it will soon dry them up, and keep the place from Pits
and Holes: Also if you anoint the Pox with the Oil of Sweet-Almonds, newly
drawn, three or four times a day, (which you must besure to do, as soon as the
Pocks are grown white, and come to maturation, it will Cure them without Pits
or Spots, and eases the Pain and burning.

If after the Pocks are come out, they do not grow to Maturation, you may help
it by this decoction: Take Mallows one handful, Figs, twelve in Number, Water a
quart; cut the Figs small, and boil all together until half or more be
Consumed, and then wet a fine soft Linen Cloth therein, and touch the Place
therewith oftentimes, and it will soon bring them to Maturation.

CHAP. XX. Of Barrenness: Showing the Signs of Insufficiency in Men and Women,
and Remedies against it: With other choice Secrets.
IF it be a Blessing to have Children, as certainly it is, then Barrenness must
needs be a great Curse. We will therefore enquire into the different kinds and
occasions of it. -- Barrenness is Natural and Accidental.

Natural Barrenness is that which happens to Women, when there appears no
visible obstruction either in her or her Husband: Which may proceed from a
Natural Cause, for where both Men and Woman are of one Complexion or
Constitution, they rarely have any Children: For if the Constitution of the
Woman be hot and dry, as well as of the Man, there can be no Conception; and if
on the contrary, the Man should be of a cold and moist Constitution, as well as
the Woman, the effect would be the same: And the way to help this, is for Young
People before they Marry, to observe each others Constitutions, if they design
to have Children: For Discordant Natures make the only harmony in the work of
Generation.

There is another Cause of Natural Barrenness also, which is occasioned by
letting Young Virgins Blood in the Arm, before their Monthly Courses are come
down, which is usually in the fourteenth and fifteenth Years of their Age, and
sometimes perhaps before the thirteenth, but never before the twelfth: For
being before those Purgations usually indisposed by fullness of Blood, they
commonly open a Vein in the Arm, which being often repeated, diverts the Blood
from its proper Channel, that it comes not down into the Womb, which by that
means dries up, and the Young Woman is thereby rendered Barren. The way to
prevent which, is to let no Virgin Blood in the Arm till her Courses are well
come down; but rather in the Foot, which will be a means to draw the Courses
downwards.

Another Cause of Barrenness is the Debility of Persons in Copulation; if
Persons perform not that Act with all the Heat and Ardour that Nature requires,
they may as well let it alone, and expect to have Children without it: For
Frigidity and Coldness never produces Conception: To help this, such things are
to be taken as do increase the Seed and stir up, to Venery, and further
Conception, viz. Eggs, Milk Rice boiled in Milk, Sparrows Brains, Flesh, Bones
and all; the Stones and Pizzles of Bulls, Bucks, Rams Boars; also Cock-stones,
Lamb-stones, Partridge, Quails, and Pheasants Eggs. And take this for a Rule,
That whatever any Creature is addicted unto, they stir up the same quality in
the Man or Woman that Eats them. And therefore Partridges, Quails, Sparrows,
etc. being extremely addicted to Venery, work the same effect in those Men and
Women that Eat them. And in what part of the Body the Faculty which you would
strengthen, lies, take the same part of the Body of another Creature, in whom
that Faculty is strong, as a Medicine. As, to the present purpose, The
Procreative Faculty lies in the Testicles; therefore Cock-stones, Lamb-stones,
etc. are proper to stir up Venery. This also is a choice Secret, That all
Creatures that are fruitful being eaten, makes them fruitful that Eats them.

But that it may be known whether the Cause of Barrenness be in Man or Woman, I
shall briefly show the signs of Insufficiency in either

Signs and Causes of Insufficiency in Man, may be the Vitiousness in the Yard,
by being Crooked, distorted, or broken, whereby the ways and passages through
which the Seed should flow, come to be stopped. Also the Weakness and
Tenderness of the Yard, whereby it is not strongly enough erected to inject the
Seed into the Womb: Also if the Stones are hurt, so that they cannot perform
their Office in producing Seed; or if they be oppressed with any Tumor or
Inflammation, or drawn up within the Belly, not appearing outwardly. These are
Signs of Insufficiency and Causes of Barrenness; Drunkenness and Gluttony; and
other Excesses, do also hinder Men from Fruitfulness, and make 'em unfit for
Generation.

Signs and Causes of Insufficiency in Women, are many: Little Women are
generally more apt to conceive than Great, and Slender than Gross; also those
that are Black, than those that are Pale and Wan: To have the Veins very
conspicuous, and the Breasts large, betokens Fruitfulness: And the others are
the contrary. The Irregularity of the monthly Courses, the straitness of the
Pudenda, or Privities, whereby Women become Imperforate; the Immoderate
moisture of the Womb, which destroys the Seed, also the Immoderate heat of the
Womb, are all Signs of Insufficiency, and Causes of Barrenness in Women.

If you would know whether the fault lies in the Man or the Woman, Sprinkle the
Man's Urine upon one Lettice Leaf, and the Woman's upon another; and that which
dries away first, is unfruitful. Also take five Wheat Corns and seven Beans,
put them into an Earthen Pot, and let the Party make Water therein; let this
stand seven Days, and if in that time they begin to Sprout, then the Party is
fruitful; but if they Sprout not, then the Party is Barren whether it be Man or
Woman. This is a certain Sign.

FINIS.

