The ART of Assassinating KINGS, TAUGHT Lewis XIV. and James II. By the
JESUITS. Wherein is Discovered, The Secret of the last Conspiracy, formed at
Versailles in Sep. 1695. against the Life of William III. King of Great
Britain. And discovered at White Hall, Feb. 1695/6.

Done out of French.

London Printed, and sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

The ART of Assassinating KINGS.
MOst SERENE PRINCES, at this Day in Confederacy against France. Here is a
Facinorous Attempt, which ought to make all the Crowned Heads of Europe
tremble. It Is a Conspiracy laid to Assassinate the Sacred Person of the KING of
Great BRITAIN. This Affair excites your selves to be careful in Good Earnest,
of your own Preservation, no less than it concerns that Renowned Prince
himself, to be watchful of his own Safety.

The means which the most Christian King, and K. James made use of, were almost
Infallible; in so much, that only God alone was able to divert and disappoint
'em. Witness the Most Christian Kings own Words: It Is impossible, said he, but
this Design must prove successful, unless God and the Winds prevent it. In the
mean time, there is nothing more dear to Us in this World then Life; and the
Lives of Princes are so precious, that often upon their Sacred Lives, depend
the Greatest Revolutions, the Ruin of their Subjects, and the Desolation of
their Dominions.

When an unforeseen Misfortune, a violent Disease, or sudden Death, may have
snatched from the World those Princes, who were the Glory of their Age, and the
Love of the People, there nothing remains behind for Us, but Tears and
Lamentations. This is all the Duty we can pay 'em; though could we by our Blood
redeem 'em from the Grave, there is no good Subject who would not bleed to the
last Drop. We have had a Glorious Example of this, in the late loss which we
sustained of the Queen of Great Britain. That Princess was snatched from Us in
the Flower of her Age: However, we have this to comfort our selves, that we are
all mortal. The Misfortune was inevitable; and it was a natural Disease that
ravished her from us.

But what a dreadful thing it is, when Swords and Poison are made use of, to
hurry out of the world Great Princes, signally eminent for their Piety, beloved
of their Subjects, dear to all other Christian Princes, and the chief Hero's of
the Age? What a dreadful thing, I say, it is, when the Authors of such a
detestable Design, are Crowned Heads? They who in After-Ages shall come to read
the Lives of these two Wretched Princes, will they not blush do you think?
Treacherous Exemplars, that sacrifice the Glory of their Reigns, the Title of
Most Christian, and all that is accounted most Sacred, Most August in Religion,
and in Humane Society, to the deceitful Fantom of their Ambition.

But, most Serene Princes, at this day Confederated together for your common
Safety, What Precautions ought you not to take, to secure your selves against
the Contrivances of such Conspirators as these. For I must repeat it once more,
Your Lives are no less in Danger, then the Life of Your Confederate King
WILLIAM. It Is your Alliance with this Great Prince, of which your Enemies are
jealous, that gave Birth to this detestable Conspiracy that has been so lately
discovered. It Is an Attempt that concerns ye every one in particular; for had
the Conspirators accomplished their Design, what Mischiefs, what Calamities,
had You not had just reason to have been apprehensive of in reference to your
selves?

All Europe is sufficiently acquainted with the Ways and Methods which the
Tyrannic Politics of France make use of, and which they have made use of for
these Eight Years of declared War together, to accomplish their Ends; that is
to say, the Enslaving of all the Sovereign Princes of Europe. There has not
been a Year since the Death of Mazarine, that has not produced a Monster: So
that the Reign of the Most Christian King has been a continued Series of
Enormous Attempts and Conspiracies.

If this Monarch have made such a Noise in the World; if he is become the
Terror of his Enemies, it is because, that besides his great Power which
distinguishes him from other Christian Princes, he has always had recourse to
Treachery, as his last Refuge in all the most desperate Stresses of his
Affairs; so that if we have seen him gain surprising Conquests in the midst of
Winter, take strong Towns in the face of Armies looking on, win Battles, attack
the Confederates in Posts almost impenetrable, and deceive the Vigilance of our
Generals, they have only been the Effects of Treachery, and the fatal
Consequences of our Remissness.

If War be to be carried on by Treachery and Infidelity, there is no relying
upon any thing. Where is the Glory of Arms, that Glory almost as ancient as the
World, which after Death, restored to a new Life those Hero's and great
Captains, who are proposed to us for the Models of all our Enterprises, such as
Caesar's, Alexanders, Pompeys, Charles the Great's, Charles the Fifth's, and
other Renowned Personages transmitted to us by Antiquity?

Nor will I deny, but that this Age affords some Patterns like those Hero's of
former times, but I cannot say those Virtues are to be found in one Great King,
a Most Christian King, an Eldest Son of the Church. This is an Attempt which
ought to make all French Men blush. But you will say, that Subjects are not to
be responsible for the Miscarriages of their Prince. It Is a personal Stain, I
grant it; I am ashamed to say it: The Noble Blood of the Bourbons, that has
glittered in so many preceding Reigns, is now sullied with so many foul
Attempts, that the very thought of it strikes a Horror into all People of Worth.

I cannot here forbear to set down the lovely Idea, which Pagan Authors had of
True Royalty, which ought to cover the Most Christian King with Shame and
Confusion. He is truly a King who is truly just. He is truly just, who governs
himself according to the Laws. There is no Justice that can subsist without
Law. Let him that ascends the Throne be pure, and environed with the bright
shining Rays of Justice, says Ecphantas the Philosopher. True Justice ordains,
that the Crimes of High Treason, and all Attempts of wicked Men, should be
punished with utmost Rigor; and it may be said, That this is one of the
Noblest Characters of Royalty. And yet at this day we behold Two Princes
authorizing a Crew of Assassines and Murderers, to embrue their Impious Hands;
if it had been possible, in the Blood of a Great Monarch.

After a Blow of this Importance, we may freely say, That the most Serene
Confederates, may justly make the most Christian King the same Answer which
Alexander gave Darius, when despairing to overcome the Macedonian by Arms, he
would fain have had him Assassinated.

Alexander gave him to understand, That he would no longer make War against
him, as against a Prince, but as a Parricide.

Will any body say, that if the most Christian King continues these Projects,
it will of necessity behove the Confederates to make use of the same means?
Would they have Villainy punished by Villainy? Or that if great Sums of Money
must be given to rid themselves of their Enemies, and put an end to the War all
at once, by destroying the Head of the Party by Assassination; will any body
deny but that France will sooner want Money then the Consederates, or at least
that the Princes of the League are not rich enough to constrain the most
Christian King to stand upon his Guard in that particular? He can lay claim to
no Immortality, nor to being Invulnerable, no more then his Predecessors Henry
III. or Henry IV.

It Is true, these detestable Ways of Destroying an Enemy, by a violent and
hastened Death, by Poison or Dagger, are open to the Confederates as well as
for the most Christian King. But God forbid that ever any one of the most
Serene Confederates should ever have so black a Thought. They have studied
another sort of Morality in the School of Virtue: Their Piety and the Niceness
of their Consciences abhor and detest those Principles, which deduced their
Original from Hell, and and which were never preached in France but by the
JESUITS, nor so much as taught ambitious Princes by Matchiavel himself.

We are thoroughly convinced, that France sufficiently ingenious to conceal the
unlucky untucky Blows which she receives from Fortune, will endeavor to escape
the Ignominy which this detestable Enterprise will six upon her, by a studied
Apology composed by some one of her most able and dextrous Ministers. Methinks
I hear already the Count d' Avaux in one of the Northern Courts, and M. Amelot
among the Switzers, loudly protesting, that the most Christian King their
Master, had no hand in this Attempt, but that it was formed by the JACOBITES in
England, without ever being communicated to his knowledge.

But this has been the Language of that Prince in all the preceding
Conspiracies; witness that of Granval. The Court of France laid all the load
upon her Ministers, and threw all the Blame upon the deceased Marquis of
Louvois, and his Son M. d' Barbesieux. All this while, the world knows under
what a sort of awe the Ministers of France live; had they made the least step
without the Kings knowledge, there would have needed no more to have rendered
their Fidelity suspected, and to have disgrac'd'em for ever. The Ministers of
the Court of France. are too wary of preserving their Posts, to commit such
Mistakes; there being nothing transacted within that Kingdom, with which the
King is not acquainted.

In short, if the King of France, as he gives out in Foreign Courts, had no
hand in the late discovered Conspiracy, Whence came that numerous FLEET, which
of a sudden was Rendezvous'd together in the Ports of Dunkirk, Callis, Bologne,
and Havre de Grace? Did that Potent Preparation fall from the Clouds? So many
Troops drawn down together to the Seaside, were they sent to Guard the Coasts
of France, at a time when the Enemies FLEET was only fitting out, half Manned,
and not in a probability of putting to Sea till the end of April? What did M.
Boufflers, and so many French Generals do at Dunkirk? For what reason did K.
James leave St. Germains? For what reason take his leave so solemnly of all the
Court, and fly to take shipping at Callis? To what end the Prayers of Forty
Hours, and the publication of a Jubilee? Will the most Christian King say, that
all this was done without his being made acquainted with it?

K. James having left St. Germains the 28th of February, came to St. Denis's,
where he performed his Devotions, and after he had begged of God in his fervent
Prayers, to bless his Expedition, he sent for a Public Notary, whom he ordered
to draw up an Act for the Sum of 500 Thousand Livres, which he had borrowed of
certain Merchants, for which he gave 'em in Pawn, the Queen his Wives Jewels.

Besides this Sum, the most Christian King Orders Six Millions to be paid him
forthwith, and made him a Present over and above of a little Chest, containing
a Hundred Thousand Louidores in Specie, to defray his Household Expenses. France
did not show him all these Kindnesses for nothing: She exacted at the same time
real Engagements from the Caressed Prince, that is to say, a Contract or Deed
acknowledged before a Public Notary. by which K. James obliges himself to pay
back to the most Christian King, after his Restoration, not only the Sum lent
him for his Passage, but all that France had disburs'd for his Support, during
his abode in that Kingdom.

The most Christian King, I say, lends all his Forces to this miserable Prince,
spares him his best Generals to command his Troops, and suffers him to want
nothing for the Execution of a Design, that was to reseat him upon hi Throne.
And all this acted in the full view of all Europe; But the Enterprise
miscarrying, the most Christian King Orders his Ministers to tell us, That he
had no hand in it.

It Is not the first time that the Frehch Monarch has talked at this rate. But
the Confederates are no longer to be deluded with Words; not will all the Water
in the Seine, be able to wash away a Crime so black as this, which has been
committed in the sight of God and all Christendom, by the Assassination
intended to have been perpetrated upon the Sacred Person of King WILLIAM,
complotted at Verfeilles the 1st. of October, in the Year 1695.

Let us conclude then, that the most Christian King being the Principal Author
of this detestable Attempt, all the shame of it rebounds back upon his own
Person. K. James is a feeble and impuissant Prince of himself. It Is true, that
he was bred in Slaughter and Butchery; his whole Life has been a continual
Train of Tragical Deaths, Attentates and Conspiracies: Witness the innocent
Blood which he has shed during his abode in England. But this Unfortunate
Prince, notwithstanding the depravement of his natural Disposition, and his
unbridl'd false Zeal for Religion, could have done nothing of himself, had not
the most Christian King supported him. You Will say perhaps, that France is a
weary of paying him his Pensions, and that She would be glad to be rid of him.
Let it be which way it will, the most Christian King is He that is looked upon
as the principal Author of this intended Perpetration; an Act which in
After-Ages, all good Christian Princes will look upon with Horror, and which
now renders him unworthy of the Gorious Title of most Christian King.

It Is a long time that the Council of France had been hatching this Monster,
which she was about to have brought forth, as may easily appear, if we reflect
upon the Conduct of her Ministers in Foreign Courts. For when the Popes
Nuncio'd redoubled their Importunities to persuade the Catholic Princes to
accept of the Proposals that were made 'em; The Ministers of France openly told
'em, There was no such need for 'em to be so hasty; for that the most Christian
King their Master, had a Design in hand which would change the Face of Affairs,
and force the Confederates to accept of the Offers that had been so frequently
made 'em, and which they had rejected with so much scorn.

This Vaunting was a Riddle not to be expounded by his Holiness Nouncio's, till
Time, that notable Oedipus, unsolded the Enigma, to the eternal Shame of the
Heads of the Enterprise, and of those that were to have been their Instruments.
We may also add by the way, to the shame of the French Ministers, who thus
discoursed the Popes Nuncio's, who are no better then their Master, while they
are the Eccho's of an Action that will load 'em with eternal Infamy. They boast
to be the Ministers of their Princes Fury, at the Expense of their Honor and
their Consciences, which they ought to prize above all things in the World.
They ought to call to mind the insinite Injury they do their Nation, and the
foul Stains of Infamy with which they sully it, and which will not be washed
off in several Reigns after This.

If we consider farther, what passed at the Taking of Namure, at what time the
Person of Marshal Boufflers was seized; all the World knows, the Marshal made
loud Complaints, and haughtily exclaimed against the Injury done him, adding,
That his Master would Revenge the Injustice that had been offered him upon the
Person of the PRINCE, who had so caused him to be stopped. M. Boufflers had been
made Privy to the Conspiracy, and therefore 'twas no wonder those Words of
Passion dropped from him. Wherefore the most Christian King judged him so
necessary for this great Expedition, that he vouchsafed to honor him forthwith
with a Brevet for a Duke and Peer of France; and consented to all things that
the Confederates demanded, to obtain his speedy Liberty.

Till now, we flattered our selves, that France would no longer have recourse
to all those Treacheries, of which She made so good a use, while M. Luxemburg
commanded her Arms. But M. Boufflers seems to be sprung up from the Ashes of
that Famous Captain, though according to all Appearances, the Disciple will not
prove much better then his Master.

However. M. Boufflers, with his good leave, does a great Injury to his
Reputation, and it is a bad Disappointment, to have had a share in the intended
Assassination, of a Prince that heaped so many Favors and Civilities upon him
during his Detention. There is no need of going to seek him out in England.
King WILLIAM does not hide himself, as all the World knows. He is none of those
timorous Princes that shun Danger. He appears every Campaign in Flanders, at
the Head of his Armies. And if the most Christian King, or his Generals, desire
an end of the War, and to obtain that Peace which they so much thirst after, He
is always ready to answer their Expectations, with his Sword in his Hand. They
might also, out of a Principle of Honor, make him that fair Challenge, which
the Prince Elector, formerly sent to M. Turenne; that is to say, by the
Proposal of a single Combat, in order to determine the Differences that have
inflamed this War by the point of the Sword, provided the King of France
himself would be one of the Champions in Person.

But that is not the thing which the King of France seeks after: He has been
accustomed to vanquish without Danger; and indeed, it is the way to live long.
In a word, Were King WILLIAM less Brave, and less Magnanimous then he is, the
most Christian King, and K. James, would never make those attempts upon his
Person which they do.

The most Christian King, since the Pyrenean Peace, has been accustomed to make
his Progresses with a kind of Rapidness; because he was assured of the Crown of
England, through the Care which he took to cultivate the Inclinations of the
last Kings, as all Europe well knows. 'Twas under the shelter of those Careless
and voluptuou^ Reigns, that he reared this Monster o^ Grandeur, which makes him
so formidable to his Neighbors, so feared by his Subjects, and so daring in
all his Enterprises to mix Heaven and Earth together.

But those Reigns are past; the Cards are all mixed; and the last Revolution
which advanced King William to the Throne, was the most terrible Blow that ever
was given to France; because that Prince has been all along his irreconcilable
Enemy, the only Prince in Europe who has crossed his ambitious Designs, who has
always disputed the Ground with him, and who, like another Joshua, has stopped
the Sun in his rapid Course.

So that the most Christian King finding that the Puissance of King William as
Head of the League, would prove an invincible Obstacle to his Enterterprizes,
thought it convenient according to the Principles of his Tyrannick Politics,
to rid himself of this Prince by one means or other For proof of which, it has
been observed, that in all the Battles that have hitherto been fought, the
French Generals have been very careful to ^ick out a good Number of the Guards
^f the King's Household, to make way through the Throng, in Order to Kill King
William.

M. de Luxemburgh did all that lay ^n his power, to satisfy the King his
Master in this Particular; and M. de Boufflers, no less zealous then his
Predecessor, makes no scruple to put himself at the Head of a Crew of
Conspirators, to second the Assassination of this Noble Prince. At the Battle
of the Boyn, the Guards who killed M. de Scomberg, had Orders to find out the
King; but God preserved him, and brought him safe out of the Snares which
France and K. James had laid for him. After so many Proofs of the King of
France's extraordinary care to destroy this Prince, there is no question to be
made, but that he was the Primum Mobile of this last Conspiracy.

There needs no more then this bold Stroke, to embellish the History of this
Monarch, which the best Pens of France have been laboring for so many Years to
set out. This will be a most gay and flourishing Flower in his Crown; a
Monument, then which he cannot consecrate a more august to Posterity. It may be
said, that by this Inglorious Action, the Mighty Monarch leaves a Glorious
Example for the Dauphin to imitate, if his Renowned Father do not outlive him
a or at least for his Children to take a Pattern by, who are young enough to
study Virtue under so Great a Master. After such an Attempt as this, the Most
Christian King has reason to rest himself from his Illustrious ^abours, and dye
well satisfied. He has Reigned a Great Monarch, a Great Politician, always
happy and prosperous; if he now missed his Blow, he must look upon it, that
only Heaven put by the Fatal Stroke, which he so fairly offered.

But as for You, Monsieur Dauphin, it is hoped that your Inclinations will not
lead you to follow this Great Exemplar: We are sensible that you, like the
deceased Prince of Conde, abhor such Treacherous Actions as these, unworthy of
a great Hero, more especially a Christian Prince, one day designed to wear one
of the most August Crowns in Christendom.

All Europe looks upon You, as one that will restore that Peace and Tranquillity
which your Father's unjust Claims have banished from among the Christian
Princes. If it be the Pleasure of Heaven that ever you come to the Crown, we
most justly flatter our selves, that France was never so happy as it will be
then. Your Subjects will be delivered from the Burdens of a thousand Imposts;
Trade will be restored; Arts and Sciences will flourish; the Nobility of the
Kingdom will reassume their Ancient Splendour; the Parliaments, and Sovereign
Courts will again enjoy that Authority of which they have been despoiled; the
Neighboring Princes will have a plenary Confidence in your Royal Word; your
Treaties will be inviolable; and you will be looked upon in all the Courts of
Europe, as a Prince that treads in the Steps of your Illustrious Ancestors, and
not pursue the Vices of two Monarchs, that strike a Horror of their Actions
into the Hearts of all the Christian Princes.

Call to mind, Sir, the Precepts of the Wise Plato, That the Laws have a Power
over Kings, as well as Subjects. So long as you take such Principles for the
Rule of your Actions, you will be the Love of your Subjects, the Glory of your
Age, and the Greatest King in the World.

All Europe, Sir, conjures you to inculcate these Noble Lessons into the young
Princes your Sons, who are one day to succeed you; it is time to do it, but more
especially to infuse into their tender years an Aversion and Abhorrency of the
Detestable Principles of their Grandfather, condemned by all good men: Instill
into them this noble Thought of Aristotle, He whom the People will not admit
for King, is a Tyrant: so long as they have the Love of the People, they will
be worthy to wear a Crown. This is that which is the greatest Glory of that
Prince, whom the Most Christian King your Father, and his Allie King James
would have Assassinated: he is passionately beloved of his Subjects, and
consequently worthy to be their King. This Love it is, which assures him of
their Fidelity, which establishes his Throne, and renders it immovable; and
which is the Reason that his Subjects will spend the last drop of their Blood
for the Preservation of his Sacred Person.

The want of this Love, so necessary for Princes that will Govern according to
Law, was the cause of King James's Misfortunes, and that which renders him the
most miserable of Monarchs. But would to Heaven that this were the only Stain
that renders him odious; all the Christian Princes of Europe would then have no
reason to upbraid him with the most detestable of all Crimes, the meditated
Assassination of King William. But let us return to the most Christian King.

If we consider what happened upon the Birth of that Prince, we shall meet with
nothing but what is surprising. All France before that, was in great
Affliction, and all in Tears besought of God an Heir to the Crown. After two
and twenty Years of Barrenness, the Queen Mother conceived; and she brough
forth a Successor to Lewis XIII. But what Successor? A Prince that came into
the World with Two Teeth. A strange Prodigy! and the most surprising that has
happened in our days. When the Soothsayers of Italy were consulted by
Expresses, which the deceased M. de Colbert sent thither, they answered, That
the Prince newly born, with Two Teeth, should with One of his Teeth tear his
Subjects, with the Other, the Princes of Europe his Neighbors.

In a word, never was Horoscope better fulfilled. The Commencements of his
Reign are full of Prodigies, and hitherto the End has been no less surprising.
Hardly was he arrived at the Age of Majority, but he began with reforming the
greatest part of his Ministers: He despoils the Parliaments and Sovereign
Courts of all they had which was most August, the Supreme Authority. He humbled
the Nobility of his Kingdom; impoverished his Subjects by an infinite number of
new Taxes: He raises great Armies to keep 'em under Submission and Respect: He
fortifies the greatest part of the Strong Holds in his Kingdom, to enslave the
whole, and serve as Ramparts to his Ambition. He lets loose his Fury against
the Sea of Rome; and he alone commits more Attentats against the Sovereign
Pontiffs, then all his Predecessors together had ever done.

After these happy Beginnings, he studies Machiavel, and got him so well by
Heart, that his whole Reign was but a Tissue of that Author's Precepts. He
observes 'em to the most minute Maxims; and by the help of Mazarin, he became
so Great a Master in the Art of Reigning, that the Bounds of France could no
longer contain him. There is not any Prince in Europe that has not been a
Victim to his Ambition. If he makes Alliances, it is only to aggrandize himself
by Violation of his Oaths: If he declares War, it is unjust, because his only
Aim is the Invasion of his Neighbor's Dominions: If he concludes a Peace, it is
only to break it to morrow, and that he may have new Pretenses to recommence
the War.

In a word, there is no Sovereign Prince, no Elector in the Empire, no
Republic in Europe, that is not sensible of the Effects of his cruel
Domination. The present War has thrown its dismal Firebrands into all the
Corners of the World. All Christendom enjoyed a profound Peace, at what time
the most Christian King sent Armies of Incendiaries, with lighted Flambeaux in
their hands, to Fire the most Noble Cities of Germany.

This dismal Conflagration, after it had reduced the Palatinate into Ashes, was
extended by the hands of M. de Boufflers all along the Rhine, the Moselle, and
thence through all Flanders and Brabant; and so overrunning, like a Madman
and a Fury, all the open Country he burnt all before him, sparing neither
Churches nor Monasteries.

All these Cruelties were acted in view of all the Princes of Europe; but there
was none but King William, who applied himself in earnest to stop the Career of
France. The People of England called this Great Prince to their Succor,
because the most Christian King Reigned no less in the Three Kingdoms of Great
Britain, then in France, by virtue of the Cruelties which King James, his
Confederate, exercised therein. King William passes the Sea, supported by the
hands of Providence; he is received with all the Honors immaginable by the
Nobility of the Kingdom, and by the People. The Crown is presented to him, and
he is desired to accept it; which he does, after Long Importunities, because
the present Condition of the Affairs of Europe, and the Safety of the
Commonweal engaged him to it.

By that means he gave a deadly Blow to France, so much the rather, because she
little dreamt of such a Revolution. Thereupon after that, the most Christian
King minds nothing but Revenge. The Hatred which he had all along for that
Prince, could no longer be kept within bounds; it must break forth, and fling
about its fiery Indignation. And from that day forward his secret Council met,
with Orders to seek out some way to destroy this Prince, as the only Person
able to put a stop to his Great Designs. So that since his coming to the Crown,
we may reckon up near 8 Conspiracies; only this last exceeded all the rest. The
Conspirators in this, never go about to conceal themselves: They walk barefaced
at Noonday, and rely upon the Death of King William, as upon a thing that
cannot fail 'em. After this, I leave the World to judge, how far the Fury and
Resentment of a Prince will go, who has sworn the Death of his Enemy.

I cannot here forbear to recite the words of Salust, when he speaks of the
Care that Princes ought to take of the Honor of their Dominions, of which they
ought to be as jealous as of their own Crowns. The Duty of Kings, says he,
consists in preserving the Liberty and Honor of a Kingdom. But the most
Christian King never troubles himself for the Honor of France: He Sacrifices
it with a good will, provided his Designs do but succeed. Where is that
Liberty, I would fain know, which his Subjects enjoyed in the Reigns of his
Predecessors? Are they not all at present Slaves within the Kingdom? Where is
the Honor of the Kingdom? Is it acquired by Oppression, Cruelty and Tyranny?
And when it is acquired, is it preserved by the Assassination of Great Princes,
for whom they have a mortal Hatred?

If this be true, I must acknowledge the Ancients to have been very great
Cheats, for having made us such a Description of the Honor of a Kingdom, so
far different from that which Lewis the Grand gives us the present Pattern of.
This Prince pretends to be the greatest Model of Perfection this day in the
World. But with submission to him, the Course he takes, is not the way to
attain to the Glory of those Great Hero's, of which Pagan Antiquity has left us
such Noble Exemplars.

After these Preliminaries, let us come to the Particulars of matter of Fact,
and consider all the Circumstances that accompanied this Conspiracy, so lately
discovered: After that, we shall examine the Doctrine of the JESUITS, which
teaches the Art of Assassinating Kings, and which they have taught the Authors
of the present Conspiracy.

God by his Providence, and the continual care which he takes for the
preservation of his Majesty King WILLIAM, has so ordered it, that several of
the Conspirators, have discovered, of themselves, the following Conspiracy the
particulars whereof are These.

About the end of the month of August, in the Year 1695. the most Christian
King, being at Versailles in a private Conference with K. James, concerning the
Events of the preceding Campaign, the most Christian King out of a peculiar
confidence in him, told him, That he saw no other way in the world to attain a
speedy Peace, then by laboring his Restoration to the Throne. That all the
Care which he had hitherto taken to wage War with his Enemies, together with
the immense Expenses he had been at to support it, had as yet produced nothing
effectual: Nevertheless, that God had so sufficiently prosper'd his Arms, by
the Advantages he had won, till the Death of Marshal Luxemburgh, that he had no
reason to complain. But that which still troubled him, and imprinted in his
Mind but ill Presages of the Future, was the present Union between the
Parliament and the Prince of Orange, which was so far from abating, that it
grew stronger and stronger: That the Reputation of that Prince, and the Forces
which the Parliament had granted him, would be fatal to the Peace, and the
Common Interests, unless some sudden Course were taken.

K. James made Answer to the most Christian King, That all that he had said was
true; that he saw but too well, and with a deep Sorrow, the Prosperity and
growing Grandeur of his Enemy; That 'twas only his fault, for that he himself
was ready at that very instant, to attempt his Return into England, if his
Majesty thought it convenient: Nevertheless, that he was ashamed to have so
often abused his Kindnesses, and that he was afraid his Evil Stars that
followed him where e're he went, would frustrate the justest Enterprise that he
should undertake; That both He and the Queen his Wife, besought Almighty God in
their most servent Prayers, to bless the Arms of his Majesty, their Protector
and Restorer, in whom; next to God, they placed all their Hopes and Confidence.

To this the most Christian King replied, That it had not been his Fault
hitherto, that their Prayers had not been heard: but that it was not yet too
late, and that it behooved him to lay hold of the savourable opportunity that
God had put into his hands, to give their Enemy such a Blow, as would prove
fatal to him. Nevertheless, that it became him to trust in God, and to arm
himself with Resolution for the execution of the Enterprise.

K. James made Answer, That he understood what his Majesty meant; so that if no
more were required but the forming a new Plot, he had Men anow at command,
provided his Majesty would lay out Money sufficient for the carrying on so
great an Enterprise.

The most Christian King replied, That all the Forces in the Kingdom were at
his Service, and that he should desire no other Reward, then the honor of
having contributed to his Restoration.

After this first Overture, the two Kings agreed upon a day to make choice of
the Conspirators; which day being the 5th. of September 1695. was no sooner
come, but the Accomplices were called one after another to a private Audience
given 'em by K. James at St. Germains; which at first was only to sound 'em,
and assure himself of their Fidelity.

At length K. James having made choice of about seven and forty Persons,
presented 'em to the most Christian King, who assured 'em of his Royal
Protection, and of the Advancement of their Fortunes, if the Business
succeeded: After which they were dismissed till further Order.

At first, there were none but the two Kings, and Father La Chaise, who were
Privy to the Secret. For the most Christian King thought it convenient, that
when the Business was drawn into Form, that the Intrigue and Management of it,
should be left to Father La Chaise: To which K. James consented. So that the
Conspirators had Orders to repair to him, two and two at a time, for fear of
making too much Noise, to confer with that Seraphic Priest about the Time,
Place and Manner, of putting the Design in Execution.

There were some of the Conspirators who offered their Majesty's to go into
Flanders, and do the Business at the time that King WILLIAM quitted the Army:
But the most Christan King did not think that the best way, because added he,
he had not been well satisfied with Grandvall's Conduct, whose Enterprise had
miscarried for want of Management, notwithstanding that the deceased Marquess
of Louvois, had taken care to manage it with all the Circumspection imaginable.
K. James was of the same Opinion, and that the Business might be done with less
danger and more ease in England, because the Prince of Orange had very slender
Guards there about his Person, especially when he went a Hunting; whereas in
Flanders he was always surrounded with his Army.

After several Conferences, it was resolved, That some of the Conspirators
should cross the Sea beforehand, in order to confer with several other
JACOBITES, from whom K. James had had particular Letters, assuring him of their
inviolable Devotion and Readiness to sacrifice their Blood for his Restoration.

All these measures being taken at the Court of France, as may be collected
from the Mouths of the Conspirators themselves in their Examinations, they fell
to work. To which purpose, the greatest part of the Conspirators that were in
France, dropped one after another into England, in several Privateers, who set
'em ashore upon the Coasts of England, and repaired to London. Where they lay
Skulking Incognito, to strengthen their Party against the time of Execution,
which was to be accomplished about the end of February in this manner:

The 25th. of February 169^. which was a Saturday, the Conspirators to the
number of Sixty, had resolved to post themselves in such a Place, through which
the King was to pass, in going to Richmond to divertize himself according to
Custom; and to attacque him either in his Coach, or as he was a Hunting: and
after they had put the Guards to the Sword, Ten or Twelve were to have made
themselves Masters of the Kings Coach, and to have dispatched him either with a
Dagger or a Blunderbuss, as they saw occasion.

But failing that Day, the Conspirators put off the Execution of their
detestable Design till Saturday following. That Day the King's Coach stood
ready, the Guards sat mounted, and the Provision Wagons were gone before:
Which being discerned by two of the Conspirators Spies, who made no doubt but
that his Majesty would follow his Guards, they hastened with all speed to the
Rendezvous to give the Traitors information. But his Majesty thought fit to
stay that Day at Kensington; and to the end he might have some better Light
into the Conspiracy, he sent away some Trusty Persons to view the Countenances
and Behavior of such as they should see Loytering upon the Roads, and to
observe where they had posted themselves. By this second Disappointment,
nothing could be done that day neither: So that the Assassines resolved upon
the Sunday following, to attacque the King in his Passage between the two Gates
of Hide-Park and St. James's, as he went to White Hall to Chapel.

Their Design was first to have killed the Coach-Horses, and by that means to
have stopped the Passage of the Guards that followed his Majesty. But the King
stirred not out that day.

The Night before, or the same day the Treason was to have been put in
Execution, seventeen of the Conspirators were seized, and the next day several
others were taken, among whom were two Dominicans, three Troopers of the E. of
Oxford's Regiment, a Trumpeter; one Charnock, who had been Vice President of
Magdalen College in Oxford, in King James's time, and for which he turned
Roman Catholic, and several others. All which, and many more afterward
apprehended, were to have embrued their Murtherous Hands in his Majesty's Blood.

The Duke of Berwick (Head of the Party) had like to have been taken. One of
his Domestic Servants was seized, who had Orders if the Design succeeded, to
have kindled Fires upon the Seaside near Dover, which was to have been a
Signal to K. James and M. Boufflers, who lay expecting the Event of this great
Enterprise. To which purpose, the Havens of Dunkirk, Callis and Bolougne, were
full of Transport Ships, which were to have wafted over a great number of
Soldiers into Engl^ to second the JACOBITES that were to have taken Arms.

Mr. Schmettau Adjutant, being sent away into England, by the Duke of
Wirtenberg, put himself into a Fisherboat, which being attacqued by a
Privateer, M. Schmettau hid himself under the Netts, so that the Privateer
finding nothing that was Booty, quitted him: After which, he went to London,
and informed the King of the Motions of the French on Dunkirk-side; and his
Report was confirmed by M. Montez, Lieutenant Coll. of the Regiment of
Belcastle.

That which is remarkable is this, That the Conspirators were engaged for a
certain Sum of Money to have accomplished their Design within the space of six
Weeks, and that before the end of February, for fear of breaking the Measures
which the most Christian King had taken for the succeeding Campaign; whence it
came to pass, that the Enterprise failing upon Saturday, it was put off till
the Sunday following: And if Providence had not so ordered it, that a good part
of the Conspirators had not been apprehended, it was to be feared they would
have sought all the ways in i^inable to have accomplished their de^able Treason.

We can never too highly applaud the Care which the Earl of Porland, and the
rest of the Lords about the King's Person, took to prevent so terrible a Blow,
that would have proved no less fatal to all Christendom, then to all his
Majesty's good Subjects.

Upon the 24th. of February 1696. the King made a Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, wherein he gave 'em an Account of the Assassination intended upon
his Royal Person, and of the Enemies Preparations for a sudden Invasion of the
Kingdom.

Upon this the House of Commons immediately drew up an Association, wherein
they protested, testified and declared sincerely and solemnly, that his Majesty
King WILLIAM now Reigning, is the true and lawful King of the Realms of Great
Britain and Ireland; and mutually promise and engage to succor and Assist each
other, to the utmost of their Power, to support and defend his Majesty's Sacred
Person and Government against K. James, and all his Adherents. And in case his
Majesty should come to a violent and hasty Death (which God avert) they
voluntarily and unanimously oblige themselves to unite; and associate, and to
assist each other to revenge his Death upon his Enemies, etc.

This was followed by an Address of both Houses, wherein they congratulate his
happy Preservation, and gratefully acknowledge the particular Care of Divine
Providence, and at the same time declare their detestation and abhorrency of so
Infamous and Barbarous a Design, and humbly beseech his Majesty to take a more
particular Care of his Sacred Person.

Upon which, His Majesty issued out several Proclamations for apprehending a
great number of the Conspirators, of whom a great part were seized and
committed to several Prisons. All which Acts of State have been so sufficiently
published at large, that they need not be repeated here.

After so many Authentic Testimonies, which ought to cover with shame the
Authors and Contrivers of so Black and Treacherous a Fact, all Europe stands
amazed! The Ministers of the Christian Princes assembled in the Congress, sit
astonished! All the World searches for the Causes, that excited the wicked
Inclinations of these two Princes. But there will be no great difficulty in the
discovery of 'em, when we consider that the most Christian King has always been
a true Jesuit. For proof of which, we need but read the History of his Reign.
The Politics, the Maxims, the dangerous Opinions, and lastly whatever that
Order teaches, not forgetting the Art of Assassinating Kings, have been
manifest quite throughout the whole Course of it. As for K. James, he left
England, a true Jesuit: He has lived in France, during his Exile, one of the
same Order; and within these two Months, he has thought sit to List himself
also in the Order of the Dominicans.

Had the most Christian King taken upon him to read the Determination of the
Faculty of Theology in Paris, carried to the Parliament upon occasion of the
re-settlement of the Jesuits in France, I am persuaded we should not have seen
him so true a Jesuit as now we do. We shall repeat the substance of it in the
same Terms, as it is in the Original.

In the Year 1554. and upon the First Day of December, the Venerable Faculty of
Theology in Pars, after the Mass of the Holy Ghost solemnly said in the Chapel
of the College of Sorbonne, and Oath taken, having four times assembled in the
same Place, to conclude upon the Two Bulls, said to have been decreed by our
Holy Lords and Popes Paul and Julius III. in favor of those that would be
distinguished from Us, under the Names of the Society of JESUS; which Two Bulls
the Court of Parliament sent Us by an Usher, to be viewed and examined: For
which Reason, after we had seriously examined and considered all the
Particulars,

We are of Advice, That this Society, in matter of our Faith, is of dangerous
Consequence, erected to trouble the Peace of the Church, to subvert the State
and Monastic Religion; and in two words, introduced rather for Desolation and
Destruction, then for Edification.

This was the Judgment which the Sorbonne made of the Jesuits Doctrine. But
without looking back so far as the Year 1554. the most Christian King need no
more then consider what passed in the Year 1610. when Henry IV. was stabbed by
Ravillac; certainly he would then abhor that Doctrine which he now upholds with
all his Royal Power, in the face of all Christendom. It deserves to be recited,
because it makes for our purpose.

The same Day that the detestable Ravillac was executed, in regard that in all
the Answers which he gave the Archbishop of Aix, and the Predicant Coeffeteau,
during his Imprisonment, for the Parricide he had committed, he made use of the
Maxims of Mariana and other Jesuits, who have written, That 'twas lawful to
kill Kings and Tyrants, the Court of Parliament, before they condemned those
infamous Books to be burnt by the hands of the Common Hung-man, would have the
Determination of the Faculty of Theology, and enjoined the Dean of the Faculty
to call a Convocation, in order to give 'em their Opinion, whether it were
lawful for any one, upon any Account, or for any Cause whatever, to attempt the
sacred Persons of Kings and Sovereign Princes.

Upon which, the Faculty assembled in the College of the Sorbonne, and made
the following Censure.

The Censure of the Faculty of Theology at Paris, assembled in the College of
the Sorbonne, against Parricides of Kings.
IN the Year of our Lord 1610. upon the 14th of June, the sacred Faculty being
assembled, and having debated the Question to them put by the Court of
Parliament; and considering withal that the University of Paris has been always
the Mother and Nurse of a most excellent and sound Doctrine: That the Public
Repose and Welfare proceeds from Order, and that this Order depends, next to
God, upon the Safety of Kings and Princes: That it only belongs to the Prince,
or Politic Power, to make use of the Sword: That some Years since, certain
strange, seditious and impious Opinions, have in such a manner perverted the
Minds of several People, that they have not dreaded to stain King and Princes
with the execrable Names of Tyrants; and in pursuance of a Pretense so
detestable, as also under color of assisting, or advancing Piety, Religion, or
the Public Good, to conspire against their sacred Persons, and to embrue their
Parricide-hands in Blood so dear, and of so high a Value, and consequently to
open a Gap to all sorts of Wickedness, Impieties, Persidies, Disloyalties,
Frauds, Surprises, Treasons, Murders, mutual Slaughter of the People, Ruin,
sacking and levelling of whole Towns, Destruction of Provinces and flourishing
Kingdoms; and in a word, to an infinite number of abominable Crimes, occasioned
by Wars as well Foreign as Domestic: Lastly, knowing that such Pestilential
and Diabolical Opinions, at this time, render those who are separated from the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, obstinate in their Errors, and cause
'em to avoid the Converse of Catholic Monks, Doctors, and Prelates, although
innocent, as if they taught and authorized such pernicious Doctrines. For these
and suchlike Reasons, after diligent Examination, the said Faculty
unanimously, and with a fixed Resolution, detest and condemn such strange and
seditious Docrines; as impious and heretical, pernicious to human Society, the
Public Peace and Tranquillity, and the Catholic Religion. In testimony
whereof, the said Faculty have concluded and resolved to renew their ancient
Decree, put forth a hundred Years ago, by the Advice of a hundred forty and one
Divines, for the Condemnation of the following execrable Opinion.

A Tyrant, whoever he be, may and ought lawfully and meritoriously to be killed
by his Vassal or Subject, whoever he be, by any manner of ways; chiefly by
secret Embuscado's, Treasons, Flatteries, and suchlike Artifices,
notwithstanding any Oath or Allegiance which the Subject may have sworn to the
Tyrant; nor is it needful that he should wait for, or expect the Sentence or
Command of any Judge for the prosecution of his Design.

Mariana.

Upon which follows the Censure of the Faculty.

This Proposition taken thus generally, and according to the signification of
the word Tyrant, is an Error against the Catholic Faith, against the Doctrine
of good Manners, and the Command of God, Thou shall not kill. It Is also against
the Doctrine of our Savior, They that take up the Sword, shall perish by the
Sword. Moreover, it tends to the utter Subversion and Ruin of all States, Kings
and Princes in the World: It opens a Door to all manner of Impieties, Deceits,
Treasons, Violations of Oaths, and generally give Subjects a License to
perpetrate all manner of Disobedience toward their Sovereigns, as also to
Disloyalty and Mistrust of one another, and consequently to eternal Damnation.
Moreover, whoever obstinately maintains such an Error, or any others that may
be deduced from this general Proposition, is a Heretic, and ought to be
punished as such a one even after his Death.

Given in the Year 1413. Wednesday, December. 3.
The aforesaid Censure of the Faculty of Theology of Paris, was confirmed by
the Council of Constance, Anno 1415. in the Calends of July, in these words:

THE Holy Council being willing to employ all their Care in the extirpation of
Errors and Heresies, budding forth in diverse parts of the World, according to
their Duty, and being also assembled for that effect, and being likewise
informed, that of late years certain scandalous Propositions, erroncous in
Faith, and contrary to good Manners, and which tend only to the subversion of
all Order and good Government have been taught and published; amongst which,
this is one: That a Tyrant, whoever he be, may and ought meritoriously to be
killed by his Vassal or Subject, etc. Now the Council having a singular desire
to oppose this Error, and utterly to extirpate it, after mature deliberation,
decree, declare, and determine, That this Doctrine is erroneous in Faith, and
contrary to Good Manners, and therefore reprove and condemn it as Heretical,
Scandalous, opening a Gap to all manner of Deceits, Frauds, Lies, Treasons,
Perjuries, etc. And we farther declare, decree, and determine, That all who
obstinately defend this pernicious Doctrine, are Heretics, and ought to be
punished as such, according to the Holy Canons.

Wherefore the Sacred Faculty, after having carefully and exactly examined the
Opinions of all the Doctors in general, and of each in particular, is of
Opinion in the first place, That the ancient Censure of the said Faculty,
confirmed by the said Faculty, ought not only to be renewed, but also imprinted
in the Minds of all Men. Secondly, that it is an Impious, Seditious, and
Heretical Thing, to attempt and lay violent hands upon the sacred Persons of
Kings and Princes, whatever Pretense any Vassal, Subject, or Foreigner may have
or seek for. Thirdly, we will and decree, That all Doctors and Batchelours in
Divinity, upon the Day tha they usually take their Oaths, to observe the
Statutes and Articles of the said Faculty, shall also swear, and also promise
under their Sign Manual, to teach the Truth of this Decree, whether in their
Divinity-Lectures, or in preaching the Word of God.

Upon this Censure the Parliament decreed, That the Book of John Mariana,
entitled, De Rege and Regis Institutione, Printed both at Mayence and other
Places, containing several execrable Blasphemies against Henry III. of Blessed
Memory, the Persons and States of Kings and Sovereign Princes, and other
Propositions, contrary to the Decree of the Faculty of Paris, shall be burnt by
the Hand of the Common Hangman, etc.

Accordingly Mariana's Book was burnt by the Common Executioner, before the
Great Church of Paris: And all Persons whatever were prohibited under the
Penalties of High Treason, to Write or Print any Books or Treatises, contrary
to the said Decree and Edict.

Thus you have three authentic Decisions of the Sorbonne, the Council of
Constance, and the Court of the Parliament of Paris, condemning the detestable
Doctrine which teaches the Art of Assassinating Kings. But are the Jesuits ever
a whit the more wise, or the less sanguinary for these Decrees? The Two
Princes, who so loudly declare themselves at this day to be their Protectors,
do they not authorize all their Maxims? Have they not, to the great Scandal of
all the rest of the Christian Princes, given a new Birth to those infamous
Monsters, whom the Prudence and Zeal of so many Doctors took care to stifle in
their Infancy? The Loss which France sustained of Two Kings, Henry III. and
Henry IV. whose Blood was shed by these Murderers, gave an occasion to the
Sorbonne, to the Council of Constance, and the Court of Parliament; to stop the
course of these detestable Opinions, which tended to no less then the
destruction of all the Crowned Heads in Christian Europe.

But at this day, I am ashamed to speak it, Kings themselves are they who
publicly authorize'em, and employ all their Forces to uphold and second
Murderers. They make choice themselves of the Traitors who are to destroy King
William. Thus you see the Art of Assassinating Kings preached up anew by the
Jesuits, authorized and supported by all the Power of Two Monarchs, one of
which holds the First Rank in Christendom.

But these are only the Disciples; let us see what the Professors of this
infamous Doctrine are themselves: Therefore that you may understand 'em well, I
shall recite a Speech which the General of the Jesuits made one day to the
whole Crew of his Order; it is so remarkable, that 'twill not be unacceptable,
though set down word for word. 'Twas made when Queen Elizabeth Reigned in
England, and King James in Scotland.

Dear CHILDREN,
YOU know that I am now here to Command ye: Jesus Christ, our Lord, is my
Mouth; so that you ought to obey Me in all Things, and in all Places. God shed
down his Holy Spirit upon our Holy Father St. Ignatius, for the Support of his
Church, which was just ready to fall through the violent Shoggs of Lutheran
Errors, which had spread themselves all over Europe, to the great Grief of all
good Christians. Since then it has pleased God that we are this holy Man's
Successors, it behooves us, that like him, we should be the chief Workmen to
extirpate the Root of Heresies. We see these Heresies reigning in several
Kingdoms: On the one side Subjects in Arms against their Princes; on the other,
Princes tyrannizing overtheir Subjects: In one place a Heretic Princess; and
not far from her, a King of the same Profession: Others feed us with fair Hopes
and outward appearances to delude us. It Is for us, my dear Children, to defend
the Cause of God and poor Subjects, not in show, as our Ancestors did, but in
good earnest. They who have hitherto taken his Duty upon 'em, have only
flattered and tickled the Wound, and consequently made it wider. It behooves us
to be the Executioners of God's Severity, who will never be displeased, if, as
the Arbitrators of his Will, we translate, to the prejudice of illgoverning
Kings, their Kingdoms to those who we shall know in our Consciences to be more
worthy of 'em. Now if you think your selves strong enough of your selves to
execute my Commands, at least let this be the Lesson which you shall teach in
the midst of the Church of God: You are to make use of Sword and Fire, for fear
the Gangrene get into it. We shall there find, at the long-run, good Workmen
and good Soldiers. But more especially apply to 'em the sacred Instruments of
Confession, Masses, and Communions, to the end, that with more assurance of
Conscience, they may finish those pious Works, which the necessity of Christian
Affairs commands us, and to which the Duty of our Functions obliges us.

Observe, I pray, the Expressions and Terms of this Harangue: You must, says
the Jesuit, make use of Fire and Sword, for fear of a Gangrene. This is an
Exhortation enough to shake the Crowns of all good Princes at this day
reigning. After this, it is no wonder if the most Christian King and King James,
who are as true Jesuits in their Hearts and Souls, as was the General of their
Order, who made this Speech, associate in a Conspiracy to cut off a Princes,
whom the Jesuits look upon at this day as the most Capital of their Enemies. A
mortal Hatred, which has no other foundation then the Religion which that Great
Monarch professes. But would to God they only aimed at the Religion of Princes;
History would not then recout to us the Tragical Deaths of so many Great
Princes, who have been offered up as Victims to their Fury; though they were
Roman Catholics, and no less eminent for their Piety and Zeal for the
Propagation of the Roman Catholic Faith. Yet for all that, have they been ever
a whit the less spared, or ever a jot the farther from being sacrificed to the
Doctrine of the Jesuits? But let us take a view of these Examples, for the
satisfaction of the Reader. We have seen the Judgment which the Sorbonne gave
of the Jesuits, upon their resettlement in France: After that, we have seen the
Doctrine which teaches the Art of Assassinating Kings, condemned by the Faculty
of Theology at Paris, and declared abominable by the Council of Constance; and,
lastly, Mariana's Books burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman, by a Decree of
the Parliament of Paris. But notwithstanding these Thunders launc'd against
their Errors and their Morals, you have also seen the General of the Order's
Harangue made to all the Members of the Society. Let us now come to their
Executions.

The first Tragical Example that History presents us withal, is the
Assassination of the Great William Prince of Orange, of Happy Memory. This
Prince was the Object of all good Men's Love, and consequently the Object of
the Jesuits Hatred: For the Assassines of Kings always aim at Virtue. A Tyrant,
a Prince who wallows in his Pleasures, and Sacrifices all things to his
Ambition, is in no danger.

The first Attempt of the Jesuits upon the sacred Person of the great Prince
William was made at Antwerp, by John Juvregni, a Spaniard by Birth. This wicked
Ruffian discharged a Pocket-Pistol at the Prince, and wounded him in the Jaw
below the Ear. Upon which, the Guard falling upon the Russian with their Swords
and Halberds, killed him immediately, which was the reason that the Author of
so black an Attempt, could never be discovered from the Mouth of the Murderer:
But the Marks that were showed upon Juvregni's Body, made it sufficiently
apparent that the Jesjuits were the Authors. Those Marks consisted in a green
Wax-Candle, with the Sign of the Cross imprinted at the bottom, and a Medal
stamped with the Image of the Virgin, which he carried upon his naked Skin,
made by the Jesuits of Madrid, according to the Deposi^ion of one of his
Accomplices, called Venero, who was executed some time after.

This Prince was looked upon as the Head of the Heretics and Rebels against
the King of Spain. And the same Spirit, which is the Spirit of Rage and Fury,
which caused 'em to act then, envenomed 'em now against the King of England.
But Virtuous Princes, who are the Nurslings of God, as Homer says, or rather
his enlivn'd Images, or as the Scripture calls 'em, The Anointed of God, are in
no Danger, so long as He takes care of their Preservation; and it is our hopes,
that the same Divine Power will preserve King WILLIAM from all the Snares of
his Enemies. But let us run over the Circumstances that attended this dreadful
Attempt of Juvregni; for they are very remarkable.

A certain Monk called Father Timerman, born in Dunkirk, formerly a Jacobin,
was apprehended and put in Prison for the same Fact: And being examined by the
Judges, he declared, That he had been bred up among the Jesuits, from whom he
learnt the Art of Assassinating Kings. That the said Juvregni coming to him, to
confess his Design to kill the Prince of Orange, the said Father Anthony
declared, That he gave him Absolution upon these Conditions: That if he did not
commit the Fact for Money, but for the Glory of God, and out of his Zeal for the
Catholic Apostolic Religion, then it was lawful for him to do it, upon giving
him Absolution, after laying before him the danger that might arise from the
Fact.

Such are the Principles of the JESVITES, and by consequence of the Jesuited
Princes that conspired against King WILLIAM. Forbid it Heaven, that any other
Christian Prince, whether Confederate or not Confederate, should be embru'd
with the same Sentiments! Most certain we are, that the Emperor, the K. of
Spain, and all the rest of the Princes, who at this time constitute the August
Confederacy that has taken Arms against France, detest these abominable Maxims.

The Public Testimonies which they give of their Zeal for the Affairs of
Europe, their particular Esteem for the Person of King WILLIAM, make it
apparent, that they have studied Virtue in another School then that of the
JESVITES. And though the Emperor, and some other Catholic Princes, suffer 'em
to reside in their Courts; nevertheless, they take care how they listen to
their Advice, as they do in France, and as they did in England while K. James
Reigned, who made choice of a Jesuit for his chief Minister.

The most Christian King and K. James, are the only Instruments at present
which the Jesuits make use of, to revive in Christendom, those dreadful
Monsters, which the Wisdom and Prudence of our preceding Kings, took so much
care to stifle.

Now let us see the end of the Conspiracy formed by the Jesuits, to cut off
the Great WILLIAM. The first Blow failing, as we have set forth, yet would they
not give over for all that: So that in the Year 1584. one Balthazar Gerard gave
the fatal Stroke to that Noble Prince. He confessed at his Execution, That he
lived privately with a Jesuit, whose Name he knew not, only that he was a
Red-hair'd Man, Regent of the Colledge-of Treves, who assured him, That he had
Communicated his Enterprise to three of his Companions, who found it to the ALL
FROM GOD; and before he left 'em, gave him their Benediction, ascertaining him
withal, that if he died in the Attempt, he should be put into the Calendar of
Martyrs. And with this Confession in his Mouth he died.

After this bloody Scene, the Jesuits who had sworn the Extirpation of the
August Family of the Princes of Orange, made an Attempt upon the Son of the
Great WILLIAM, who was Prince Maurice. Furor Arma ministrat. The Spirit of
Blood which push't 'em forward, excited 'em to suborn an infernal Monster,
whose Name as Poter Pan, a Cooper, who undertook to Assassinate this Prince:
But Providence, which does not always permit the Wicked to prosper in their
ungodly Enterprises, so ordered it, that Peter Pan was apprehended just as he
was about to have dipped his hands in the Blood of the Great Maurice.

The Offender was executed at Leyden, the 22d of June 1598. and before his
Death confessed, That the Jesuits of Doway had set him on to commit that
Murder, upon promise of a Prebendary for his Son: And that when the Father
Provincial gave him his Benediction, he embraced him, saying these words, Go my
dear Friend in Peace, for you go like an Angel under the Protection of God, and
died with this Deposition in his Mouth.

These Attempts upon the Sacred Persons of these two Princes, make it plainly
manifest, That the famous Masters who teach the Art of Assassinating Kings,
have had a strange Hatred from time to time, against the Illustrious House of
Orange; so that it is no wonder, if it now break out again in the Treason so
lately contrived against the Person of King WILLIAM. One would think, that all
Hell were let loose against that Prince; nor is it to be expected, that the
Fury of these determined Ruffians will ever be at an end, unless tired out and
wasted by exemplary Punishment.

However, it is a singular Proof of the continual Care, that Providence takes
for the preservation of this Great Monarch, that all the detestable
Conspiracies which these Sons of Belial contrive against his Person, are still
discovered, to the eternal Infamy of the Contrivers, thereby rendered odious to
perpetuity to all truly Christian Princes. It Is a foul piece of Treachery,
unworthy a most Christian Monarch, to seek the destruction of his Enemy by ways
so detestable. For whatever Shifts and Evasious France may use to ward off the
Reproach which all Christendom has at this day just reason to throw upon her,
she will never be able to clear her self. She has got too bad a Name already
for the Cruelties she has exercised upon her most faithful Subjects, and the
Princes her Neighbors; so that she had little need to have added this stain of
Infamy to the Nation, and render her self more obnoxious in all the rest of the
Courts of Christendom.

After Prince Maurice, Queen Elizabeth, the Greatest and the most virtuous
Princess of her Time, was in danger of losing her Life by the Fury of the same
Assassinators.

William Parry, by Birth an English Man, and a Doctor of the Civil Law, was the
detestable Instrument made choice of by the Jesuits, to attempt the Life of
that Princess. This William Parry had spent his Life in all manner of looseness
and Debauchery, till he had wasted his Estate, and reduced his Family to the
Hospital: So that not being able to subsist in England, he took a resolution to
travel into Otaly. Where being arrived at Venice, and not knowing what course
to take for a Livelihood, his evil Star carried him to Father Benedict Palmin,
a Jesuit; a Man of great Reputation among the Members of his Order, with whom
he entered into a strict League of Amity.

After some few days Acquaintance, it came into Parry's mind to propose to the
Jesuit the making an Attempt upon the Sacred Person of Queen Elizabeth, in
hopes to gain the Affection of one whom he desired for a Patron in a strange
Country, where he had no Acquaintance, or else to signalize himself in the
World by some remarkable Action.

With these thoughts he proposed to the Jesuit, the killing of Queen
Elizabeth, his natural Princess, and the setting up in her room Mary Queen of
Scotland, a Roman Catholic. This Proposal was well liked by Father Palmin, who
extremely encouraged and applauded his Zeal, telling him, That there was
nothing but Delay that could disappoint so noble and so pious a Design, that
would acquire him not only a great Reputation in this World, but a blessed
Immortality in Heaven.

Parry considering that time was precious, leaves Italy, and comes to Lion,
where he was to deliver Father Palmins Letters to the Jesuits of that City,
and where having opened his Design, he was received by the Jesuits with all
the kindness imaginable, telling him, That they looked upon him as the Restorer
of the Catholic Apostolic Religion in England, Scotland and Ireland.

And after they had blessed him, and fortified him as much as lay in their
power, for the execution of such a holy Act, they gave him Letters to Father
Coldrett a Jesuit in the College at Paris, to whom upon his Arrival, he
confessed himself; and after he had imparted to him his Design, Father
Coldrette gave him his Benediction, applauded his Zeal for the Propagation of
the Faith, and gave him all necessary Instructions for the speedy Execution of
his Design.

This done, the holy Apostle departed for England, and came to London, where he
so ordered his business that he got to be admitted into the Queens Presence;
and the better to insinuate himself into her Favor, he feigned to make her
Privy to a Conspiracy which the Roman Catholics were weaving against her Life,
and that he had promised to enter into the Plot on purpose to sound 'em; of all
which he thought it his Duty to inform her Majesty. And this detestable
Murderer told his Tale with so much Probability, that the Queen gave credit to
it; so much the rather, because it agreed with the Intelligence which she had
received from France, of a Design that was contriving against her Person.

All this while, Heaven preserved this Illustrious Princess: For though Parry
wanted neither Opportunity nor Resolution, for the Execution of his detestable
Enterprise, yet Providence would not permit him to accomplish it. At length the
Traitor imparted his thoughts to one Nevill, a Roman Catholic, in hopes of his
Assistance; but he, detesting so horrid a Crime, kept Parry in suspense, and
flattered him with fair Hopes, till he could find an Opportunity to inform the
Queen, who ordered both to be apprehended, returning Thanks to Heaven for her
Deliverance, from so great a Danger. Upon which, Parry being examined,
confessed the whole Matter with all the Circumstances, as we have here set 'em
down; so that he was Executed upon the 2d. of March 1584.

Such was the end of this Martyr, who the Jesuits had taken so much care to
instruct, in order to the taking out of the World a Princess no less then
beloved, for her Zeal and Piety, then King WILLIAM is now for his Heroic
Virtues.

But as the most Christian King and King James, true Jesuits as they are,
disdain to give over for a Disappointment, never aweary of returning to the
Charge, so that there hardly passes a Campaign without some new Attempt to cut
off King WILLIAM by treacherous Violence: So in Queen Elizabeth's time, hardly
one Conspiracy was discovered, but the Jesuits were setting another on Foot.

For in the Year 1595. one Edward Squire, an English Man by Birth, and a
Protestant, embarking in Sir F. Drakes Fleet, which was bound for America; the
Ship wherein he was, being separated by bad Weather, was taken by the
Spaniards, and he carried into Spain a Prisoner of War. In that Distress he
fell into the Acquaintance of Father Richard Walpote, an English Jesuit, who
in hopes of making him change his Religion, procured his Liberty. Which, when
Squire after he had got his Liberty, refused to do, he played him a Jesuits
Trick indeed, and clapped him up in the Inquisition; which proved so
unsupportable to him, that he sacrificed his Religion to his Liberty: After
which Change, Walpote was so much the sole Master of his Will and Inclinations,
that he easily instilled into him the Villainous Sentiments of the Society. When
he had him sure, he proposed to him the making an Attempt upon the Person of
Queen Elizabeth; adding, that it would be an Action pleasing to God, and by
which he would certainly merit Paradise. Thus gained, he received the Jesuits
last Orders, how to regulate himself; he confessed, and received the Sacrament.
At what time Father Walpote giving the Ruffian his Benediction, embraced him,
and after he had loaded his For head with a Thousand Signs of the Cross, Go
Son, said he, God bless, conduct, and strengthen thee; be of good Courage, I
engage my Soul for thine, and alive or dead, thou shall have a share in my
Prayers.

After this, he put into his hands a Poison, enclosed within two Piggs
Bladders, with Orders not to touch it without Gloves, for fear of poisoning
himself: Which Poison was to be rubbed upon the Pummel of the Queens Saddle, or
the Elbow of her Chair of State, as he could find his best Opportunity. But
while Squire was slow in his Performance, or else was disappointed of meeting
convenient Opportunities, Walpote, who was impatient to hear of the Success of
his Disciple, nor receiving any Intelligence from him, and therefore believing
himself betrayed and gulled, while he meditated Revenge upon Squire, was
himself the occasion of the Discovery: For he immediately sent away an
Englishman from Spain, with directions that he should pretend that he had made
his Escape out of the Inquisition, and inform Queen Elizabeth of the
Conspiracy. Which he did in good earnest. Whereupon the Queen caused Squire to
be sought for, and apprehended: And being thus in hold, he was soon convicted
and condemned; and at the Place of Execution, discovered who was the Person
that had set him at work.

Nor was this the last Attempt upon the Life of that virtuous Princess; for
that during the whole course of her Reign, she escaped most terrible Snares,
and many wicked Contrivances against her Life: So that if Divine Providence had
not had a particular care of her Life, she must infallibly have been hurried,
by some violent Death, out of the World. Nor has Heaven showed less surprising
Wonders in the Preservation of the sacred Person of King William; of whom it
may be said, that he has no sooner escaped one Danger, but another threatens
him.

Now all the Tragical Events, all the Conspiracies before recited, have deduced
their Original from the Jesuits: They were the Persons who first preached to
the World the Art of Assassinating Kings. Whence I conclude, that it is no
wonder if at this very day we find the most Christian King and King James
associated together in such a horrid Cabal, as has been lately discovered,
seeing they are more Jesuits then Kings.

But it will be objected, That Queen Elizabeth was of the Reformed Profession,
and King William is of the same Religion; no wonder then the Jesuits cabal
against 'em. To which I answer, That if Religion were the Pretense that could
only justify Conspiracies and Assassinations, how came it to pass that Henry
III. and Henry IV. who were both Roman Catholic Princes, could not 'scape the
being made Victims to the Fury of the same Murderers. Henry III. was a Monk in
his Sentiments, and in all his Conduct; witness the cruel Massacre of St.
Bartholomew, of which he was the Promoter. Henry IV. had changed his Religion.
Nevertheless the Blood of these Two Princes was never the less spared; nor were
they Both, the One and the Other, never the less the Objects of the Jesuits
Fury, then King William, who is a Reformed Prince.

It Is not then the Religion of Princes that gives an occasion to these fatal
Conspiracies against their sacred Persons; but rather a Spirit of Wickedness,
Jealousy, Ambition, Fury, and unbridled Zeal, which animates the detestable
Authors; who teach, that Princes are to be assassinated, who refuse to comply
with their Designs and Purposes, and study their Advancement as the most
Christian King and King James have done.

After this, I leave it to the Consideration of all good Catholic Princes,
whose Interests are so closely united to those of the Protestant Princes, since
they fight at this day for the same Cause, which is to free their Dominions
from the Tyranny of the Common Enemy; I leave it, I say, to their
Consideration, whether they will be less exposed to clandestine Attempts, for
being Good Catholics, then the Protestants.

The Barbarous Act which the Conspirators so lately projected against the
Person of King William, is a Fact which at this day concerns all Crowned Heads.
The Emperor, the King of Spain, and all the rest of the Catholic Princes, are
engaged to exclaim so loudly against this detestable Enterprise, that the most
Christian King, and King James, may lose all Thoughts of attempting the like,
unless they desire to be looked upon as the most odious of Princes that ever
Reigned among Christians or Pagans. I dare be also bold to say, That in respect
of the Bloody Outrage which they have offered Religion and all Christianity,
the Catholic Princes are in some measure obliged to excite the Pope to lance
out all the Thunder of the Vatican against these Monarchs, with Threats of
Excommunication, if they beg not Pardon of God and the Church, for so black an
Attempt, according to the Decrees of the Council of Constance, the Decisions of
the Sorbonne, and the Decree of the Parliament of Paris, before recited.

Well: After to Queen Elizabeth, the next Prince that presents himself upon the
Jesuits Bloody Theater, is Henry IV. who succeeded next after the Death of
Henry III. who was a true Roman Catholic, more Monk then King, but yet
assassinated by James Clement. Henry IV. had changed his Religion; and yet we
find he had no more Mercy showed him then his Predecessor.

In the Year 1593. Peter Barriere, born at Orleans, being a Soldier in one of
the Regiments of the Gens d'Armes, a Fancy took him to kill the King, out of a
belief that he should do God good Service; which is always the gilded Pretense
of these infamous Assassines. To this purpose away he goes to Melun, where the
Court then was; but upon intelligence given the King, grounded only upon a bare
Suspicion, the Miscreant was apprehended at the Gate of the City: There was
found about him a Knife much like a Baionette, which the Grenadiers in France
make use of at this day. And this Knife was designed for the fatal Blow that
was to have been given the King.

Upon this, he was brought to his Trial; and being convicted of High Treason,
was condemned to die: And at the Place of Execution he confessed, That being at
Lions, he had consulted four Religious Persons, one Carmelite, one Jacobin, one
Capuchin, and one Jesuit; who after they had carefully enjoined him Secrecy,
gave him their Benediction, and confirmed him in the Resolution he had taken.
With that, away he went for Paris, and immediately applied himself to the
Curate of St. Adnrews des Arts, a troublesome Fellow, and an Adherent to the
League.

After he had made him privy to the Enterprise, he applauded it extremely; but
advised him above all things to conferr with the Rector of the Jesuits, which
was done. The Rector assured him, that the Design which he had laid, was all
from God; that it behoved him only to have a good Courage, to Confess himself,
and receive the Sacrament. Afterward, the Rector carried him into his Chamber,
and after he had given him his last Instructions, gave him also his Benediction.

The next day he was confessed by another Jesult, and received the Sacrament.
He also imparted his Enterprise to a Third of the same Order, who was a great
Preacher, and a great Stickler in the Rebellion against the King, who approved
his Resolution as most Holy and Meritorious. Upon which Approbation, he bought
the Knife that was found about him, the Point of which he caused to be ground
for the purpose; and in pursuance of his detestable Designs, he followed the
King to Melun, where he was apprehended.

Besides this Confession, his Answers to the Interrogatories, put more home to
him by his Judges, are such as ought to make all Princes ashamed, who declare
themselves to be Favorers of the Jesuits. For being asked where he had learned
that New Theology, which taught him to Murder Kings? He answered, That he was
taught by Philosophy. Being asked, Whether he had never studied in the College
of Jesuits? He answered, Yes; under Father Gueret, with whom he had been two
Years and a half. Being asked, whether he had been in the Chamber of
Meditations, into which the Jesuits carry their greatest Sinners, to show 'em
several dreadful Portraitures of Devils, under various Figures, thereby
pretending to reduce 'em to a better Life, or rather to dislocate and disorder
their Minds, and prepare them by terrible Visions for some bloody Undertaking?
He answered, That he had often been in the Chamber of Meditations.

Being asked whether he had been incited to murder the King; he answered, That
he had been told, it was a laudable Thing to kill the King; and that they who
told him so, called him Tyrant. Being asked, whether such Proposals and Maxims
as these were not often in the mouths of the Jesuits? He made answer, That he
had heard 'em say, that it was lawful to kill the King: That he was not to be
obeyed nor looked upon as King, till he was absolved by the Pope.

This was the Confession of this notorious Offender, before all the Chambers
assembled in a Body: And being upon the Wheel, he said, There were still two
swarthy Priests, whose Names he knew not, who were departed from Lions, upon
the same Design; but that he aimed to have got before 'em, that he might have
had all the Honor of the Design.

But Barrier having missed his Blow, the Jesuits would not stop there: They
had determined the King's Death, and therefore no means must be left unessay'd
to cut him off. Not much unlike the Blood-thirsty Prosecution of Conspiracy
upon Conspiracy, against the sacred Person of King William at this day. But
that which is to be admired at, in the Proceedings of the Conspirators now
adays, is this: That they are authorized and protected by two Christian
Princes; whereas in the Attempts laid against Henry IV. the Jesuits alone were
the principal Actors. The next Monster therefore whom they made choice of,
after Barrier, to attempt the Life of that Renowned Prince, was John Chastel, a
young Stripling, about nineteen Years of Age, who had been brought up in the
College of the Jesuits; and this was a Masterpiece of the Morality which he
learnt among 'em. Upon the 27th of December, 1594. he sought an opportunity to
put his Enterprise in execution. The King being at the Louvre, Chastel found a
way to get himself admitted among the Courtiers, and to get near the King, who
was then discoursing very pleasantly with several of the Great Lords; at what
time, he so well took his time, that he struck his Majesty in the Mouth with
his Knife, without being perceived; which put all the Lords into a most
terrible Consternation, not knowing from whence the fatal Blow came.

In the mean time, the Ruffian taking his advantage of this Disorder, cunningly
dropped the Knife, and thrust himself into the Crowd, as if he had done nothing,
in hopes to have made his escape. However, the Courtiers, who were busy in
searching after the Assassine, seized upon this same Stranger at a venture,
being no otherwise assured whether he were guilty or not. Nevertheless, he was
no sooner apprehended, but he confessed the Crime. Upon which, the Parliament
made a Decree, wherein the Jesuits are so well set forth to the Life, as one
would think should be anough to make all Princes ashamed, that suffer 'em in
their Courts and Dominions; particularly Lewis XIV. and James II. who make 'em
their Favorites, their Counselors, and their Chief Ministers of State.

The Court of Parliament, etc. having seen the Process exhibited against John
Chastel, etc. Student in the Jesuits College at Clermont, etc. for High
Treason, and a thrice execrable and abominable Parricide, attempted upon the
Person of the King; as also against John Gueret, stiling himself of the Society
of Jesus, and formerly the said John Chastel's Tutor, etc. And finding that the
Criminal Court has attainted and convicted the said John Chastel of High
Treason against God and Man, by the most wicked and most detestable Attempt
upon the King's Person: And that for the Punishment of the said Crime, the said
Court has condemned, etc.

Now the Parliament farther ordains. That all the Priests and Scholars in the
College of Clermont, and all others stiling themselves of the said Society; as
Corrupters of Youth, Violaters of the Public Repose, Enemies to the King and
Kingdom, depart out of Paris, within three days after Publication of this
present Decree, and out of all Cities and Places where they have any Colleges;
and within fifteen days after, quite out of the Realm, upon pain of being
punished as Criminals, and guilty of High Treason. And all their Goods, as well
immovable as movable, shall be laid out in pious Uses. Moreover, all the King's
Subjects are forbid to send any Scholars to any of their Colleges without the
Kingdom, upon pain of incurring the Penalties of High Treason, etc.

Having thus given you a description of the Disciple, let us take a view of the
Masters in the Art of Assassinating Princes. John Guignard, a Jesuit, who was
Regent of the College of Clermont, was apprehended by Commissioners whom the
Parliament sent to the College of Clermont, to seize the Papers of that
infamous Professor, among which they found several written with his own hand;
wherein he asserted, That it was lawful to assassinate Henry III. and gave
Instructions in order to the murder of Henry IV. Upon which, the Parliament
made another signal Decree, bearing date the 7th. of January, 1595.

Having seen the Criminal Process exhibited against John Guignard, Priest and
Regent of the College of Clermont, in this City of Paris, Prisoner for several
Treatises by him written, and containing among other things, the Approbation of
the most cruel and inhuman Murder of our deceased King; and Motives to induce
others to murder the King now Reigning, the Interrogatories and Confession of
the said Guignard, the said Book represented and acknowledged to have been
composed by him, and written with his own Hand: It shall be said, That the
Court has declared, and does declare the said Guignard attainted and convicted
of High Treason, for having composed and written the said Books, containing
several false and seditious Arguments to prove, That it was a laudable thing to
commit the said Parricide upon the Person of Henry III. and that it was lawful
to kill Henry IV. at present Reigning, for which he is condemned to the Amend
Honorable, naked in his Shirt, with a Rope about his Neck, before the
principal Gate of the City of Paris, and there upon his Knees, holding a
lighted Wax-Taper weighing two Pounds in his Hands, to say and declare,

That wickedly, villanously, and against the Truth, he has written, That the
deceased King was justly killed by James Clement; and, That if the Reigning
King did not die in the Wars, he ought also to be murdered: Of which he
repents, and begs Pardon of God, the King, and Justice. Which done, he is to be
carried to the Public Place of Execution, and there to be hanged and strangled
upon a Gibbet set up on purpose; after which, his Body to be consumed to Ashes
in a Fire kindled at the foot of the Gibbet, and all his Goods to be confiscate
to the King, etc.

After such an authentic Piece, which so fully exposes the Blackness of the
Crimes, which the Authors of the Doctrine that teaches the Art of Assassinating
Princes, commit in the World, what is there which all the Princes of Europe
have not reason to fear; especially when this Doctrine is authorized and
supported with all the Fury and Power of the most Christian King, and the
utmost of King James's Ability.

Should this continue, there is nothing to be expected but Butchery and
Massacre all over Europe; and a Pious, Debonaire, Magnanimous Prince, beloved
by his Subjects, must always carry Death in his Bosom. All human Prudence will
not be able to preserve him from the Attempts of Conspirators. Nor does it
concern Protestant Princes alone, but the Roman Catholics also, to be careful
of their own Preservation.

The 10th. of the same Month, the Parliament issued forth another Edict,
against Peter Chastel, the Father of John Chastel, and John Gueret, the Jesuit,
who was John's Master. The Substance of which Edict was, That John Gueret
should be banished for ever; and that Peter Chastel, the Father of the Ruffian,
should pay a Forfeiture of 2000 Livres, be banished for Nine Years out of the
Kingdom; that his House should be pulled down, and the Place be consecrated to
public Use, with a Prohibition that it should never be built upon again: That
a Pillar of Freestone should be erected upon the void Space, with a Plate,
representing in large Characters the detestable Paricide committed upon Hen.
IV. to render the Memory of the Authors and Instruments, which the Jesuits
made use of, to commit so black and enormous an Action, infamous to Eternity.

In pursuance of this Edict, a Pillar was Erected before one of the Gates of
the Palace, upon the Bridge called, Pont au Change, where the Ruffians House
stood, and there remained till the Return of the Jesuits into France.
Nevertheless, this mark of Ignominy did no way discourage the Jesuits. Barrier
and Chastel had missed of their Blow, and therefore the Authors who set 'em at
work, enraged that they had not atton'd their Fury by the total Effusion of
that renowned Prince's Blood, resolved to make a thild Attempt upon his Life.

But before we recount the Circumstances of the Assassination of Hen. IV. let
us speak one word concorning James Clement, who Assassinated Hen. III. Till the
Death of Hen. IV. there was some reason to question, who were the true Authors
that set James Clement to work; for that as soon as ever he had struck the
Stroke, he was killed by the Guards of Hen. III. which was the reason that it
could never be understood from the mouth of the Murderer, who were the Authors
and Accomplices of that detestable Action.

But the Death of Hen. IV. which followed not long after that of Hen. III.
unfolds the Riddle, and gave Justice those Illustrations which she was ignorant
of before. 'Twas then found that the Jesuits were the Persons who had embru'd
their Parricide Hands in the Blood of that Prince. James Clement had been a
Student in their College, where he had learnt their Doctrine, and after all
his great Learning, was become a Jacobin. Nor will it be amiss to take a view
of the Memoirs which the Jesuit Guignard had drawn up and which afterward
fell into the Hands of Justice.

The Cruel Nero, says he, speaking of Hen. III. was killed by one Clement, and
the counterfeit Monk fell by the Hands of a true Monk. The Heroic Act
performed by James Clement, as a Gift of the Holy Spirit, so called by us
Divines, is justly applauded by the Prior of the Jacobins, Confessor and
Martyr; and the Crown of France ought to be translated into another Family then
that of the Bourbons: And the Bearnois, meaning Hen. IV. will be treated a
little more gently then he deserves, if they give him a Monks Crown in some
well reformed Convent, there to repent for the Calamities he has brought upon
France, and to thank God for being so favorable to him as to spare him an
opportunity to know himself. And if he cannot be deposed without a War, let 'em
make War upon him; and if it cannot be done by War, let him be killed.

Now let us observe the Circumstances of this great Princes Death, so
remarkable through the Conformity which they had with what so lately passed in
the intended Assassination of of King WILLIAM, had not God in his mercy averted
the fatal Stroke, by the Discovery of the Conspiracy.

Heury IV. had resolved upon the day of his Coronation, and of the Public
Entry of the Queen his Royal Consort, to give some marks of his Clemency to the
Prisoners of the Bastile; and to render the Act so much the more August, he
laid a Design of going in Person. To which purpose between three and four a
Clock in the Afternoon, his Majesty took Coach at the Entrance into the Louvre,
admitting only the Dukes of Espernon, Monthason, Roquelaure, and three other
Lords, to go along with him, who rode altogether in the Kings Coach; the Guards
being forbid to follow him.

That Order, and that moment of Time proved fatal to the Life of that
magnanimous Prince. For Ravilliac, as he declared himself at the place of
Execution, having a long time before premeditated the Assassination of his
Majesty, followed him to the Street, called La Rue de la Ferronerie, before St.
Clements Churchyard, where seeing the King's Coach stopped by some Carts, and
the Monarch leaning toward the Duke of Espernon, with whom he was in Discourse,
the Monster animated by the Devil, got up upon the Fore-wheel of the Coach, and
with his Knife made on purpose, gave the King two Stabs into the Breast, and
bereaved him of his Life in the midst of his Bravest Generals. Both which Blows
wore given with that swiftness, that they were hardly perceived. The first
entered between his fifth and sixth Rib, pierced his Heart, and reached the
hollow Vein, which being cut, that great Prince lost his Speech and his Life
both together. As for the second, it only rased the Skin, without any more hurt.

No body saw the Blow Struck; so that if the Parricide had but flung away the
Knife, it could never have been known who was the Author of that detestable
Fact. Presently the six Lords that were with the King alighted, and some sought
for the Parricide, while others went to help the King; but one of 'em seeing he
had lost his Speech, and that the Blood ran out of his mouth, cried out, The
King is Dead. Upon which words, the People were all in a hurry, and such a
terrible Despair seized 'em, that they threw themselves into the Shops
adjoining, as if the City had been taken by the Enemy.

One of the Lords observing the Disorder, bethought himself of giving it out,
That the King was only wounded, and that he was fallen into a swoon. They
called for Wine, and while they ran to fetch it, they pulled down the Boots of
the Coach, telling the People, That seeing the King was only wounded, they
would have him carried back to the Louvre to be dress't.

The Queen in her Cabinet, received the doleful Tidings, overwhelmed with
sorrow, and in a strange Consternation was going to meet the Body of her dear
Monarch; but being met by the Chancellor, he put a stop to her. Upon whose
approach, the Queen all in Tears, cried out, Alas, the King is Dead! To whom
the Chancellor, without the least Disorder in his Countenance, because the
Affairs of the Kingdom then required it: Your Majesty must excuse me, Kings
never die in France: And so having persuaded her to return into her Cabinet, We
must have a care, said he, least our Tears render our Affairs desperate; we
must reserve them till another time. There are those that weep both for You and
Us. It Is for your Majesty to take care both of Us and your self; We have need
of Remedies and not of Tears.

After such a fatal Stroke which put all France in Mourning, it may be said,
That the Rage of the Jesuits, who had the greatest share in the Fact, was in
some measure assuag'd. Though when we consider the Benefits which they had
received from that Prince, and the Signal Proofs of his Clemency which he had
given 'em, since their being recalled into France, who would have thought this
Monarch should have been a Victim to their Fury?

In the Year 1625. in the Month of May, this Prince had given 'em leave to pull
down the Pyramid erected before the Palace in the Place where John Chastel was
born, who had been a Student in their College, and was set up for an Eternal
Monument of Infamy to the Jesuits, who had set 'em on to attempt the Life of
this Prince. For on the top of the Pillar, were to be seen Plates of Marble,
whereon were Engraved in Letters of Gold, the Decree of the Court of Parliament
against John Chastel and the Jesuits, and over the four Corners, were set up
four Statues of four Virtues.

There was reason enough to believe, That this Monument would have stood many
Ages; but the King, in hopes that the Remembrance of his Favors, would have
engaged the Jesuits to live more Christian like for the future, out of a
Horror which they ought to have had, of so many Attempts against his Life,
commanded the Lieutenant Civil, Miron to cause it to be pulled down, and to
Erect a Fountain in the same place, which was done.

The more Curious were pleased to say, when the four Statues were pulled down,
among which was the Statue of Justice, That Justice had erected the Pillar, but
that the King's Clemency had pulled it down. On the other side, they who
abhorred the Jesuits Doctrine, that Taught the Assassination of Princes, made
the four following Verses: SIR, if you needs will blot from Time to come
The Memory of the Assassin Chastel's Doom,
By Monument pulled down, that Justice did ordain,
It is but just to have Your For Chastel with the force of the Blow, struck out
one of the King's Teeth.
Tooth again.


But notwithstanding this, and whatever else was published or written against
the Jesuits, that Monarch persever'd in giving 'em all the marks imaginable,
of his Goodness and Clemency, which lasted till the end of his Life. Three
Weeks also before he was Assassinated by Ravaillac, he sent for the Brass Plate
from the Printer John le Clerc, which was made in the Year 1595. to the end
there might not remain the least Footstep of their Infamy.

So many Illustrious Proofs of that Princes Love toward those perfidious
People, plainly demonstrate to us on the one side, the natural Inclination of
that Prince to do good; and on the other, the Infidelity and Treachery of those
Authors who teach the Art of Assassinating Kings, and who were never satisfied
till they had embru'd their Parricide Hands in the Blood of their Benefactor.

We must therefore conclude, from all that has been said, concerning the cruel
Assassination of Hen. IV. complotted by the Jesuits, and put in execution by
the detestable Ravaillac, that so long as there are any Jesuits in the world,
the Art of Assassinating Kings will be taught in the World; and that according
to this Principle, every good Roman Catholic Prince as well as Protestant,
will be exposed to the Fury of these Assassinates. So that all Monarchs or
Sovereigns in Europe, who are not the Jesuits Friends, or rather who are not
the Executors of their execrable Designs, or who contemn their Counsels in
matters of Religion, have no more to do, then only to make their Wills, and
prepare betimes for Death.

As for the most Christian King and K. James, they are in no Danger. Those two
Princes are the Societies Pupils; they will be sure to die a natural Death. Which
is the reason, that both those Monarchs, in acknowledgment, are so prodigal of
their Favors to the Jesuits. The Society proposes to 'em, the Destruction of
a Heretic Prince by Sword or Poison. Now King WILLIAM is looked upon by those
Traitors, as the Restorer of Calvinism, the Deliverer of the Oppressed English,
and the Instrument whom God at this day makes use of, to free all Europe from
the Fetters of French Slavery. This is sufficient to render him Odious to the
Jesuits, and by consequence, to their Protectors Lewis the Great, and James
the Little.

Therefore, according to the cruel Maxims of these Assassines of Kings, there
is nothing to be omitted that may hasten the Destruction of this Great Prince.
And this is the Source and Spring of the Conspiracy so lately discovered, and
the Fatal Original of all the Attempts upon his Sacred Person, since his coming
to the Throne of Great Britain.

But the Politicians of the Times will say, wherefore do the Jesuits attempt
the Persons of Roman Catholic Princes? Princes who were the sworn and
irreconcilable Enemies of the Hugonots, as was Hen. III. who consented to the
cruel Massaker of St. Bartholomew, and who said one day, That if he had but one
Faggot in the world, he would give it with all his Heart to burn the last
Heretic, and set fire to it himself? Or a Hen. IV. who had abjured his
Religion to become Roman Catholic? Such a way of Proceeding, ought it not to
have secured him from all Attempts of the Jesuits? What could they have
exacted more from him?

To this I answer, That 'twas not any Principle of Religion, as to the Persons
of the Princes, which caused those detestable Assassines to act as they did;
for that those Princes were as Zealous Catholics as they could desire: But
because those Monarchs, more especially Hen. IV. was not inclined to do the
Protestants all that Mischief which the Jesuits would have had him have done.
For Example, they would have had him revoked the Edict of Nants. The King had
granted 'em that Edict of Pacification, to assuage the Troubles that had
turmoyl'd France for so long time. Which was the Rise of that implacable Hatred
which the Jesuits had for his Person, which was never satisfied till they had
laid him in his Tomb, by committing the most cruel and enormous of Crimes.

Thus you see, now far the Fury of Religion will carry Men, when they are
guided by no other Principles but those of Ambition and false Zeal. That
unbridl'd Zeal is only a mistaken Assurance, that they do God good Service in
destroying Princes, when they are not devoted to their Party and to their
Interests.

From the Murder of Henry the Great, we shall descend to the Unfortunate Mary
Stuart, Queen of Scotland, who was also the Jesuits Victim, though after a
different manner. We have told ye, That the Roman Catholic Religion is not
capable to preserve the Sacred Persons of Princes or Princesses from the Hands
of Conspirators. Queen Mary was as Zealous for the Roman Catholic Religion, as
ever any Princess in the World: And it may be said in a word, That She was as
good a Roman Catholic, as Queen Elizabeth was a good Protestant; only that the
Zeal of the former extended it self even to Fury.

Nevertheless, the Jesuits having sworn her Destruction, they were never
satisfied till they had plunged her in those Misfortunes which cost her both
her Life and her Crown at the same time. She had been detained a Prisoner about
18 or 19 Years, in hopes that by the Death of Queen Elizabeth, she might one
day obtain her Liberty, and step into the Throne. In these flattering Hopes she
spent her Days, and gave her self up wholly to Religion and Piety, as the only
Consolation she had left, to soften the Sorrows and Vexations of her
Imprisonment.

But the Jesuits, who never sleep when there is any extraordinary Game to be
played, but sacrifice to their Tyrannical Politics, the dearest Persons in the
World, to bring about their Ends; in the Year 1582, sent into England one
Father Henry Saumier, a Jesuit, under the Character of their Deputy, with
private Instructions for the Parts he was to Act.

To this purpose, he took upon him the Habit of an Officer. Nor did he leave
any Stone unturned, to raise Combustions and Troubles in England. However, he
did not think it convenient to discover himself at first to any but the Roman
Catholic Lords; and in regard Queen Mary was not then so close guarded, but
that the greatest part of the Catholic Lords might have access to her Person,
the Jesuit Saumier had an opportunity to introduce himself into her Presence;
and then declared it to her as a Secret, That he was sent to her from the
General of their Order, to let her understand, that all the Catholic Princes
had extrcamly concerned themselves in the procuring her Liberty, as well for
the Re-establishment of the Catholic Religion in the Three Kingdoms, and for
her Advancement to the Throne in the room of Queen Elizabeth. As for what
remained, he besought her to redouble her Zeal and Piety for Religion, and that
she would endeavor to dispose and prepare for so great a Design, all such good
and faithful Subjects as were able to contribute toward it; to the end that in
so doing, she might be set at Liberty from the Slavery of her Rival; and second
the fervent Prayers which the whole Order made to God for the Accomplishment of
an Enterprise so pious and so holy.

But in regard these Perfidious People never tread a step without Treason in
their Bosoms, while the Jesuit Saumier fed that Unfortunate Princess with
these gaudy Hopes, he complotted with the Catholic Lords the Advancement of
some Catholic Prince of the House of Austria, to the Throne of England, under
pretense that he being more Potent then Queen Mary, would be able to favor and
support their Designs by force of Arms, which was so requisite for the carrying
on their great Entorprizes. Whereas, the Weakness of Queen Mary would be the
Disappointment of all at the Beginning.

That Princess, over credulous, gave Credit to all the Fair Promises of the
Flattering Jesuit, without having the least suspicion, that she had then to do
with a Knave that was going to make her a Public Sacrifice. It Is true, that
when Saumier imparted to her the first Discoveries of his Design, she showed at
first some Reluctance to engage in so nice and ticklish an Affair, that would
be her infallible Ruin, should she happen to be betrayed. Upon which, the
Jesuit told her, That if she refused to give her consent, that he knew several
ways to deprive both her and her Son of the Succession to the Crown; adding
Expressions injurious to the Circumspection and Prudence of that Princess: Quod
si molesta fuisset, nec illa nec filius ejus regnarent. Saying withal, That it
was the last Order which he had from his Superiors.

Let us now see the end of the Tragedy. The Guises, who were the next of kin to
Queen Mary, and whose Interests were united with the Interests of that
Princess, and consequently ought to have been informed of this whole
Negotiation, knew nothing of it. The Jesuits had so well ordered their Affairs
to hinder the Guises from giving 'em any Obstruction, by reason that their Aim
being to deceive Queen Mary, and advance in her Place some Prince of the House
of Austria, as we have said already, thought it more to the purpose, to find
out new work for the Guises in France, that they might not have leisure to mind
the Destiny of their Kinswoman.

In the mean time, that great Conspiracy which was laid so privately, and
carried on so secretly by the Devices and Artifices of the Jesuits, was
discovered at length to Queen Elizabeth, by some of the Lords her Friends, who
had feigned to be of the Conspiracy. Thereupon Queen Mary was accused of
Conspiring against the Life of the Reigning Queen, and Executed, and with her
fell some of the Lords that had a share in the Plot. And the Jesuit that had
drawn 'em into all that Mischief, fled out of the Kingdom with all the
Precipitation imaginable, leaving all those of his Party in a world of Trouble
and Confusion.

Hen. III. of France, who was the only Person in whose Power it was to save
this unfortunate Princess, sent M. de Bellievre indeed to Queen Elizabeth, with
Orders to be very importunate for the Life of Queen Mary, which he was to
outward Appearance, while underhand (for Reasons of State, and in pursuance of
the King's private Orders) he persuaded the Queen to cut off her Head, as the
Common Enemy of their Persons and Kingdoms, the Crime being sufficiently proved.

The Dissimulation of Hen. III. in this Affair, was grounded upon important
Reasons, which concerned his Person, and the Tranquillity of his Kingdom. For
that Mary being the next Heir to the Crown England, should she have happened to
succeed Queen Elizabeth, the Guises, who were irreconcilable Enemies to Hen.
III. and Counselors of Queen Mary, their Kinswoman, would have favored that
Princesses Party against him, if they did not make use of all the Power of
England, to engage him in a fatal War; for the Guises were already too powerful
in France. So that good Policy-requir'd that Prince to take all the Precautions
imaginable, for keeping fair with Queen Elizabeth, and preserving her Alliance.

However it were, the Jesuits were still the first Instruments of the death of
that Princess, while they sacrificed her Life, in hopes of raising a Foreign
Prince to the Throne. But what is there which they have not now done, to raise
K. James to the Throne? Did they not find a way to sacrince King Charles, his
Brother, and to cut him off by Poison? What is there which they leave unacted
against King WILLIAM? How many Attempts, how many Conspiracies and reiterated
Plots against the Sacred Person of this Illustrious Prince? And all to raise to
the Crown of England a Furious Bigot, full of Transport, and in a word, a
sanguinary Priest, more Jesuit then King.

The most Christian King is very ill advised, to seek the having a share in an
Action so treacherous and so odious, as that of complotting with the Jesuits
and K. James, the Death of a Prince who now Reigns with so much Glory, the
meanest of whose Actions will deface, or at least eclipse whatever was
performed of most remarkable and famous under the Reign of Lewis the Great.
Witness the Parallel that might be made between their Lives and their Actions,
between which without question, there would be a vast Difference, were they to
be displayed to the World without Passion or Prejudice. But let us pursue these
Assassinators of Kings, to the end we may show to what excess of Rage and Fury
the Diabolical Art and Infernal Doctrine which they have taught in the world,
is able to Transport 'em.

In the Year 1605. which had like to have proved fatal to all England, by the
Destruction of the Prince, and all the Nobility of the Kingdom at the same
time. A Blow so much the more deadly and terrible, because it was not looked
for, nor so much as dreamt of, in the midst of that Peace which England then
enjoyed. Nevertheless, the Misfortunes threatened by that detestable
Conspiracy, vanished by the Discovery of it; so that it was not attended with
any Catastrophe, unless it were, what turned to the Confusion of the Actors,
who were to have played that Bloody Tragedy.

I shall not insist upon the Circumstances of this Infernal Plot, as being so
well known to all the People of England. It may be only said, That this was one
of the Jesuits Masterpieces, to have blown up not only the Sovereign Monarch
himself, (for a single Blow would not then serve their Turn,) but all the Royal
Family, and all the Nobility of the Kingdom. The Quintessence of Jesuitical
Machination, which struck with Horror not only the English Monarchy, but filled
with Consternation and Detestation of the Fact all the Foreign Courts of
Europe. Insomuch that the Jesuit Baldwin being accused by his Accomplices, to
have been one of the Principal Contrivers of that dreadful Conspiracy, and
afterward apprehended at Frankendale in Germany, was from thence carried to
Heydelberg, and thence by Order of the Elector Palatin, sent with his Hands and
Feet bound into England.

The King was also so sensible of his Escape, that he made a Speech to the
Parliament upon the importance of the Discovery; wherein he set forth the great
Danger from which God had preserved his Sacred Person, the Queen his Wife, his
Children, and lastly, all the Nobility of the Kingdom, whose Blood was to have
been all intermingl'd and blended together in a moment.

What then remains, my Lords and Gentlemen, said he, but that we imitate the
great Captain Scipio, who finding himself accused by the Tribunes of the
People, for having laid out the Public Treasure in a War against the
Carthaginians. This is a Matter of nothing, said he; content your selves that I
have won the Victory, and let us all ascend the Capitol, to return Thanks to
the Gods for it. Let us do the same, my Lords and Gentlemen; Let us not give
way to a Pagan; but let us return Thanks to God, whose mercy shines over all
his Works.

In like manner, does King William exhort all his good and faithful Subjects,
who are interested in the Preservation of his Sacred Person, to return Thanks
to Heaven, for having delivered him from so imminent a Danger. But what wonders
of Providence do we not behold in the Discovery of a Design so deeply laid for
for the Destruction of this great Monarch! Without contradiction, the most
execrable and cruel Conspiracy that ever was.

For the Relation that we have given of all the Attempts which the Jesuits
have been all along contriving and making upon the Sacred Persons of Princes,
we find not any one that was carried on with more Contrivance and Artifice. All
the cunning Wariness, all the Infernal Subtilty of the Jesuits, supported by
all the Power of the most Christian King, were made use of in the carrying it
on; and the execution of it was to have been performed with all the Cruelty of
King James, so that if God by Secrets of Providence unknown to Men, had not
stirred up the Conspirators to discover it of themselves, the Blow had been
infallible.

Nevertheless, the most Christian King desirous to hoodwink the Eyes of all
Europe, and to make the Christian Princes believe, that he had no share in so
treacherous and odious an Action, caused a Report to be spread abroad of a
pretended Manifosto, which he resolved to publish to the World. And M.
Pontchartrain has already given Orders to the Gazetteer of Paris, to give us
some Preliminaries in order to it, and by way of Explanation of what we are
farther to expect, to exclaim in the Public News against a Bloody Injury done
this Great Monarch, by those that charge him with being an Accomplice in so
foul and detestable an Attempt. And to prepare the Minds of People to give his
Apology a kind Reception, he has begun to say something of it in his last
Ordinary, in the following Terms, as we have here set 'em down word for word.

The same Day, says he, an Officer dispatched away by the Duke of Wirtemberg
was sent to give Advice, that a great number of the French Troops were drawn
together about Callis, with several Transport Ships, and the King of Great
Britain (meaning K. James) was expected there: that being afraid that all this
was done, with a Design to attempt a Descent, the Duke of of Wirtemberg
advanced with some Troops to embark upon the first Orders of the Prince of
Orange. This advice caused a great Consternation (observe I beseech ye that
which follows,) and presently, to prepossess the Public by Artifices, like to
those that have been so frequently been made use of, a Report was presently
spread abroad of a Discovery of a Conspiracy against the Prince of Orange, etc.

It Is not the Gazetteer that speaks this, but the Ministers of France
themselves. It must be thought that either the most Christian King and his
Ministers have forget the use of their Senses, or else that they will not allow
the Princes of Europe to have common Reason, while they talk at this rate. They
would make the World believe, that this is but a a Vision; that the Conspiracy
that makes so loud a Noise, was only a Trick of State, to try the Fidelity of
the People, or a Fancy of Policy to blacken France with Eternal Infamy.

If we would be so easy as to believe the Court of France, all the Conspiracys
which have hitherto been contrived against the Person of the King of England,
have only been pretenses to gain some end or other; either to get Money from
his Parliament, or to put a value upon himself, or to try the Fidelity of his
Subjects.

But those People who advanced such Calumnies as these, must be as great
Deluders, and as knavish in their Evasions as the Ministers of France
themselves. By this means the most Christian King their Master, in pursuance of
the Maxims of the Jesuits his Counselors, shall be always attempting the
Destruction of a Prince, by delivering him into the hands of Traitors and
Assassines; and when they miss their Blow, and that the Conspiracies are
discovered, he shall have a delicate excuse to say, they were all Pretenses or
Tricks of Policy which the Prince made use of to advance his Affairs, and fix
himself in the Affections of his Subjects.

This is not the first time that France has made her self known in this
particular. The most Christian King is become so famous in all the Courts of
the Christian Princes, by his Treacheries, that without doing him any wrong, we
may safely judge him guilty of having dipped his hands in this, and to have been
one of the principal Authors, as indeed he was. And without Dissimulation, we
may safely say, That whatsoever ingenious Tour they give to so base an Act, all
Christendom is so well convinced of the truth of it, that I will never believe
that Monarch will ever be able to wash it off, with all the Eloquence that ever
he can hire to endeavor it.

To prepossess, they say, the Public, by Artifices like those that have so
frequently been made use of. Observe here, that the Ministers of France (for
they are the Persons that send to the Gazetteer what the Court thinks proper to
publish) acknowledge themselves, that this is not the first time that France
has attempted the of Person K. William. So frequently made use of, say they.
Upon what occasion? Why, upon frequent Conspiracies; for nothing else can be
gathered from the Words. So then, if the Pretenses were frequent, it follows
that the Conspiracies were frequent; and if frequent, then real, and not
imaginary; otherwise there had been no ground for Pretenses; for the People are
not frequently to be deluded by the self-same Artifices. On the other side, if
the Conspiracies were real, then they could be no Pretenses, but just Occasions
of Complaint. 'Twere well for the most Christian King and King James, that they
could acquit themselves at the cheap rate of Frequent Pretenses.

But since King William's Advancement to the Throne of England, we have seen no
less then Eight different Conspiracies. In all the Campagnes since the War
declared, we have seen New Monsters spring up, which the Council of France has
brought forth to destroy this Noble Prince. The Confessions of the Accomplices,
the intercepted Letters, the private Conferences of the Assassines with the
Chief Ministers of the Court of France, their Indictments and Trials, and
lastly, the Executions of the Traitors, have sufficiently justified the Truth
of their Crimes. All which demonstrates to us, that the most Christian King and
King James, were the principal Authors of all those bloody Contrivances.

But by this we may see, how far Effronterie will carry these Ministers, who
will presume to deny a matter of Fact that is apparent to the Eyes of all Men,
and which all the Earth acknowledges for such. Thus, says the Paris Gazetteer,
or rather the Echo of the Court of France's Voice, The Pretense of a
Conspiracy has served to countenance the inserting into a Public Act, a Part
of an Oath which was rejected when the Business of the Commissioners of Trade
was examined; though they durst not, out of a Remainder of Respect for the
Truth, and the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, make use of the principal
Clauses which caused it to be rejected.

The Oath which all the Lords unanimously took to defend King William and his
Government, against all the Attempts of his Enemies; the Act of Association,
whereby all the Members oblige themselves to revenge his Death upon the
Assassines, in case he should come to a violent End; the Bill by which the
Parliament is to be continued, though it should please God to afflict the Kingdom
by the sudden Death of the King; and the Clause inserted against suspected
Persons, by which it is made lawful for the King to apprehend all suspected
Persons, detain 'em in Prison, and seize their Horses and Arms. All these
things the Court of France looks upon with an evil eye. These are new Degrees
of Grandour, Puissance, and Authority, which they never looked for. This
increase of Union and good Correspondence between his Majesty and his
Parliament; the earnest Applications and sincere Zeal of the English Nobility,
by which they all unanimously concur to sacrifice their Estates and Lives, for
the Preservation of his Britannick Majesty: All this, I say, extremely
perplexes the most Christian King; and this is that which makes his Ministers
give out, That the Pretense of a Conspiracy has given the English an
Opportunity to insert into a Public Act, a Part of an Oath which had been
rejected, etc.

To answer therefore, in a word, to all these Evasions, I will say, That the
Experience of Things past, has so well taught the Christian Princes to
understand the Spirit and Cenius of the Council of France, that all the Craft
and Artifice of her Ministers will never be able to disengage 'em out of the
Labyrinth into which they have run themselves. It Is a Personal Stain that
Sullies the Crown of the most Christian King, and which will heap Infamy upon
Him, as long as He lives.

As for King James, he is a Prince abandoned to his Sanguinary Passions, to
Murders, Violences, and from his tender Years has breathed nothing but Hatred
and Fury against the United Provinces, and their Governors. King William being
then but Prince of Orange, has had the cruel Experience of it to this very day:
And the Name of the Duke of York has always been so suspected to that
Republic, that She has always looked upon Him as her greatest Enemy: Witness
the Pains he took in the Time of King Charles his Brother, to exasperate Him to
the Dutch Wars, and to foment in Him an irreconcilable Hatred against this
State, by creating perpetual Quarrels between the English and Hollanders, upon
the account of Trade; and by exciting King Charles to unite with France, for
the Destruction of this Republic, and by using a thousand other Extremities,
which have rendered him odious, and caused him to this day to be looked upon as
a Prince that never gave any other then base and mean Examples of a transported
Bigot, more Jesuit then Prince.

I cannot for bear reciting here one Passage in History, which is in the Annals
of the Republic of Holland; by which the world may judge of the Inclinations
of this Prince, which always incensed him to do all the Mischief that lay in
his Power to the Republic of Holland.

At the beginning of the Year 1673 a detestable Enterprise was discovered at
Amsterdam; the Design of which was, to have burnt all the States Men of War.
The Person that was to have put this fatal Design in execution, was one John
Fraser, a Scotchman. The Duke of York, who had been all along an
irreconcilable Enemy of the United Provinces, had engaged him by great
Promises to go through with this treacherous Undertaking, as the confessed
himself, when he was apprenended without being put to the Rack. This miserable
Wretch was broken upon the Wheel, and his Body exposed upon the Wheel, near
Vootewyk.

But this is but only single a sketch of his Fury: The whole Life of this
Prince has been a continued Series of Attempts, Treacheries, Conspiracies, and
Murders, with which the West of England rings to this day. The sanguinary
Passion which he learnt from the Jesuits, who bred him form his Youth, have
exasperated him not only to do mischief to the Hollanders, but all the
Protestant Princes of Europe, without sparing his Friends, his Confederates,
and even his nearest Relations; witness the precipitated End of Charles II. his
Brother; merely out of a Desire of Reign.

For Princes who only consult their Prevailing Passion, and ardent Thirst of
Sovereignty, will sacrifice all to attain their End. Thus if we may believe a
Great Archbishop of France, Marie de Medicis, Second Wife to Henry IV.
concerted the Death of her Husband with the Jesuits and Ravillac, out of
impetuous Thirst after the Regency. And when she was confirmed, she quickly
showed what Princes or Princesses are capable of doing, that are overruled by
that cursed Passion.

Catharine de Medicis was possessed with that insatiable Passion all the whole
course of her Life; witness what we are going to recite, though so much care
was taken to conceal it. She was, as they well know that are versed in the
History of France, the Mother of Three Kings; Francis II. Charles IX. and Henry
II. and might have been of a Fourth, had the Duke of Alenson, her youngest Son,
lived. Francis II. being dead, Catharine de Medicis obtained the Regency during
the Minority of Charles IX. her Son, by means of those Artifices which she made
use of: Nevertheless, the Civil Wars over whelmed her with Business, with
Vexation, and perpetual Disquiet, and reduced her even to the point of seeing
her self constrained to quit the Management of the Kingdom to the Prince of
Conde, gave her soon to apprehend, that a Crown was a Burden too heavy for a
Woman.

In the midst of these Perplexities, she retired to her Closet, that she might
wholly abandon her self to Solitude for some days, giving order that no Person
should come near her. But at length she sent for M. de Mesme, a Person of the
Long Role, for whom she had a particular Esteem, as being one that had given
her several signal Proofs of his extraordinary Zeal for her Service upon
several Occasions.

To this Person the Queen delivered a Steel Box, well locked, with a Key;
telling him at the same time, that the Civil War affording her but ill Presages
of her Destiny, she thought it convenient to entrust in his keeping that Sacred
Depositum, which was the richest Treasure she had in the World, with Orders
never to open it, or deliver it to any Person, unless by her Command signed
with her own Hand.

Now the Queen dying without ever sending for the Boy from M. de Mesme, and he
also deceasing not long after Catherine de Medicis, the Heirs of de Mesme, kept
it a long time in their Family without opening it: But at length, Time, which
causes us to forget all things, had buried the Queen's Commands in Oblivion,
insomuch that Curiosity would needs entice the Grandchildren of de Mesme to
open the Box, in hopes to find some inestimable Treasure: But instead of that,
the Box being opened, they met with a Sight which struck them with Horror: It
was an Oval Copper Medal, in form of a Buckler, which the ancient Romans
consecrated to their false Gods.

The Sculpture of the Medal represented Catharine de Medicis upon her Knees,
making an Offering to the Devil, who was painted sitting upon a high-rais'd
Throne, with all the deformed Delineations of Affright and Terror imaginable:
On each side of the Queen were her Three Sons, Charles, Henry, and the Duke of
Alenson, with this Impress in French: Soit, pourven que je regne. Let it be so,
provided I may Reign. Which Medal is still to be seen in the Family of de
Mesme, from which the Count d'Avaux, formerly Ambassador in Holland is
descended. And they whose Curiousity leads 'em to be more distinctly informed
of the Circumstances of this Secret, may hear it from the Lips of that Minister.

Such are the Crimes which Princes are carried to commit, by their exorbitant
Ambition of Rule, or rather by their unbridled Fury and Zeal. Whence we
conclude, that it is no wonder if King James, who has all along been animated
with this Fury, and possessed by this unruly Passion, seeks now to regain his
lost Throne by the Assassination of King William. But God, who has all along
taken care of this Magnanimous Prince, and guarded him from all the Snares of
his Enemies, will, we trust preserve Him still a Blessing to Europe, in despite
of all their detestable Enterprises. All the Christian Princes unite their
Prayers to Heaven for his Happy Preservation. And, indeed, it is the Interest
of all Christendom, which looks upon Him as Her Deliverer, and as the Person
who is to set Her free from all the Mischiefs that have afflicted Her for so
many Years.

Most Serene PRINCES,

This is a violent Outrage, an Attempt which ought to awake the Care and Zeal
which you have showed for the Common Cause, ever since the commencement of the
War. It Is that laudable Ardour which ought to engage ye to redouble your
Efforts against the Common Enemy of your Lives, your Territories, your States,
and your Liberty. you ought all to be enlivened with the same Spirit and
Resolution, to demand Reparation of your Enemies, for an Act so base and so
abominable.

Let it never be said, that your wanted either Counsel or Courage to revenge an
Attempt formed against the Life of one of your Confederates. It Is an Act
wherein you are all equally concerned, since the Interests are still the same
which first engaged you to take Arms, and which ought still to encourage ye
unanimously to concur with our Magnanimous Prince, in seeking all the Brave
and Noble Ways imaginable that a lawful War will permit, for the pulling down
so mortal, so haughty, so inexorable an Enemy as Lewis XIV.

Nor can we endeavor this incomparable Design with more Honor, than by
redoubling our Efforts to carry on the present War with all the Fervor
imaginable. This is that which the most Christian Monarch dreads; and this is
that which made him hasten, had it been possible, the Destruction of the most
Potent and most Formidable of his Enemies. He saw the impossibility of
vanquishing him by force of Arms; though he wanted neither good Generals, nor
stout and numerous Armies; nor Fortune of his side; and all this backed with
Treacheries and Conspiracies, laid against the Life of his Powerful Adversary.
All this has hitherto proved fruitless; however, he must vanquish or lose all
his ill-got Honor. And this it is that enrages the most Christian Usurper
against King William, and inspires him with new Attempts. Nor do they now
conceal themselves as in the former Conspiracies; they are no longer Two or
Three Assassines that now seek the Life of King William, but Shoals of
Murderers that show themselves barefaced, supported and authorized by Two
Kings, who give 'em their Orders under their own Hands, and supply 'em with
Money, Arms, and Horses. What a Shame! what an abject Baseness is this for
Christian princes! And what may we not expect for the future from such
Disciples, who have so well profited in the School which teachers the Art of
Assassinating Kings? It Is a Fact which will cover the Authors of it with Shame
for ever, and strike a Horror into all Pagan Princes, who never knew among
themselves the Practice of these detestable Principles. I defy any Man to
find, in any of the most faithful Histories, the least footstep of this
barbarous Fury, condemned by all Religions, and all good Men.

It Is now for the most Christian King and King James, to say what they can for
Themselves; and we expect with impatience the Manifesto which is promised us.
We know there is no want of eloquent Pens in France, to varnish over a Piece of
this Moment and Importance, and give it that specious Tour which it shall
please the Court, on purpose to put an Illusion upon the Public, and cover the
Horror of this detestable Crime.

It Is a sort of Coin which the most Christian King has so frequently made use
of upon these Occasions, that there are few Courts in Europe wherein it will
any longer pass for current. The Confederate Princes are preposses'd of this;
and know very well what France is meditating upon this Subject: Whatever
ingenious Tour she gives her Manifesto, and whatever Tricks she plays to ward
off the bloody Reproaches which all Christendom will throw upon her, and that
deservedly too, she will never be able to justify her self, nor to make an
Apology, such a one was will do her Business.

It Is a hard matter to render Good and just, a Cause that is bad of it self;
they must not be weak and feeble Arguments that are employed upon this
Occasion. This thing now in dispute is a matter of Fact, averred and attested
by the Mouths of the Conspirators themselves: So many Authentic Proofs; so
many undeniable Witnesses which the Confederates have of so important a Fact
are sufficient, if not to stop the Mouth, yet to convince the World of the
Guilt of the most Christian King. The Trials of the Conspirators, the
Attestations of the Evidence, will answer this Manifesto, whenever it appears,
in such a manner, as will be a Public Conviction of the Authors and Abettors
of so base and black an Enterprise. So that unless the Council of France make
haste with their Manifesto, they may justly fear that the Trials in England
will prevent 'em, by rendering all the Artisices of France of no use to her, and
by publishing Particulars of the whole Conspiracy so essential, that it will be
a dissiult matter for the Ministers of that Crown to answer, whatever care they
take, or whatever trouble they put themselves to.

We dare advertise them beforehand, that whatever they advance, will only
serve to render the matter of fact more manifest. However, let 'em produce
their Reasons whether good or bad. It Is a Privilege which the most rigorous
Justice allows the most Guilty; which is, to plead their own Cause, and allege
what they think most proper for their Justification, according to the
Accusations charged upon 'em.

Let us then conclude, in expectation of this Manifesto, which without
question, will be one of the most studied Cabinet-Pieces that ever the Court of
France set forth; let us then conclude, that it would have been much better for
the Crown of France, that the most Christian King had never meddled in this
Conspiracy; it is an odious Stain that reflects upon all the Nation, and
blackens it with an Infamy which many Ages to come will never wipe away. In the
mean time, K. William, according to the Principles of Christianity, sincerely
pardons his Enemies, and prays to God to forgive the heinousness of their
Crime; assured, that so long as he is under the Protection of Divine
Providence, he shall never be in danger, but shall triumph over all their vile
and clandestine Attempts, whatever Snares they lay to ravish away his Life.

The END.

