THE ARRAIGNMENT and CONDEMNATION Of the Late Rebels in the West: With a
Discovery of the RISE and GROUNDS OF THEIR REBELLION.
This may be Printed.

R.L.S.
August 18. 1685.


OUr Blessed Savior, after long Preaching and showing Miracles among the Jews,
finding them still addicted to their own wills, and rather delighting in their
old Idolatries, than de^i^ous to embrace the Truths delivered unto them by the
Son of God, at la^^ sets before them the Judg^^^^ (...) to the true God: But I
say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom in the day
of Judgment, than for (...). A fearful Judgment! Sodom, we know, was a place
that might be called the Sink of wickedness, a Deluge of sin, nay, a my Hell
upon Earth; and yet it shall he more tolerable for that wicked Land of Sodom in
the Day of Judgment, than for (...). The reason we find in the foregoing
verse; For if the mighty works which have been done in Thee, had been done in
Sodom, it had remained unto this day: thereby convincing them what a shame it
was to them, that this Land of Sodom should have been more ready to observe the
Dictates of the Son of God, (had they been preached to them) than They, who
could boastingly cry, We have Abraham to our Father; We are not born of
Fornication; We have one Father, even God, etc.

If this was so strong an aggravation of the errors of the Jews in those times,
when the name of Cirist was little known, and his Works but newly published to
the world; what will it be against a Generation of men amongst us, who, under a
disguise of Religion, zeal for God's worship, and crying (with the Pharisee in
the Gospel) I am more holy than thou, renounce all ties of Religion and
Christianity, break through all Oaths and Sacraments, and steer their course so
far contrary to all human Prudence and Reason, that the Heathens themselves,
governed only by the Light of Nature, may reasonably appear to act far more
conscientiously than They, who boast so much the name of Christians? For, let
but any reasonable man consider, that is not either an Actor in these
unchristian Proceedings, or at least a Well-willer to them; Whether it be
consonant either to the Commands of our Savior, the Precepts of Religion, or
the Dictates of our own consciences, to run into these many unheard of
Barbarities, as, Sacrilege, Rebellion, Murder, Rapine, and other the most
notorious sins, and all under the pretense of Religion? Religion is made the
Cloak for all Designs and Mischiefs that the craft of Man or subtlety of the
Devil coninvent. Has an aspiring Traitor a mind to put in for a sharer in the
Government, and make a breach in the most flourishing Commonwealth in the
world? Religion presently is the cry; Religion must be the Warrant for his
Treason, by the strength of which he need not fear enough to side with him, and
take his part. Is any over-jealous or hotheaded Citizen dissatisfied with the
Government he lives under; or has he run himself so far into dangerous designs,
that he fears the Justice of his Superiors will overtake and punish him? it is
no more but pretend an Invasion in Religion, (or if it be but a fear of one)
and presently he shall pass for a godly conscientious man, and all his past and
present Offenses be washed away with the powerful Ball of Religion. Has a
private man a picque against his Neighbor: would he dis^ him, ^uine him, or
put him to death? It he can but make him a Papist, (or if it be but a Papist in
Masquerade it is no sin although he perjure himself to take away his life; 'twas
for the sake of Religion he did it.

How many of these pretended Zealots have we seen within these few years, that
have not only in their lifetime, but even to their very death, counted it a
piece or Religion, and gloried in it too, to resist their lawful Sovereign?
never remembering the expression of the Apostle, Whosoever therefore resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive
to themselves Damnation.

Good God! what stupidity! what strange spirit of Delusion has gotten into the
hearts of Englishmen! Let their Religion be in the most flourishing and
prosperous condition in the world; let them inherit the desired Blessings of
Peace and Pienty; let their Darlings of Liberty and Property be ever so
securely settled; nay let them have all that they can either desire or wish: If
some leading men of the Faction do but buzz in their ears, That their Religion
is in danger of being subverted, their Liberties invaded, and their Properties
infringed, (though there be neither sign nor danger of it) presently they are
all in a hubbub: Lord! what shall they do to secure their Religion! when God
knows it is at the same time under the greatest security and most flourishing
Prosperity that can be wished. Thus is that which ought to be the most
inviolable thing in the world, prostituted to the base desires and depraved
wills of the most profligate Villains upon Earth.

Religion too was the cry of that diabolical Faction who would have Excluded
the Just and Lawful Heir to the Crown, (His most Sacred Majesty now reigning,
whom God grant a long and happy Reign.) Religion! the security of the
Protestant Religion, as continually bawled about, when at the same time (see
the sin erity of these Patriots!) they acted contrary not only so the
Principles of GOOD Protestants, but even to the Law of Christianity it self.

And the better to promote this Devilish Project of Exclusion, the Faction
caused to be Reprinted a Treasonable Book, pretended to be written by Do^eman,
but written indeed by one Parsons a Jesuit, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, which
for the ill Principles contained in it was disowned by the Jesuits Society, and
the Book lately burnt by Sentence of a public Convocation at Oxford, From this
Garden it was our modern Reformers gathered those precious Flowers of EXCLUDING
a Lawful Heir, and DEPO^^NG or TAKING OFF a King, if to the Commonwe^^^^ (...)
seem meet. Two of w^^^h for the Readers sa^^^fa^^^on I shall ^ere transcribe:
And (...), for the mystery of Exclusion for Religions take, says the counter^
Do^eman, Part 1. cap. 9 page 172 I a^^irm and hold, that for any man to give
his help, con^ent, or assistance, toward the making of a King, W^^m he ^geth
to be, a^y in Religion, and consequently would advance either no Religion, or
the wrong, it he were in Authority, is a most grievous and damnable sin to him
that does it, [of what side soever the Truth be, or how good or bad soever the
Party be that is presented.]

Could any thing in the wo^ld strike more at the root of a good form of
Government that this, which makes every private individual man a Judge of his
Prince's Religion; which if contrary to his ^^king, he is upon pain of
Damnation to resist, withstand, or under him, according to his Power, from ever
inheriting his Right of Dominion; and this without considering whether his
Religion be right or wrong, or how good or bad his Morals may be: If he thinks
him not fit to Reign, it is enough.

For the other impious point of Deposing Lawful-Kings, he introduces the
Civilian speaking thus: By this then you see the ground whereon depends the
righteous and lawful Deposition of wicked Princes, to wit, their failing in
their Oaths and Promises which they made at their first entrance, that they
would rule and govern justly, according to Law, Conscience, Equity, and
Religion; wherein when they fail, or wilfully decline, casting behind them all
respect of Obligation and Duty, to the end for which they were made Princes,
and advanced in Dignity above the rest, then is the Commonwealth not only free
from all Oaths made by her of Obedience or Allegiance to such unworthy Princes,
but is BOUND mereover, for saving the whole Body, to RESIST, CHASTEN, and
REMOVE such EVIL HEADS, if she be able, for that otherwise all would come to
Destruction, Ruin, and public Desolation.

There are the pernicious Tenets upon whi^^ our Godly ^^naticks, those Pests of
Government, despisers of Kingly Power, Devourers of the Church, and continual
broachers of Sedition and Mutiny, lay the foundation of their accursed
Principles, which need no other Confutation than a bare Recital, every good
Subject being (I question not) satisfied in the illegality of the Arguments, as
well as the Perfidie of those People, who when their clamours are greatest
apainst Popery, even then are they making use of Arguments forged by the very
worst of Papists, so brack so false, and so hurtful to Government, that they
are abhorred even by the Jesuits themselves; and even then when they pretend the
greatest Loyalty to the King, Zeal for Religion, and Love to the Government,
are they making use of all the Plots that the Devil can invent, to Murder the
One, Profane the Other and Subvert the Third: Witness that Irreligious Caval,
whose case for the Preservation of the late King was so great, that ^^ey were
never satisfied till they had pa^ a Vote, That if he ^ame to any untimely end,
they would Revenge his Blood to the utmost upon the Papists; and yet, when all
came to all, these very men (some of them) that stickl'd so much for the safety
of the King, were the first that entered into a Design against his Life. A rare
policy! First to condemn the Innocent; let who will strike the Fatal blow, the
Papists must pay for it; and afterward to endeavor to perpetrate the execrable
Design themselves. It Is a thing seldom known, that the same Persons should be
Judges, Offenders, and Executioners: 'Twas. They made the Vote, They designed
the Treason, and 'twas They themselves that werere to do Execution upon the
Innocent for their own Fact. But however strange it may seem, 'twas the True
Pretestants L^ve to their King, and there is an end on it.

To pass by many other demonstrations of the Love of these Saints, come we now
to examine somewhat concerning this late Rebellion, begun, promoted, and
carried on by the most Zealous Advocates for the True Protestant Religion as
they called it, to expel Popery, and maintain the Liberty of their
Fellow Subjects against Arbitrary Government: This was the Pretense, this was
the ground, upon which the Sword was drawn against Majesty, which how weak it
was, every reasonable man is able to judge. Was our Religion ever Molested? Was
our Liberties in Danger? Had we any cause for the least Apprehension or Fear of
either? Did we not sit every man under his own Vine, and under his own
Tig-Tree, enjoying all the blessings of an Obedient People under a Merciful
Prince? And yet, contrary to all Law, Religion, or Policy, these are the
Pretenses to a most Bloody and Unnatural Rebellion.

But the better to cover their Designs with a pretense (tho a weak one) of
Right, these impious Wretches made use of their cursed delusions for the
drawing in that unfortunate Gent. the late Duke of Mon. Whom as they only made
use of as a Cloak for their Villainy, so, had they once attained their ends, and
Heaven permitted them to prosper in their Devilish undertakings, they would not
only have thrown him from that Height to which by their Rebellious Arms he had
been advanced, but deprived him even of his Life it self; it is blood alone that
must satisfy the thirst of these devouring Canibals; these Sanguinary Devils
delight in nothing but Blood and Destructign.

How great was the hope of this sanctified Crew? How did they please themselves
with the thoughts of being glutted not only with the Blood of all those whom
they would brand with the name of Papists, but even of His Sacred Majesty
himself, the Lords Anointed! With what notorious falsities did they daily fill
the ears of the People, That the D. of Albemarl was killed, the Real Army
Routed, that hundreds of the Kings Army had deserted the Camp, and fled to the
Rebets; And what was the intent of all these stories, but only to encourage and
animate others to rise in Rebellion against their Sovereign, by the success
they suggested these Infamous Rebels to have had, and by the goodness of their
Cause from the increase of their Army? But thanks be to God their Designs are
frustrate, the Diadem sits unmoved on the Head of Him where (...) Him and His
Posterity may it continue, as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.

And now consider, you that have been so eager in the Promotion of this
Rebellion, Whether, the Almighty Providence was not signally manife^^ed in the
event of sins (short, but sharp) War? Had not the Rebels all the advantage
they could with? Did they not make use o^ the sheeter of a Night as black as
their own Souls? Nay, were they not come within Musket shot before they were
discovered? And yet when they had all these Advantages, when there was nothing
in the Art of Man seemed able to withstand them, when they thought themselves
secure even beyond the reach of Heaven it self, then even then, in the mide of
their greatest security, the Almighty Deliverer, (who alone gives Victory)
spread his Wings over his Anointed, and his Cause, sheltered them from the
Cruelty of their Enemies, and brought a total overthrow upon the Rebels.

O Then let every good Subject remember the day of their Deliverance, and give
thanks to that God alone who saved them from the hands of the Cruelest of
Enemies. Nor let it be only remembered by the good, but even by the bad
Subjects; Let it for ever be a means to deter them from listing up accursed
hands against their Prince; let it fright them into Obedience, that they
considering the care of the Almighty over his Vicegerent, may forsake the
Error of their ways, leave off that old pretense of Religion to countenance
their wickedness, banish their needless fears of Popery and Arbitrary
Government, and numbly submit themselves to the disposal of God and their King;
so shall the Monarchs Crown Sit easy on his Head, and the Subjects Yoke be
pleasant on their Shoulders, so shall the black Cloud be dispersed, and England
again become the most glorious Nation in the World.

LONDON: Printed by T.M. (for the Author) in the Year 1685.


