SERMONS Preached upon several Occasions.

BY That Able and Faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Mr Timothy Armitage, late
Pastor of a Church in the CITY of Norwich.

London, Printed 1678.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THese Sermons, Preached diverse years since by the Godly and Reverend Author,
who is now with the Lord, reaping the fruit of his Holy Labors, which do still
follow him; having by the care and pains of a Christian Brother, been
preserved, and now brought to Light by the good Hand of Providence, for thy
good and benefit, as some other of his Works formerly published Viz. Of the
woman of Canaan: And of the three Children in the furnace.
, which (if they have come to thy hand) may have been through the Lords
blessing: Be pleased therefore to understand, that they were preached and
delivered by that Eminent Servant of God, Mr. Timothy Armitage, sometimes
Pastor of the Church of Christ gathered at Norwich; as may easily appear unto
thee (if thou have been acquainted with any of his Labors in Print) by that
gracious Spirit which breaths and runs through all the Veins, and almost every
Line of the same. It Is needless to hang out before these Sermons a Bush, to
commend the same to thy perusal; do but taste a little, and if thou have a
savoury palate, thou will be ready to say as the Samaritanes to the Woman, that
enticed them to go to see and hear Christ speak, Joh. 4. 42. Now we believe not
because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves. The Subjects herein
handled we doubt not but thou will find to be very momentous First, The
eminency of Christ, from Cant. 2. 3. Secondly, About Forgiving one another,
from Mat. 18. 21, 22. Thirdly, Walking with God, from Genesis 5. 24. Fourthly,
Gain by Christ in life and death, from Phil. 1. 21.
, and very spiritually treated of: We shall not need to add any more in this
kind, but commending them, and thy perusal of them, to the Grace and Blessing
of Jesus Christ, in whom we shall desire to remain

Thy Well-willers, Thomas Allen, Samuel Petto,


SERMON I.
CANT. 2. 3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood so is my Beloved
among the Sons: I sat down under His Shadow with great delight, and His Fruit
was sweet to my Taste.
AS the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the
Sons, etc. Here are two things considerable in the Words; viz. the Matter, and
the Form of them: For the Form, it is a Similitude; the Matter in it is the
Person, and a Thing: The Person is Christ, the Thing to which this Person is
resembled, and that is an Apple Tree; it is titled by its plantation; Among the
Trees of the Wood: Then we have the Application of this Similitude, in that
word, So is my Beloved among the Sons.

Here is also an Illustration of this similitude in two particulars, which
discovers wherein Christ is resembled to the Apple Tree: First, For the shadow
of it; I sat under his shadow with great delight. And then,

Secondly, for the Furit of it; His Fruit was sweet to my Taste. There is
something observable held forth in the dependence that these words have upon
the former: If you look into the second verse, As the Lily among the Thorns, so
is my Beloved among the Daughters. In that verse Christ sets forth the
excellency of his Spouse, declaring the high estimation he has of her; She is
a Lily among the Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters. By how much the
Lily is to be preferred before the Thorns and Thistles, so much is the Spouse
before all other Children, before all other Men, before all other
Congregations. Now see how the Spouse does admire Christ, As the Apple Tree
among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons; and how the Love
of Christ does beget Love; what Improvement a gracious Heart makes of the
manifestation of Christ's Love; He declared that he loved her, he loved her
dearly above all the World; and presently she breaths love again. There was a
Fire of Love, that was kindled in her bosom, which flamed toward Christ; the
more love Christ manifested, the more a gracious Heart loves Christ again: You
know the Woman in the Gospel, what abundance of love she expressed to Christ; she
sat at Christ's Feet weeping, and washing Christ's Feet with her Tears, and
wiping them with the Hair of her Head; she had much forgiven, many
manifestations of Love, in the forgiving her many sins; and therefore she loved
much. But again observe, the Spouse does not rest in that Commendation that
Christ had given her; he had highly commended her as a Lily among Thorns: But
she carries the commendation back again to him; what ever she has from Christ,
she carries back again to Christ, she 'I make him the Alpha and the Omega, the
Beginning and the End of all, and therefore she presently falls upon
admiration, admiring his Beauty and Excellency. A gracious Heart is more taken
with that which is in Christ, than with that which he gives out to it: It does
not rest in Grace that is received, or in Love that is manifested, but it goes
back again to Christ, pitches upon Christ in whom are all Divine perfections:
She does not repeat the words of Christ again, as if Christ had said, My Love
is a Lily among the Thorns; she does not say, Oh, now I am a Lily, I am more
beloved than all the World: she looks from that presently, she looks to Christ,
how shall she make him glorious. The Lord Jesus, he had set a Crown, or at
least a Garland upon her Head, and she speedily put off her Garland, and set it
upon Christ's Head, she thinks it fit that all should be swallowed up in the
Glory of Christ. Let him be lifted up and magnified, let his Name and
Excellency and Goodness be magnified and remembered, though I be forgotten for
ever. Oh that you would be more practical, turn this into practice, make it
practical, do as the Spouse did here; let all the manifestations of Love kindle
love in your Hearts to Christ, and look not so much what is given to you, as
what is laid up in Christ for you: Look upon Christ, and carry it to him, as he
is the Alpha, so let him be the Omega, carry it all back to him again.

But let us look more strictly upon the words, As the Apple Tree among the
Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons.

The words are clear enough; only it would be known what is meant by Son, So is
my Beloved among the Sons.

It may be either the Sons of God, or the Sons of Men: The Sons of God, so the
Angels, and so the Saints are called by Jo^^^^ Now there was a day when the
Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord; The Angels are his
Sons, he uses them like Sons, and they serve him like Sons. And so believers
are called the Sons of God. Now we are Sons, but it does not appear what we
shall be, says the Apostle. If we take it in this sense, still it is true of
Christ, that he is the chief among the Sons, among all these Sons of God; he is
far above the Angels; he is made the Head of Principalities and Powers they are
all ministering Spirits unto him.

But we may rather understand it of the Sons of Men, because he speaks of such
Sons as are Trees of the Forest, Trees of the Wood: At the Apple Tree among the
Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons. Among all the Sons of men
Christ is the chief that ever lived, that ever was planted in the Forest of the
World; God the Father has given him the pre-eminence, he has given him a Name
above every Name, He is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: He is more
excellent than the chiefest of the Sons of Men. Take the best of Men which may
be, and they are held forth by the names of Sons. Daughter in Scripture phrase
is a name of Weakness: Daughter of Sion, Daughter of Jerusalem: God would show
what poor weak Creatures his people are without him: Son, is a name of
strength, and honor, and dignity; Among all the Sons of all the Honorable Men
in the World, among all the Princes and Potentates in the World, Jesus Christ
he is the most desirable, he is more excellent than they: He is more excellent
than the tallest Cedars, than the greatest Oaks in the Wood; As the Apple Tree
amongst the Trees of the Wood: Here seems to be a double ^^^parison.

First of all, the Sons of men are compared to the Trees of the Wood.

And then Secondly, The Son of God is compared to the Apple Tree among those
Trees, in the midst of those Trees.

First, The Sons of men are compared to the Trees of the Wood, Trees of the
Forest: And this holds forth the state and condition of men by Nature; Every
man by nature is a wild Tree, he is not in Gods Garden, but is cast out into
the open Field, it is a Tree of the Forest, not a Tree of the Orchard. We speak
of the corrupted nature of man, what man is since the fall of Adam: For when
God made him at first, he planted him in Paradise, and he was the chiefest Tree
there, brought forth most excellent and delightful fruit unto God, but you know
how Adam degenerated, he turned a wild Tree, and brought forth sour Fruit; and
therefore God plucked him up by the Roots, and threw him out of Paradise; so
that he and all his posterity after him were for ever after Trees of the Wood,
and Trees of the Forest; he brings forth nothing but wild Fruit, till such time
as the Lord is pleased to take poor creatures and ingraft them again upon Jesus
Christ, who is the Root of Jesse, that they may bring forth better fruit unto
him.

Now I shall show wherein this comparison holds: Every man by Nature is a wild
Tree, a Tree of the Wood, a Tree of the Forest.

1. First of all, He either brings forth no fruit, or else he brings forth
sour fruit; he is an unfruitful creature; Israel is an empty Vine, God
complains: And so it is true of every man by Nature, he is an empty Vine; he is
an unfruitful Tree; if he brings forth any fruit, it is wild fruit, it is sour
fruit; as is spoken of in Deuteronomy. 32. 32. which does well resemble the condition
of all men by Nature. Their Vine is a Vine of Sodom, they are of the field of
Gomorrha. Here Is the fruit that every man's Nature brings forth; It Is a Vine of
Sodom, and a field of Gomorrha; sour fruit, and bitter fruit, and cursed
fruit. This is the fruit that man by Nature brings forth.

2. Again, Secondly, The Trees of the Wood or Forest, so long as they remain
there, they are unprofitable; they are not of that use which the Trees of the
Orchard, or the Trees of the Garden are, they are not only useful for their
fruit, but they are a great Ornament to a man's ground or house; and they are
also a defense to a man's house. A Tree nigh at home, at the house side keeps
off many a Blast, and many a Storm; and such are the Trees that are of Christ's
planting: Oh they are a Beauty, they are an Ornament. The Godly man is an
Ornament to the place where he grows; The Godly man is a defense to the place
where he grows; he keeps off many a storm and Judgment from the place where he
lives; and others fare the better for his sake. But now the Trees of the Wood,
they are altogether unuseful, they serve for nothing but to shelter the
Serpents, and to shelter the wild Beasts, and this is the condition of every
natural man. Oh what Serpents, and what wild Beasts, what base lusts, and what
hideous Monsters are sheltered in the heart of a Natural man, that is a
stranger to Christ?

3. Again, Thirdly, The Trees that are in the Wood or Forest, they grow in
Wildernesses, and have none to look after them, there is none prune them,
there is none to hedge them, they lie open to all dangers, to the Horns and to
the Teeth of the wild Beasts, that will easily knock off all their Budds and
Springs, break and eat off their bark, and keep them from growing, and the
like: And truly this is the condition of every Natural man; he is as a Tree in
the Forest, as a Tree in the Wilderness; there is none to look after him, there
is none to prune him, and to take away unfruitful branches, that he may bring
forth fruit to God, God does not look after the Trees in the Forest: It Is true,
Christ is the Fathers Husbandman, and he does cut off unfruitful Branches; he
cuts off unfruitful Trees that bring forth untimely fruit. But he does this to
such as are in his Garden, to such as are in his Christ. Thus the Father takes
a special care of his. The Lord makes a round hedge about his people; he will keep
all hurtful things from them. See what is said to Job: The Devil confesses the
goodness of God unto his people in this respect, Job 1. 10. Have not thou made
a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every
side? It Is a most certain truth, that God has made a hedge about his people, a
hedge about him, a hedge about his person, a hedge about his house; that is, a
hedge about his family, a hedge about his Friends and Relations, a hedge about
his people. There is a threefold hedge that God makes about his, that are of
his planting: But now it is not so of the Trees in the Forest, of the Trees in
the Wilderness, there is no hedge made about them, they lie open to a thousand
dangers; they lie open to the furious assaults of Satan, and to the prevalency
of all Temptations, lie open to dangers from all the Creatures, there is no
hedge about them: God has not made a League with the Beasts in the Field for
them. Here is the misery of a man out of Christ, it is set forth by a Tree that
is in the Wilderness, a Tree that grows in the Wood: And therefore a word of
Application to this particular.

Use. Beloved, This lets us see the necessity of being planted into Christ by
faith. We are all of the wild Olive, and the wild Vine; and therefore there is
a necessity, that every man should seek after his transplanting into Christ. Oh
that the Lord would make you willing to be plucked up by the Roots! You that are
out of Christ, be willing to be plucked up by the Roots, that you may be planted
into Christ. There is some rooting that every natural man has which he is loath
to be plucked from: One man is rooted into the World, and another is rooted in
his lusts, and another is rooted in himself, in his own righteousness, in his
own works, in his own strength, in his own performances. Oh that the Lord would
make you willing to be plucked up from all that Root, that in which you have any
thing besides Christ: Here is the great difficulty, to bring off the wills of
men. Men cry out many times, Oh it is a hard matter, Oh it is an impossible
thing, that ever they should be plucked up from such Rooting: That they have
such lusts, Trees which are of twenty, thirty, forty years growth; and all that
time rooting deeper and deeper: Is it possible that such should be plucked up
by the Roots, and planted into Christ?

My Brethren, it is possible if men were willing to be plucked up, the Lord would
soon accomplish it. You know what Christ said to his Disciples; that if they
had Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, they should say to this Cedar, be removed
into the Sea, and it should be so. Why, the Lord can make poor Creatures to do
that which is impossible for sense and reason to think may be done: Oh what is
it that the Lord cannot do! There is no Oak, there is no Cedar, so strong and
so tall, and so deeply rooted, but the Lord can say, Be thou removed, be thou
plucked up by the Roots: There is no Tree so barren, there is no Soul grows in
such a barren Soil, but the Lord can say, Be thou plucked up, and be thou
rooted in that fruitful Soil. Oh that the Lord would make the hearts of men
willing to be plucked up by the Roots, from that rooting which they have in sin,
or which they have in themselves, that so they may be planted in a better soil,
and rooted in the Lord Jesus. Do but remember this, that you may see what a
necessity there is that every man should seek after their planting in Christ.
Why, so long as you are out of Christ, you are wild Trees, so long as you are
out of Christ, you bring forth no fruit; you bring forth no good fruit. Our
Savior makes it an impossible thing, in Mat. 7. 17. Even so every good Tree
brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt Tree brings forth evil fruit: It Is
impossible that ever the fruit should be good so long as the Tree is evil. Now
so long as a Man is out of Christ, he is an evil Tree, he is a wild Tree, a
Tree of the Wood, a Tree of the Forest, not a Tree of the Garden. Oh that men
would be made good, that their Trees might bring forth good fruit. Truly it is
in vain to teach men to bring forth good fruit, until such time as the Tree be
made good. If the Tree were made good, and ingrafted into Christ, it is
impossible that that good Tree should bring forth evil fruit. Oh know you that
have Interest in Christ, that all the fruit that you bring forth out of Christ
is lost; I say, Men and Women, they lose all their fruit; It Is such as the Lord
cannot accept of, such as the Lord does not delight in. The Lord could not
endure that fruit that Israel brought forth, in the first of Isaiah, they were
a burden to him, their fruit he was weary of; they and all the fruit that they
brought forth to God were cast out. What a pitiful thing is it that a man
should lose all his fruit, all his Labor, and all his pains? Yea truly, till a
man be in Christ all is lost. You know the young man in the Gospel, that came
to Christ, he had a great deal of good Moral fruit, he had kept all the
Commandments, he said, from his youth, and yet all that fruit was lost, it
withered and fell off before it was ripe, it rotted and perished, it was never
gathered by Christ, his Soul did never eat of it, it was no delight to him; And
why? because though the Tree had a great deal of seeming good fruit on it, yet
it was an evil Tree, it was a wild Tree.

Nay, Let men consider further, what a fearful word was spoken against such
wild Trees, as bring forth no fruit to God, or such fruit as is sour, as his
Soul can have no pleasure nor delight in; it was a dreadful Word spoken by
Daniel, which was spoken concerning the great Tree; see Dan. 4. 14. Hew down
the Tree, and cut off the Branches, and scatter the Leaves, and the fruit. Why,
this was spoken of the mighty Tree, which reached up to Heaven, a Tree that did
fill the whole Earth with its outward Glory; and yet of this very Tree, God
said, Hew it down, and it was hewn down. Oh that men would remember, there is
no outward privilege, that can exempt a man from the stroke of the Lord. He
can breath upon the tallest Cedars, and the greatest Oaks; if the Lord blow
upon them, they shall wither as the Grass in the Field: Now is the Ax laid to
the root of the Tree, says John the Baptist, in Mat. 3. 10. Therefore every
Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire.
Now that the Gospel is preached, now that Christ himself is come to offer terms
of peace unto him, now that God from Heaven has declared his willingness to
pluck men out of the cursed Soil of Nature, and to implant them into his Son;
now, now, if men submit not unto Christ, if they continue obstinate, hew them
down and make them fuel for unquenchable Fire. Oh now see then how it concerns
every man to seek to be implanted into Christ. It Is not a leaning upon Christ
that will serve men's turns, but there must be a planting into Christ, a rooting
in Christ: the Apricock does lean upon the wall, but it is not rooted into the
wall, it has not its life from the wall, but it is rooted in the Ground. And so
many a poor creature may pretend, he is leaning upon Christ, and in the mean
time he is rooted in the World, in his filthiness, in his base lusts and
corruptions, this man is not rooted into Christ: So much to that first
Similitude. Thus you see that the Sons of men are compared to the Trees in the
Wood, to the Trees in the Forest; As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the
Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons.

The Son of God (I shall speak but a Word to that) he is compared unto the
Apple Tree in the midst of the Trees in the Wood, or of the Forest.

But why is the Son of God set forth here by the Apple Tree? There are many
Trees that are of more worth than the Apple Tree; why not the Cedar? and why
not the Oak? Why set forth here by the Appletree?

First of all, Christ is set forth by the Apple Tree for the fruitfulness of
this Tree. It Is a fruit-bearing Tree; it brings forth abundance of useful
fruit; and therefore Christ is usually set forth by this Tree rather than
others. It Is a very fit Simile to set forth Christ by the Apple Tree; Christ
was a fruit-bearing Tree. Oh what abundance of pleasant delightful fruit did
Jesus Christ bring forth! Such as did rejoice the Soul of God his Father, and
of men and Angels. He was fruitful all his days; he continually brought forth
fruit, all the time of his being upon Earth, all the time that he was planted
by the Father, in the Nursery here in this world. He was fruitful even upon his
first planting here, he made it his meat and his drink to do the will of his
Father. He was never well but when he was bearing some fruit. The fruit that
Christ bare when he was upon Earth, it shall last to Eternity; It Is that which
the Saints shall feed upon for ever and ever. The fruit that the Apple Tree
bears, it is both an Ornament to it self, and it is exceeding beautiful, and
beneficial unto others; and therefore still fit is it to set forth this Simile,
for it is a fruit-bearing Tree, a beautiful sight, a delightful sight: The Lord
Jesus he was laden with fruit, every Branch and every Bough full of fruit. It Is
said, We saw his Glory as the Glory of the only begotten Son, full of Grace and
truth. So Christ he is full of Grace and Truth; and this is the Glory of the
only begotten Son, being full of Grace and full of Truth. And then he is of
benefit to others. The fruit of this Tree is exceeding beneficial to others.
How many are fed, and nourished and refreshed by the fruit of the Appletree?
It Is a Tree that man could not spare of all the Trees that God has planted.
The fruit this Tree brings forth, it serves both for Meat and Drink; it will
both satisfy the Appetite, and quench the thirst also, which many other fruits
will not do. Thus still this holds forth Christ, who is complete nourishment to
his people, he is meat indeed, and he is drink indeed; he satisfies the hungry
Soul with good things, he quenches the thirst of the poor, dry and parched
Soul. There is a drink that is made of Apples, which is very useful (we know)
for the quenching of thirst, for the allaying of heat: Such is that refreshment
that Christ gives out unto his people; he is content that his very heart blood
should be squeezed out, that so his people might drink of it, that they might
be refreshed, cooled and revived, that all the heat of his Fathers wrath might
be allayed in them. This is the will of Christ, this is a Similitude that
Christ is held forth by, like unto an Apple Tree.

2. Then Secondly, For the shadow that this Tree casts, that also is held forth
in the Text, I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet
to my taste. There are some Trees that bear fruit, but cast no great shadow;
other Trees cast a shadow, that bear no fruit that is desirable. Ay, but both
these meet in Christ; he is as the Apple Tree that brings forth fruit, and also
casts a comfortable shadow. This makes the fruit more delightful, when a man
can stand under the shadow and gather the fruit of the Tree; it makes the fruit
exceeding pleasant to him, he is not scorched with the Sun whilst he gathers
it. Oh there is a sweet shadow, a sweet comfortable and refreshing shadow,
which the Lord Jesus does cast over his people, whilst they pluck that fruit,
and eat of that fruit which grows upon him. But then,

3. Again, Thirdly, His fruit is commended for the Smell of it, in Cant. 7. 8.
Now also thy Breasts shall be as a cluster of the Vine, and the smell of thy
Nose like Apples. That is, that very breath that comes from thee, all thy
breathings they are sweet and comfortable, they have a sweet savor in them;
thy breathings after God and Christ they are full of Grace; and they are full
of holiness. The Smell it is like the smell of Apples: There are some Apples
that are of a very fragrant smell, as your Pomecitrons and others, and some
have thought them to be the Apples here meant in the Text; and this does well
set forth the Lord Jesus, for that sweet and fragrant smell that he sends
forth. Oh what a sweet savor was he unto God! And what a sweet savor is he
unto man! It Is said, he offered himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God: He carried his sacrifice as his fruit, and it was a sweet smelling
savor unto God. And so Christ is a sweet smelling savor unto man also; where
there is any thing of Christ in a Creature, it makes that Creature sweet; where
there is any thing of Christ in an Ordinance, it makes that Ordinance smell
sweet; where there is any thing of Christ in a duty, it makes that duty smell
sweet. Because of the sweet savor of thine Ointment, it is therefore the
Virgins follow thee. It Is Christ that makes the Gospel of a sweet savor;
Christ in a person, or Christ in an Ordinance, or Christ in any condition makes
that thing sweet.

4. And again, Fourthly, This Tree it is a Common Tree, and therefore Christ
would rather be resembled by this Tree than by any others, which are not so
common, and are not so useful. There is almost no part in the World but has
some kind of Apple Trees. It Is a fruit more common than many others, that even
the poorest may eat of it. And therefore the Lord Jesus he may be resembled by
this Tree, to hold forth, that he is a common savior, that he is free for all
poor creatures to come unto, he is the Apple Tree in all parts of the World,
that men in all places might come in and feed upon him and be satisfied. And
therefore he is said to be A Fountain set open, in Zech. 13. A Fountain set
open; it shall not be sealed up, but a Fountain set open. The Gospel tenders
Christ freely; and in that respect is Christ compared to A fountain set open.
He is also compared here to an Apple Tree for the commonness as well as for the
usefulness of that fruit, that none might plead Ignorance, that they might not
plead excuse, that none might say he was such a fruit as none could buy, that
they could not come at. No, Christ would be resembled unto that which is
common, that he might be held forth freely unto poor lost sinners under the
Gospel.

5. And then fifthly and lastly, He is set forth by the Apple Tree for the
variety of fruits which it does bring forth, and do grow upon this Tree. There
is no Tree that brings forth such variety of fruit. How many sorts, several
kinds of Apples? they are almost innumerable. And truly in this respect Christ
is the Apple Tree, because of those innumerable precious Gifts and Graces which
do grow upon him. The fullness of the Spirit was poured out upon him; it made
him to bring forth fruits of all kinds. He is the only begotten Son of God full
of Grace and Truth: There can be no excellency, nor no perfection named, which
is not to be found in the Son of God, they all do concenter and meet in him. I
shall say no more at this time, but leave the Metaphor unto your consideration;
think of it. The Lord Jesus was pleased to be resembled to an Apple Tree. And
what great condescension of Love is this, that he should stoop down so low to
set forth himself under such a mean comparison, that we might know what
goodliness and sweetness are in him: Abundance of the love of Christ is held
forth in this, that he should choose to be set forth by such a Tree as this is,
by the Apple Tree; you see the Lord Jesus Christ would rather choose a Fruitful
Tree, than a Great Tree, than a Strong Tree, he having such a delight in being
Useful, in being Serviceable, in Bringing forth Fruit unto his Father; Fruit
that should be for the good of the Sons of men. And therefore let us look to
Christ, and labor to imitate Christ; the Lord he delights in a fruitful Tree,
rather than in a Tall Tree, or in a Strong Tree; it is the Greatest Commendation
that can be, to be Fruitful, and Serviceable, to bring forth Fruit to God and
our Generation; Christ chose this, and let us choose it too; and let us look to
God who is the Husbandman, who makes all this Trees to be fruitful Trees in
his due time. So much for this time.

SERMON II.
CANT. 2. 3. At the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved
among the Sons: I sat down under His Shadow with great delight, and His Fruit
was sweet to my Taste.
I Have made entrance the last day: Here is a double comparison, the Sons of
men are compared to the Trees of the Wood; The Son of God is compared to the
Apple Tree among those Trees.

I shall add a fifth particular wherein the resemblance holds.

5. Christ here is set forth as the Apple Tree: It seems to relate to the fruit
of that Tree that Man did eat in Paradise, which in all probability was a kind
of Apples: And herein we call to mind how man lost his happiness, where it was
that man undid himself, how sin came into the World by eating of the forbidden
fruit; as also it holds forth that Christ has taken away that Curse all the
bitterness and wrath for his people, which was the fruit of Adams
transgression. There was man undone at first, under the Apple Tree, there he
lost himself, and God, and Happiness: And therefore Christ will be an
Apple Tree as shall bring forth better Fruit, the Fruits of Peace, Joy, Life
and Salvation for his people: See what is said, Cant. 8. 5. Who is this that
comes up from the Wilderness leaning upon her Beloved? I raised thee up under
the Apple Tree: There thy Mother brought thee forth, there she brought forth
that bare thee. Some make it to be the words of the Spouse to Christ, I raised
thee up under the Apple Tree; She looks up to Christ, and says, Lord I took
hold of thy Boughs, I took hold of thy Covenant, I took hold of thy Promise by
Faith and Prayer, there I raised thee up: He rose up to be a help and deliverer
of his people. But others make them to be the Words of Christ* Christ speaks
unto his Spouse* Under the Apple Tree there I raised thee up. It should seem to
have a reference to the Tree which was the Occasion of Man's fall* Thou lost thy
self under the Apple Tree, there was thy fall; there did the Devil thrust down
Man, Adam, and all his posterity. Well says Christ, I Will be an Apple Tree, and
under this Apple Tree i will raise thee up again: under this Apple Tree thou
shall be comforted, thou shall be saved, i will raise thee up again. The Lord
Jesus he came to undo the works of Satan, because Satan had undone the Works of
his Father, and spoiled the whole creation with sin; and therefore thus will
Christ be avenged of him: Christ will be such an Apple Tree, that will bring
forth that fruit which shall be the destruction of Satan; the destruction of
Death and Hell, which were brought into the World by the disobedience of Man
under the Tree. So then I say this may be held forth,

1. First, That the Lord would have his people remember what they lost in Adam
by their disobedience, and then the Lord would have them remember the Lord
Jesus, he has taken away all that curse, and all that wrath which was the
desert of man's disobedience; so that it shall not be poured upon believers. And
so much for the comparison betwixt Christ and the Apple Tree.

2. It Is said further, That he is as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the
Wood. The next work then is to enquire after that comparison; Why is Christ
said to be the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood? Why not among the Trees
of the Garden? There is much in this comparison; receive it with Attention, for
I shall be but short in this work.

1. First of all, It holds forth, That the Lord Jesus took the same Nature that
we have, he became man; he took upon him the Nature of man. It Is true, he was
not a wild Tree, but he was a Tree as well as the rest of the Trees in the
Wood; he was of the same Substance with them; he had the same Body, the same
Bark, the same Rind, the same outside, that other Trees had; he was in all
things made like unto us, we read in Heb. 2. 14, 17. For as much then as the
Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same, that though death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil; wherefore in all things, it behoved him to be made
like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the People,
etc. It was needful that he should be made partaker of Flesh and Blood, there
was a Necessity of it. For first of all,

1. The Lord Jesus was that stock or that root, upon which God the Father had
determined to graft all the Sons and Daughters of men, that he had appointed to
be Trees of Righteousnes^ in his Paradise. I say all that were to be made Trees
of Righteousness, were to be engrafted into that stock, and therefore there was
a necessity that the stock should be like unto the Cyons, it was necessary that
the branch and the root should be of one nature.

Again, The Lord Jesus was to fill all his Branches with Life and Spirit, the
Sap and Juice must run from the root to the Branches, and therefore it was
necessary they should be Homogeneal, of one Nature; that they should be
incorporated, and made one, that so Christ might fill our Nature, that humane
Nature which he took into the second person, with all the fullness of God, and
from that, and through that, fill all his Members. That Is the First, That
Christ is compared to an Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood.

2. But again Secondly, This comparison does hold forth the unspotted Nature,
and that holiness which was in Jesus Christ; It holds it forth in the
excellency of it: He was an Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood: He was not
a wild Tree as they were, though he grew amongst the wild Trees; though he grew
in the World, yet he did not partake of the sin of the World; there was no
corruption in him, he brought forth no wild fruit: And herein is the excellency
of Christ held forth. To see an Appletree, a sweet Apple in the midst of an
Orchard, is no great wonder; but to find an Apple Tree laden with goodly and
pleasant fruit, where there is nothing but a Wood and a Forest, and wild Trees,
and Briars, and Thorns, and Brambles round about, this is a wonder; and even
thus was the Lord Jesus, the Trees round about him were wild Trees; they are
all gone out of the way (it is spoken of the wild Trees) and become altogether
unprofitable, there is none that does good no not one. This is the natural
Estate of all men; and that Christ should be planted in the midst of these, and
yet be an Apple Tree, and bring forth sweet and blessed fruit, this was his
great commendation; and the Spouse does here admire him for it. Before he was
admiring the Spouse, as a Lily among Thorns, the tender Lily among the Thorns;
and here the Spouse does admire that the Lord Jesus should be a green
Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood: That none of the corruption of man's
Nature should cleave unto him, that he should bring forth nothing but pleasant
fruit; he was the Lamb of God without spot, and there was no guile found in his
mouth: Here is the great Commendation of Christ; still a pleasant Apple Tree,
though in the midst of the* Trees of the Wood.

3. Again, Thirdly, The comparison holds forth the High and Honorable esteem
that the Spouse had of Christ, As the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Wood;
as the Apple Tree is to be preferred before the Trees of the Wood, so is my
Beloved to be preferred before all the Sons of men: He had preferred the Spouse
as much as the Lily is to be preferred before the Thorns: And here she returns
his love back again, says she, He is to be preferred before the Sons of men;
as the Apple Tree is to be preferred before and beyond the Trees of the Wood.
What says the Apostle in Phil. 3. speaking of all things in comparison of
Christ to be but Dung and Dross: Yea verily, says he, I count all things but
Dross and Dung in comparison of Christ; how precious is Christ to a gracious
soul* all is but Dross and Dung in comparison of him; to you that believe,
(says the Apostle Peter) he is precious; you that have tasted of the comforts
of this Tree, you will say, Oh Lord, give me evermore to eat of this Tree: That Is
a third particular wherein the comparison holds.

4. Fourthly, It holds forth that mean and low Estimation that the men in the
world have of Christ. They look upon him as a Common tree; he is among the
trees in the wood; and he is of no better account than the trees of the wood,
Cant. 5. 9. what is thy beloved (say they) more than another beloved* They
could not believe, that there should be any thing of worth more in Christ than
was in other persons and other things; what is thy beloved? they could not
believe that he was any more than another tree, because he grew among them; and
truly it is because men know not the worth of Christ and have no Esteem of him;
they have not tasted and seen how good and gracious the Lord is, and therefore
they have no high account of the precious fruit that grows on this tree. The
carnal heart closes with the world and closes with his lusts; they are his
Dalilahs, his Beloved: and when he looks upon a child of God, sees a gracious
heart go lamenting after Christ; another that has found Christ rejoices in
him* and solaceth himself in the fruit of this tree; Why, this is the wonder
unto a carnal heart; why? What Is thy Beloved more than my Beloved? what do you
find more in Christ, than I find in the world, than I find in my lusts? Oh it is
a dreadful deceit of a man's heart. Can a man gather grapes of thorns, and figs
of thistles? Is it possible that the wild tree can bring forth as good fruit as
the Apple Tree? No, it is the ignorance of men that they know not Christ; that
Christ is not precious to them. But again,

5. Fifthly, This comparison holds forth the great sufferings of Christ: he is
said to be the Apple Tree in the forest, or in the wood; because of the
sufferings that Christ was exposed to when he was on earth. You know the trees
in the forest, they ly open to the Storms, there is no fence about them, they
lie open to the teeth and horns of the wild beasts; and thus did Christ suffer
when he was upon earth: he laid open to most grievous Storms, to blow upon him:
the very wrath of God his Father went over his head; it blow exceeding sore
upon him, that it even brake his tree to pieces. It pleased the Father to
bruise him, Isaiah 53. 10. It pleased the father to bruise him and to put him
to grief* yea it pleased the father to break him in pieces. Moreover he met
with a world of sufferings from men: Oh how was he persecuted from first to
last? How many Psalms are there in which David does complain in the person of
Christ? He complains of the wild beasts in the forest, the Dogs, the Lions, the
Unicorns, and the wild Bulls of Bashan encompassed him round about, Psalm 22.
20, 21. Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.
Save me from the Lions mouth: for thou have heard me from the horns of the
unicorns. And in diverse other Psalms which he made of Christ, and in diverse
other respects, Christ is compared to a tree, a tree of the forest. Again,

6. Sixthly, He is a tree in the forest, an Apple Tree in the forest, for that
unexpected comfort and relief that the Lord Jesus does afford for poor souls:
unexpected comfort and relief; when a man has been traveling all the day long
in a forest or wood, hungry and dry and thirsty, he casts his eye upon a well
laden Appletree full of goodly fruit, Oh how welcome is it, and so much the
more welcome, because he did not expect to find such a tree there: and so it is
with poor creatures: how many are there wandering up and down in the world,
hungry and thirsty and ready to faint, then does Christ step in seasonably,
then does Christ present himself unto poor souls as an Apple Tree laden with
delighful fruit; he says, Poor soul, thou shall not famish, I will not suffer
thee to famish; come take and eat of my fruit, and let thy soul for ever be
satisfied in me. Now the unexpectedness of the mercy does heighten the mercy. I
had thought I should never have seen thy face, says Jacob to Joseph, and now
God has showed it to me. Surely. Hagar was mightily taken with that fountain
or well that was shown to her in the wilderness, when she was ready to perish,
when she had given over her child for lost, and there was no water to give;
then for the well to be shown her, surely this was a very welcome thing to
her: and so when the soul is ready to faint, how often does Christ present
himself, as a well in the wilderness, and as an Apple Tree in the midst of the
wood or forest; and how pleasant and comfortable is that? But again,

7. Seventhly, In the next place, He is said to be an Apple Tree among the
Trees of the wood, because of the freeness of Christ: it holds forth much of
the freeness of Christ in bestowing of himself upon poor creatures; an
Apple Tree among the Trees of the wood, that is free for every man, for every
man to take of, and eat of: If an Apple Tree be in a garden or an Orchard, a
man may see it a great way off, and cannot taste of it; he may desire it, and
his stomach may be for it, but he despairs of it, because it is none of his: but
an Apple Tree in a wood, that is free for all, for all that pass by; there is
none excluded; but he that wants may go and take and eat of the fruit of it. It
holds forth much of the fruit of Christ's love, he is not only an Apple Tree in
the wood, but he is an Apple Tree in the forest: and therefore those tenders of
grace that are held forth, Isaiah 55. 1, 2, 3. See there what invitation is
made; Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money, and
without price, etc. yea though a man has no money, yet he may come and drink of
this water, and eat of the fruit of this Tree. That Is a seventh particular.

8. Eighthly* But again, in the Eighth place, Christ is said to be a Tree among
the Trees of the wood, Because there are very few that go forth to seek Christ,
and few there are that find him, and seed upon him by faith. An Apple Tree that
is in the midst of the forest, how few are there that feed on that Tree? It may
be God by a special providence directs a poor, weary, hungry traveller, a weary
man to that Tree; but how few are there that go to seek it! Men that have an
Orchard at home, will hardly go to the wood. Men that have Orchards of their
own, Trees growing at home, they will not go abroad: they which were invited to
the feast, you know they would not come, they had enough, they had no need of
Christ as they thought; and therefore they would take no pains. The Lord by his
special grace must direct the poor soul to Christ, or else it is impossible they
should come to him: indeed men will not come to Christ; ye will not come to me,
says Christ, that I may give you life. In all these respects Christ is said
here to be an Apple Tree, among the Trees of the wood: And therefore to
conclude with one word of Application*

Use. This lets us see the usefulness and desirableness of Jesus Christ: What Is
more useful and desirable in your Orchard, than the Apple Tree? If a man has
never so many Trees in his Orchard, he never thinks his Orchard complete,
except he has some Apple Trees. Oh that the Lord would persuade your hearts,
to look unto the Apple Tree, look to get the Apple Tree into your Orchard; get
Christ into your hearts. Oh he is an useful and desirable Tree. Let me tell you
the benefit of it in a word or two.

It will be a comfortable shelter to you. The Appletree that is Planted in your
Orchard, it will keep off a storm from your house. Christ in the heart is a
comfortable shelter to the poor soul. Oh how many a storm of wrath and
indignation, which blows from Heaven, and Christ keeps it off from the poor
Soul!

Nay again, Let me tell you that this Apple Tree it is a Tree of Life; and
therefore worth the seeking after, that you may get him planted in your garden.
I say it is a Tree of Life, whosoever eats of this Tree lives for ever. Your
fathers they did eat Manna in the wilderness, says Christ, and they are dead,
John 6. 58. but he that eats of the bread that I shall give him, shall never
die, says he, he shall live for ever: it must needs be so, for Christ he is a
Tree of Life.

Again, He is not only a Tree of Life, but he is a Tree of knowledge: and
therefore worth the seeking aften. You read in Genesis 3. of the Tree of
knowledge that was in the midst of the garden, which the woman looked upon: and
it was very desirable for three things* 6. verse. The woman saw, that the Tree
was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye, and a Tree to be
desired to make one wise; she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave
also to her husband. Truly all this is to be found in Christ; he is good for
food ye heard before, they that eat of him, shall live for ever. He is pleasant
to the eye* Oh how beautiful is he in his Nature, and in his person! thou art
fairer than the Children of men: and he is desirable to make one wise; he that
feeds upon Christ is made wise indeed; he that knows Christ, is the wisest man
in the world; it is Christ that opens the eye: the eating of Christ, this Tree,
opens the eyes and makes men wise, wise to salvation, wise to know and
understand the great mysteries of God in Christ, even those mysteries hid from
ages and generations. Again, I might tell you, This Tree, it brings forth fruit
at all times, and therefore desirable; the Apple Trees in your gardens and
Orchards, they will not bring forth fruit in winter; but this Apple Tree, Christ,
every Month in the year, every Summer and winter, every day of the Month: look
upon Christ with an eye of Faith, and you shall find him full laden with fruit.
Oh how useful a tree is Christ! Again.

I might tell you also, here you might have a staff to lean on, upon this Tree
you might have a staff to lean on* I am thy God to old age. The waters that the
Children of Israel drank of, were bitter till such time as Moses cut down
boughs, and they made the waters sweet; such boughs grow upon this Apple Tree;
it will make your bitter waters sweet. Oh there is love in Christ, there is
goodness in Christ, and precious Promises, which if cast into those bitter
waters, afflictions, the sorest bitterest afflictions, these boughs will make
them sweet. Get into this Apple Tree. Why do you endeavor to get Briars and
Thorns, and Oaks and wild Trees and Crab-trees, and in the mean time neglect
this Apple Tree? there is a Curse upon the ground and on every soul, even the
curse of the ground, thorns and thistles, and these here will grow, till such
time as Christ be planted: Nay, if Christ be not planted in the garden, God the
Father cannot walk there; If the Tree of Life be not there, if the Tree of
Knowledge be not there. God takes no delight to walk in the garden. The soul
out of Christ, where Christ is not planted, that soul can have no gracious and
sweet communion with him? Well then,

What an Invitation is here for poor souls to come in to Christ? Christ is the
Apple Tree, an Apple Tree in the midst of the trees of the wood: Oh! why will
men reject Christ? Poor sinners, why are you fearful through unbelief, to come
to Christ? If Christ were a bryar or thorn or thistle, you might be afraid of
him; but he is as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the wood; he is laden with
fruitful branches; if Christ were a Tree hemmed in, walled in, you might
despair of having any fruit, but he is open to you: whoever thirsts let him
come, who ever hungers let him come, take and eat of this fruit. Poor souls you
have the leave of God, nay, you have not only leave, but you have command to
come and eat of this Tree of life: it is the commandment, that you come and
believe in Jesus Christ. Oh what straggling and perverse hearts lodge in our
bosoms! There was a time when God said of the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, Thou shall not eat of it, and then man would eat; and now the Lord has
set up another tree of life, and the Lord says, Thou shall eat of this tree of
Life, and now they will not, though the eating then, and the not eating now is
like to cost many thousand souls lives. The Lord help you to consider of it!

SERMON III.
CANT. 2. 3. At the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved
among the Sons: I sat down under His Shadow with great delight, and His Fruit
was sweet to my Taste.
I Told you before, here is a twofold comparison, the sons of men are compared
to the Trees of the wood, the Trees of the forest, which are wild Trees, which
hold forth the state of all men by Nature; we have done with that.

The second is, The son of God is compared to the Apple Tree among those Trees.
I showed you in what respect Christ is compared to the Apple Tree; and the last
day I showed why Christ is said to be as the Appletree among the Trees of the
wood: why not an Appletree among the Trees of the Garden, but as the Appletree
among the Trees of the wood.

Use 1. First, let such as profess the name of Christ, be like unto Christ.
That Is the use of the point I shall make at this time. They that profess Christ
must be like Christ. Labor to be fruitful Trees, fruitbearing trees; and look
that your fruit be of this Apple Tree, and bring forth much of this fruit, as
Christ did: yea be like unto Christ in being Appletrees in the midst of the
wood. To this head I shall reduce all that I shall press upon you at this time.

First of all, Christians should labor to be fruitbearing trees: the Lord
Jesus Christ would rather be set forth by a fruit-bearing tree, than by a tree
of strength, or a tree of tallness; not the Oak or the Cedar, but the
Apple Tree, and that because it is a fruitbearing tree. Oh how should Christians
labor to be fruitful in their place! it is better to be serviceable to God and
man, in your place and Generation, and relation, than to have places, titles,
honors and dignities amongst the great ones of the world: and Christians
should rather choose to be serviceable to God and man, than to seek great
things for themselves in the world: there is a notable parable in Judges 9. 8.
The trees went forth on a time to anoint a King over them, and they said unto
the Olive Tree, Reign thou over us. But the Olive Tree said unto them, Should I
leave my fatness wherewith by me they honor God and man, and go to be promoted
over the trees? There was a particular application of the parable: the Sons of
Gedeon chose rather to be useful in Israel, than to be honorable in Israel: it
holds forth thus much in general, a gracious heart will rather choose a place
of service than a place of honor; I will not leave my goodness, my sweetness
and my fatness, says the Olive Tree, fig tree and the vine: no though to be
promoted over and beyond other trees: consider that it is the greatest
Commendation of a Christian to be a serviceable and fruit-bearing tree; I say
it is the greatest commendation unto men that they are serviceable unto God in
their place and generation: look unto David, in Act. 13. see what a special
commendation God gives of him, v. 36. after he had served his own generation,
by the will of God he then fell asleep: it was the greatest commendation that
God could give David, when he would speak honorably of David; when David is
gone, this was his commendation, he served his generation, he was a
fruit-bearing tree, he served his generation according to the will of God; He
sought the glory of God, he labored to do good to the sons of men whilst he
was here upon earth; and so David served his generation: Brethren, it is no
commendation for a man to live long, if he don't serve his generation; It Is no
commendation for a tree to stand a hundred years, if it ben't a fruitful Tree:
Let us see,

1. First of all wherein God begins to commend David; he begins at the service
of his Generation: as if God did not take notice of other time that men spend,
in which there is no service done to him; he does not say after he had lived so
long, or after he had served so long, but after he had served his generation
according to the will of God; A man may live a hundred years upon earth, and
may stand so long, and yet be an accursed tree all the time of his standing, if
he be not a fruitful tree, and a tree doing some good for his generation
wherein he lives: you may see the prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah, 65. 20. But
the sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed: so that it is not
simply a blessing to live long, to stand long, if a man be not a fruitful Tree;
for a man may stand a hundred years, says the Scripture, and yet all that time
be under a curse. Again,

2. Secondly, I beseech you remember that you have the example of Christ: you
have the example of Christ and of his people before you, who are all trees of
righteousness, fruit-bearing trees: What abundance of fruit did Christ bring
forth to his Father, when he was upon earth? Every bough and every branch be
full of precious fruit. To see the Glory of the only begotten Son, full of
grace and truth. See Rev. 22. what is spoken there of this fruitful tree; and
it is Christ that is this tree, the tree of life. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of Life. Oh what a fruitful
tree is this tree of Life! He brings forth fruit every Month; continually full
of fruit, and all that was in Christ was useful; the very leaves are good* the
very leaves of this tree of Life were good. Oh the precious balm that dropped
from the leaves of this tree of life, into poor afflicted and wounded Souls!
The very leaves of it were good for the healing of the Nations: And it was Jobs
commendation, and it was also his comfort, when the hand of the Lord was upon
him, that he brought forth fruit, that he was a fruit-bearing tree, Job 29. 11.
When the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave
witness to me: and as the ear and eye blessed him, so the loins blessed him,
Job 31. 20. the loins of the Poor blessed him, that he warmed and that he
refreshed: So that this was a great comfort unto Job, in the day of his
distress, when all his friends upbraided him with hypocrisy, he knew that
grace would uphold him, he was not an unfruitful tree, but was still
serviceable in the place and relation God had set him.

3. Thirdly, Nay let me further tell you, that if Christians be not
fruit-bearing trees, they are a dishonor to Christ; it is a dishonor to the
very root they profess they are engrafted upon. When you come to a tree whose
branches are dead and withered, and you see there is no fruit upon it, you will
complain presently, and say there is some fault in the root; the fruit is dry
and withered, the unfruitful branches are a dishonor to the root. Unfruitful
Christians are a dishonor to Christ. Oh! What will the world say, when they
come to look upon Christians, when they see they are dry, withered, and
fruitless, and there is no more to be seen in them than in others? What says
the world? why, the blame is cast upon their head, the root: these are the
Christians, these are the professors. Oh wherein do men take occasion? Oh give
no just occasion for men to speak dishonourably of Christ whom you profess.

4. Fourthly, Again it is the dishonor of the husbandman to have an unfruitful
tree, Joh. 15. 1. I am the vine, and my Father is the Husbandman: every branch
in me that bears no fruit, he takes away, and every branch that bears
fruit he purges it that it may bring forth more fruit: and so when the
Gardener, the Husbandman, shall let a tree stand forty years, and be
unfruitful, this man will be accounted unskilful in his Vineyard: Why, so if
the Lord should let such trees to stand forty, fifty or a hundred years, and no
fruit brought to him, it is a great dishonor to the husbandman.

2. Secondly, Therefore again secondly, Christians should look that their fruit
be the fruit of the Appletree, be like to Christ: in this, he was as the
Appletree among the trees of the wood: You know the Apple Tree is known by the
smoothness of the branches; it is not full of pricks and Thorns, as many other
trees are; It will not scratch, it will not tear or rend, as others will,
though men break the branches, and spoil them, yet it does not tear or rend
them: and truly thus was Christ, and thus it becomes Christians to be; He was
no thorn, he was beset with thorns, Isaiah 53. 7. he was oppressed, he was
dumb, he opened not his mouth: as a Sheep that is dumb before his shearer: he
did not revile, he did not render reviling for reviling, he did not reproach,
and the smoking flax he did not quench, nor break the bruised reed, he did not
strive, he did not cry, his voice was not heard in the streets; and thus was
Christ, and thus it becomes Christians. Christians should not tear and rend;
they should not bear pricking thorns; they should not render evil for evil,
they should not pour forth expressions of hatred, envy and wrath. This is for
the bryar and the thorn; this is not for the Apple Tree. If you be Apple Trees,
be like to Christ in this. But,

3. Thirdly, Again the Apple Tree is known by the fruit. There Is a great deal
of fruit that is like the fruit of the Apple Tree, that is not known till such
time as men come to taste it. It Is possible that a wild tree may be as fair and
as beautiful as the Apple Tree; but when you come to taste it, you will
distinguish the fruit of the wild tree; the Crab-tree, it is sour, it is bitter;
the fruit of the Apple Tree is sweet and pleasant. Brethren, know, God does
examine all your fruit and all the Apples, and God does taste every fruit,

First of all, by the Principle, and secondly, by men's End.

1. First of all, The Lord does taste men's fruit by their principle; he
examines from whence men brought forth their fruit, whence came their
fruitfulness: he examines whether they were grafted upon a good stock or no;
the Lord knows it I say by the taste: when you take a twig, or cyon and graft
it on an Elder, or some other tree that has an ill taste, the fruit will taste
as the tree is: If it be engrafted upon a good stock, the fruit will be good;
the Lord will examine every man's stock, whether he be engrafted on Christ or on
himself. See Hosea 14. 8. I am like a green firr tree (the words of Christ) and
from me is all thy fruit found. That Is good fruit that grows upon Christ, that
comes from Christ, that tastes of Christ.

Object. But you will say, When does a man's fruit taste of Christ?

Answ. 1. First of all; When the Soul is still laboring to get out of it self,
is still emptying it self, getting out of himself: when a man does all that he
can do; and yet looks upon himself as vile, and wretched, abhorring himself in
dust and ashes; when he continually says, there is nothing at all in him that
is good. The Apostle Paul says it: that is his expression, and it was the
expression of a gracious heart, Romans 7. 18. For I know that in me (that is in
my flesh) dwells no good thing. When the Soul is thus taken up (with Paul)
emptying it self, and looking upon it self as a poor vile, weak, wretched
creature, utterly unable to do any thing in his own strength for God, and lying
at the footstool of Christ, breathing and waiting; this fruit is not of
himself, but it tastes of Christ. But again,

Answ. 2. Secondly, the fruit tastes of Christ, when as the soul does all out
of a principle of Faith. It works from a principle of faith: It has seen the
tenders of grace in the Gospel, how the Lord does freely and graciously hold
forth himself to poor lost sinners; and has through the power of God made a
close with his tender of grace, received it by faith, so that now this faith it
works by love; and all that ever the Soul does, it desires to do it out of love
to God; when it comes thus from a principle of faith, it does always act by
love, then the Soul tastes and feeds upon Christ. But again,

3. Thirdly, the Soul tastes of Christ, when it lives from a continual
dependence on Christ; when the Soul goes only out to Christ for righteousness
and strength and Salvation; when it goes out to Christ for all grace, strength
and Holiness; for strength to perform every duty, and to bear every burden; and
to walk wisely and graciously in every relation; when the Soul lies breathing
and waiting upon Christ (as the Poor man in the Gospel, who laid at the pool of
Bethesda,) when the soul lies waiting for the movings of Christ, and is
continually opening its savory affections to Christ; looks upon it self as a
Ship at sea in a Calm, and is not able to stir, unless the wind move, unless
the wind blow; I say when the soul does thus act, this fruit tastes of Christ;
and thus does Paul profess that he lived in a continual dependence upon Christ,
and that all that he did, it was not from himself or any thing of his own, but
it was from Christ: See that place in the Galatians from which a gracious
Spirit does breath, Gal. 2. 20. I am Crucified with Christ; nevertheless I
live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the Life which I live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for
me. Here Is a gracious expression, I live, says he, and yet not I, it is Christ
that lives in me. When the soul can thus refer all to Christ, and, says, I
believe, and it is not I but Christ that helps me, and so I obey, yet not I, but
it is the Spirit of Christ in me; and I suffer, yet not I, but Christ
strengthening me; I pray and I perform duties, and yet not I, but it is the
Spirit of Christ in me, that breaths in me; when the soul thus goes out of it
self, and depends upon Christ for all grace and strength, and all Holiness, as
well as for life and Salvation, now does the fruit of this Soul taste of
Christ, God knows it, he tastes of Christ in it. But then again,

2. Secondly, As God does taste of the principles of the Soul as by the Stock
from whence it comes, so also by the ends of it. What Is the end of a man's
action, what is the end of that he does for God, what is the end of his
affections, of his forwardness, of his duties? the Lord judges of all the
fruit by the ends of it; why, if the Glory of God be a man's end in all that he
does, this tastes of the fruit of Christ, of the fruit of the Apple Tree; but
if a man aim at his own ends, if a man seek himself in all that he does, it
tastes strong of Self, and the Lord has no delight in it; see what is said in
Hosea 10. 1. Israel is an empty Vine, and yet he brings forth fruit; how can
these two stand together? he brings forth fruit, but he brings forth no good
fruit, he is empty because he is empty to God, he brings forth fruit and that
fruit is empty, it is to himself, and so empty: and so God looks upon him as
an empty Vine; if a man bring forth never so much fruit, (it being to himself)
it cannot be called good, but seemless fruit, and all that fruit is lost, the
Lord takes no delight in that fruit, it is not for Gods taste, when as it is not
brought forth unto him.

Object. But you will say, when does a man bring forth fruit to God? What are
the ends that a man should propound to himself in all his actions to God, that
makes his fruit to be good?

Answ. When the Soul does all that it does, that it may testify its
thankfulness that it owes to God for the great and wonderful salvation that
comes in by Christ; when a man says, I will take the Cup of Salvation, and
call upon the Name of God; When a man does all that he does to testify his
Subjection to God, and only does all his works that he may honor and lift up
Gods name in the world; that he may be serviceable and instrumental to do God
service in his generation, when he makes this his end: when a man shall do all
for this end, that God may reap the Glory, that God may eat of the fruit he
has planted, that God may not lose all his labor, and all his pains, and all
his cost; that so he that has planted the tree in his Orchard, may eat the
fruit of it; so that when a man makes not himself the end, but God the sole
end, this God tastes of as savourie, as a fruit savoury to himself. But again,

2. Secondly, Christians should labor to bring forth much of this fruit; a
good tree brings forth much fruit: Oh how full was Christ! every bough was full
of fruit: Therefore the people of God, they are compared unto trees that are
planted by the rivers side, it is said, they shall be as trees planted by the
rivers of waters: they are fruitful trees that are well watered, and so bring
forth abundance of fruit; Oh Christians, remember this was the end of Christ's
coming, that you may bring forth fruit, and bring forth abundance of fruit; you
should not only be trees, but bring forth abundance of fruit. I came that you
might have life; and that you might have it more abundantly: See that promise
and make much of it, Psalm 92. it is a gracious promise, and may tend through
the blessing of God to quicken dead unfruitful hearts, v. 12, 13. the righteous
shall flourish like a Palm tree: he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; those
that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our
God, they shall bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing: it is a large promise, they shall be fat and flourishing, and they
shall bring forth fruit in old age; therefore you that complain of the
deadness, and unfruitfulness of your hearts, look to the promise, and say, Oh
Lord I have a dead heart, my branches are withered, I even despair of bringing
forth fruit to God; why, don't look to thy own deadness, look to the promise of
God: It Is said of Abraham, he had a dead body, or as good as dead in respect of
begetting Children, Romans 4. yet he looked to the promise, v. 19, 20. And being
not weak in faith he considered not his own body now dead when he was about an
hundred years old, neither the deadness of Sarahs womb: he staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in Faith giving glory to God,
he had a dead body, and yet his faith was revived: when he looked to the promise
of God, he was confident that God who had promised was able to perform: and
thou that complainest of the deadness of thy heart, don't look upon thine own
heart, but upon the promise, God will declare his faithfulness and whatsoever
he has promised he will fulfill it.

Object. But you will say, how should we believe it? we see the contrary: how
is this promise made good that the righteous shall bring forth fruit in old
age? don't we see many times how the best Christians decay in old age? which
makes us even afraid to live to old age*

Answ. Certainly the promise of God is made good, they do flourish, and bring
forth fruit in old age: an old Christian, though he may not bring forth so much
of some fruit, yet he brings forth more of other fruit, than young Christians
do; it may be there is not so much Zeal, nor so much activitie for God, ay, but
there may be more rootedness, more stedfastness, more establishment of heart;
the heart may be more rooted, more grounded upon him: this makes the fruit the
more savoury: the less of Self, and the more of Christ is in him, the more well
pleasing is it to Gods taste. Now I say that old Christians (it is true) may
decay in parts and gifts, in utterance and expression, and the like, and yet
may not decay in grace: the inward man, the hidden man in the heart, that may
wax strong, and be more fresh, green and fruitful.

2. Secondly, Again I say to this that young Christians may have more
activitie, but old Christians may have more Skill, and therefore though they
may not act as formerly, yet there may be abundance of Skill in holy things; as
the wise man says, remember thy creator before old age comes, before the
daughters of music fall low, before the voice is gone; he was able it may be
to sing clear before, yet now he may have as much skill, and it may be more
than ever though old; and so of an old Christian, this may be said, that young
Christians may bring forth more fruit, but old Christians may bring forth
sweeter fruit; it is so of older trees, they bring forth sweeter fruit, though
not so much indeed as young trees: why, so, old Christians that hold fast in
their Integrity, if they don't bring forth so much as the young tree, yet they
bring forth sweeter and pleasanter fruit; and still the Lord is faithful in his
promise, the righteous bring forth fruit in old age; and therefore look to the
promise of the Lord, and let this promise strengthen your faith.

3. Thirdly, Again, Labor to grow up in grace: the Lord loves to walk in his
Orchard, when there are fruitful trees he loves to bestow his pains upon them,
he will hedge them, he will prune them, he will spare no cost on his fruitful
trees; nay the Lord will not cut down his fruitful trees, here is great
encouragement for Christians to bring forth much fruit in their Generation: God
does spare those who bring forth much fruit: God gave command in the book of
Deuteronomie when as they went out to war, Deuteronomy. 20. 19 When thou shall besiege
a City a long time, in making war against it, to take it, thou shall not
destroy the trees thereof, by forcing an ax against them, for thou may eat
of them. For the trees of the Field might be employed in the siege, the trees
that brought forth no fruit, those trees should be cut down; but those that
bear fruit shall not (by Gods command) be cut down: you that are fruitbearing
trees, the Lord takes special care of you, the Lord will not cut down those
trees: the husbandman he comes and looks on a branch, and sees no fruit, he is
ready to cut it down; ay, but if there comes one and spies a cluster on it, if
it be but one cluster, don't cut it down, surely it is not dead, here is a
cluster on it. Oh the grace and goodness of God toward his people, there is
something of Christ found in such, and therefore Lord cut them not down; thus
mercy pleads: Well then, you that belong to Christ, bring forth much fruit. If
you ask me how? I answer, look to God the great husbandman, he is such a
husbandman as he knows how to make you fruitful: Paul plants, and Apollo
waters, but God gives the increase; look to the Lord, be willing to submit unto
God in whatsoever way God shall deal with you, be willing that the Husbandman
should prune you, lance you, that he should cut off your unsound branches;
Submit unto Gods ways of affliction, though they be never so hard, the Lord he
can by them make you fruitful. The rain it makes ways dirtie, but in time it
makes grounds fruitful. The Lord he can make thy trees fruitful, and the herbs
that he has sown and planted in thy heart fruitful: therefore submit unto
Gods ways, and get nigher to Christ as ever thou desire to be fruitful; the
branches that are nearest the root, those branches bring forth most fruit:
Christ is the root, and you that are in Christ cleave more to him, and let your
dependence be on him. The nigher you are to him, the more fruit you shall bring
forth.

4. Fourthly, The fourth and last thing and I have done, Let Christians be like
unto Christ in this, that they be Apple Trees in the midst of the wood. Christ
he was an Apple Tree among briars and thorns in the world, Oh that Christians
would be like unto Christ in this: It was the great commendation of Lot, Enoch,
Moses, Josiah, David, and others that lived in an evil age, yet their hearts
were upright for God; and truly though their services be hard service, and
though Gods people be in an evil world, yet in heaven they shall lift up God
without opposition (and thought it be here with opposition, yet: still it makes
the Name of God Glorious; to bring forth fruit when all the world is
unfruitful, or has nothing but wild fruit, this is their commendation. There
are some professors, they will be Apple Trees among the Apple Trees, but when
they are among the trees of the wood, then they will be crab-trees; Christ though
in the midst of the wood he was sweet and delightful fruit, though compassed
about with sinners; well, look unto Christ to keep up your savoury fruit, that
God may taste it, that you may still bring forth sweet and pleasant fruit,
though compassed about with Wild trees. And so much for this time.

SERMON IV.
CANT. 2. 3. I sat down under His Shadow with great delight, and His Fruit was
sweet to my Taste.
YOu heard in the former part of the verse, that the Lord Jesus is compared to
an Appletree in the midst of the trees of the wood; and I pressed it upon you the
last day, that you should be like unto Christ: Choose to be fruit-bearing
trees; it is better to be a fruitful tree than to be a tall Cedar or a mighty
Oak; I proceed to what remains.

You have heard of the tree: Now consider the two resemblances in which Christ
is compared unto the Apple Tree. Here is a Specification, or an Illustration of
the Simile. First, Here is an Apple Tree for the nature; And secondly, for the
fruit: so that these words hold forth,

1. First, How Beneficial Christ was, and how Beneficial he is as he is a tree.
And

2. Secondly, What use the believing soul makes of him.

First, He is beneficial for his shadow, that is delightful, a pleasant
delightful shadow. Secondly, Then he is beneficial for his fruit, his fruit
that is sweet also: now the use that the believing Soul makes of Christ is,

First, It sits down under his shadow: I sat down under his shadow with great
delight. Secondly, It eats of his fruit; His fruit was sweet to my taste: So
that both his shadow and his fruit is exceeding pleasant and delightful to the
believing Soul.

The words have two several readings: Some read them thus. In his shadow I
delight and sit down; I desired and sat down in his shadow: Or in his shadow I
desired to sit; I desired that I might sit down, for the word signifies both
desire and delight, now I take it so. I desired that I might sit down. It holds
forth,

1. First, the Vehemence of affection which is in the believers heart to
Christ, the mighty strong desire, the breathings and pantings, the desires of a
gracious heart are carried out strongly after Christ; Ps. 42. 1, 2. they are
the expressions of mighty strong desires, vehement desires after God: as the
heart pants after the water brooks, so does my Soul after thee, O God; my soul
thirsts after God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God!
so, Isa. 64. 1. the Church expresses her strong desires after God; Oh that thou
would rent the heavens and that thou would come down, that the mountains
might flow down at thy presence: the expressions of vehement desires after
Christ, it is like the desire of a Servant, or laboring Man after the shadow,
so Job expresses it, Job 7. 2. he sets down what desire the laboring man has:
as a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as a hireling looks for the
reward of his work, he thirsts after it, he breaths after it, when a man
desires and breaths after a thing he draws in the air, he sucks and pants after
it, such is the desire of a poor Soul.

2. It does not hold forth only vehemence of desire, but it holds forth
constancy of desire, I desire that I may sit down: she was sat, but she desired
to sit still, I desire to sit longer and to continue under the shadow, as a man
that sits under a shadowy place at ease, he is loath to be disturbed: One thing
have I desired of the Lord, says David, Psalm. 27. his desires were like unto
the desires of the Spouse here; v. 4. one thing have I desired of the Lord, and
that will I seek after all the days of Life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his temple: David desired all his days to sit under
the Ordinance, that he might behold the beauty of God.

I shall look toward the other reading, which is more known: I sat down under
his shadow with delight: Or I delighted and sat down under his shadow, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste. She had a great delight; as her desires were
strong, so her delight was good. When a Soul finds Christ, it always finds a
Sweetness in him, which is proportionable to all its desires: It Is not so in
the things of the world: a man may have strong desires after vanities and
creature comforts, but when he enjoyes them, he can take no delight in them;
but it is not so in the enjoyment of Christ, the delight is proportionable to
the desire of the Soul; nay, it is more in Christ than it expected: it is able to
say as the Queen of Sheba did of Solomon, I heard a great deal of thy wisdom,
said she, but the half was not told me. I shall clear up two things in the
words.

1. First, show you what this shadow is that the spouse sat under.

2. Secondly, What is it to sit under this shadow?

1. First, What is the shadow the Spouse sat under with so much delight? they
are either natural or metaphorical; you know what a natural shadow is, it is a
darker or obscurer light which is caused by the Interposition of your body
betwixt the eye and the sun, when the Trees or the Mountains stand betwixt you
and the Sun, they cast a shadow toward you; now there are shadows of the
night, and shadows of the day: indeed night is nothing else but a shadow, a
great shadow, nothing but the shadow of the earth, the earth coming betwixt the
Sun and us, therefore the shadow: the night, it is a privation of light, and
therefore it is terrible, the shadows of the night are dreadful to nature
because it is a privation of light: but the shadow of Christ is not the shadow
of the night, for his shadow is no dreadful shadow, indeed it is like the shadow
of the night for the largeness of it, because the shadow that Christ casts it
reaches the whole earth over, it is a mighty large shadow, that thousands and
ten thousands of poor weary souls may sit under, and so indeed it resembles the
shadow of the night: but it is not the shadow of the night, it is a comfortable
shadow, a delightful shadow, it is the shadow of the day, it is as the shadow of
the trees, or as the shadow of a Rock in the midst of Summer: as you know they
are exceeding pleasant and delightful. So then we shall enquire what is the use
of these shadows, that we may see how useful Christ is to the Soul.

1. First of all, The use of the natural shadow it serves for Secrecy: If a man
will hide himself, or retire himself, he will go among the shadows. A man that
walks amongst the woods and shadows, he is not so easily found, as when he
walks in the open field, and no trees, and so nothing to shadow him; and
therefore the Lord is said to shadow his people, Isa. 51. 16. I have put my
word into thy mouth, and covered thee in the shadow of my hand, there I have
hid thee, that thou may be safe: and thus Beloved is Christ a shadow: Christ
is a shadow to his people in that he is their hiding place, they are hid in
Christ, their life is hid in Christ, and their comforts are all hid in Christ,
they are hid from wrath, they are hid from displeasure, they are hid from
enemies, they are hid from the power of temptation: and therefore God puts
Moses into the Rock, when he would hide him, which rock was a type of Christ:
the Soul that is in Christ it lies in the rock, it lies in the clefts of the
Rock, it is in Christ that the soul enjoyes sweet Communion with God, it retires
it self and hides it self in Christ, and converses sweetly with the Almighty.

2. Secondly, As the shadow is a place for secrecy, so a place for rest; I say
it is a place for rest: When a man, a laboring man in the field, desires to sit
down, he will sit down under a shadow; the expression of Job before, as the
servant earnestly desires the shadow; why wherefore does he desire the shadow,
but that he might sit down and rest? there is nothing so welcome to him as a
shadow, a shadowy place where he may sit down and rest: In this respect Christ
is a shadow to his people, he is a sweet resting place: it is not possible the
soul should rest but in Christ, it never finds rest till it come to Christ:
therefore he calls, Math. 11. 28. poor laden Souls, such as are weary and
tired, and have spent their labor and strength in vain; Come to me, says he,
you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest: the Soul does
never rest sweetly till it come down and rest sweetly under Christ.

3. Thirdly, Again, a shadow it is a place of coolness and of refreshment, it is
a defense against the heat: if a man desire to walk in the height of Summer, he
will walk in the shadow; thus is Christ to his people. You shall see what is
said in that Isa. 32. 2. And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, as
a covert from the tempest, as a river of water in a dry place, as the shadow of
a great rock in a weary Land: as the shadow of a great rock* which keeps off
the heat and the scorching of the Sun; and thus is Christ to a poor Soul, a
poor fainting Soul, that is scorched with the heat and displeasure of the Lord,
why there is no sitting down but under Christ. When the Soul sits down under
wrath and displeasure, he makes every place too hot, and every condition too
hot, and there is no sitting down under any creature comfort; a man cannot sit
down under the shadow of any creature, or under the shadow of himself, or under
the shadow of his own righteousness, the Sun of wrath will be too hot for him,
he will soon set all the straw and stubble on fire, there is no rest there, and
it cannot sit down until it come to Christ.

4. Fourthly, Again, To sit down with Christ there is Contemplation and
Meditation; for a man to exercise his thoughts and meditation he will choose a
shadowy place: the Lord Christ he is thus a shadow. When the Soul sits under
Christ, it may contemplate the glory of God that is in Christ. God reveals
precious things, excellent things to his people, such as eye has not seen nor
ear heard, nor the heart of man can conceive; the soul sits down under Christ,
and it gains more of the knowledge of God in one day, than in many years: all
the knowledge that God gives of himself, it is in, and through Christ. God gives
knowledge, says the Apostle, but it is in the Face of Jesus Christ. I say
whilst the Soul sits under Christ, it is under a shadow, and it may contemplate
on the great things of the Kingdom of God, and is learnt to know that which is
hid from the wise and prudent of the world. Again,

5. Fifthly, We are wont to use the shadow for a place of refreshing our
selves, eating and drinking under it. It was usual among the Patriarchs in
those hot contryes: the Angels when they came to Abraham, he desired them to
sit under a tree, and made provision ready, and there they did eat; and thus is
Christ useful unto his people, whilst they sit under Christ, they feed upon
precious fruit; I sat under his shadow, and his fruit was sweet to my taste,
under God in Christ. God does make a sweet Banquet for the Soul, and the soul,
though it enjoys many promises, and never so many precious ordinances, yet
unless the soul sits under the shadow of Christ, it cannot feed upon them, it
can take no delight in them. If a man have never so good meat, in the height of
Summer, if he has no shadow to keep off the Scorching beams of the Son, he
cannot eat his meat with delight. So the soul if it looks not upon God in
Christ, as he is a shadow to him, it cannot partake of any of that dainty with
delight.

6. Sixthly, Again, You know a man cannot look upon the beauty and light of the
Sun with ease, it is so Glorious as it spoils the sense: but if a man look
through the trees, or the shade he may see the sun: and thus the Lord he does
cause the Soul to see Christ, and thus the soul it beholds his Glory; Thou
can not see my face and live. But thus I will do, I will put thee in the
Rock, and so thou shall see some glimpse of Glory. It Is in and through Christ
that the Soul sees something of God, for he could not else behold his Glory,
for our God is a consuming fire; thus you see what the natural shadow is, so is
Christ.

2. Secondly, There are Metaphorical shadows: shadow in Scripture is taken in a
Metaphorical sense: the shadow is taken for a defense; as they that sit under
protection, are said to sit under a shadow. So Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3. Woe to the
rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take counsel but not of me; and that
cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin: that
walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth, to strengthen
themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt.
Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame; and the trust in the
shadow of Egypt your confusion. God pronounces woe to them that run down to
Egypt; you see there that strength and shadow is all one, they trust in the
strength of Egypt: under the shadow of Egypt, that is the strength of Egypt.
They thought that Egypt should have been their protection: so Psa. 17. when
David prays that the Lord would protect him, he prays that the Lord would be a
shadow to him; there protection and shadow is all one. Verse 8. keep me as the
Apple of thine eye, hide me under the shadow of thy Wings: Now if you take
shadow in this Metaphorical sense, for defense and protection, it is very
evident that Christ is thus a shadow unto his people, he is their defense and
protection: It Is he that defends them from the wrath of God, and it is he that
defends them from the wrath of man. It Is said of some trees, the Laurel tree
and some other, they are a defense unto men in a tempest of thunder and
Lightening. However it is true of Christ. He that sits under Christ, he is a
defense from thunder and lightening, from the wrath of God, and that Soul that
stands under him he is safe and well protected.

And as he is a defense to man from the wrath of God, so he is a defense from
the wrath of man; Isa. 4. 6. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in
the daytime from the heat; and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from
storm and from rain. The Lord Christ promises protection unto his people in
the day time, when it is never so hot, when the wrath of man is fierce and
cruel: and there is a like promise in the 25. of the same prophecy, 4. verse,
For thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his
distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of
the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall, etc. the Lord Christ he is
such a shadow, such a protection to his people against the heat and tempest of
all wrathful ones.

2. Secondly, Again, A shadow in the Metaphorical sense, it signifies
afflictions and sorrows, and sometimes Death it self, because they are
privations of comfort, even as the shadow is a privation of light, and these
may be called Christ's shadows: the sufferings of Christ are Christ's shadows: It
was the sufferings of Christ that did eclipse his glory when he was here upon
earth: now all these shadows these sufferings of Christ, though they were
dreadful shadows to him, yet they are comfortable shadows to his people from
first to last; all the sufferings of Christ are comfortable shadows to his
people. He sat under them with abundance of grief and dolor, that so his
people might sit under him with abundance of joy and peace and comfort; his
temptations were all sore griefs. Oh what a day of temptation was it to him?
And yet how comfortable were these sufferings unto his people? Afflictions,
even Death it self, was a shadow to Christ, and what a comfortable refreshing
was it to his people! When Christ was upon the Cross he cast a great shadow,
and what comfortable refreshment is it for poor weary Souls to sit under it?

3. Again, Thirdly, The shadow in a Metaphorical sense in Scripture is a dark
representation of a thing; that which does represent a thing, it is called the
shadow of it; as you know the types and Ceremonies and the whole Levitical Law,
they did hold forth something of Christ, and therefore all those ceremonies and
types they were shadows of things to come, and so the Apostle speaks of all
those ceremonial things, they were the shadow, but the body is Christ. So then
whatever it is that holds forth Christ, whatsoever it is that represents Christ
to the soul, that may be called a shadow, the shadow of Christ under which the
Soul sits down, which the Soul takes delight in. As all the Ordinances of
Christ they hold forth something of Christ; as a man's picture is called a
shadow; the ordinances, they hold forth Christ, there is the shadow of Christ in
them. The word holds forth something of Christ, and so the Sacrament, and so
the fellowship of the saints, there is something of Christ to be found in all
these, to be seen and enjoyed in all these: this also is one of the shadows of
Christ that a gracious heart desires to sit under; where ever it sees any thing
of Christ, in any word, any Ordinance, in any Communion of saints, there it
takes delight, it blesses God for such communications of himself, and there it
sits down, desiring with all faithfulness to wait upon God in them, that it may
see more of Christ until such time as the day shall break and the shadows may
fly away. Thus you may see what this shadow is that the believing soul desires
to sit under, and how Christ is likened and set forth by the Natural and
Metaphorical shadow.

Quest. But you will say in the next place, What is it to sit down under this
shadow?

Answ. First of all, It Is a Posture of rest, as walking is a moving posture, so
sitting is a posture of rest; It holds forth, the soul is in a restless
condition, till such time as it comes to Christ, there is no rest till such
time as it pitches upon Christ: what says David, in that Psalm, he speaks unto
his Soul there, when he desired that he might return to his rest, Psalm 116. 7.
Now Oh my soul return unto thy rest, for the Lord he has dealt bountifully
with me: he had been wandering abroad in the world, and he found no rest there,
he returns to God as to his resting place, and now Oh my soul return unto thy
rest.

2. Again, Secondly, it is a rest with Confidence; as it is a resting Posture, so
it is a Confident Posture. A man will not sit down in a place of danger, if he
sees danger he will not sit down: If a man be in such a place as he fears wild
beasts or thieves, he will not sit down: why, when a man sits it is a confident
Posture; to sit down with Christ, it is a confident Posture, it is to trust in
Christ, when the soul lays all its weight upon Christ, when it looks to the
power, goodness and faithfulness of the Lord Jesus, held forth in the promise,
there it sits and ventures it self upon him, and says with the Apostle, I know
in whom I have trusted, and believed, and he is able to keep what I have
committed to his trust.

3. Thirdly, Again, sitting it is a posture of stedfastness: when a man leans or
rests upon another he is ready to fall down, but this holds forth the
stedfastness of the souls condition in Christ. Oh then it is not possible the
Soul should fall; he may be moved, but he shall not be greatly moved; he may be
moved so as not to be removed; I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not,
nay twice he has made this promise, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against his people.

4. Again, Fourthly and lastly, This posture does relate to continuance and
abiding; and therefore that eternity of enjoyment of Christ is set down with
that eternity of rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. If
a man sit down, he will make some stay, it holds forth a continuance, or
abiding of the soul with Christ, there it resolves to stay, there it resolves
to take up; as the Lord says unto his people, here shall be my rest for ever;
so says the soul, Lord here I will rest, here I will abide and continue for
ever. Well then, to conclude all with a word of Application.

1. Use. First of all, it lets us see, whatsoever is in Christ is useful and
delightful. Every passage of the life of Christ, yea all the sufferings of
Christ, from first to last, how useful are they to the Saints, and how
comfortable when they are improved by faith? Not only the fruit of the Tree is
good, but the shadow of the Tree is good, the very shadow of Christ is good,
the sufferings of Christ, the very death of Christ is exceeding useful and
delightful, when the Soul delights in it: Oh how delightful is the Glory of
Christ!

2. Use. But in a word I beseech you sit down under Christ's shadow, let not any
Poor creature sit down under any other shadow but the shadow of Christ. Make
haste, poor weary Souls, you that have toyled your selves, and labored in
vain, have sought for righteousness and consolation in your selves, Oh that you
would not think of sitting down under these shadows: But make haste to Christ,
get out of your selves and sit under his shadow. Let me tell you if you be not
under this shadow of Christ, you are under the shadow of death; It Is said of
Christ before he came into the Land of Napthali, they sat down under the region
and shadow of Death: so Poor Souls, if you sit not under Christ's shadow, you
sit under the very region of the shadow of death.

Nay, let me tell you further that it is not possible you should find rest, but
only under this shadow; there is no creature can shadow you: the shadow of your
own righteousness and your own works is too short to comfort you, and the
shadow of all the works that men do enjoy they are too short. A man may solace
himself under the shadow of the creature for a time, these shadows are too
short when the Sun gets up to the height of it is beauty, and you have most need
of shadow you cannot have it. Poor Souls, when you have most need of cool
refreshing shadows, these shadows go quite away; so that I say it is not
possible that you should rest sweetly and securely under any other shadows but
the shadow of Christ, it is not possible ye should hold out in the time of
trial: you read of the stony ground in Math. 13. the corn that was sown upon
it, when it came up, the Sun did arise, and though it did spring up, yet anon
it withered, there was no root, and so it died: if Christ had been their shadow
he could have helped it, but when the wrath of man was furious he could not
stand long, but withered, because he had not depth of root: Oh what a sweet
refreshing shadow is Christ! if he do overshadow the Soul, it may stand in any
place, in any condition, though times of Persecution be never so hot. You know
Christ was a shadow in the fiery furnace, a sweet refreshing shadow to the
three Children, there he kept off the heat.

Nay, Consider further, all the shadows besides Christ are perishing, they are
vanishing shadows; they are truly compared unto shadows; man walks in a vain
shadow; whatever any man sits down under, he sits under a vain shadow, it flies
away presently: you know the Prophet says, all flesh is grass, and the glory of
it as the flower in the field, and what man would sit down under the shadow of
grass? it is soon withered, and then the shadow is gone. What man will sit down
under withering comforts? they are cut down in a moment: and what are these
shadows? All creature comforts are like the shadow of Jonahs Gourd, it was a
good refeshing shadow while he had it, but the Lord prepared a worm, and it did
eat the Gourd before the Morning, and when the Sun did arise it did scorch the
head of Jonah, and made him faint and sick: why, so the Lord he does serve Poor
creatures like Jonah, when the creature is gone and the shadow is gone, when a
man apprehends the wrath of the Lord, and the displeasure of God, he has
nothing to shadow it; Oh what a hard affliction is this! what dangerous shadows
are creature comfort to sit down under, which are prickling thorns and
brambles? A man to sit down under thorns when he might as well sit down under
the Appletree: all creature comforts when a man sits down under them, if
trusted in, they will prove tearing thorns, pricking thorns, and nothing but
sorrow in them; now Christ he is a shadow wherein you may rest, you may rest
upon Chrirst and lean upon Christ, and he is of Infinite sweet refreshing and
support unto his people: take heed I say that you sit not down under the shadow
of any creature comfort, but under Christ, and then this will follow, you shall
sit down under him with sweet delight, and shall eat of his fruit, and this
fruit will be sweet to your taste. But so much for this time.

SERMON V.
CANT. 2. 3. I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet
to my taste.
I Gave you the several readings of the verse: In his shadow I desired and sa^,
so some say; in his shadow I desired that I might sit: others thus, In his
shadow I delighted and sat down; I have delighted. I come to the Application.

A word of Instruction. You see that every thing that is in Christ is very
useful; not so much as the shadow of Christ is useless: and if the shadow be so
useful and desirable, what is the tree it self, and what is the fruit that this
tree brings forth? And if so, then by way of caution, I say, take heed of
sitting under the shadow of any one creature comfort. He that is not under the
shadow of Christ, he is under the shadow of Death. It Is a poor shadow that all
creature comforts afford, it is a shadow that will not continue when the Sun
shall break forth at noon day. You know the natural shadow it goes up when the
Son is at the highest, and when men have most need of the shadow, the shadow
goes up, and thus is the shadow of all creature comforts: in times of
affliction, in times of distress when men have most need of them, then the
shadow of creature comforts leaves them; but now Christ's shadow it is always
refreshing, it continues even at noon day, he makes his flock to rest at noon
day. It Is not possible for the Soul to hold out in time of persecution, if it
sits not under Christ's shadow: the stony ground is soon withered, why, because
Christ did not overshadow it. Well then, I shall proceed to an use of
Exhortation, and that is

Use. First, To speak to such as are strangers to Christ, to such as for the
present sit under the shadow of Death, and under the shadow of Hell and
destruction. Oh that the Lord would persuade your hearts to come and sit under
the shadow of Christ! Poor sinners, you that are working the works of the
Devil, you that are drudges to Satan, and your lusts, the base lusts of your
own hearts, you that have a long time wearied your selves in the service of
sin, and spent your labor as the Prophet speaks, for that which cannot
satisfy; Oh that you would not be content to be perpetual drudges to Satan.
The Devil has been willing to make you drudges, be not you willing to make
your selves everlasting drudges; Oh bethink of some resting place where you may
sit down and rest from this labor, from this bondage of Satan; it may be
whilst you are under the pursuit of sin, you are not sensible of it, you are
not sensible of those labors, pains and travails of the Soul. It fares with
the poor sinner as it fairs with a laboring man or a servant that is
over-wrought; it may be (especially if he be used to it) he feels it not whilst
he is in it, he feels not the ach, nor the evil of it; but when the evening
comes, when he lies down for rest, he feels then the fruit of his former labor
and travail in his bones; and truly so it is with many a sinner, whilst they
are in the pursuit of sin, they feel not the pain, they feel not the ach, ay
but the time is coming, the evening is coming, the night is coming, when they
must lie down, when they can no longer go on, when they must whether they will
or no rest from that Labor; then certainly they will find and feel the smart
of their former drudgery and bondage in their Spirit: Our Lord Jesus made that
an argument, John 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me whilst it is
day: The night comes when no man can work; but let me say the contrary to you,
Oh don't work the works of Satan whilst it is day, do not work the works of sin
all the day long, the night comes when you must cease the labor of sin, and
then of a certain you will feel the smart of your pains and former services in
sin; Oh then that the Lord would help you to consider when you shall have a
resting place, when you shall sit down and rest your Souls, before the strength
of your Spirits be spent in the labor of sin: Let me speak this word in your
ear and tell you, the Lord Jesus is willing that you should sit down under his
shadow, here is a sweet cool refreshing resting place for you to take up in: And
let me say further for your encouragement to come under this shadow,

That the Lord Jesus, he will keep you for the future; he will be a defense to
you, that your old Master shall not take you away again, and the Soul whom
Christ has taken to himself is free from the bondage of sin, and if the Son
make you free you shall be free indeed: if you sit under any shadow but Christ,
the Devil, your lusts and your own hearts will fetch you back again: it may be
you have sat down under your good works, vows, resolutions, humiliations and
repentances, and the like, yet notwithstanding all this, the Devil and the
corruption of your own hearts have fetched you back again to the old slavery,
and to the old bondage. Oh that you would trust this shadow of Christ, this is
such a shadow as Satan dare not come nigh; it is the shadow of the day, it is not
the shadow of the night, it is such a shadow as is dreadful unto the powers of
darkness. What have we to do with thee, says the unclean Spirit, thou art the
son of the living God; of a certain Christ will be a defense unto you, and a
protection, and you shall not sit under your former slaverie and bondage, if
once you sit under his shadow; Oh then that you would not toil your Spirits in
the service of sin and Satan: Oh what a racking of the conscience and soul have
poor sinners in the Service of Satan! They are ready to sweat drops of water
and blood, and they are not aware of it. Oh why will you tire your selves in
the heat, and weary and tire your selves, when as you might sit down under
such a pleasant shadow as the shadow of Jesus Christ is?

2. Use. Secondly, Let me speak a word to Poor Souls that are sensible of their
bondage and misery by reason of sin, to such as cry out with David in Psam 38.
4. for mine iniquities are gone over mine head; as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me. Oh you say, you have travailed in the wilderness, and have set
many a weary step in a dry and barren wilderness where no water is, and never a
tree for a shadow to shelter you; you dare sit down under the shadow of your
own comforts and the creatures righteousness, you see there is no shelter but
under the shadow of the Almighty. Well, let me tell you here is a tree of life
that springs up in this your wilderness, that casts a shadow over your Souls,
here you may rest in a cool shadow, here will be a defense and a protection
from the wrath of the Almighty. And let me say (for your encouragement) unto
you,

First of all, That Christ is willing you should sit under his shadow, you have
his own word for it, see what he speaks in Math. 11. 28. Come to me all you
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: Why do you stick so
long in that condition, why do you say you are not laden enough? you know not
whether your spirits be laden aright or no, or whether you be made sensible
enough of sin, or whether you may be so bold, as to come to Christ, and sit
under this his shadow.

Christ does not offer himself upon any conditions, upon the condition of your
weariness, It Is not a conditional promise, but it is an absolute promise, it is a
sweet encouraging promise, come unto me you that are weary, says Christ, and I
will give you rest. The Lord Jesus foresaw that they were most apt to be
discouraged, poor laboring Souls, such as were pressed with the guilt and burden
of sin, and he knew that they were such as were fearful in coming in unto him,
but says he, come ye that are laden and weary, and I will give you rest, but
then,

2. Secondly, Again, The Lord Jesus he is not only willing that you should sit
under his shadow, but he will be a defense unto you under this shadow; you say
you are hunted and pursued by Satan, you are hunted with wrath, Oh then that
you would flee unto Christ, go now and sit under his shadow, there is no other
shadow can defend you but this shadow of Christ. Adam you know he ran away from
God when he was guilty, he goes and runs his head into the bushes, but the
Lord found him out; there is no creature can be your defense. What says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 7. Thou have beset me behind and before, etc* whither
shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence? there is
no place of safety but only in this shadow of Christ; and he is a sure
defense; If it should rain Storms of fire and Brimstone, if once in Christ,
this shadow will keep off all the heat of wrath, for he is a safe and sure
defense. Nay let me say,

3. Thirdly, Further for your encouragement, The Lord Jesus he will not deal
Treacherously with you when you turn in unto him: If you take under his shadow,
he will not deal treacherously with you; when you flee from the pursuit of your
enemy, he will rescue, save and deliver: The Lord Jesus he will not deal
treacherously with those that come under his shadow, there is no drop of wrath
shall fall from this tree to those that are under his shadow; the Lord Jesus he
never made any prey upon Poor creatures that turn in to him for shadow and rest.

Ay but will he not betray me into the hands of others, of those that seek my
soul to destroy it?

No certainly, Christ will not deal so with you, his honor is engaged to the
contrary. You know what Lot said concerning those two strangers that came in to
him, when they came to him for shadow, he would not deliver them, he would let
go his life first, Genesis 19. 8. for therefore came they under the shadow of* my
roof. When they came under his shadow for protection, Lot would not be so base
as to betray them. He tells them he has two Daughters that are undefiled, and
he will rather deliver them into their hands than he will deliver those
strangers, who took shelter under his roof: why, so says Christ, if wrath
shousd demand you or justice should demand you, I will not let you go, he will
rather say, let my Daughters go for it, my body or Soul go for it, rather than
they shall go my self shall go for it: thus Poor disconsolate Souls, you see
Christ he will not betray you unto those who seek your Souls to destroy them.
But

3. Use. Again, Thirdly, a word to those that have interest in Christ: Oh that
you would make more use of this shadow of Jesus Christ: That Christians would
sit more under Christ's shadow, make use of it.

1. First of all, Work all your works under this shadow: Whatever you have to
do for God, or for your Souls, or for eternity; whatsoever your hand finds to
do, be sure you do it under this shadow: it is hard working in the open Sun in
the heat of summer, it makes men's labors very uncomfortable, it adds to their
toil; but if they work under a shadow, it is a sweet refreshment to him, and
it is a great ease to his work, he toiles and sweats less and with less pains:
so Christians if you set your selves directly under Christ when ever you have
any work to do for God, or concerning your souls, or when ever you have any
burden that is too heavy, set your selves under Christ, through Christ you may
do all things, and you may bear your burdens with a great deal of more ease and
comfort; the Soul under Christ feels not the weight, nor burden which would
sink another that is not under this shadow.

2. And then again, Secondly, as you should work all your works under this
shadow, so be sure to Walk under this shadow: I say walk under this shadow in
the whole course of your walking with God: Walk in the shadow, and it will be a
great deal more comfortable unto you: Why, the Lord Jesus himself delights to
walk with the Soul when it is under the shadow of this sun. God came and walked
in the Garden, Genesis 3. in the cool of the day, God delights to walk with the
Soul when it is under the shadow of Christ, he delights there to manifest
himself much to the Soul. Oh it is hot walking with God when the poor creature
is not under the shadow of Christ; why, the presence of God, the very presence
of God will be very hot and uncomfortable, if the Soul be not under the shadow
of Christ: Ye cannot see my face and live: then be sure you set your selves
under the shadow of Christ in all your walkings with God: When you pray, pray
under this shadow, set your selves under this shadow; and so when you hear,
read, and meditate, in the whole course and way of your walking, be sure you
set your selves under this shadow of Christ.

Quest. But you will say, what shadows of Christ should you sit under, walk
under and work under?

Answ. 1. I Answer, First of all, look to the Humane nature of Christ, that is
a sweet comfortable shadow through which you may see the face of God; I say the
human Nature of Christ it is a shadow, a vail through which you may behold the
face of God: God out of Christ is a great way off, and you cannot see the face
of God he is so glorious, he is too glorious for your eye, you cannot behold
him: Ay but God in our nature, look upon God as he has taken our nature up
unto himself, and there you may see God nigh unto the poor creature; it is very
comfortable to look up unto God through Christ, upon or through the shadow of
the flesh of Christ.

2. Secondly, And then Secondly, make use of the sufferings of Christ: those
are shadows that Christians should always walk under, and work under, and
contemplate under; as I said before, they were terrible shadows to Christ, they
were shadows of the night unto Christ: Ay but they are comfortable shadows; all
that Christ suffered, and every passage of his sufferings, even the very shadow
of Death that went over his head, it is a sweet and comfortable shadow unto his
people that sit under him in it: Now poor souls sitting under these shadows
there is a great deal to be seen, and the Soul by faith sits under these
shadows: and under these shadows of the sufferings of Christ, Oh the glorious
sight that it may have by faith; here it may see Justice and mercy meeting, and
kiss each other, here it may see Justice reconciled and sin carried out and
everlasting righteousness brought in: here it may see reconciliation purchased,
and a way made for those that were afar off to come nigh unto God: here it may
see deliverance from that wrath which is to come; it may see Death, Hell, sin
and Satan and all trodden under foot; here it may see all grace, and all
strength purchased by Christ; here it may see a door of grace, and a door of
Life set open, and Oh what a glorious sight may the Soul see there!

3. Again, Thirdly, sit under the Ordinances of Christ, take heed you neglect
not these shadows of Christ, and look at all the ordinances as shadows of
Christ: this is the way to use ordinances aright: men and women never use
ordinances aright until such time as they look upon ordinances under this
notion and consideration, as they are shadows of Christ, as they represent
Christ and hold forth something of Christ. Take an Ordinance as it is out of
Christ, and it is a shadow indeed, a mere shadow, a shadow of shadows, but take
the shadow as it is in Christ, and then it is a glorious shadow, and holds forth
abundance of sweetness and grace and comfort and refreshment; and then be sure
you keep under Christ in the ordinance; when the Soul thus looks upon
ordinances, as shadows of Christ, then ordinances are sweet and refreshing, and
the Soul may see cause for ever to bless the Lord that he has provided shadows
for poor Souls to sit under; that is a Third particular.

Again, Fourthly, you that have Interest in Christ know it is not enough to sit
under his shadow, but delight your selves in sitting under his shadow: be like
to the spouse in this; she sits and sits with delight under this shadow of
Christ.

Quest. But you will say, what is it to sit under the shadow of Christ with
delight? when may a Soul be said to sit under the shadow of Christ with
delight, under the ordinances?

Answ. Delight, it is a complacency and rest which the soul takes of a suitable
good: so that then the soul may be said to delight in Christ, or under the
shadow of Christ, whenas it rests and takes up in Christ, as in the most
suitable good; Oh what is so refreshing, and so suitable to a poor weary
traveller as a comfortable refreshing shadow is to sit under? And Oh so, what
so suitable to a poor weary soul as the comfortable shadow of Christ to sit
under? When the soul does thus apprehend this suitableness of Christ to it, Oh
here is a suitable shadow, here is a great shadow, it is long and large, it is able
to cover multitudes of transgressions; here is a might shadow, that can fence
off abundance of wrath and displeasure. My sin has reached up to heaven, but
here is a shadow that is higher than the Heavens; here is the shadow of the day,
a refreshing shadow, and how suitable is that to a Poor soul, that has sat
long under the shadows of the night, the shadows of darkness, or the shadow of
death? When the Soul does thus look upon Christ as the most suitable good, and
so to take up in him, then may the soul be said to sit down with delight under
Christ's shadow. But then again,

2. Secondly, What a man delights in, that he is continually taken up withal;
his thoughts they run out much upon it: So the soul that delights in Christ,
sits under Christ's shadow with delight, it is much in the meditation of Christ,
continually taken up with Christ. What says the Psalmist, Psalm. 1. His delight
is in the Law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate day and night: His
delight is in the Law of the Lord, and how is that known? by his continual
meditation of it: I know a gracious heart it may be weighed down by the
prevalency of corruption, ay but it looks upon it as a burden, it cries out, Oh
Lord how long shall my spirit cleave to the dust! or with Paul in Romans 7. Who
shall deliver me from this body of sin and death? from this carnal heart, and
this sensual frame of spirit? He is never well but when with Christ, he is then
in his Element, Oh then how does he rejoice when he sees Christ lifted up and
transfigured on the mount? Oh then it is good to be here always, let me never go
down, but let me always live with God: here is a soul lifted up with delight in
Christ.

3. Again, Thirdly, what the soul delights in, that it desires, and desires
more of: a soul that delights in Christ, it desires more of Christ, more
communion with Christ, more acquaintance with Christ, it is never satisfied: See
what David says, Psalm 119. 174. I have longed for thy salvation O Lord, and
thy Law is my delight: when the Law was his delight, he longed for the
salvation of God; how did his soul long for God and after Christ? he expresses
it in Psalm 42. 1. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so does my soul
after thee O God: as the heart pants and breaths after the waterbrooks, so
his soul panted after God, and when shall he get nigher God; When shall I come
and appear before thee? The desires of the Soul prepare the soul for delight,
and stretch the soul wide for delight, when it shall enjoy that which it does
desire.

4. Again, Fourthly, delight in the soul does beget strong desires in the soul,
that it may enjoy more of God; and the soul that is thus carried out after
Christ, desires to see him more, and to enjoy him more, desires to do all in
Christ, to work under his shadow, and to delight under his shadow, to
contemplate under his shadow, and walk under his shadow, then may the soul be
said to delight in Christ.

Well then poor souls, what care should you take to sit under the shadow of
Christ, to sit and to sit under his shadow with great delight: with the more
delight you sit under the shadow of Christ, the more do you express the power
of grace, and the power of Godliness; for certainly it is the excellency of a
Christian, and the excellency of grace, that the soul can be taken up with
delight in Christ: as it is with the sinfulness of sin, it is the height of
wickedness and sin, when the sinner delights in sin, when he does not only act
in sin, but delight in sin, and in doing evil; even so when the Soul does not
think enough to do that which is good, but desires to do it with delight, and
can delight in God and delight in Christ, and delight in grace and holiness,
delight in doing for God, and delight in suffering for God, the more you
delight in Christ, the more shall you express the power of grace.

5. But again, consider what cause you have to express your delight in Christ:
remember what delight the Lord Jesus took in sitting under these shadows (which
were most uncomfortable to him) for your sakes; lo I come to do thy will, O my
God, in the 40. Psalm 8. I delight to do thy will O my God, yea thy Law is
within my heart. It was hard work to Christ, and yet he delighted in it,
because it was his fathers work, and because your souls were concerned in it;
it was the work of your redemption, and though it was a bitter cup, yet the
Lord Jesus took delight in it: If Christ delighted in these uncomfortable
shadows, in the shadow of Death for your sakes, Oh why should not you express
the comfort and Joy of your hearts, in taking delight in being under his
shadow? Again, Christ, he is the delight of God the* Father: in Isa. 42. 1.
It Is the father that speaks of his son, he speaks of Christ, Behold my Servant
whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul delights; he would have you not only
behold him as a servant, but as his Elect in whom he delights: now if he be the
delight of his father, what cause have you then to make him the delight of your
Souls?

Nay further, It Is the way to have all the desires of your hearts to be
satisfied, to be filled; there is an express place for that, in Psa. 37. 4.
Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine
heart: He was speaking before that he should not fret because of the wicked,
yea think that they have all that heart can wish, but you are mistaken, their
desires are not satisfied, the more they drink, the more they thirst, they are
not satisfied in the enjoyment of any creature comfort; but I will show you the
way of satisfaction, delight in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart; it is the way to more grace and more strength, it is the way to be
more able to do for God, and more able to suffer for God, and abundance comes
in, in this way in delighting in Christ: when the Lord has brought the soul
into this frame once, to take delight in Christ, under some shadows of Christ,
Christ he is not far off from that Soul, but will satisfy and reveal himself
to that Soul in a most glorious manner: see Mal. 3. 1. Behold I will send my
messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the Covenant whom ye
delight in; and he shall come suddenly, he is not far off; and this is an
evidence of this his coming, that he stirs you up to seek him and to delight in
himself, to sit under the shadow of Christ with delight. Oh then Christ he will
come, and will come suddenly, and to manifest himself in a more glorious manner
to that Soul that does thus delight in him.

Well then, to conclude, I beseech you Brethren that you would look up to the
Lord to have this frame of Spirit wrought in your hearts. Do not think it
enough to have these shadows, but delight your souls under these shadows.
Christ calls for a great deal of delight from you to himself: he is a most
comfortable shadow, a most pleasant shadow, he is as the shadow of a tree, and
as the shadow of a great rock in a weary Land: and as he is of great benefit to
you, so he calls for much delight from you; Behold I bring you tidings of great
joy, says the Angel to the shepherds; where Christ is, there is tidings of great
joy: and so when Christ draws nigh to your souls in his shadows, he expects
there should be great joy and delight in him, that you should solace your
selves under these shadow of Christ, sit down and meditate under these shadows:
whilst you look under the Sufferings of Christ and ordinances of Christ, see
what a glorious prospect the Lord has set before your eyes, that you may take
great delight: delight in every shadow of Christ, delight in his ordinances,
set your selves under these shadows* It Is said those that were sick and
diseased, they laid them in the high way that the shadow of Peter might go over
them; shall the shadow of Peter heal diseased bodies? why it is Christ under
whose shadow who ever comes will heal diseased Souls, and he is greatly to be
delighted in, he is a sweet refreshing shadow.

SERMON VI.
CANT. 2. 3. I sat down under His Shadow with great delight, and His Fruit was
sweet to my Taste.
I Showed you what is this shadow of Christ, and what it is for a soul to sit
under this shadow: I made Application the last day: But I shall proceed to the
last clause of the verse, and his fruit was swee to my taste.

I have considered the shadow, now for the tree it self, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste. Here is another benefit comes in by Christ! It Is a mercy to
sit under a shadow: a Poor weary man in a wilderness rejoices that he finds the
shadow of a fruitful tree to sit under, where he may not only sit and rest him,
but sit and eat with delight, he will account this a double mercy: and truly thus
beneficial is Christ to his servants, he is willing they should sit under his
shadow, and he is willing they should eat of his fruit, and it is the sweetest
and the most delectable and delightful fruit that ever poor creature tasted:
The taste is one of the external senses, the Object of it is meat and drink,
here it is applied to the inward man, to that taste the soul has of Christ by
faith, because the soul it does taste Christ, and it does taste the sweet fruit
of Christ, and it finds pleasure in them, in feeding upon Christ: even as the
palate does find delight in savorie meats and delightful drinks: I showed
Christ yields both shadow and fruit: you see the mercies that Christ gives to
his people, they are complete mercies, for he is a complete and a perfect
savior: he is not only a shadow, he is not only a defense unto them, he does
not only keep off evil, he does not only keep off the scorching beams of the
sun, he does not only keep off the wrath and displeasure of the Father, but he
is a pleasant shadow and yields pleasant fruit, under whom they may sit, and
eat with delight and pleasure. So he is a perfect savior: he is not only a
privative but a positive Salvation; this is that which the Lord holds forth to
Abraham, says he, I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great reward: I am thy
buckler, there is the shadow, and I am thy exceeding great reward, there is the
fruit which the Lord gives him to feed upon. Christ does not only deliver from
wrath, but he brings in Life, glory and salvation, in Dan. 9. 24. Seventy weeks
are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to finish the
transgression, and to make an end of sins; and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, etc. he shall carry out
sin, and bring in righteousness; to take off sin that is not enough, but to
brings in righteousness, an everlasting righteousness, far more glorious and
excellent than the righteousness of men, or Angels; he shall deliver his people
from the fear of death, this is a mercy: but that is not all, Christ, he brings
in a glorious hope, hope of life, hope of glory; who has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, says the Apostle. He does not think it enough to deliver
his people from the Slavery of sin, but he translates them into the freedom and
liberty of the Sons of God, he delivers them from the power of sin, and he puts
them under the power of grace, he brings them out of the Kingdom of darkness,
and he brings them into the Kingdom of his own glorious light: it was not
enough, to free them from wrath, to save them from hell, but he will put them
into the possession of glory, and therefore he prays his Father in John 17.
that he would let them be where he is: he has been a shadow to them, but
that is not enough, they shall eat of his fruit, let them be with me where I am
that they may behold the glory thou have given me, which is and which was
before the foundations of the world were laid. And

1. First, therefore brethren let your expectations and faith be according to
the largeness of the heart of Christ, don't think it enough that you sit under
his shadow, that the Lord Christ is one that can free you from wrath, don't
think that enough; but look further to taste of his fruit, look up for those
joys and consolations of his Spirit, which he is willing to pour into your
souls, as well as to free your souls from the apprehension of wrath; and so
don't think it enough that you are delivered from the slavery and bondage of
sin, that sin has not dominion over you, don't think that enough, but look out
further for the life of Christ to be revealed in you, to be manifested unto
you, for life and righteousness to reign gloriously in your hearts, let your
expectations be according to the largeness of the heart of Christ. And then

2. Secondly, you should deal with the Lord Christ as he deals with you. He did
not think privative salvation enough; it was not enough to make a shadow for
you, but he prepares fruit for you: and therefore don't think it enough that
you have bare negative holiness, that what you do is not against Christ, but
that you do what you do for Christ; for he that is not with me (says Christ) is
against me. Don't think it enough, that you pass your time and spend your
days, without being conscious of any wilful Sinning, but what you do from day
to day, deal with Christ as he deals with you, that you may lift up his name,
and honor him who will in due time honor and lift up you. That Is the first
particular. Again,

2. Secondly, Christ brings you first unto the shadow, and then he gives of his
fruit to eat, and then he causes you to taste of his fruit. Because she was
brought under his shadow, therefore she shall eat of his fruit: see how the
Lord does make one mercy to be the beginning of another mercy unto his people:
it is Gods ordinary way of dealing with his Servants, because he has shown them
mercy, therefore he will show them mercy, because he has brought them under
his shadow, he will have them to eat of his fruit. See Genesis 18. 17, 18. Shall I
hide from Abraham that thing which I do, says God, seeing Abraham shall surely
become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed in him? in his seed, in the Messiah that shall come out of his loins;
yea and because I have given out this mercy, I will not hide what I will do: God
makes one mercy to be the beginning of another. And so when he promised to
bring his people unto the mount a in in Isa. 56. 7. it was a mercy to be
brought to the mountain of God, yea but God does not leave his people there,
but that mercy shall be a step to many a mercy, which he intends to give out:
when I have brought them thither, when I have got them thither, then will I
make them joyful in my house of prayer I will make a feast to them, a feast of
fat things; I Will cheer, hearts their and accept of their sacrifices and
services: and thus God makes one mercy, the beginning of another. And therefore
Brethren do but see what a large testimony this gives unto the infinite
goodness, and riches of free grace, which is in our God; well might the Apostle
say, God who is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he has loved us,
what riches of mercy is here? what fullness of grace and mercy in Christ is
here? that he should make mercy the way to mercy, and mercy the beginning of
mercy. Oh what fullness of grace and mercy is there in Christ? he is never well
but when he is giving out: we see the glory, the glory of the only begotten son
of God, full of grace and truth; there is a fullness indeed, all infinite
fullness, and this fullness does delight to empty it self and to communicate it
self unto poor empty creatures; the riches of grace is mightily held forth in
this. And then what encouragement is here to poor souls, that are conscious of
their own unworthiness? They want such and such mercies, and such and such
graces and strength, and I have received more mercy, than ever I can be
thankful for, and how can I, or dare I be so bold with God, to ask more mercy
than I am able to express thankfulness unto him for what I have received? Why,
if thou have no argument to plead with God, he will make this an Argument,
because he has done thee good already; this is not the manner of men, but it is
the way of God: it is no argument with men; you showed me such and such
kindness, and therefore do me another such kindness; but the Lord he does thus,
he will make this an argument, his doing of thee good, from thence he will do
thee good again. But then again,

3. Here is a third particular observable, First the shadow, and then the
fruit. See how the Lord does proceed gradually in a way of mercy in doing good
to poor creatures; the longer they are with him, and the more they know him,
the greater mercy he gives out: it is a greater mercy to eat of the fruit, than
to sit under the shadow: well, after Christ has caused thee to sit under his
shadow, then he will give thee to eat of the fruit: the Lord deals with his
servants as you deal with your servants; it may be you are not so friendly to
them at first when they come to be apprentices, but afterward when they have
served you long, and you have learnt them more of the mystery of their trade,
you will use them more friendly and communicate yet more of the mystery of your
trade, and secrets, and the like: and so the Lord deals with his servants,
though he may hide his face for a time, yet at last he will shine graciously
upon them, he will deal friendly with them, he will use them as friends and not
as Servants, he will communicate of his secrets to them; I call you not
Servants, but I call you friends, as Christ did to his disciples at last, for
he reveals the whole will of his father unto them; and therefore what
encouragement is here to all you who are Christ's? although it may be for the
present, you have not such comings in from Christ, you may say, blessed be God,
I sit under the shadow, and the Lord Christ is a safety to me: but you have not
found of that sweetness which is spoken of him; yet let me tell you, you shall
eat of his dainties, the longer you are his servants the more gently will he
deal with you, and learn you, and show you great things; the Lord Christ will
show greater and greater things to his people, the longer they are in his
house, the longer they serve him, the more they shall know of his Fathers mind
and will, and the more friendly will he deal with them; and therefore don't
fear things to come, or conditions to come, and don't think that things to come
may separate from his love, for certainly the longer you are with him, the
better he will use you; and as it may be said of wicked men, the worst is still to
come, so of the righteous man, the best is still to come, the best is still
behind; so long as they are on this side the grave, on this side of Heaven, the
best is still behind, for Christ reserves better and better for his people:
These are the particular observations that do offer themselves* I shall make
entrance into the main general proposition or observation which the words hold
forth, and that is this.

Obser. That the fruit that grows upon Christ it exceeding pleasant to the
believing Soul: the fruit that grows upon Christ is exceeding pleasant and
sweet; he is a generous Vine of Gods own planting, the choicest tree that ever
the hand of God planted, and therefore the best fruit; the sweetest fruit that
ever grew upon tree, it grows upon Christ: It was fruit that the great King of
Heaven intended for his own spending: it must needs be sweet fruit, excellent
fruit; God intended that all the fruit that he would feast his servants and his
friends and children with, should grow upon this tree; and therefore it must
needs be pleasant fruit, he intends to make a feast unto his people, a feast of
fat things, as is promised in Isa. 25. 6. and in this mountain shall the Lord
of Hoses make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the
lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined: now all
the fat things that are at the feast with which God does refresh the souls of
his people upon this mountain, grow upon this tree, all the fatness I say it
comes from this Olive Tree, and all those cups of sweet consolations which the
Lord does stay poor fainting and bleeding Souls with, it is the fruit of this
tree; nay the great feast that God shall make in Heaven, at the great supper of
the Lamb, with which God shall feast all his people for ever and ever, and sit
and rise no more, and all the dainties that shall be at the supper of the Lamb,
it shall be the fruit of this tree, they shall ever feed upon Christ, and for
ever feed upon that fruit which grew upon Christ, they shall feed for ever upon
this one dish, and shall never be weary of this fruit; and therefore certainly
the fruit that grows upon Christ, it must needs be exceeding sweet and
delightful fruit.

Quest. But you will say, what is the fruit that grow upon this tree? What is
this fruit that is so sweet and delightful?

Answ. Why, there are innumerable kinds, more than can be reckoned. I shall
give you a taste of some.

1. First of all, there is the fruit of Christ's heart, the fruit that grows upon
Christ's heart. Oh! the abundance of precious fruit; all those gracious thoughts
which are in the heart of Christ to his people, are one kind of precious fruit
that grows upon this tree: in Isa. 10. 12. I will punish the fruit of the stout
heart of the King of Assyria: God speaks of the fruit of the stout heart of the
King of Assyria, but the fruit that grows upon the heart of Christ it is other
kind of fruit: it is not the fruit of a stout heart, but it is the fruit of a
gracious heart: many are thy wonderful works, O Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
40. 5. and thy thoughts which are to us ward; the gracious thoughts of the
heart of Christ toward his people, they are many, they are more than can be
numbered. But more particularly, to consider the fruit that grows upon the heart
of Christ.

1. First of all, there is abundance of meekness and lowliness of mind, and
tenderness toward poor creatures which grows upon the heart of Christ; in Mat.
11. when he calls poor creatures to him, v. 28, 29, I am meek and lowly in
heart; it is an argument by which Christ does invite poor heavy laden sinners
to come to him: why, but they may be discouraged from coming, by looking upon
Christ as full of wrath, anger and implacable, saying, Christ will not be
reconciled: you are mistaken of me, says Christ, there is no such sour fruit
grows upon my heart, though this be your disposition, yet it is not mine, I am
meek. But I am a poor worm, says the soul, and will the Lord ever look down on
such a poor worm? he is ascended and sits in glory, and will he look upon a
poor worm? I am meek and lowly, says Christ, though I be never so high, I can
look upon poor creatures, I am meek and lowly in heart.

2. Secondly, there are in Christ's heart very earnest desires of reconciliation
with poor creatures, this is another gracious fruit that grows upon Christ's
heart: I say vast desires and large desires, if poor creatures will come in and
accept of those tenders of grace and salvation which he is pleased to make in
his Gospel, let them come, says he, let them come, he that is a thirst let him
come, and whosoever will let them come, and let them drink of the water of life
freely; I desire you should come, says Christ, let no man hinder, let him not
lay blocks in his own way, I am willing he should come: and thus does Christ
hold forth his golden Scepter, as Ahashuerus did his golden scepter to Hester,
come in Hester, says he; so says Christ, Poor Soul, come, let him come, in and
drink of the water of life freely. And so, as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead, that you would be reconciled unto him. That Is a
second fruit that grows on Christ's heart. Again,

3. Thirdly, there are affections, that grow upon Christ's heart, sympathizing
affections: Oh! how tender is he of his people, he suffers when they suffer, he
bears the leaviest end of the burden; in all their afflictions he was
afflicted: and therefore he is called a merciful High Priest, and he is one
that knows how to have compassion, and how to be tender, see Heb. 5. 1, 2. for
every High Priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining
to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin, who can have
compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he
himself also is compassed with infirmity. He can have compassion, he is able to
have compassion, he has a compassionate disposition within him, he knows how
to pity them when ignorant, and when they are out of the way, he knows how to
portion out grace to every of his peoples conditions, he knows how to
sympathize with them in their burdens, for he was compassed about with our
Infirmities, he knows well what afflictions are, and what temptations to sin
are, and he best knows how to compassionate his people; these compassions are a
gracious fruit growing in Christ's heart.

4. Fourthly, But then again, there are thoughts of delight in Christ's heart.
Oh how does he rejoice over his people with joy, with great joy! He does solace
himself in their communion: I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the
valleys, as the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters; she is
unto him as the lily among thorns, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice and thy countenance is comely: the expressions of the great delight, that
Christ takes in his people, this is the fruit of Christ's heart.

2. Secondly, There is the fruit of his lips; not only the fruit of his heart
is exceeding delightful, but the fruit of his lips is exceeding sweet: see Isa.
57. 19 I create the fruit of the lips Peace, peace to him that is afar off and
to him that is nigh, says the Lord, and I will heal him: peace it is a fruit of
Christ's lips; as there are thoughts of peace in his heart, so there are words
of peace in his mouth, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will
speak; therefore it is said, that the tongue of the learned is given to him, the
Lord has given to him the tongue of the learned, and he knows how to speak a
word in season; there is none in all the world can speak a word in season to
the wounded Soul but Christ, his lips are like unto the lilies dropping
sweet-smeling myrrh: every promise in the Gospel is a fruit of the lips of
Christ, and Oh! how sweet and refreshing is this fruit, how delightful is the
least promise of Christ! if he be pleased to bring it home to the soul, it
stays it as with flaggons of wine, when Christ shall bring home a promise to
the Soul; else a promise will do us no good, will be of no use to us, for all
the promises of God, they are in him yea, and in him Amen; all the promises
they grow upon this tree, and it is most precious fruit: if you will take David's
commendation of it, he eat and commended it, Psalm. 19. 10. more to be desired
are they than gold, yea than much fine gold* he speaks of the word of the Lord,
the promises of the Lord, they are sweeter than the honey; nay take it when it
is at the sweetest, when it is in the Comb, the word of the Lord goes beyond
it, Sweeter than the Honey, and the honey Comb: Oh! how gracious and acceptable
is the least word that drops from Christ's Mouth, out of Christ's lips to the
poor wounded bleeding Soul? A word in season, says Solomon, is like Apples of
gold in Pictures of Silver; pleasant and exceeding acceptable fruit unto a poor
soul. Again,

3. Thirdly, There Is not only the fruit of Christ's lips, but the fruit of
Christ's loins. Oh the fruit of his womb! he has a seed which he brings forth
unto God, which are pleasant and much be to delighted in; all that are brought
in to God by the preaching of the Gospel, they are called the fruit of Christ,
they are his seed, he shall see the travail of his Soul and be satisfied; this
fruit is mighty delightful to Christ, and therefore should be delightful and is
delightful to the Saints. Christ had a mighty delight in children, he cared not
what he suffered, what pains, what travails; let the travail of the Soul be
never so great, so he might bring forth children he cared not, nay though he
knew he should die in travail, yet he cared not, and though he knew he should
die of it, and also live again and rise again, he asked no other reward but only
that he might have children, and it was the great promise in Isaiah 53. 10, 11.
He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the good pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his hand; he shall see the travail of his Soul and shall
be satisfied: he shall have a multitudinous offspring, because he was such a
lover of children. And therefore when the promise was made to Abraham, I Will
bless thee, and thy seed shall be as the Stars of heaven that could not be
numbered: and therefore you read in the Revelations of a great number which no
man can number, and he brought them all unto the Father and presented them,
Here am I and the Children thou have given me. They are exceeding delightful to
him; and as Christ takes delight in them, so

The saints cannot but take delight when they see souls brought in to God and
brought forth for heaven, they cannot but rejoice in it, and take great delight
in this fruit of Christ: To name no more,

4. A fourth sort of fruit, and that is the fruit of Christ's life. Take him as
he was here upon earth in the days of his flesh, when he was planted in the
Orchard of the world, he brought forth exceeding much fruit unto God, he was
the most fruitful tree that ever the Father planted, he brought forth a world
of precious desirable fruit; there was never any part of Christ's life that was
not fruitful, he went up and down doing good. He sought all opportunities to do
good: I must work the works of him that sent me while the day lasts, for the
night comes when I shall not work; he took all opportunities for the doing
good to the souls of men, and the bodies of men, and glad was he that he had an
opportunity. There is never a part of Christ's life, if you look into the
history of it, as it lies before us by the Evangelists, but was altogether
fruitful, and all that fruit was exceeding pleasant and desirable, and affords
an abundance of matter of refreshment: there is matter of much contemplation
when you look into the life of Christ. And these are some of the kinds of fruit
which grow upon this Apple Tree, upon Christ the tree of life; they are the
fruit of his heart, the fruit of his lips, the fruit of his womb, the fruit of
his loins, the fruit of his life. There are diverse other kinds of fruit, but I
shall speak no more at this time, the Lord help you to feed upon this fruit.

SERMON VII.
CANT. 2. 3. -- And his fruit was sweet to my taste.
AFter many particular observations, we came the last day to the main general
proposition that these words hold forth, viz. The fruit that grows upon Christ
the tree of life is sweet to the believing soul: it must needs be so, for it is
the fruit that God does feast his friends withal; the feasts that he makes to
his servants upon his holy Mountain they are nothing else but the fruit that
grows upon this tree: Nay in the great supper of the Lamb, that everlasting
feast that God shall make in heaven, wherein his people shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and shall rise no more, they
shall have no other dainties but the fruit that grows upon this tree. But
what is the fruit that grows upon Christ, that is so pleasant and sweet? I told
you of the fruit of his heart, the fruit of his lips, the fruit of his loins,
the fruit of his life: and I came in the last place to speak of the fruit of
his Death, and this is a precious bough full of fruit. Well, what is the fruit
that grows upon Christ's Death?

First of all, Satisfaction of his Fathers Justice: That satisfaction which is
given to Justice is a fruit of Christ's death; He has paid the debt, he has
cancelled the bond, he has given to Justice what Justice could demand, he has
satisfied it to the utmost farthing, so that now Justice and mercy are met
together, they now do embrace and kiss each other; Justice is satisfied and
mercy is satisfied; Justice is glorified and mercy is glorified: the believing
soul may look Justice in the face as well as mercy in the face, because Justice
has fully as much from Christ, as it can demand; now this satisfaction which
is given to Justice it is a fruit of Christ's death; But again,

2. Secondly, By the death of Christ, Christ is made a fit Object for poor
sinners to pitch upon; He is an Object for the guilty sinner that durst not
look Christ in the face, he is a suitable object to a poor bleeding sinner;
there is abundance of precious fruit that grows upon Christ the tree of life,
but this tree it was too high for a poor wretch, and could not have been
enjoyed if Christ had not been willing to have his fruit cut down, he was cut
down to the earth, laid upon the earth, humbled to the death of the cross; so
that now the poor guilty sinner that is humbled through the sense of his sin,
may look upon Christ in and through his death, and is become a suitable object
for the poor soul to pitch upon: what more suitable to a wounded bleeding
conscience than a wounded bleeding dying savior? Now that Christ is so
suitable an Object for a poor guilty sinner to pitch upon, this is a fruit of
Christ's death.

3. Again, Thirdly, Christ by his death has carried out sin, and brought in
righteousness; this is another fruit that grows upon the death of Christ, the
volume of sin in respect of the guilt, in respect of the condemning power of
it, he has carried out, and made an end of it, in Dan. 9. 24. Seventy weeks
are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the
transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision
and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. Sin, like a monster, seized upon
it, sucked the very heart blood of Christ; well, the Lord Jesus he will be
avenged of him, and therefore his blood, it was the bane of sin. I'remember
Pliny in his natural History, reports of the enmity that is betwixt the Dragon
and Elephant, the Dragon gets under the Elephant, and sucks his blood, and by
his fall oft-times is the death of the Dragon; and this may be fitly compared
to Christ, sin is the Dragon that seized upon Christ; and the Lord Jesus by his
death fell upon sin, he has crushed it all to pieces, he has taken away the
killing power of sin, so that sin, by this deed, he has carried it out, as an
abominable thing, and in the room of it he has brought in a glorious
righteousness, a perfect righteousness, and put it upon his people, a far more
glorious righteousness than the righteousness of the Angels; so that the
believing Soul may stand in the presence of God, with much more boldness than
formerly. This is a third fruit that is brought in by the death of Christ.

4. Again, Fourthly, Reconciliation is brought in as another fruit by the death
of Christ: perfect reconciliation, and sweet communion and fellowship with God,
all this is the fruit of Christ's death; he by his death has taken in the wall
of partitions, and by his death has made those that were enemies friends;
those that were a far off, nigh unto him; so that the heart of God is now nigh
unto a believing Soul, and the believing soul may say now* with the Apostle,
truly our fellowship is with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. Before,
it might be said of every man in the world, his fellowship was with sin, with
hell, and the devil, and enemies to God; but now by the death of Jesus Christ
peace is made, and reconciliation is made, and believing souls may say truly,
our fellowship is with the father and with the son Jesus Christ: that is a
fourth fruit that grows upon the death of Christ.

5. Fifthly, The death of Christ, it has crushed the head of the old serpent,
he has bound the strong man and cast him out, and delivered poor captive souls
out of the mouth and paw of the Lion; it was promised long before Christ came,
thousands of years, that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head:
and Christ by his death made good that promise, he did crush the serpents head:
by death he overcame him that had the power of death. But then,

6. Sixthly, Here is another fruit of Christ's death, and that is by subduing
the power of sin and corruption in the hearts of Gods people. This is a very
sweet and desirable fruit that grows upon this bough, the death of Christ; I
say the subduing and conquering of the power of sin in the heart: see what the
Apostle says of it in Romans 6. 11. Likewise, ye also reckon your selves dead
unto sin, but alive unto God: he said before in v. 10. In that he died, he died
unto sin once, but in that he lives he lives unto God, so likewise reckon ye
your selves dead unto sin; that is, in that he died he died to sin to the
crucifying of sin, to the violating and mortifying of the power and strength of
sin; and therefore brethren, account and reckon your selves dead unto sin:
fetch arguments from the death of Christ to kill sin; and truly brethren there
are no such Powerful arguments in the world to the subduing of the Power of
sin, as those which are to be fetched from the Power of the death of Christ. Oh,
says the believing soul, shall that be sweet to me which was so bitter to
Christ? shall I look upon that as a friend, which was an enemy to Christ?
Shall I love that which was a nail and a spear to pierce Christ? Shall I take
delight in that cup, to drink of that cup which was such poison to Christ? No,
God forbid, says the believing soul, did not I die with Christ? did not he
stand as a common person, and therefore ought not I to have reckoned my self
dead, dead unto sin, even as Christ died for sin? And how then shall we that
are dead unto sin, live any longer unto it? This is another fruit that grows
upon the death of Christ.

7. Seventhly, there is a holy and sanctified use that believers have of all
ordinances and of all creatures; and this comes in as another fruit of the
death of Christ; to unbelievers (says the Apostle) all is defiled, and all is
polluted; his conscience is defiled, he defiles the best things, and the
holiest ordinances, he has no sanctified use of creature comforts: but by the
death of Christ all ordinances are sanctified and blessed, and all creatures
are blessed and sanctified to such as have faith in Christ; the blood of Christ
sprinkled upon a man has a smell exceeding sweet, and makes the soul to be
thankful for every crum; Oh, this morsel is sanctified through Christ's blood;
and thus every mercy being sanctified is sweetened by the death of Christ: and
that is most comfortable.

8. Eighthly, Christ has changed temporal death, and taken away the evil of it
for his people; this is a most sweet and desirable fruit of the death of
Christ; that temporal death is changed, sweetened, sanctified, that the sting of
death is taken out for all his people: Christ has sent a challenge to death,
Oh death, I will be thy death, long before he came into the world, and he made
good his word when he came, he fought a duel and overcame death, as in 1 Cor.
15. 55. O Death where is thy Sting? O grave where is thy victory? this is a
most precious fruit. Nay death that was a curse, is turned into a blessing; and
this makes it a greater mercy, death that was a curse and the worst of curses
is turned into a blessing to the believer, it does them a very good turn, it is
the fathers Servant, and it helps to bring them home, and although it be
terrible to look upon its hard vizage, yet still he does a good office for all
that are in Christ, he helps to carry them home unto their fathers house, and
this is another fruit of Christ's death.

9. Again, Ninthly, Christ has swallowed up eternal death, he has vanquished
hell, by letting forth the stream of his blood, so that that now there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ, there is no hell, there is no wrath, no
displeasure in the Almighty: he has opened a door wide to life, grace, and
salvation; and this is another fruit of Christ's death.

10. Again, in the Tenth place, Another fruit of Christ's death is this, The
confirmation and ratification of all the promises of the whole Covenant that he
has made with his people: and this is a most precious and desirable fruit; I
say by the Death of Christ all the promises are confirmed and ratified: he has
confirmed his testament, his last will and testament, with all the Legacies
that Christ gave to his people, he bequeathed grace, life and salvation, and
all these were ratified, when Christ died. When a man dies, his will is sure,
then there is no man can alter the will of him that is dead, for by death the
will is ratified: As the Covenant is unalterable being ratified by the death of
Christ, so every promise is ratified by the death of Christ: it is as sure, that
heaven and earth shall pass, but not one jot or tittle of the word shall fall
to the ground, they shall as certainly be fulfilled as God is in heaven; now
that the promises are so sure, this establishment and confirmation it is a
blessed fruit of the Death of Christ. So much for the fruit of Christ's death.

6. Sixthly, Again in the sixth place, let us consider the fruit of Christ's
resurrection; and that has a great deal of fruit; the resurrection of Christ,
what fruit grows upon this bough! Three sorts of fruit grow upon this bough.
But briefly of these.

1. First of all, the believing soul is fully and completely justified: The
full and complete justfying of the Soul depends upon the Resurrection of
Christ: For when Christ arose from the dead, he is said to be justified of the
Spirit: That is, he was fully acquitted, he was fully absolved; God the father
declared to all the world that he was satisfied, the debt was paid, he was
fully satisfied: I say, it was declared to men and Angels at that time when
Christ did arise, the judge himself acquitted him, he did not break prison, but
the father himself justified him; and it is said, the Angel came and rolled away
the stone, which makes it evident to all the world that he was justified; and
so he being justified, all his people are justified virtually in him, so that
he left all his chains behind him: He did not come forth, when he came forth,
bound hand and foot, as Lazarus did, but the Napkins and all bonds were left
behind; so that the complete justification of a Sinner comes in by virtue of
Christ's complete Resurrection. The Apostle speaks of the Answer of a good
conscience by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. A good conscience
may now answer, if justice come to demand any thing, the good conscience it may
answer and say, Lord did thou acquit thy son by his Resurrection? did not
thou roll away the stone, or cause the Angel to do it? and why do thou come
to me? That Is a sweet fruit that grows upon the Resurrection of Christ.

2. Secondly, the Quickening of the new man, and the raising of a dead heart to
life, is another fruit that grows upon the resurrection of Christ; now Christ
is he that quickens whom he will: by the mighty power of his resurrection is a
poor soul raised up to live unto God; I say all the life and strength of grace
comes from the resurrection of Christ; see what the Apostle says in Romans 6. 4.
mark, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, that is, by the glorious power of the father, by that almighty power in
which he was so glorious, I say Christ was raised from the dead, even so, says
he, we should walk in newness of life; it is a mighty argument unto a gracious
heart to walk with God, and to live unto God, and to walk in the newness of the
Spirit; why, Christ he is risen, he is risen from the dead, and therefore when
this word comes to the soul that is grovelling here below, and seeks Christ in
dead works and duties, he is not there, he sees not the death nor the
resurrection of Christ, but the power of Christ does raise souls to live unto
this newness of life, and that is the fruit of the resurrection of Christ. But,

3. Again, Thirdly, there is another fruit of the resurrection of Christ, and
that is the Resurrection of the body at the last day, this is a most sweet
fruit that grows upon Christ, the resurrection of the bodies of all his Saints
at the last day: he is said to be the first- fruits of them that slept, in 1
Cor. 15. 20. He is become the first fruits of them that slept; the first fruits
sanctify the whole crop, they were to bring the first fruits, the first fruits
they were brought forth, the first fruits sanctify the crop, that as they
should reap that for the glory of God, so their whole harvest: now Christ he is
the first fruits of them that slept, his resurrection it gives assurance unto
the saints that as he is risen from the dead, so the Lord he shall also raise
them up, he shall raise them up by the mighty power of his resurrection: see
there in the Gospel by Matthew 27. 52. And many bodies of the saints which
slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
the holy city, and appeared unto many; a pledge given of our resurrection, that
all the saints shall be raised at the last, many of the Saints that slept in
the dust they arose, and were seen of many in Jersalem, there were witnesses of
it; this is a pledge I say that the bodies of all the Saints shall be raised up
at the last day; and these are the fruits that grow upon Christ's Resurrection.

7. Seventhly, There are also many fruits that grow upon Christ's Ascension, his
Ascension unto Heaven; to tell you what fruits are there.

1. First of all, this is the fruit of Christ's Ascension, viz. The glorious
triumph over all enemies, and powers of darkness, both in his own person, and
in his people, I say a glorious triumph over all enemies, for the day of
Christ's Ascension was the day of his triumph; it is said in Ephesians. 4. 8. when he
ascended on high he led captivity captive; alluding to a great conquest that
when they have taken captives they will have a day of triumph to show them
openly: and so Jesus Christ he led captivity captive, Sin and Satan and all the
powers of darkness that had led poor souls captive, even them has he led
captive, and looks upon all these as bound by Christ, and they shall do no
great harm: that is the first fruit of Christ's ascension.

2. Secondly, the donation of the spirit, and all the gifts of the Spirit, is
another fruit of Christ's Ascension; it is said before in that place of the
Ephesians, That when he ascended on high, he led Captivity Captive, and he gave
gifts to men: all the gifts that are given to Churches, to men for the use of
the Churches, they are the fruit of Christ's Ascension: Nay, all the gifts and
graces that are given to any particular Soul, they are fruits of Christ's
Ascension; he gave gifts to men, yea, to the Rebellious: yea, The Spirit of
grace and consolation is given to the Saints to comfort them, and to lead them
into truth. See what Christ has promised in John 16. 7. Nevertheless I tell
you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto you:
see how the sending of the Spirit did depend upon Christ's going, If I do not
ascend, the Spirit will not come; but if I go, I will send him.

3. But again Thirdly, There is another fruit of Christ's Ascension, and that
is, The carrying up of the hearts of his people into Heaven: the holy
conversation, and those heavenly affections and dispositions, which are (or
should be) in all the Saints, they are the fruits of Christ's Ascension, for he
ascended for this very end that he might lift up their hearts: If I be lifted
up, I will draw all men after me: he was lifted up into heaven, that he might
draw eyes and souls after him: and therefore it is observable how Christ
ascended, he ascended openly, he ascended in the view of all that were present:
he ascended whilst he was in the midst of his Disciples, talking of things
concerning the Churches, he presently ascended; this was one end why Christ
would not ascend in secret, but openly, that they may know he is in Heaven, and
that by the sight of his Ascension he might draw them after him in Spirit,
though they could not follow him in body for the present: as the Eagle, when
she teaches her young ones, she goes before and flies aloft, that they may
follow after her; and thus does the Lord Jesus, he soars aloft, that he might
make his Saints to give holy attempts, at least in their Spirits, whilst their
bodies are here on earth; Oh, he cannot endure that they should be creeping here
below; a low spirit and a low conversation is not fit for Saints: he would not
have his people to have rooting in the earth, he would have his people be like
Aaron's Rod: Aaron's Rod it was not like other Trees, it had no rooting in the
earth, and yet it blossomed; such would the Lord have his people to be, he
cannot away that they should have low conversations, that their affections
should be creeping here upon the earth and not soaring aloft, and living in
heaven where he is. Under the Levitical Law, the things that did creep upon the
earth, they were abominable, and they were unclean; God gave a Commandment in
Levit. 11. 41. And every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth shall be
an abomination, it shall not be eaten; it does typifie what the Lord would have
his people to be, he would not have his people to live below on the earth: the
earth is but dust, and that is Serpents meat; the Lord would have them to live
above as Christ did, that his Ascension might be a means to draw their hearts
above, that their affections, meditations and desires, and whole conversation
might be in heaven: as for us, says the Apostle, Our Conversation is in
heaven; now when this conversation is given out to any of the Saints, let them
be thankful to Christ for it, it is not in themselves, it is the fruit of this
bough that proceeds from Christ the Tree of Life. But then

4. Fourthly, Again, all those boughs and branches that are above, they with
all the Mansions are the fruit of Christ's Ascension, in John 14. 2. In my
Fathers house are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you; I go
to prepare a place for you; this is one end of Christ's going to heaven that he
might prepare a place for all his people, that he might furnish a Table with
great glory, that he might prepare a great supper against their coming, that he
might bespeak a great welcome for them against they come there; I say there are
glorious preparations that Christ is making to entertain his people with, when
they are come into heaven, such as eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor
the heart of man cannot conceive: all these are fruits of Christ's Ascension.
Besides, their Ascension in body and soul at the last day, is a fruit or
consequent of Christ's Ascension, he ascended that they might ascend after him,
Father I will that they which thou have given me, may be with me, that they
which thou have given me, may come and behold my glory: The Lord Jesus he has
set the doors wide open to his people, having unlocked them, and taken the
Keys; he has not only the Keys of heaven, but of hell; and the Lord he has
set a flaming Sword by the way of Paradise, that after Adam had sinned he
should not come there: but Christ by his Ascension, he has taken away that
Sword and opened the door, and set forth that glory, that they shall all be put
into the possession of that glory which he has prepared for them; and this
Ascension which they shall partake of at the last day, is a blessed consequent
of Christ's Ascension into heaven. I thought to have spoken of the fruit of
Christ's Mediation or Intercession, and so have come to the Use, but I shall
reserve it for another time.

SERMON VIII.
CANT. 2. 3. -- And his fruit was sweet to my taste.
I Showed you what this fruit is, that is sweet: there are several kinds of
fruit that grow upon Christ: you have heard of the fruit of his heart, the
fruit of his lips, the fruit of his loins, the fruit of his life: I speak the
last day of the fruit of his death: and I showed you ten several fruits that
grow upon this bough: I speak also of the fruit of his Resurrection, and the
fruit of his Ascension; I shall repeat nothing, because I must be short. Here Is
but one bough more, and that is his Intercession, or his sitting at the right
hand of his Father. Now, what is the fruit that grows upon this bough, the fruit
of Christ's Intercession?

1. First of all, The actual Application of all that he has purchased unto his
people; this is the fruit of Christ's Intercession, he has purchased by his
death, and applies by his Intercession: the Lord Jesus he intercedes for them
in particular, he has all their names in particular upon his breast, and he
does not only intercede for them in the lump, but for every particular soul
that his Father has given him: so he tells Simon Peter, I have prayed for thee
Simon, that thy faith fail not; Christ has purchased pardon of sin by his
blood, but the Application of pardon to this and that soul, it is the fruit of
Christ's Intercession; and so he has purchased grace, and he has purchased
glory by his blood; but the giving out of grace, and putting the soul into
actual possession of glory, this is a fruit of Christ's Intercession.

2. Again Secondly, There is another precious fruit grows upon this bough, and
that is, The large way, or door that is made and set open for poor sinners to
come to God the Father by. There is a large door for poor sinners to come to
God by, and that this door is open, and held open, we are beholden to Christ's
Intercession; in Heb. 7. 25. He lives for ever to make Intercession for all
that come to God by him, and therefore, says the Text, He is able to save to
the uttermost all that come to God by him: so that now the poor sinner that
durst not come to God, that stood afar off trembling, that looked up like the
poor Prodigal, and said, Father I have sinned before thee in thy sight, and am
not worthy to come under thy roof: even for such poor souls has Christ set
open a door by his Intercession to come to God.

Will ever Christ plead for such a one as I am? Yes, says the Text, He lives
to do it; he lives for ever for that end, to make Intercession for them that
come to God by him.

But is it possible that ever Christ should prevail for such a one? though
Christ be willing to intercede, is it possible that he should prevail for such
a sinner?

Yea, it is possible with Christ, for He is able to save to the uttermost: if he
could not prevail, he were not able to save to the uttermost, but, says the
Text, He is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him.

3. Again, Thirdly, There is another precious fruit that grows upon the
Intercession, and that is, The presentation of the persons, and of the
Sacrifices of all his people in his own name and righteousness unto God his
Father; this is the fruit of Christ's Intercession: He takes all his Children
by the hand and leads them to his Father, Lo, says he, here am I, and the
Children thou have given me. Father, these are my friends, these are my
beloveds, let them find welcome in heaven for my sake; he presents also their
sacrifices, all their services, their prayers, their praises, and their works,
and washes them in his blood; it is said in the Revelation, there was an Angel
stood by the Altar with a Censer in his hand, and he offered much sweet
Incense, which he mixed with the prayers of the Saints: the Lord Jesus is that
Angel, he mixes all their sacrifices with his Incense, that their prayers and
praises may ascend before the Lord as Incense, that all their liftings up of
hands and hearts may be acceptable.

4. Again, Fourthly, There Is another fruit upon the bough of Christ's
Intercession, and that is, The casting out of all those Indictments which are
brought into the Court by malicious Adversaries against any of his people: the
Lord Jesus sits at the right hand of the Father to cast them out; the Devil
brings many a black bill of Indictment, but the Lord Jesus sits there to rebuke
him; in Zach. 3. 2. The Lord rebuke thee Satan, says the Angel, the Lord
rebuke thee: he pleads for them, he is their Advocate, he lets his Father know
that all the accusations that Satan brings in are out of malice and envy: he is
a malicious wrathful wretch, a Murderer from the beginning, he has always
sought the destruction of my servants, and therefore Father hear him not, says
he, for he accuses out of malice, he has always been a false accuser, he was
cast out of heaven for a common Barreter, and therefore Lord let him not plead
at thy Bar; there are many Bills brought in, but the Lord Jesus he shows the
Cross that is made over them, they are all crossed with the cross of his own
blood, all is discharged, all is paid; that Christ by his blood makes a mighty
noise in heaven: sin cries loud many times, but the blood of Christ cries
louder, it fills all the Throne with outcries, and it will be heard, it will be
heard when it speaks for poor sinners: this is a precious fruit of Christ's
Intercession.

5. Fifthly, The preservation of the Saints in a state of grace, is a fruit of
Christ's Intercession, they cannot fall, it is not possible they should be
plucked out of his hand, for he holds them sure, he is continually Interceding
for them, it is not possible they should be forgotten in heaven, for he always
bears their names, and presents them unto his Father; he Intercedes continually
for more grace, for new grace and for new strength, and new supplies to be
given out every moment for his people, and therefore it is not possible their
faith should fail: I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; it is not
possible that their faith should fail; and this is a fruit of Christ's
Intercession. Christ intercedes for his people, and therefore they are kept,
and shall be kept by his mighty power through faith to salvation. I might add,
The protection of Churches, and the destruction of enemies, as a fruit of
Christ's Intercession; he sits to protect his people, and he sits there to
destroy his enemies: Sit thou at my right hand till I make thine enemies thy
footstool; the Lord in that day shall make Kings submit unto him; He shall
strike through Kings in the day of his power: Intimating that the subjection of
all enemies is a fruit of Christ's Intercession. These are the fruits that grow
upon this bough. Now you have in part seen what fruit this Tree bears, let us
make Application.

Use. First of all, If the fruit that grows upon Christ be so sweet to a
believing soul, Then,

1. Use of Conviction, First, This may serve for Conviction unto such as taste
no sweetness in Christ's fruit, that have no longings, no desires to eat of the
fruit of this Tree; why certainly it is an evidence against such, they never
were yet espoused to Christ. It Is said of young women in their breeding
condition, their desires are after fruit, rather to feed on fruit than other
meat: I am sure it is so with such as are the Spouses of Christ, their desires
are always after fruit, they would by their good will eat nothing else, their
souls are always longing after it, they cannot make a good meal, though they
have never so much of creature comforts, if they have not a dish of this fruit,
of this fruit that grows upon this Tree of Life: Oh poor creatures (they know
not, such as find no sweetness) surely they know not what this fruit is, If
thou knew the gift of God, says Christ to the woman of Samaria in John 4.
10. and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water; poor soul, thou
know not what this Tree of Life is: Oh my friends, if you knew this Tree,
the sweetness of it, you would say, Lord give us ever to eat of the fruit of
this Tree; what pity is it that such fruit should be lost, because poor souls
know not the goodness and sweetness of it! It Is very strange that poor sinners
should take so much delight in the world, so much delight in the fruit that
grows upon their own stock, so much pleasure in the fruit of iniquity, and
should find no sweetness, nor savor in the fruit that grows upon Christ: I say
there is no fruit so sweet as this, yea there is nothing sweet but what grows
upon this Tree, no mercy sweet if it grows not on this Tree, if it comes not
from this Tree of Life; and yet to a carnal heart every thing but Christ is
sweet: Oh such men and women they have lost their taste: when a man's appetite
is gone, that is a sign of a great distemper: give him wholesome meats, and
pleasant drinks, and he tells you they are bitter and unsavory, it is a sign of
a great distemper of the body, yea many times it is a great forerunner of
death: and truly it is thus with men's souls that taste not of the sweetness of
Christ, they have lost their appetite, why? it is wonderful strange they should
find no sweetness in Christ: What! sweetness in your profits and pleasures,
sweetness in your lusts and harlotry, and what, no sweetness in Christ? Poor
creatures, they have lost their taste, and the Lord grant it be not a
forerunner of eternal death; you have a woe denounced against such men in Isa.
5. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness, and put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter:
Woe to them that call the Tree of Life bitter fruit, unsavory fruit, whose
souls find no sweetness in the feeding upon it, and in the mean time find
sweetness and delight in those things which are indeed bitter, for the fruit of
sin is bitter fruit: Oh that such men would consider these two things:

1. First of all, What will you do when your desirable fruit is taken from you?
There was a threatening against Babylon in Rev. 18. 14. And the fruits that thy
soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all things which were goodly and
dainty are departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all: The
time will come when this will be spoken to Contemners of Christ, the despisers
of that fruit which grows upon this Tree of Life: all thy desirable fruit is
departed from thee, that which thou tookest most delight in it is departed from
thee; the Lord he can easily blast your fruit, and cause it to wither: if the
Spirit of the Lord do but blow upon your comforts they are gone, they are gone
in a moment, they wither and they fall off immediately, and what will such men
do when their fruit is departed from them, if they have not better fruit to
live upon?

2. Secondly, Again, Oh that such men would consider that fearful threatening
against despisers of the fruit of the Tree of Life, in Prove. 1. 31. Therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devices: They shall eat the fruit of their own doings, when they will not
listen to Wisdoms call; oh my friends it will be very sour fruit for a man to
eat the fruit of his own ways: the fruit that grows in the Highway side it is
but sour fruit, take heed that you despise not the Tree of Life, lest the Lord
say you shall not eat thereof. That Is the first Use of Conviction.

2. Again, Secondly, Here is a word of Invitation, and I shall propound it in
the words of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 31. 8. a gracious Invitation, O taste and
see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusts in him: You have
heard of the fruit that grows upon Christ, and now oh my friends come taste,
and see how good the Lord is; the Psalmist speaks as a man that had found a
good morsel, found some dainty food, he was eating of it alone, he found a
great deal of sweetness in it, and he calls his friends, Oh friends come and
taste, and see how good it is; if you did but taste of this meat, you would
say, Oh taste and see how good the Lord is, there is pleasure and sweetness,
there is enough to take up all your affections, and all your senses, here you
may see and taste, you may see beauty and taste sweetness: the Tree of Life is
not only beautiful, good to look upon, beautiful to the eye, but it is good for
food; let me tell you, it is not enough to see the beauty of the Tree of Life,
it is not enough to look upon it, it is not enough to see, but your souls must
taste, you will never be the better for the fruit that grows upon Christ unless
you taste it, unless you come and feed experimentally upon Christ: it is not
enough to hear that the Lord is good, it is not enough that you have heard that
there is so much pleasant fruit grows upon Christ, but as ever you desire to be
nourished, comforted, revived, strengthened and quickened, why then come here
and taste and see how good the Lord is: it is mercy that you have an Invitation;
it was a direful threatening in Luke 14. 24. For I say unto you, that none of
these men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper: That they which were
bidden as Guests should never taste of my fruit; the Lord does* not speak this
to you this day, he does not say, You shall never taste of his fruit, but he
gives you an Invitation, Oh then come and taste and see the goodness of God.
Let me tell you by way of motive, That there is nothing in the world will do
away the cursed and bitter taste of sin, but only the taste of the fruit of
this Tree. Poor sinners you know not what the taste of the fruit of sin is: oh
what bitterness many times does sin leave behind! It Is sweet in the commission,
whilst men are committing sin, whilst men are in the midst of their lusts, in
the midst of their vanities, in the midst of their cups, sin is sweet, but oh
the bitterness, the poison of Asps that sin leaves behind in the Conscience;
you have tried it may be to put out the taste of sin, to do away the bitterness
that sin has left behind, and you swallow many a good Ordinance after it, many
a good duty, as you have supposed, you have washed with your own tears, and yet
the taste of sin is left behind: and truly Brethren no wonder; there is nothing
in the world will do away the taste, the bitter taste of sin, but only the
taste of the fruit of Christ: O come and taste of this fruit, it will leave a
sweet relish behind, it will leave a taste in your souls and consciences, that
shall always be above and prevail against the bitter taste of sin.

Nay further, let me tell you, there is nothing else can sweeten your
affliction, there is nothing else can sweeten your temptations, and your
trials, but only a taste of the fruit of Christ, this will take away all the
bitterness: and therefore I beseech you make good provision for your selves
against you take those bitter Pills; you will have something that is sweet by
you, to sweeten your mouths against you take bitter Pills: Oh that men would
make such provision in and against evil days; death is bitter in it self, and
life is sweet: Oh that the Lord would revive you in giving to you a taste of
the Tree of Life, and this will sweeten all afflictions, and it will take away
the bitterness of the taste of death: the Martyrs they felt not the heat of the
flames, for they had the juice of the Tree of Life in their mouths and souls,
and the fruit of the Tree of Life preserved them.

Quest. But how may you know that you have tasted of this fruit of the Tree of
Life?

Answ. You may know it by your desires after Christ: when the soul has tasted
of the fruit of Christ, it desires to taste more of that fruit, and it will see
an averseness to sin: so did the Spouse of Christ, she sat down and desired to
eat (as I told you it was rendered) she sat down and desired to eat, and still
to eat, her desires were carried out still after further and further enjoyments
and tastes of Christ; when the woman of Samaria had tasted of the sweetness of
the water of Life, in John 14. 15. Give me to drink of this water that I thirst
not: Give me evermore to drink of this water, she tasted but a drop and this
gave her to cry out, O Lord give me evermore to drink of this water: so the
soul having once tasted but a taste of this fruit of the Tree of Life, Lord
give me evermore to eat of this Tree, of this fruit.

Again, It Is known by the contentment, delight and satisfaction, that the soul
does find in Christ, by the tasting of him it has satisfaction in Christ, a
high esteem, and honorable esteem, such an esteem as David had: he desired to
be a doorkeeper in the Courts and House of the Lord: And so the soul that has
tasted of Christ, Oh Lord let me eat of thy fruit, though my condition be never
so low, let me sit under thy Tree, though I sit like Job on the Dunghill, let me
sit down and eat of thy fruit, and it is enough, it satisfies; when it has
Christ, whatever it has it is satisfied: if it be but the fruit of Christ's
love, it is satisfied: if it be but a piece of bread, if it has the love of
Christ with it, I shall say, Lord my lot is fallen on a goodly ground: and thus
says our Savior, Noman that has drank old Wine and tastes of new, desires
the old again, because it is bitter to him: so no man that is once in Christ
desires to taste of the fruit of sin, because this fruit is better; Oh that
many might be convinced of sin, such as wallow in their lusts, and take more
delight in their lusts than in Christ, that have not yet tasted of the fruit of
this Tree of Life, the Invitation is even to them, unto such that they might
come in and taste, and see how good the Lord is. So much for the first Use.

2. Use. Secondly, A word of Exhortation to those that have interest in Christ.
O that you would come and sit under this Tree and eat: That Christians would
sit more under Christ, and eat more of his fruit. It Is not enough to give a
pluck and away, a snatch and away: but the Spouse she sat and plucked and eat.
Christ does not love a hasting gesture, he does not love souls have in plucking
of his fruit: he does not love they should post over Communion with him, but
that they should sit down and eat. Oh chew well upon the Tree of Life, that you
may find that sweetness, that infinite sweetness that is in it: Oh that you
would pluck much of the fruit of this Tree; you that have interest in Christ,
pluck much of this fruit, and eat much of this fruit; let me tell you, there is
more fruit grows upon one bough than you can pluck all your days, and make no
spare; there is more fruit grows upon one bough than you can pluck throughout
all Eternity; Oh that you would every day be plucking a little; continually
plucking and eating some of the fruit that grows upon this Tree of Life, it is
but a taste that you can have, and therefore you had need be often, and always
tasting of that fruit which is in him.

Besides, you can have but a taste of this sweetness, yet this taste is
exceeding comfortable, reviving and strengthening; I say that very taste it is
exceeding comfortable and reviving, there is no fruit so full of spirit as this
fruit that grows upon the Lord Jesus; and it is full of strength, it will
strengthen your souls abundantly; you may know it is very nourishing by the
sweetness of it: Physicians say, That which tastes well, it nourishes well, and
if so, I am sure this fruit is nourishing fruit, for it has the sweetest
taste, it has the most delightful taste. O the sudden strength that the taste
of this fruit has conveyed unto poor weak and weary souls, to such as have
been spent almost in their combats, and ready to faint and give up the Ghost,
their spirits have been ready to fail within them, and the Lord has given but
one taste of this fruit, some fruit or other, the fruit of his death, or the
fruit of his Resurrection, Ascension or Mediation, and it has given new
strength, and new Life to the poor soul, and it has made it stand up and leap
for joy: it crept upon the earth before, and now it mounts up like the Eagle.
Oh this excellent fruit that is in Christ, it is worth the plucking, and it is
worth the eating.

Besides, you may well pluck much of this fruit (you that have interest in
Christ) you have all the advantage that can be; you have the shadow over you
whilst you pluck it, and whilst you eat it, you need not labor much, and toil
much, for the Lord (with this Tree) will be a shadow to you, you may pluck with
delight, and eat with delight under his shadow, he will keep off his fathers
displeasure, you may eat and pluck, and eat with delight, and need not fear
surfeit, all the fruit is fully ripe, here Christ has bidden you eat without
fear. It Is the sin of some, as the Apostle speaks, that they eat without fear:
but here is the commendation of this fruit, you may eat without fear. Men may
eat too much of the fruit of this world, and get a surfeit, it may cost many a
Life and Soul, but here Gods people may still pluck and eat, and eat and pluck,
and eat abundantly.

3. Use. Thirdly, This Doctrine calls the Saints to thankfulness: Oh bless the
Lord that he has made such provision for you, that he has provided such a
Tree as this, that you may eat here, and eat in heaven, and for ever feed upon
it, and be comforted, and satisfied; What do you owe to the Lord, you that are
the people of the Lord? What do you owe to the Lord for his mercy? I say, what
shall you render unto the Lord for all his loving kindness, when you pluck, and
when you eat; look upward, I say eat and look upward. Do not eat as the Swine
eat under the Tree and never look up from whence it comes; it is a sin to
receive any mercy, so to take them as not to look up; but when you eat of the
fruit of this Tree, Oh lift up your hearts and look up unto Christ and be
thankful; do but consider what poor creatures you are, what need you have of
this fruit, you had starved, your souls had starved and famished for ever, if
Christ had not been a fruitful Tree, all the creatures could not have given you
fruit for your souls to feed on. I tell you the fruit that is upon the
creature, is vanity, it is perishing, they could not have nourished you up to
eternal life; Oh you had famished, you had fainted, you had perished; and when
you were in this fainting perishing condition, he sprang up as a Tree in the
Wilderness, as a Tree in the Forest; he sprang up in your fainting and wildred
conditions, he sprang up and became a fruitful Tree unto your nourishment. And
do you but consider what unfruitful Trees you were to Christ, when Christ
became a fruitful Tree unto you; Oh the cursed fruit that you brought forth to
him, you brought forth nothing but sin and death, there is all the fruit that
you brought to him, you brought forth sin to him, and brought forth death to
your selves* Oh that ever the Lord Christ should be a Tree of Life unto you,
you that were Trees of death unto your selves, and Trees of Death unto him:
your sins put him to death: That ever he should be a Tree of Life unto you, and
be a Tree to bring forth such fruit, such peace, such pardon, such joy, such
strength, oh the infinite love of Christ to you! Why certainly Christ deserves
a great rent for his fruit; it is said in Cant. 8. 11, 12. That Solomon had a
Vineyard, and he let it out for a thousand pieces of Silver; if Solomon had so
much for his fruit, what deserves Christ for his fruit? Oh the thousand pieces
of Silver, the thousand Hosannahs, the thousand Halleluja's, and thousand
praises that are due to Christ for his fruit!

Well, I beseech you, give Christ of his own fruit, I say give him of his own
fruit: he requires nothing from you, but what you may pluck from his own Tree;
give him his own fruit: as it is said of Cain, as wicked as he was, when the
Lord blessed the ground, he brought of the fruit of the ground and presented it
as an offering unto the Lord; and now if Cain brought the fruit of the ground,
should not you bring the fruit of the Tree? The Lord has given you all the
fruit of the Tree to eat of; Oh bring of the fruit of the Tree as a Sacrifice
that the Lord has given you so freely to eat of; know that all your mercies
come from this Tree, and therefore look that all your mercies, liberties and
comforts grow upon this Tree: Oh then acknowledge Christ in all, and say with
David, O Lord all things come of thee, and of thine own have I given thee: So
go and return all these mercies to Christ; if thou have any thing that is good,
say, Lord this grew upon thy Tree, and I am beholding to Christ for it: if thou
have any grace, any strength, any ability, any opportunity to do for God, to
serve thy Generation, say, Blessed be Christ for it, it is none of my fruit, but
it is Christ's fruit, this strength and that grace, it grew upon that Tree, I
bless the Lord for it; Oh be taken up with admiration, with holy admiration;
there is a world of precious fruit that grows upon Christ: you have heard but a
little of it, oh be taken up with admiration, continually be taken up with
thanksgiving and acknowledgement, give all back again to Christ, and by that
little, that little sight of the goodness, and the little taste of the
sweetness that the Lord now gives you of the Tree of life, rise higher, do not
rest here, but be rising higher and higher, and say, Oh Lord if the fruit be so
sweet, what is the Tree it self? How excellent and glorious is the Lord Jesus
Christ the Tree of life, from whence such precious fruit does grow? Rest not
upon any thing but Christ, and be still ascending higher and higher, and say,
Lord if this fruit, the fruit that I now taste be so sweet, what is the fruit
that I shall taste of in heaven! If I taste of the fruit of the lowest boughs,
and they be so sweet, what is the fruit that grows upon the top branches, which
is reserved for the Saints to pluck, and to eat of when they shall come unto
heaven? And thus I have given you in part to see the meaning of these words,
and how usefully they may be enlarged in your own Meditation, and remember the
Text, it is worthy you should spend many thoughts upon it: As the Apple Tree
among the Trees of the Wood, so is my beloved among the sons; I sat down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste*

SERMON I.
MATT. 18. 21, 22. Then Peter came to him and said, Lord, how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times: but until seventy
times seven.


HEre is Peter's Question unto Christ about the Forgiving of Offenses, and
Christ's Answer unto Peter's Question; you must know that the Question, and so
the Answer relates unto particular offenses, personal offenses, such wrongs and
injuries as are done by one man unto another. As for those which are more
immediately against God, and more public, Christ does give another rule in
this Chapter: but this, I say, is concerning personal offenses or wrongs which
are done by one man unto another. How often shall my Brother sin against me,
and I forgive? It is true, every such offense is a sin against God, and so far
as it is a sin against God, there is no man can forgive: the Lord only can
forgive sin, he against whom the sin is committed: but now there is an offense
or wrong which is done against man, and so far as the offense is against man,
man may forgive; man cannot forgive Gods part, but so far as the offense is
against man, man may forgive it: nay Christians ought to forgive it, so far to
forgive it as not to seek any revenge for the wrong done. How often shall my
Brother sin or offend against me? By Brother here we are to understand any
relation, any friend, any neighbor, any man that we have to do with; if that
he has done any wrong or any offense, he is comprehended under this relation of
a Brother: any man, for we are all Brethren. How often shall my Brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? there is Peter's Limitation:
he seems to give an answer to himself, for it comes short of the answer of
Christ: Shall I forgive him so often, says Peter? Lord! what shall I forgive
him seven times? It seems to be hard to forgive a brother seven times: but see
how Christ's answer does exceed Peter's, Christ will have no such bounds set as
seven times, I say not unto thee, till seven times, but until seventy times
seven: As if Christ should say, Wherefore do thou say seven times, to set the
bounds of thy forgiveness seven times to thy brother? I Will have no such bounds
given: you think it a great matter to forgive seven times, I say unto you, That
it is the Will of my Father that you forgive until seventy times seven: a
certain number for an uncertain; seventy times seven, that is, I will have you
to multiply forgiveness: not that Christ himself does set bounds to seventy
times seven, that they should proceed so far and no further: but I will have
you to forgive very often, nay, as often as thy brother does offend, not seven
times, but I say seventy times seven. That which I shall observe at this time
is this:

Doct. How far the thoughts of the Lord and the ways of the Lord are beyond
our ways and our thoughts in this matter of forgiveness; Peter thought seven
times for a man to forgive an offending brother, was a great matter, but
seventy times seven was not enough; and know that what the Lord Christ does
here give in as a duty unto Peter, and to all the Disciples, that the Lord
Jesus himself does assert as his prerogative in the matters of forgiveness, in
the matter of forgiving offenses and transgressions. The Lords thoughts and the
Lords ways are infinitely above ours. This truth I shall handle at this time,
to make way for that main Doctrine of the Text, which is the Doctrine of
Forgiveness, forgiving Offenses. Now that the Lords thoughts, and the Lords
ways, are so far above ours, it is clear from Scripture, Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9. see
it was in the matter of forgiveness this is spoken: Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon: For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the
Lord: for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. Though you cannot think that I
should multiply pardon, you think seven times hard, but the Lord can multiply
unto seventy times seven; the Lords ways are not as your ways, nor his
thoughts as yours, for his thoughts are above your thoughts, as the heavens are
above the earth; now this shows us how far short we do imitate the Lord in
forgiving others: For

1. First of all, The Lord when he forgives, he forgives those that are
enemies; this will advance the exceeding riches of the Lords grace; I say the
Lord when he forgives, he forgives enemies, for so is every man by nature;
neither can any man lay down that enmity that is in* the heart, till such time
as the Lord Christ brings home a pardon, that is the first work and the ground
of all that the Lord does for a soul, and of what it does for him: I will be
merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more. Now how far are the thoughts and ways of the Lord above our
thoughts and ways in this matter of forgiveness! Christ he forgives enemies,
he brings home forgiving mercy unto enemies, and reconciles the enmity that is
in their hearts; But oh how far come we short? we are so far from forgiving
enemies, as we can scarce forgive friends, hard to forgive a brother, a dear
and near relation: Oh how far do we come short of Christ in that?

Secondly, The Lord when he forgives offenses and transgressions to a poor
soul, he forgives freely: and the freeness of the Lords forgiveness, will
appear in these particulars*

1. First, In that the Lord is always ready to forgive, there is a propensity
in the heart of the Lord to pardon poor sinners that come in to him, he is
ready to it, God is never unready; it discovers the freeness of the Lord in
this work: the Psalmist speaks of the Lord in Psalm. 86. 5. For thou Lord art
good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all them that call upon
him. Of tender mercies, God is never unready for this work, always ready,
ready to forgive, the heart of God is never out of tune, never out of frame for
this work, never unready for this work, always ready to forgive: but oh, how
far are the ways of the Lord above our ways, for this, and his thoughts above
our thoughts? Where is the man, or where is the woman whose heart is ready to
forgive, whose heart is never out of tune, never out of frame for this work of
forgiving wrongs, injuries and offenses unto them that they do commit them? The
Lord he is ready to forgive. It may be at last a man may be drawn off to
forgive a man when friends have dealt with him, when he has been urging it on
his own heart to be his duty, when he has taken pains with his own soul, and
brought the Word home to his soul, and has smarted for this unreadiness to
forgive: but oh, where is the man or woman that looks unto God, whose heart is
never out of tune, but always ready to forgive?

2. Secondly, The freeness of the Lords forgiveness appears thus, In that he is
not only ready to forgive, but he forgives at the desire of the poor creature;
no sooner does a poor creature express his desire, but the Lord is ready to
express his willingness, set forth in the Parable of the wicked Servant in Mat.
18. 32. I forgave thee because thou desiredst me; not that this his desire was
the cause of forgiveness, but it expressed the readiness of the Lord at his
desire to come in, and to manifest pardon unto him. Now I pray let us consider
how far the thoughts of the Lord, and the ways of the Lord in this particular
are above ours: for the Lord forgives that which is desired; but oh, where is
the man almost that can so easily forgive at the desire of him that offends?
hardly brought off, although the party offending does desire it, although
friends have desired him, and relations have desired him, and God has desired
him, and Christ has desired him, yet how hardly are they brought off to this
work?

3. Again, Thirdly, The Lord forgives freely: it appears thus, He does forgive
upon the confession of his people, he is ready to manifest his pardoning and
forgiving love, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins: And hereby I say it appears that he forgives freely, in
that he forgives upon the very confession of his people, though not for
confession, and not for desire, as I said before; but yet in this way the Lord
is pleased to manifest forgiveness; no sooner does the poor soul confess, but
he presently forgives: I have sinned, says David: The Lord has done away thy
sin, says the Prophet presently, that is the next word. Now how far is the way
of the Lord above ours? Where is the man that is ready to forgive upon a
confession? Yea, although there be an acknowledgement of the wrong done, yet
how hard a matter is it for a poor creature to pass by that wrong? Thus, how
much are we unlike to God?

4. Fourthly, Nay further, the freeness of Gods forgiving mercy appears in
this, He does forgive presently, as soon as his people look toward him; he
does not make long delay about the business, he does not stand to consider
whether he shall forgive such offenses or no, but presently gives out pardon: I
have sinned, says David, and in the next words, The Lord has done away thine
iniquity: Now how far is the way of the Lord above us in this? Where is the man
or woman that can find in their heart to forgive presently the wrong or injury
done? Oh there must be a great deal of do to bring off the heart to this work
to forgive. It may be in length of time men's hearts may be persuaded, through a
long time they may forgive and forget: but oh where is the working of grace, to
bring off the hearts of men to forgive presently? truly in this we come far
short of God, and the way and thoughts of God.

5. Fifthly, Nay further, The freeness of God in forgiving a poor sinner,
appears in this, He does prevent poor sinful creatures with pardoning mercy,
Even before they do desire, he prevents their desire, their supplication for
mercy, he brings in a pardon to a poor soul, before it has made any real
acknowledgement of its offense: I said I will confess my sin unto the Lord,
Psalm. 32. 5. And thou forgavest me the iniquity of my sin; David did but say it
in his heart, he had but such a thought, such a purpose in his soul; well, I
will return unto the Lord, and I will confess: And before David could do it,
the Lord he prevents him, he prevents him with mercy. And so another Instance
you have of the Prodigal in Luke 15. He said he would go to his Father and make
his confession; at the 18 Verse, I will arise and go to my Father, and say,
Father I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, etc. and then at the 20
Verse it is said, He arose and came to his Father. But when he was yet a great
way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him. Mark how the compassion of the Father did prevent the
confession of the Son, I will go to my Father, and say, Father I have sinned so
and so, but before he could utter one word, the Father falls upon his neck and
kisseth him, and forgives his many and great transgressions, and then indeed
afterward he does make an humble acknowledgement: And thus the Lord does deal
with poor sinners, he does prevent them with pardon, before they can
acknowledge their transgression; and how far is the way of the Lord above the
way of man in this? Where is the man or woman that will deal thus with an
offending brother, with one that has done him wrong and injury, that will
prevent their desire, and prevent their confession? but men will rather stand
upon it, and think they have rather warrant so to do: If my brother confess and
acknowledge his offense, then it may be we think it our duty to forgive, though
hardly to bring off our hearts to that: but where there is no confession and
acknowledgement, where is the man like the Prodigals Father, to run and meet
his son, and seal up forgiveness before confession, or an acknowledgement? This
shows that the way of the Lord in matters of forgiveness is far above man, the
Lord forgives enemies, and the Lord forgives freely. But,

3. Thirdly, The Lords ways are above ours, it appears in that the Lord
forgives fully: He does not only forgive freely those whom he does forgive, but
the Lord forgives poor sinners fully: I shall make it out in these particulars.
As

1. First, The Lord he does forgive all the debts When God does forgive a soul,
he does forgive all offenses, all transgressions and sins whatsoever: I forgave
thee all the debt; he does not forgive one sin to the soul, and leave the other
to reckon with him for, and to condemn him for; but where the Lord forgives
one, he forgives all, else the forgiveness of the Lord were not full. There are
some that think indeed that God may forgive a soul one sin, and yet reckon with
him for other sins: as the Arminians say, That God forgives Original sin to all
the World, and yet condemns for actual sin; but this is contrary unto the
fullness of that grace of forgiveness: As Jesus Christ died for sins against
the Law, so he died for the sin of Unbelief; and when God forgives the sin of
the Law, he forgives Unbelief, and overcomes Unbelief, else it were in vain for
God to forgive transgression: though God could forgive all transgressions
against the Law, yet if God did not forgive transgression against the Gospel,
we had been shut up eternally for that sin; but when God forgives one sin, he
forgives all sins, and herein is the fullness of his pardon; But oh how short is
our way of Gods way in this particular! A man can find in his heart to forgive
some wrong, but to forgive all the wrong that a man has done, this is a hard
work: how hardly is the heart of man brought off to this work?

2. Secondly, Nay again, The fullness of Gods forgiving mercy, it appears in
this, He does not only forgive all the offenses, where the offenses are few,
but he forgives them all where they are many. If the soul be brought home to
Christ the great Mediator, the great Sacrifice, the Lord forgives for all sins
though never so many, Luke 7. 47. She loved much, because much was forgiven
her; though her sins were very many, yet they were forgiven her fully: we can
forgive a brother, a Neighbor, or a friend if they have done us but a few
wrongs, but now when offenses come to be multiplied, suppose they were many, Oh
how hard a matter is it to us to forgive them, though easy with a Almighty
God? But

3. Thirdly, Again, The fullness of Gods forgiving mercy does appear, in that he
does forgive the greatest wrong. He does not only forgive many when they are
small, but he forgives many when they are great: and herein I say is the
greatness of the grace and of the love of God toward poor sinners, that
although offenses be never so great, he pardons and forgives them all, Though
your sins be as scarlet, yet they shall be made as white as snow, Isa. 1. 18.
This is it that aggravates the offenses of his people, in Isa. 43. 24. Thou
have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine inquities;
yet this follows at the 25 Verse, I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my Name sake, and will not remember thy sins; this was it
that did aggravate the offenses of his people, thou have made me to serve with
thy sins. God he forgives their sins though they were so great, that God was
oppressed under them as a servant under a heavy burden, and yet says the Lord,
I, even I am he that blotteth them out: Oh how short is our way of the way of
God? It may be a man may forgive offenses when they be small, but when they
come to apprehend them great, they are great wrongs done unto him, and never
was any wronged as I am, by such a one, and such a friend: Oh how hard a matter
then is it to imitate God in forgiving such great wrongs?

4. Fourthly, But again further, The fullness of Gods forgiving mercy appears in
this, He so forgives his people as He retains no grudge in his heart against
his people, nothing but clearness in the heart of God toward his people; Joseph
was one that forgave his Brethren so freely as he never retained any grudge: he
takes off their aggravation; it was not you, but God that sent me hither,
therefore be not offended: Joseph herein was a Type of Christ, he forgave his
Brethren so fully as he bore no grudge against them, we never read that he
upbraided his brethren so much as once, for all the wrong they had done to him,
there was no grudge in the heart of Joseph against his brethren, there was
nothing but clearness in his heart, and so nothing but clearness in the heart
of God: But oh how do we fall short of God? Men may profess forgiveness, O they
forgive their Neighbor such a wrong: but oh is there not still some old grudge
at the bottom that is ready to break out upon all occasions? How short do we
come of God in this respect? Nay

5. Fifthly, Further, The fullness of Gods forgiveness does appear in this, That
he does not bear any grudge, he will not only not upbraid, but He does receive
those whom he forgives into nearest friendship and fellowship with himself.
Though man did greatly sin against God in Adam, and brake his first Covenant,
the Lord he enters into another Covenant, a second Covenant, and in that
Covenant he gives his people a nearer admittance unto himself than formerly in
his first Covenant, nearer in Christ in the second Adam than in the first; and
truly when ever the Lord does forgive a poor soul, and pass by the failings and
infirmities of his people, the wrongs and injuries which they do commit against
him daily, yet he carries it as fairly and as friendly with them, as if they
had never broke Covenant with him; so did Christ to Peter, though he did wrong
and injury to Christ, yet the Lord Jesus he does admit him as near as formerly,
he does not only not upbraid him, but look upon him as his dear friend. Now how
far is this way of God above our ways and thoughts? It may be you will forgive
a man that has done you wrong, yea, but you will not trust him; he was once
your friend, but you will never trust him with your secrets again, you will
have an eye upon him, and watch over him as long as ever he lives: Oh! how far
short are we in our forgiveness, of the forgiveness of God? But

Again, The Lord he does not only forgive freely and fully, but he forgives
sincerely, with all his heart: I will do you good with all my heart and soul:
so the Lord does not only profess with his lips, he does not only speak it in
word, but the heart of God goes along with it, with every word of pardon: I
know my thoughts toward you, in Jer. 29. 11. they are thoughts of peace, and
not of evil, to give you an expected end; he does not only speak peace, but his
heart is full of peace. Oh how sincerely does God forgive! there is no
hypocrisy, no dissimulation, no deceit in Gods forgiveness: but oh how unlike
are we in our thoughts and ways to God in this? There is many a man professes,
ay, he does forgive, he does forgive another that has done him wrong, but his
heart does not go along with his word, though he cannot but for shame profess,
yet a man's heart does check him, and tell him, he does not really forgive even
as God forgives, Psalm. 55. 21. Their words are smoother than Oil, peaceable
words, but war is in their heart: when a man is put upon it by being urged to
it to forgive, it is a shame not to confess forgiveness, but it is not from the
heart. But

Again, When God forgives he forgives unchangeably: When God pardons, he does
not pardon to day, and call it in tomorrow again: he does not pardon to day and
recall it tomorrow: I will be merciful to their sins, and their iniquities will
I remember no more, I will blot them out as a Cloud, as a thick Cloud; A Cloud
that is blown away and scattered that it never come again, so does the Lord
give out pardon, he forgives unchangeably. Indeed the Papists, and some that
follow them in that way, God he may forgive, say they, and yet visit for
transgressions, and afterward such may fall away, and God may call to account
and visit for all sins: but this is contrary to sound Doctrine. That which is
urged by them for the proof of this their Assertion is that Parable in Matthew.
18. that was spoken upon this occasion of forgiving: some plead (upon this
Parable) that God may forgive a man all his sins, and yet afterward calling
him to account may reckon with him for those very sins: It speaks of a certain
man who ought his Lord ten thousand Talents, but his Lord forgave him all the
debt, and immediately he went forth and fell upon his fellow servant which
ought him an hundred pence, and took him by the throat and cast him into
prison, till he should pay all the debt; whereupon it is said, When his Lord
heard thereof, he was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due unto him. Now from this Parable some plead, That a
man may be pardoned, and afterward God may reckon with him for those very
sins. But by way of Answer,

1. First, Know it is dangerous to strain every Parable: we are in Parables to
look to that which is the main scope; it is not that God forgives sins, and
then calls to account afterward for them again; the scope of the Parable is,
That no man can know he is pardoned of God, but that man that is ready to
forgive wrongs and injuries done unto him: But yet they will urge particularly
this Parable, that the debt was forgiven, and yet he called to an account.

2. Secondly, I answer to that, That the Lord may forgive some temporal
punishment; when God removes a man or a people from temporal punishment, then
God is said to deliver from sin, and so far this servant was forgiven, and any
a person may be forgiven so far, God may give out a promise of the removal of
some temporal punishment, as he did upon Ahab his outward confession; a man may
be so far forgiven, that temporal punishment for a while may be repealed and
held back, and a man by his own folly may pull down some greater wrath. And then

3. Thirdly, Again, He was never made partaker of that pardoning mercy which
the Covenant holds forth, which appears by the frame of his Spirit after he was
pardoned, Verse 26. Lord have patience with me, and I will pay thee all; it was
no more than the forgiving of some temporal punishment: he knew not what did
belong to the Covenant of Grace, he was ignorant of Gods way in forgiving sin,
he was a Legalist; certainly this man was never acquainted with the Covenant of
Grace, he did not know that he was a poor weak man, and altogether unable to
make satisfaction to his Lord. And then

Again, He was never made partaker of that pardoning mercy which the Covenant
of Grace holds forth, as appears by the frame of his Spirit after he was
pardoned. It was no more than the forgiving of some temporal punishment, his
sin was not pardoned by the Covenant of Grace, for if it had, he would have
acted more mildly, and not so irregularly, and dealt so harshly with his fellow
servant.

And it appears in that other word, in the 32 Verse, O thou wicked servant; so
that he was never made righteous with the righteousness of Christ, for there he
is called the wicked servant: so that you see notwithstanding what was
objected, that the Lord whenever he does forgive a soul, he does forgive
unchangeably, he does not cross the score to day, and then call to an account
for the same another day, but whom he pardons, he pardons for ever: how far
short is our way of forgiveness unto Gods? How hard a matter is it to forgive
unchangeably? David did forgive for a time, when Shimei cursed him, then he
made an humble acknowledgement, but upon another occasion he commands his son
Solomon to fall upon him, that Shimei's head might not go in peace to the
Grave: You see then that the point is made good, that the thoughts of the Lord,
and the ways of the Lord in the matter of forgiveness, are far above the
thoughts and the ways of man; Peter thinks seven times to be a great matter,
but Christ says, not seven times, but seventy times seven. A word for
Application in brief to shut up all.

1. Use. Here is encouragement for poor sinners to come in to Christ, there is
mercy and forgiveness with him that he may be feared, and the thoughts and
ways of the Lord in this particular, they are as far above your thoughts and
ways as the heavens are above the earth; and oh what a wide open door is here!
That the Lord would persuade some poor guilty soul to come in to Christ by this
door of mercy, forgiveness and plenteous redemption: though you have been
enemies, and though your hearts be still filled with enmity against God, yet
know that the Lord is able to forgive enemies, and though you have nothing in
the world to procure your acceptance, you can do nothing that should commend
you to God; yet know that the Lord he forgives freely, and though your
transgressions have been multiplied, though very many, though very great,
though you have made the Lord to serve with your sins, and wearied him with
your iniquities, yet he is able to blot them out freely for his own name sake:
Oh then that the Lord would persuade your hearts to come, and to submit to
Christ, and not to go on in the way of rebellion, and take hold of that great
propitiatory sacrifice, and then you shall know that the Lord forgives, for he
forgives you cordially and sincerely; he does so forgive your transgressions,
as he will never remember them more.

2. Use. And it speaks a word of comfort and refreshment unto such poor souls
as are in dark and sad conditions: some poor souls that have looked to Christ
for righteousness, and yet are found sitting in darkness and oppressed with the
weight of sin; and because (it may be) when you look into your own hearts, you
find they are very narrow, when you are put upon this work of forgiving
another, you are hardly brought off to it, and certainly the Lord may for this
withdraw himself; Oh know you have sinned after profession, and you have sinned
much, yea you have sinned much against light, and that is that which cuts and
makes great gashes: but yet know that the Lord gave Commandment to Peter and
his Disciples to forgive seventy times seven; certainly that command which the
Lord gave to man to forgive seventy times seven, he will certainly forgive poor
creatures though their sins be numberless. This is not to spur on to sin, this
is no word to invite to sin: but this word of forgiveness is to the end the
Lord may be feared and admired for his great grace; and take heed poor
creatures you wrong not God of that which is his greatest glory: It is the
glory of a man to forgive seventy times seven, and the oftener the more like
unto God; now do not rob God of his glory, that infinite mercy which put him
upon it to forgive seventy times seven; say therefore as the Church did in Mic.
7. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity, and passes by
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger
for ever, because he delights in mercy: he will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all our
sins into the depth of the Sea. You may look upon your transgressions, nay you
ought to look upon your sins, nay and to lie low because of your provocations,
and abhor your selves in dust and ashes, you can never lie too low in the
consideration of your own vileness, none have sinned against so many
aggravations, and sinned against so much light and conviction; when you have
thus aggravated your sin, do not rob God of his glory, but say with the
Prophet, Who is a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity, that forgiveth
great iniquities, and many iniquities, who forgives seventy times seven.

3. Use. Lastly, This should be matter of great humiliation, that our thoughts
and our ways are so beneath the thoughts and ways of God in the matter of
forgiveness; Peter thought it a great matter, What to forgive seven times?
Peter's number is very short of Christ's number. Yet where is the man or woman
that is come to Peter's number? and yet Peter's number was short of Christ's
number: Oh what cause have we to be humbled? One of the Evangelists has it, If
thy brother offend thee seven times in a day, and say, I repent, thou shall
forgive him; Oh how far are we from forgiving seven times in a day? We are so
far from forgiving seven offenses in one day, as we many times remember one
offense seven days, nay seven years together; Oh how unlike is this to Christ?
Oh let us therefore labor to walk up to the rule, or else never profess our
selves to be Christ's Disciples. And so much for this time.

SERMON II.
MATT. 18. 21, 22. Then Peter came to him and said, Lord, how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times: but until seventy
times seven.


I Made entrance before into these words: Here is Peter's Question and Christ's
Answer concerning the forgiving of offenses, particular wrongs and personal
injuries which are done to any man or woman. Peter propounds the Question, and
seems to forestall Christ's Answer, by giving an Answer to it himself, which
Christ did not approve of. But I proceed to the main Doctrine, which is this:

Doct. That the often forgiving of wrongs and injuries, is a duty which Christ
commends unto, and commands all his Disciples to follow: I say until seventy
times seven.

1. First, I shall clear this Point to you from Scripture, and show you from
the word of the Lord, That this is a duty that is incumbent upon all that
profess themselves to be Christ's Disciples.

2. Secondly, I shall hold forth unto you diverse Examples of worthy and
gracious men, who have practiced this Duty.

3. Thirdly, And then show you upon what ground Christ does commend and command
this Duty.

1. First, Look into the Proverbs of Solomon, where Wisdom speaks, which is
Christ, Prove. 24. 29. Say not I will do so to him, as he has done unto me, I
will render unto a man according unto his works. Mark, here is the Counsel
Wisdom gives unto all her Children, Say not I will do so to him as he has done
unto me: Do not say, I will be revenged of him for the wrong he has done to
me: do not say, I will give to him as good as he brings, I will recompense him
according to his work; say not so, no, Christ will tell you, and Wisdom will
teach all her scholars to unsay this Lesson, you must learn to forget this
Lesson, I will do unto him as he has done unto me, say not so; if you will be
Wisdoms Scholars, you must learn to unsay this Lesson; indeed flesh and blood
says so, and corrupt nature will bid you say so, I will do to him as he has
done to me, I will never put up these wrongs: Flesh and Blood will not put up
these wrongs: and the Devil will put you on to do as you say, but Christ would
not have you. If you would be Wisdoms Scholars fear to purpose this in your
hearts, much less to act; Why? what then must we do? See but what Wisdom
invites us unto in Matthew. 5. 39, 44. I say unto you resist not evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also; and
again, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you. Here Christ tells you what you should
say, and what you should do in case of wrongs and injuries, namely, to render
good for evil, it is the best way: look into Luke 17. Christ would teach you
your lesson if you would be his Disciples; Take heed to your selves, says
Christ, take heed: Ay but what should we take heed of? He does not bid them
take heed of the wrongs and injuries that others do unto them, that is not the
matter Christ bids them take heed to; no, but take heed to your selves, look to
your hearts, watch over your affections, and over your passions; when any wrong
and injury is done unto you, then you have need to take heed to your selves,
you do no resist evil, take heed you do not meditate revenge: you are in great
danger of sinning against God when wrong is done unto you, and therefore of all
other Counsel, now take heed to your selves: see the Epistle to the Romans 12.
17, 19, 21. Recompense no man evil for evil. Avenge not your selves, but rather
give place unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says the Lord. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Mark what
counsel Christ gives here by the Apostle to all his Disciples. Be not overcome
of evil: When is a man overcome of evil (we are speaking of wrongs) When is a
man overcome with evil? Why, when his spirit is put out of frame by the wrongs
and injuries he meets withal, when he strives to resist and meditate revenge,
then this man is overcome with evil. Whenas a man can pass by the wrongs, pass
by an injury that is done, and his soul is drawn forth in pity and compassion
toward that man that does him the wrong: Alas poor man, he has wronged his
own soul more than me, I have cause to pity him more than to seek revenge of
him: but now when as a man's passion is heightened, to give him as good as he
brings, this man is overcome with evil. As it is with Fire and Water: cast
water upon the fire, if the fire be quenched with water, and so kept from
burning, then we say the fire is overcome: but when the fire does gather
together its force, and does continue its heat and burning, is as hot after as
before, then the fire overcomes the water: wrongs and injuries are as water,
now wrongs and injuries being cast upon a man, quench his love, and that duty
which he owes unto any man or woman; when as a man is taken off from his duty,
hindered in the performance of his duty, his love is quenched, he cannot perform
it: there is duty of love which he may owe to his Neighbor and brother; but
now when this shall continue, and he is found doing his duty, though he meet
with wrongs and injuries, yet passes them by, and love overcomes them, then
does he overcome evil with good: Take one place more in Col. 3. 13. Forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another. If any man has a quarrel against any,
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Forbearing and forgiving one
another, which is spoken to every man, If any man has a quarrel, and if it be
against any man whatsoever, Yet, says Christ, it is your duty to forbear, and
not only to forbear but also to forgive. A man may forbear, yet not forgive:
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, is the pattern that is set
before us, which is Christ himself; even as Christ gave himself as a pattern,
even so do ye, not only forbear but also forgive.

2. Secondly, But the second work is to show you the example of many blessed
servants of God that have been very eminent in this very duty, very ready to
forgive wrongs and injuries which were done by others unto them; and oh that by
their example we might be drawn unto a holy imitation of them!

1. Examp. And the first Example that I shall mention is Joseph: Joseph was a
man that had much of the Spirit of God, he was a man that received many wrongs
and injuries from his Brethren, they could not endure him, they hated him, they
conspired against him, they sought to take away his life: when they were
prevented in that, then they sold him, sold him as a slave, and if the Lord had
not been the more merciful to him, he had ended his days in slavery and
bondage; and this was from his Brethren, and yet we find in Joseph a great
readiness of forgiving all those wrongs and injuries which were done unto him
by his Brethren: in Genesis 45. 5, 7, 8. Be not grieved (says he) nor angry with
your selves, that ye sold me hither, for God did send me before you to preserve
life. And God sent me before you, to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and
to save your lives by a great deliverance; so it was not you that sent me
hither but God, etc. See how this good man does not only forgive the wrongs and
injuries, but endeavors to comfort his brethren, to take off their fears and
to take off their grief: and therefore tells them, these three times together,
it was not you but God, God sent me hither, and God sent me hither, and God
sent me for gracious ends; not a word that savours of any grudge, or any spirit
of Revenge: Nay, afterward whenas old Jacob their Father was dead, they might
think now Joseph would remember their old unkindnesses now their Father is
dead; in Genesis 50. 19. But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant
it unto good; they besought him that he would not remember their old
unkindness: Fear not, am I in the place of God? Do you think I will take upon
me to revenge the wrong, to revenge an injury? that were to set my self in the
place of God, Vengeance is mine, says God, and I will repay it: God forbid
that I should set my self in the place of God, you need not fear that I will do
you wrong, that I will revenge me of you, God has turned it for good, God has
turned it for good to you and me and more people, and therefore God forbid that
I should take upon me, to turn that into evil which God has made for good.

2. Examp. A second Example for our imitation: And that is Moses, a man full of
the Spirit of God, a man that had great acquaintance and familiarity with God,
God spoke with him face to face; now Moses he was very ready to forgive all
personal wrongs and injuries. Many times when the Children of Israel murmured
against him, they laid all upon him: Thou have brought us from out of Egypt to
slay us here in this place, and thou have done this wrong unto us; Moses even
at that time intercedes for this people in Numb. 14. 2. Moses is so far from
avenging the wrong, that he is the first man that steps in for pleading for
this people at the 17, 18, 19 Verses: and therefore he beseeches God, that God
would be pleased to pass by this their transgression! And there is one
remarkable Instance of Moses his meekness and readiness to forgive wrongs and
injuries done unto him, in the twelfth of Numbers in the beginning of the
Chapter, it is said, Moses was very meek, he was the meekest man on the face of
the Earth, he does not reply one word. It Is said that Miriam and Aaron spoke
against him because of the Ethiopian woman that he had married, and said, Has
the Lord spoken only by Moses? has he not spoken by us also? He does not reply
one word to them; they reproached his Wife, that he had married an Ethiopian;
and that he was a man that had taken too much upon him: but Moses does not
reply again, but God takes Moses part, and calls Aaron and Miriam to stand
before him, and God smites Miriam with a Leprosy, because she carried it so
before him; and yet look into the 13 Verse, Moses cried unto the Lord, saying,
Heal her now I beseech thee; Moses was the man that was wronged by Miriam, and
Miriam was cast into a Leprosy, and now Moses is the first man that steps unto
God to plead for her: Oh his great love and readiness that was in him to
forgive and pass by injuries, which made him to forget his duty to God,
limiting him for the time, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee, let it be done
now I beseech thee; Oh here is a pattern, here is an Example for the imitation
of all!

3. Examp. A third Example that I shall mention, is that of David: David a man
full of the Spirit of God, and we find him a man ready to pass by personal
wrongs and injuries: Because that Shimei had cursed him, some of David's
Worthies would have smote off his head, and David would not suffer them, It may
be, says David, God has bidden him to go and say, Curse David: This was a
foul aspersion cast upon David, Come out thou bloody man, come out thou bloody
man, see the 2 Samuel 16. 6, 7, 8. and 2 Samuel 19. 21, 22, 23. Whenas one of
David's Captains would have had him put Shimei to death, No, says he, I will
not Revenge, but says, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah? He
pardons Shimei, and swears unto him, That he should not be put to death for
this his Conspiracy. And so in the matter of Saul, David was greatly oppressed
and persecuted by Saul, though Saul seemed to be put into his hand, when he
took him asleep in the Cave, and had an opportunity to avenge his cause upon
his enemy, yet David would not do it. It is true indeed David's foot had almost
slipped in the matter concerning Nabal, when he swear he would be avenged upon
Nabal for the affront done to him: but when Abigail comes and pleads with
David, he does accept of her counsel and bless God, Oh blessed be the Lord that
has sent thee to withhold my hand from shedding blood, and from avenging mine
own cause this day; and thus you see David was a man ready to forgive and to
put up wrongs and injuries.

4. Examp. One Example more from the Old Testament, and that is of Elisha in 2
Kings 6. 12, 13, 14. The King of Syria took an Army to apprehend Elisha, now
they came to the City where Elisha was, to take it, and there God smites them
with blindness, and Elisha he comes and takes them and carries them into the
City of Samaria; at the 22 Verse, when Elisha had brought the Army into the
midst of the City of Samaria, and the King of Israel would have been smiting of
them, says he, My Father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them? Says the
Prophet unto the King, Thou shall not smite them; Set bread and water before
them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their Master. Though they came on
purpose to apprehend him, and carry him to their Master and so to take his
life, yet the Prophet seeks not to avenge himself of them; but on the contrary,
requites them good for the evil they intended toward him.

5. Examp. And so if we look into the New Testament, there is some worth the
taking notice of: As Stephen the Martyr, they did not only wrong Stephen in his
name, but in his estate, and in his very life, yea, they put him to death: he
was so far from seeking revenge, that the last words he breathed forth with his
soul, I say the last words were, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; and
when he had said it, he fell asleep.

6. Examp. And so the Apostle Paul in the Galatians, take his Example, it is
worthy our imitation, in Gal. 4. the Galatians had done him a great deal of
wrong, they had under valued his Ministry, and set up false Teachers in
opposition to him, and the Apostle he was very free to forgive the wrong, so
far as it was personal; declaring that he did acknowledge it not to be any
wrong, 12 Verse, Brethren, I beseech you be as I am, for I am as ye are, ye
have not injured me at all; here is a gracious spirit: I do not look upon it as
any injury as it concerns me, I do freely pass it by. Nay,

7. Examp. We have not only the Example of man, but the Example of Christ
himself: Oh the wrongs and injuries that were done unto Christ! What meekness!
What scourgings? what buffettings? what revilings, what reproaches? insomuch as
the Governor wondered, What nothing to speak for thy self? And when he was to
die, and giving up the Ghost, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.
And then,

8. Examp. That Instance of the Prodigals Father; The son had greatly offended
him, done him great wrong, yet the Father runs out to meet him, and before he
could speak one word of confession or acknowledgement, the Father declares a
readiness of forgiveness, he seals up his love and forgiveness, Falls upon his
neck and kisses him. Thus you have seen the Examples of holy men, and of Christ
himself for a pattern of passing by of wrongs and injuries. But now for the
grounds of the Point: Upon what ground does Jesus Christ Commend and Command
his Disciples to this work and duty of forgiveness? Why first,

1. Reason, The first ground is, Because he has forgiven them much, and
therefore he requires that we should forgive others, that so they that are
forgiven of Christ, may testify their love, and also their likeness unto
Christ: and that is held forth in the Parable that follows the Text; the Lord
there had forgiven the Servant that ought him ten thousand Talents, and
therefore he expected that he should have forgiven his fellow Servant a few
pence. I say all that are Christ's Disciples, all that are Believers, that do
believe in the name of Christ, they have very much forgiven them of the Lord.
There is no man but the Lord does forgive a great deal of that temporal
punishment which he might inflict upon them: now there is no Believer but the
Lord does forgive not only temporal but eternal punishment, and therefore there
is an engagement to us unto forgiveness: Alas, what are the debts and
trespasses done to us, or owing unto us in comparison of what we have done, or
what we owe unto the Lord? Our sins are set forth by Talents, the offenses and
wrongs done unto us are set forth by pence: our sins are set forth to be ten
thousand Talents, and the offenses that are done unto us are but a hundred
pence; when the Lord does forgive so many transgressions, so freely, fully, so
sincerely, so unchangeably, the Lord does expect that there should be a
readiness in them to forgive others from a sense of that forgiveness unto them
of his, that so they may testify themselves to be the Children of their Father
which is in Heaven. But the second ground is this,

2. Reas. Because those that we are called upon to forgive are our Brethren:
How often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Christ Answers,
Till seventy times seven. Now there is a great deal in the very name of Brother
that may challenge forgiveness, and call us upon this duty; though many, though
never so many, yet still often and ever called a brother; for still in one
sense or other; every man is a brother: some nearer than other, though not born
of the same Parents, though not of Kindred, yet he may be a Brother in the same
faith; though not a Brother in the family, yet a Brother in the same Town,
City, Country, or Nation; however in the same common nature of Adam, in respect
of the poor, dark, frail nature every man and woman is a Brother: but some
relations more near than others. This spiritual relation, the same Profession,
the same Faith, the same God, the same Inheritance: this is a great engagement
to pass by and to forgive wrongs whilst he is a Brother. The Lord when he
forgives, he forgives inferiors; there is an infinite distance between God and
the creature; when the Lord forgives a poor creature, there is an infinite
distance betwixt God and man, but not betwixt man and man, and therefore upon
this account Christ requires it. But then,

3. Reas. Thirdly, Another ground is this, If there be neglect of this Duty
unto any of their Brethren, it will be a grief unto their fellow servants, and
they will make their complaint unto their Lord. It cannot but be a great grief
of heart unto those that are fellow servants, when any that do profess the name
of God, shall be so far from performing this Duty, that they shall express a
spirit of Revenge, and a spirit of Enmity: it will sadden the hearts of many
Saints, when they shall see one that is called a Brother, a Professor, when
they shall see him so unready to forgive, as he shall study wrongs and
injuries, and study revenge; it will grieve them, and cause them many times to
go to the Lord and make their complaint, There is such a man that makes
profession of thy Name, and yet walks very unworthy of that profession, very
unsuitable. But,

4. Reas. Fourthly, Again, Neglect of this Duty will hinder and keep back a
great deal of good, and pull down a great deal of evil: Christ knew this very
well, and therefore he did command this Duty, Christ knew that the neglect of
this Duty would hinder men of a great deal of good: It may deprive a man of
many temporal mercies, of many temporal salvations; the Lord may call in the
grant of temporal mercies, whenas he shall see such a spirit in any that
profess his Name, as to retain the sense of wrongs and injuries, and not to
pass them by, it puts the Lord upon it many times to recall the grant of
temporal mercies, as in the Parable following. Nay not only so, but it may
deprive the soul of many special spiritual choice mercies: It may hinder the
soul from beholding the light of Gods countenance. It is true, the soul being
once pardoned by Faith in Christ, God will never recall that pardon: Ay but if
that man or woman that is pardoned, and they have the pardon sealed and
witnessed, yet shall walk unworthy of pardoning love, and shall not come up to
this Duty of forgiving, pardoning, and passing by wrongs and injuries, the Lord
will recall the manifestation of his pardoning Love, and the sense of it,
though not the pardon it self. It does not only deprive the soul of much good,
but it also pulls down much evil, and not only outward evils, but sometimes the
Lord manifests a great deal of wrath and displeasure upon such a one as is of
an implacable spirit to retain wrongs and injuries; as it was with that servant
that would not forgive his fellow servants, the Lord commands that he should be
delivered up unto the Tormentor, and cast into prison until he had paid the
uttermost Farthing: Why, a man though he has but a profession, the Lord lets
him alone with that formal profession till such time as he comes forth with
such a waspish peevish spirit against Gods people, and seeks to wrong and
injure them; Why, then the Lord he takes the advantage upon him, and gives him
up unto the Tormentor because of such a waspish spirit, whenas he will not
forgive a Brother a wrong or injury, but retain anger, he cannot find in his
heart to forgive: the Lord sometimes comes upon such a man (though a Christian)
the Lord comes and takes him, and delivers him up to the Tormentor, delivers
him up to his own Conscience, though not to deliver him up out of his hand, but
the Lord will deliver him up unto his own Conscience, unto the manifestation of
wrath, till he shall have made satisfaction, till he shall have cried out unto
Christ for more strength to carry it more like unto him.

5. Reason, But lastly, Christ Commands and Commends the forgiving of wrongs
and injuries, that so his Disciples they may have room to act their Graces, and
do some singular thing for the Lord; in the fifth of Matthew, when Christ put
them upon this Duty, there says Christ, What singular thing do you, if you
love them that love you, what great matter is that? The Publicans do the same,
the very Heathen do the same: Ye wish good, and do good to them that do the
like to you, that is no great matter, But what singular thing do you? Christ
would have all his Disciples to do something more than the World does, and he
is a Monster amongst men that will not do good when he can, when good is done
unto him: But Christ he would have his Disciples, his people, do some singular
good thing for him: The Lord has ordered it, that they shall meet with wrongs
and injuries more than any people in the World, for the trial of their Graces.
Offenses must come, there is need of them, great necessity there should be
offenses in this sense, that wrongs and injuries should be done, that the Lord
by this might try and exercise the Graces of his people, there would be else no
room for the trial and exercise, or at least not so much for the trial and
exercise of love, meekness, patience, forbearance, long-suffering, forgiving,
and forbearing one another. If there were not wrongs and injuries, there would
be no room for the exercise of these Graces, Christ would have his people put
upon it to do some singular thing. As many a man or woman will say, Well, let
me alone as I am, and I am as quiet as any man living, do not disturb me, or do
not wrong me, and you shall live as peaceably and as quiet as any people in the
World: Ay, here is good Neighborhood, but this savours not of Grace; Christ
would teach his people to do something singular; the World says, Ye shall have
blow for blow, and wrong for wrong, and injury for injury, but let them alone
and you shall be quiet; here is no more than the wild beasts in the Wilderness
will here do, is no trial of Grace: where is your love, your meekness, your
patience, your long-suffering? The Lord would have his people in the exercise
of Grace, to do something more than the World.

Object. But you will say, May not a natural man do this, that has mere
nature, quiet nature, pass by wrongs and injuries, and not render reviling for
reviling, and wrong for wrong?

Answ. I Answer, Yes, There is many a man will go a great way in this, that
has but good nature: But oh! what a shame is this to them that profess to have
more than nature? Will not this be a shame and condemnation to those that
profess more than good nature, that they who have but good nature may exceed
them? And truly, that we may be ashamed of our neglect, and provoked unto our
Duty, I shall give you but two or three Instances of what men have done by good
nature: And oh that the Lord would fasten something upon us, either by what
good men or bad men have done!

Amongst the Heathen Writers, it is written of that Sect of Philosophers that
were called Pythagoras his Scholars, there was this Rule amongst them, That
when any offense was given by one to the other, the Parties offending and
offended should agree together and make up the breach before the Sun set,
whatever the injury and wrong was: and now we let many a Sun set and not shake
hands and close hearts.

There is another Instance amongst the Heathens, which is very remarkable, of a
Governor, and an excellent Governor: Upon a time, there was one of the chief
Ringleaders that struck at this Governor, and struck out his eye, and he
though but a Heathen, was so far from being revenged of him, as he takes this
offender and receives him into his Family: And oh that this Heathenish man
should thus forgive him that had put out his eye, and yet we cannot forgive one
that gives a blemish to our Name!

There is another Instance you have in Scripture, and that is Esau, Jacob's
Brother: Jacob supplanted him, took him at an advantage, and got away the
birthright, and stole the blessing from him; and although his offenses were
very great and did stir up his passion against his brother, insomuch as Jacob
was forced to flee from his presence; yet afterward, how freely does Esau put
up all the wrongs and injuries done unto him, and how friendly does he carry it
toward him? Oh! how will Esau condemn many that profess to be the seed of
Jacob? Shall Esau forgive such wrongs and injuries as to have his Birthright
and the blessing taken from him, and yet we that are the seed of Jacob, cannot
put up the least petty wrong and injury! But I should show you the difference
betwixt the natural man's forgiveness and the spiritual man's; and several cases
of Conscience, which I shall reserve for a further opportunity.

SERMON III.
MATT. 18. 21, 22. Then Peter came to him and said, Lord, how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times: but until seventy
times seven.


THere were two Doctrins raised from the Words, the first was this,

1. Doct. That the thoughts of the Lord and the ways of the Lord, in this
matter of Forgiving Offenses, are far above the thoughts and the ways of man,
as far above ours as the Heavens are above the Earth. The second was this,

2. Doct. That the often Forgiving Offenses is a Duty which Christ Commends
unto, and Commands all his Disciples to follow. I made it clear from Scripture,
both by Precept and Example of holy men of old, who have desired to walk up to
this Command of the Lord. But to proceed to the Answering some Objections
concerning this point. It may be Queried,

Quest. First of all, How comes it to pass that mere natural men may go so far
as to outstrip many Christians in this particular, in the passing by of wrongs
and injuries?

Answ. I Answer, First of all, There are some natural men walk up to their
principles; though there are no natural men (in all things) walk up to their
light, yet there are some natural men walk up to their principles; and it is
true, a Christian has a more excellent principle than the natural man, which
would carry him out (if well improved) far beyond all the actings of natural
men; Ay, but when a Christian does not improve his principle; when he does not
walk up according to what the Lord has given him, and the natural man does
improve his principle, and walk up unto it, the natural man, the mere natural
man, may be a shame unto some Christians. A man that has a principle of
reason, he has a more noble principle than a principle of sense, yet if the
principle of reason lie hid, and be clouded, it is possible that he may then
act beneath a beast, and a natural man that has but a natural principle, he
may excel the Christian that has the more noble principle, by walking up to
his principle. But,

2. Secondly, A mere natural man, that has but a natural principle, may
outstrip some Christians in this work of forgiving wrongs and injuries,
because there is many a natural man places his life and righteousness in this,
he has nothing else to commend him to God, nothing else to trust to for
salvation, nothing else: He is quiet, peaceable, loving, and one that will do
no wrong, rather put up wrongs and injuries, than do wrongs unto any: Now,
whenas a man does trust to any of his works for life, it is a wonder to see
what a great deal such a man will do, whenas a man works for life; there is
such a desire in such men to work for life, and to work for righteousness, and
work for Heaven: It is very admirable to see what a natural man will do upon
such an account; Oh what a shame is it to Christians? yet there is no true
Believer but is bound to do as much for God, and as much for Christ as if he
were to earn Life and Salvation by doing: Christ having laid down his life for
him, he accounts himself as much engaged to do for Christ, as if he were to
gain life by doing, it is a shame to Christians to consider what a natural man
will do for life and salvation. But

3. Thirdly, There is many a natural man will outstrip a Christian in this,
because some natural men have the advantage of a natural disposition; there are
some that are more mild, and more peaceable, and more loving and gentle: some
men are so, and do exceed others in natural qualifications: now such a man has
a great advantage, whenas he is put upon such a work as of passing by wrongs
and injuries. The Lord many times, and for the most part, makes choice of, and
brings in to himself the worst of Natures, the most crooked, the most rugged,
the most knotty pieces, the Lord is pleased to make choice of such; and this is
for the glory of the great Master Builder, for the glory of his Wisdom, and the
glory of his Power, and the glory of his Grace: I say this does appear, in that
he is pleased to make choice of the most crooked pieces of Timber for his
Building; his Wisdom does appear the more in making these crooked things
straight, taking away the knottiness, and unevenness that is in the natures of
poor creatures. But now a man that is of a mild nature, a soft disposition, he
has a great advantage, it is no hard matter for him to pass by wrongs and
injuries; but now there are many of Gods people that have crooked natures, when
God takes them to work them for his Building: Oh they cannot come up to their
Duty without much striving, struggling, wrestling, praying and crying unto the
Lord: That is another cause why some natural men may exceed a Christian in that
work of passing by wrongs and injuries. And then

4. Fourthly, A natural man may not meet with such opposition from without, a
natural man may not be so much hindered in this work when the Lord calls him
thereunto: for the Devil suits his temptations according to the qualification
and disposition of the creature, where he sees them mild, he will not put them
upon such rugged temptations; the Devil will let a natural man alone and will
not seek to hinder him, no, when he is in the practice of such a good as this,
for the Devil knows that these his works are nothing, and he knows that such a
man when he has done never so much, forgiven seventy times seven, his best
works are nothing without Faith, if he has no interest in Christ; yet such a
one, I say, will outstrip many a Christian, which should be our shame, and a
provocation unto us. But

Quest. 2. Again, A Christian may forgive, and a natural man may forgive, the
one may forgive as often as the other: But what is the difference? Oh a great
deal of difference betwixt a gracious heart and a mere natural man; and I pray
take notice of it, for it may be for the discovery of the great deceitfulness
of man's heart in this particular. There is many a man may look upon himself as
forgiven, and he may think he forgives a great deal, and yet God and Christ
look upon him, and see he has forgiven nothing at all! Well, the difference
betwixt a natural man, and a gracious heart, in the forgiving of wrongs and
injuries, lies in these particulars.

Answ. 1. First of all, A natural man may forgive wrongs and injuries, but it
is not from a principle of love unto God in Christ, it is merely from reasons
that are taken from himself; I say, the natural man's arguments are from
himself, they are out of the shop of reason, and not from the apprehension of
the love of God, nor from any persuasion of his Duty, or any desire that he
has to express his likeness and conformity unto God in Christ: I say, his
reasons are from himself; He may reason thus, Alas, this is unworthy of a man
to express wrath, to take revenge, or this will but disturb mine own peace,
this will but lay me open to others, it will but discover my nakedness, and
frowardness, my passion which is my nakedness: He reasons thus, Why should I
meddle with one that is so much beneath me, it will be no great conquest if I
do overcome him? And thus his Arguments are from himself. But now a gracious
heart, when God comes and puts him upon the work of forgiveness, his arguments
are taken all from God: By this I shall express my love unto God, and my
obedience unto Christ; by this I shall show my self like unto God, more
conformable unto Christ who is the Image of the invisible God; upon this
account, I say, a gracious man is brought off to forgive wrongs and injuries.
But

Answ. 2. Again, A natural man when he forgives, it is in his own strength that
he does it: when he sets upon this Duty, it is in his own strength; he is never
sensible of the contrary workings of his own heart, which do lie in the way to
hinder him; he is not sensible of his own contrary motions that are in his own
spirit against this Duty, he is not sensible of the need he stands of the Lord
Jesus Christ to help him herein: and therefore he does not make use of Christ,
he does not run unto the Lord and cry to him for strength, and rest upon him
for strength to perform his duty: but now a gracious heart does not move upon
his own hinges, but is made sensible of the contrary motions and workings of
his own heart and spirit unto this duty, he sees how hard his spirit and heart
is brought off to this duty, he sees what need he has of a better principle,
and of further strength than that he has in himself, and therefore he runs to
Christ, and cries unto him, Oh Lord, says he, here is an opportunity for me to
express my love to thee in the forgiving such and such wrongs and injuries,
here is an opportunity for me to do some singular good thing for thee: but I
have no strength of my own, and therefore he cries unto the Lord, and waits
upon the Lord for strength; but as for the natural man, he is as the Ship upon
the Sands, and beats and staves himself there. But

Answ. 3. Again, A natural man when he forgives wrongs and injuries, he aims at
himself; as self is the beginning, so self is the end: he forgives indeed, but
it is not for Christ's sake, but for his own sake, and oh it is a great deal
that a man will do for himself, for his own credit, for his own reputation,
that he may be taken for a good man, for a loving man, for a peaceable man,
that he may not discover his nakedness: for his own credit and name a man will
do a great deal, and so for his own ease, and for his own peace, that he may
not be disturbed in his own spirit, and he says, to render evil for evil will
be an occasion of disturbance to his own spirit, if he retains wrongs and
injuries it will prejudice his health, and bring down his strength; and so for
such ends a mere natural man may be brought to forgive: But now a gracious
heart when he forgives, he eyes the Lord, and does forgive for the Lords sake:
he eyes the honor of God, and the glory of God, that so he may do something
for the lifting up of the name of God, that truth may be well spoken of, that
God and his ways and Christ may be well spoken of, that he may be lifted up in
the world.

Answ. 4. Again, A natural man when he has forgiven wrongs and injuries,
commonly he presently reflects upon himself, and is lifted up because of what
he has done, and this tends to the nourishing of pride in his heart, and ruin
of himself; as Jehu said in another case, Come and see my zeal for the Lord:
And so in this case of a natural man, when he has forgiven wrongs, Come and
see my meekness, come and see my patience, come and see my long-suffering,
there is no man would have passed by such a wrong as I have done, and taken no
revenge: you shall have it often repeated by himself, and that is an aggravation
after he has done it, because he makes it his work to lift up himself: But now
a gracious heart acts contrary to this, he reflects upon the Lord when he has
been enabled to forgive any wrong or injury, he desires to give God the glory,
he is sensible that if the Lord had left him, he had done as evilly as others:
at such a time my heart was boiling, and rolling up and down and meditating
revenge, and the Lord was pleased to bring off my heart to this duty of
forgiving wrongs, and then gives glory unto the Lord; and thus did David, in 1 Samuel 25. whenas the Lord had sent Abigail, and took off David from his purpose
of revenging himself upon Nabal, at the 32, 33 Verses; Oh how does David give
all the glory to God! and so he does not take any thing to himself, but
acknowledge that the free Grace of God was in it, and it was the hand of God
that did keep him, his heart was as prone as any other; Oh blessed be God, and
blessed be the instrument that God sent to prevent me from revenging of my self.

Answ. 5. Another difference is, That a natural man many times may forgive, but
it is through length of time that he wears out the Impression of the wrong and
injury that is done unto him: But now a gracious heart does not let nature
alone to wear it out by length of time, but it is desirous to set grace at work
for the present silencing of that corruption which is boiling and stirring in
the heart; you know Esau's heart was filled with a great deal of revenge
against Jacob, yet when Jacob fled and kept out of his presence twenty years
and more, at last Esau begins to fall from that passion of anger, and when he
comes to his brother he falls upon his neck and kisses him: There is many a
natural man, may through continuance and length of time forget: But a gracious
heart (though corruption may be boiling up) yet Grace will take hold of its
heel, and will presently be fetching in arguments, such arguments as have been
spoken of before, fetched from God, from Christ, from the love of God, from the
command of God, from conformity unto Christ, and by these arguments laid before
the soul, it is desirous to come up unto its duty.

Answ. 6. Again, There is this difference, A natural man may forgive; Ay, but
it is a hard thing for him to render good for evil, and ^o overcome evil with
good: It is possible he may not revenge the wrong that is done unto him; Ay,
but it is a hard matter to overcome evil with good. Now a gracious heart looks
to the Commandment of Christ, of overcoming evil with good, and looks to the
example of Christ, who overcame evil with good; and to the examples of the
Saints, Joseph did good for evil, and Moses did good for evil, and Elisha did
good for evil, and David did good for evil; and he desires herein to be a
Follower of Christ, and to come up to his duty: Now, I say, it is a very hard
thing for a natural man to come up to this duty; though he may forgive and pass
by wrongs and injuries, yet to requite evil with good, and to love them that
hate him, and to pray for them that persecute him and despitefully use him,
this is a hard lesson for a natural man. But then

Quest. 3. A third Question is, Whether is a man bound to forgive wrongs and
injuries, whenas a man does not confess, when they are not confessed and
acknowledged? The place that some make use of to uphold their corruption, is
Luke 17. 4. And if he trespass seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. Therefore some
think from hence, that they are not bound to forgive a man the wrong and injury
that is done unto him, when that they be not confessed. But to this

Answ. I Answer, That a Christian ought to forgive wrongs and injuries, though
not confessed. The ground of my assertion is this, Because we are bound to
forgive as God forgives, and the Lord brings forth a pardon before one word of
acknowledgement can be made: As in that Instance, Before the son spoke one word
of confession, the Father gave him a pardon, and sealed up his pardon unto him,
and fell upon his neck and kisses him, and then he makes confession. Our rule
and practice must be from God himself, that we are bound to pardon and forgive,
though there be not an acknowledgement and confession of the wrong.

Object. But you will say, How can I forgive him the wrong, that will not come
at me, and hearken unto me?

Answ. Thou may forgive in thine own spirit, there ought to be a readiness in
thy heart to forgive; as the Lord was ready to forgive, so thy heart should be
prepared, and ready at all times for forgiving and passing by wrongs and
injuries. Nay, it is not only required that thou should be in a readiness to
forgive: but the Lord requires that thou should pass by wrongs and injuries,
so far as not to meditate upon them, and so far as not to be hindered in holding
forth love unto thy brother. And to say further in answer to this Objection,
Whereas thou say, thou can not; Why? Because he will not come to thee. I
answer, Thou art bound to go to him, if he will not come to thee: thou art
bound to go to that man, or that woman that has done thee wrong, if they will
not come to thee; in Matthew. 18. 15. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee,
go to him, and tell him first privately betwixt thee and him, and if he shall
hear thee, thou have gained a Brother.

Object. This is strange you will say, He has done me the wrong, it is he that
has heaped injuries upon me, and what, should I seek him first?

Answ. Yes, If he will not seek thee, then thou must seek him: It is true, it is
his duty to come to thee, but if he will not come unto thee, then Christ has
imposed the duty upon thee to go unto him, and this is the pattern of God
himself. Poor creatures, we had offended the Divine Majesty, and we are far
from coming to God, nay the louder God calls, the further are we from God, he
pursues after them, they will not come to him, now he will come to them, by his
Word and by his Spirit, and bring his pardon, and make them sensible of their
fault and transgression; so that what the Lord does unto the sons of men in
this particular, it is for our imitation.

Quest. Again, There is another Query, or case of Conscience, Whether may not a
man, in case of wrongs and injuries, endeavor to right his wrongs; as, Whether
may he not use lawful means to right himself? Whether may he not go to use the
Magistrate, or to the Church?

Answ. A man may upon these cautions,

1. First to deal with him in a private way, and so to labor to convince him
of his fault, so far as it is a sin against God; now if a man cannot prevail in
a private way, then he may proceed further, he may take two or three witnesses,
and seek unto the Church. But

2. Secondly, Take this caution, That before a man does this, he must be sure
to forgive it in his own heart as to himself, to pass by the wrong and injury
as to him, and to retain no grudge in his heart as to himself. And then further,

3. Thirdly, Take this caution, In such a case a man may not make himself the
last end, and the great end for which he does these things, for he is bound to
seek the glory of God in the first place, and to do this, that God may have
honor; and in the next place, he is to eye the good of his brother, that his
brother may be reclaimed, that his brother may be convinced, that his Brother
may see the sin that he has committed against God: a man ought to seek
opportunity to right himself, but not for himself, but he ought to eye the
glory of God and the good of his brother, and then he may use such lawful means
as God lays before him.

Quest. There is another Query, as a Case of Conscience, Whether may not a man
that is wronged by another, go and spread his wrong before God, and complain
unto God of the wrong and injury that is done unto him by another?

Answ. I answer unto this, That a man may go unto the Lord and make his
complaint whenas others have done him wrong, but take heed it be not for this
end, that thou may be avenged of thy brother; if there be any desire of
revenge, nay, if there be any desire that the Lord should revenge* this is not
that forgiveness that the Lord calls his people unto.

Object. But you will say then, Why, upon what account may we spread our wrongs
and injuries before the Lord? If we may not desire that God would revenge them,
and requite them according to what they have done unto us, to what end should
we make our complaints before the Lord?

Answ. I Answer, We may complain for this end, That the Lord might consider us,
that the Lord may pity us, that the Lord may deliver us, from the wrongs, and
from the pressures and grievances which are happened to us, but there ought not
to be a desire of revenge; see Prove. 20. 22. Say not thou, I will recompense
evil; but wait on the Lord and he shall save thee: What then, may I not go unto
the Lord? Yes, for this end that the Lord may save thee, but not that the Lord
may take vengeance for thee upon another: he does not say, Go and wait upon the
Lord that he may take vengeance; no, but wait upon the Lord and he shall save
thee, he shall clear up thy good name, and make thine innocence to appear. But
there ought not to be a waiting upon the Lord that he may take vengeance for
thee; this is far from that forgiveness which Christ calls for in the Text.

Nay further, The Lord would have his people to be so far from desiring
revenge, that he would have them to pray that the Lord would forgive others the
wrong which they have done unto them: mark those Examples of Christ and
Stephen, Father forgive them, they know not what they do; and says Stephen in
the like case, Lord lay not this sin unto their charge; so that I say the Lord
would have his people so far from spreading the wrongs and injuries that others
have done unto them, that he would rather have them with Christ to pray, Father
forgive them; and with Stephen, Lord lay not this sin to their charge; and to
pray for them that persecute you, and that speak all manner of evil of you: The
Lord would have his people so far from spreading their wrongs before him upon
this account, that the Lord would avenge them. The deceit of man's heart is such
that man will forgive, that the Lord may reward it, and revenge it; no, this is
not the forgiveness; but that forgiveness which Christ here calls for, ought to
be a through forgiveness, to forgive so far as to pray for them, that the Lord
would forgive their sin unto them; that the Lord would not lay their sin unto
their charge.

SERMON IV.
MATT. 18. 21, 22. Then Peter came to him and said, Lord, how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times: but until seventy
times seven.


YOu may remember the Doctrine which we are insisting upon is, That the often
forgiving of offenses and injuries is a duty which Christ commends unto, and
commands all his Disciples to follow. Not till seven times, but until seventy
times seven. I proved the Doctrine by Scripture, and held forth unto you the
examples of godly men, who had much of the Spirit of the Lord; and the more of
Gods Spirit was in them, the more ready were they to pass by wrongs and
injuries which were done unto them by their Brethren. I gave you the grounds of
the Point, the last day I came to answer some Objections, and Cases of
Conscience. But I come now to the Application and Uses of the Point.

1. Use. It is a word of reproof in the first place. Oh what a sad complaint
may we take up, that this duty which Jesus Christ commands, is so little
practiced in our Generation! that there is such an unreadiness in the spirits
of most men, if not in all men, to come up to this duty, a Gospel duty, a hard
duty; and oh what unreadiness is there in men's spirits to come up unto the
practice of it! Oh! how many are there in the World that do not only come short
of walking up unto this Rule, but do walk quite contrary unto it? And I shall
show you who they are: and oh that God would speak convincingly unto men's
hearts.

1. First, They walk contrary unto this Rule of Christ, Who are easily provoked
unto wrath, who are soon displeased, who are soon put out of the way, take up
every small wrong, every petty offense, nay, are many times provoked unto wrath
upon a conceited injury, for a poor trivial business, that will make a man an
offender for a word: Nay, it may be, displeased for want of a look, or for want
of a Complement: Oh how contrary is this unto the Rule of Christ? Oh! how far
are such spirits from that forbearance, and that long-suffering that the Gospel
calls unto? Where is the grace of long-suffering? Nay, such spirits, they are
far from the exercise of the grace of Love, Love believes all things, and
hops all things, makes the best interpretation of all things: Such spirits as
are easily provoked with every petty wrong and offense, they are far from the
duty of the exercise of this grace of Long-suffering, and come far short of
walking up to this Rule that Jesus Christ has left for his Disciples to walk
in. But,

2. Secondly, They walk contrary unto this Rule of Christ, Who are retentive of
those wrongs and injuries, that are hardly appeased when once provoked, that
will remember one wrong seven days, nay, seventy times seven: when Christ
says, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, let it not once go down upon
your wrath, there are many that let the Sun set seven times, nay, seventy times
seven on their wrath. Let me say to such, I must needs say that such actings
are beneath the actings of a man; there is a heavy Judgment upon such a man;
or such a woman, a heavy Judgment is upon them, and they know not of it; I say
such as can retain wrongs or injuries, think of them seventy times seven days,
speak of them seventy times seven, a Judgment will belong unto them, such a
Judgment as was upon Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4 32. Truly I may say of such men and
women, this Judgment is upon them in a spiritual sense: He was turned out from
among men to dwell with the Beasts, his reason was taken from him, and he was
cast out seven times, yea seven years among the beasts. I say it of such men
and women that have this spirit reigning upon them, whenas anger lodges in
their hearts, they are turned out as among the beasts; what a Judgment is it
to be turned out among the Beasts days and years together? and so is every one
judged of God, till they shall come to know that the most high rules over all,
and that he has taught them this lesson, To forget, and to forgive. But let me
say again of such, Whilst passion so reigns, they give entertainment unto Satan
that foul and unclean spirit: when ever anger and wrath lodges in any man's
heart, the Devil lodges there too; see it in Ephesians 4. 26, 27. Be angry and sin
not; let not the Sun go down in your wrath, neither give place to the Devil.
That man that lets anger lodge in his bosom all night, gives entertainment that
night to the Devil. There is many a man, and many a woman in the world in word
will bid defiance to the Devil or Satan, and yet they open their bosom, their
breast, and their doors, and give entertainment unto Satan; for where anger and
wrath lodges in any man's bosom, the Devil will certainly creep in, they cannot
be parted; these two will go together: If there be anger one night, that night
the Devil will be there too; And oh! that we may not be found to give
entertainment unto such a Guest as Satan is: But they do give entertainment
unto him, that are retentive of wrongs and injuries. But,

3. Thirdly, How contrary do they walk unto the Rule of Christ, That do
aggravate all offenses which are done unto them: aggravate all wrongs and all
injuries, and do improve them to the uttermost, and make the worst of them? So
did Laban whenas he pursued after Jacob when he returned to his own Country,
Genesis 31. Laban pursues after him, 26, 27, 30 Verses, What have thou done, that
thou have stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as
Captives taken with the Sword? Wherefore did thou flee away secretly, and
steal away from me, and did not tell me? etc. Yea thou have stolen away my
Gods. See here is a man that aggravates all to the utmost; twice, thrice, Thou
have stolen away, and stolen away, and carried away my Daughters as Captives,
and thou have stolen away my Gods: Oh, such a Spirit is far unlike unto the
Spirit of God. The Lord Jesus calls offenses against men, Trespasses, and so
Christ would have us to look upon them as Trespasses, as errors, and not to
aggravate them, nor to look upon them as sins of presumption; Oh! that such
hearts were but as ready to aggravate their own offenses against God! We
aggravate all wrongs and all injuries which are done against us, but we are but
little in aggravating our sins and our transgressions against the Lord; Oh that
men could but aggravate both their own sins and the Lords mercies, as they are
ready to aggravate the offenses of their Brother. We commit many sins against
the Lord, and do not aggravate them, we receive many mercies from the Lord, and
do not aggravate them: we do not compass our mercies, and tell the Towers of
them, and behold the goodness of the Lord in them; and yet oh how ready are we
to aggravate our wrongs, and compass them round again and again, and aggravate
them to the uttermost? Oh! how far do such come short of walking up to the rule
of Christ? And let it be considered, what should become of poor creatures. If
the Lord should aggravate thy offenses as thou do thy Brothers, and set them
before thee withal the aggravation of them, how sad would it be unto thee? Oh!
that we might not improve and aggravate all to the height, for that spirit is
very unlike unto Jesus Christ. Again,

4. Fourthly, They are far from this rule That are hardly brought off unto
reconciliation; that although there be confession, and although there be
acknowledgement sometimes, though they that have offended be ready to
acknowledge the offense, and do seek reconciliation; nay, although friends
intercede, and friends plead that they would be reconciled; nay, although God
steps in, and Christ pleads, and Christ beseeches, and Christ commands, and God
sets a man's Conscience upon him, and that speaks unto him, and lets him know he
is out of the way, yet how hard is it for a man to bring off his heart into a
reconciliation with his Brother, after some wrongs and injuries which are done
unto him; and oh, how unlike is this to God, and how contrary is this unto the
rule which Christ here commends unto, and commands his Disciples to follow? But,

5. Fifthly, Again, They are far from this Lesson, that instead of being
reconciled or satisfied, Will not be pacified, till they do avenge the wrong
which is done unto them with their own hand; they will render one evil word for
another, reviling for reviling, and one evil turn for another, an eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth: Nay, are there not some men, that are not ashamed
to profess this before all the World, that they will put up no wrongs, no
injuries, but they will give as good as they bring, and if you provoke me I can
be as hot as you: is not this the language of the World? Oh Sirs! this is
cursed speaking, and cursed acting, altogether contrary to Christ's rule, for a
man to avenge with his own tongue, and his own hand; Oh cursed be the wrath of
Simeon and Levi, whenas they would avenge (that wrong that was done unto their
Sister) with their own hands. Nay, let such men and women consider that they do
but profess before all the World their likeness unto the Devil, while they do
speak and while they do act; I can be as hot as you, and I can give as good as
you can bring; what is that but in plain English to say, I can be as like the
Devil as you? How far is this from a gracious heart, I can put up as many
wrongs as you, and can commit my Cause unto the Lord? This makes you like to
God, and the other like to the Devil himself. Nay, let such men and women
consider, He that gets the best of it in such contests when men's wrath is
stirred up, why truly always he that gets the best of it, has the worst of
it; that man that got the victory, he is overcome: It may be he gains his lust,
he may gain his will and satisfy his lust, but he may lose his peace, he may
not satisfy his own heart, nor his conscience; but always he that has the
best of it, goes with the worst of it. Now such as will pass by wrongs and
injuries, till they do requite them word for word, and wrong for wrong, they do
walk contrary unto this rule which Jesus Christ has given unto his Disciples.
Again,

6. Sixthly and lastly, They come short of Christ's rule, That cannot come up to
Christ's number. We are willing to forgive one or two wrongs it may be, but oh,
how hard it is to come up to Christ's number, to forgive seventy times seven,
four hundred fourscore and ten wrongs unto one man! Oh where is the heart that
can come up to this number of Christ's? Nay, there is such an averseness unto
the practice of this duty which Christ does command, as it is a very hard
matter for Christ's people to believe it is their duty; see what the Disciple
said when Christ had told him his duty, in Luke 17. 4, 5. And if he trespass
against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again unto
thee, saying, I repent: thou shall forgive him. And the Apostles said unto the
Lord, Increase our Faith. When he said, Forgive seven times in a day, it is a
hard matter to bethink it a duty, now Lord increase our Faith; Now, if it be so
hard to believe it a duty, oh how hard is it to come up to the practice of it?
Surely, if the best men in the World had been put upon it, to have given Answer
to Peter's Question, they would never have answered as Jesus Christ has
answered; there is never a man upon earth would have said, Thou must forgive
seventy times seven: But the thoughts of the Lord, and the ways of the Lord,
are infinitely above our thoughts and our ways: it is a hard matter for us to
forgive seven times, and if hard to forgive seven times, then how hard to
forgive seventy times seven? Oh, that the Lord would make us sensible of our
great coming short of this duty, and that the Lord would humble us, lay us low,
that we have come so far short of this rule which our Lord Jesus has left us
and all his Disciples to follow and practice in passing by wrongs and injuries.

2. Use. But the next Use is an Use of Exhortation. First, I shall speak to
those that have done wrong unto their brother. And

Secondly, To them that have received wrongs from their brother.

1. First, To them that have done wrong unto others, that have injured their
brother, or brethren, either by word or action, done them wrong in their Name
or Estate, or any other way; Know that it lies upon you, and is your duty to go
and seek reconciliation: It lies upon you that have done wrong, to go and
tender satisfaction for the wrong which you have done unto your brother, at
least to make acknowledgement of the wrong and injury which you have done: And
to press you unto this duty which is hard,

1. First, Consider you that have done wrong to others, It may be thou have put
the spirit of thy brother or Neighbor out of frame, and thou have unfitted him
for all duty, either unto God or man; thou by thy injury have stirred up his
passion, and his passion has opened a door unto the Devil, and the poor soul
is exposed unto manifold temptations and snares: and oh! how is he filled with
hard thoughts, with hard thoughts it may be not only of thee but of the way of
God, and of the truth of God, filled with hard thoughts against Christ himself?
And although it will be very sad, and a woe unto that man that shall be so
offended; woe to him that shall be offended at Christ for the miscarriages of
men; woe to him that shall be offended at the truth, or any of the ways of
truth from the miscarriages of men: but yet know thou that have done the wrong,
and art the occasion of this, thou art under a woe; and Woe also unto him,
says Christ, by whom the offense comes. And therefore know, that it lies upon
thee as thy duty to go and seek to deliver thy brother out of the snare, thy
going and tendering satisfaction unto him may break the snare of the Devil for
him: thou may prevent a multitude of sins, and therefore oh that God would
persuade such to come up to their duty. In a word, either he that thou have
offended or wronged, carries it impatiently, or bears it patiently a while: now
if he bears it impatiently, and his spirit be put out of frame, and he begin to
fret and fume in his spirit, and be thereby indisposed unto his duty, then by
thy going thou may break the snare of the Devil for him; but if he carry it
patiently, and his spirit be silent before the Lord under those wrongs and
those injuries which thou have done him, thou have the more need then to go and
make acknowledgement of the wrongs thou have done, for certainly God himself
will step in on his part that is wronged, that bears the wrong patiently, and
is quiet in his spirit before the Lord, the Lord will engage against thee;
though he be silent, yet the wrong which thou have done to others, unto such a
man, or such a woman, it will cry very loud before the Lord; and woe be unto
thee if God shall step in and engage against thee; if God be for a man, who can
be against him? if God be for him, better to have all the world engaged against
him, than God to engage against him; therefore go and acknowledge thy error
before thy brother: for if not, the Lord will engage against thee.

2. Secondly, And then again, Consider the patterns and examples of holy men in
Scripture that have given satisfaction, and acknowledged their error to the
full when they have done wrong: as Jacob, he had done indeed a great deal of
wrong, sinned against God, as well as against his Brother, in getting, or
cheating his brother of the blessing: well, the good man returns again to his
brother, and oh how submissive is he unto his brother? He sends many a Present
before him to appease his wrath, and how many soft words does he give him, in
Genesis 3. 3. 5, 8. This is to find favor in the sight of my Lord; and these are
the Children which the Lord has graciously given thy servant; and how many
soft words does he give unto his brother Esau? By which the wrath of Esau was
appeased. And so you see Joseph's brethren, when they sinned against their
brother Joseph, oh how free were they to make an acknowledgement of their wrong
which they had done him, in Genesis 50. 17, 18, 19, 20. they came and made an
humble acknowledgement of all the wrongs they had done unto him: For give, I
pray, the trespass of thy Brethren, and their sin, etc. And at the 18 Verse
it is said his Brethren wept, and fell down before his face, and said, Behold we
be thy Servants; and thus they make supplication that he would forgive the
wrong. And so did Job's friends, they had done him great wrongs, they had
judged of his eternal estate, they concluded he was a hypocrite, they told him
so to his face, they added grief to his sorrow, great was his affliction, they
had done him a great deal of wrong: Well, but in conclusion, when God does
convince them of it, they make acknowledgement of their evil unto Job, as in
Job 42. 8. So then you see it lies upon you that have done wrong unto your
Brother, to go and make acknowledgement of the wrong that you have done.

3. Thirdly, And let me say this further to you, to stir you up to this your
duty, That all the Works which you perform in the service of the Lord, they are
lost till such time as you submit unto this duty, to go and seek
reconciliation; see Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. Mark, would thou bring thy gift, leave thy gift
before the Altar, the Lord will not accept it, till thou be reconciled to
whom thou have done the wrong; leave thy injury there, I will have none of it
till thou have done so: The Lord does not say, go and carry away thy gift, but
leave it there. There is many a man is taken off from his duty to God, because
he cannot bring off his heart to this duty to man, and instead of leaving his
gift, he carries away his gift. Go and be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come again: the Lord would have you do it, and have it done instantly, go and
do it speedily, do it quickly before the time of offering be past; the Lord
will not receive gifts and offerings from that hand, or from that tongue that
has done wrong unto his brother, until such time as there be an
acknowledgement, till such time as there be a reconciliation. So much for that
duty which concerns those that have done wrong unto others, you see what
necessity does lie upon them, that they should go and acknowledge the wrong and
seek reconciliation.

But a second Exhortation is to them that are wronged, and have received injury
from others. The Lord by this Doctrine calls upon you to express your readiness
to forgive and pass by wrongs and injuries: he would have you to forgive, and
to forgive often; for Christ's sake be you willing to pass by all wrongs and
injuries which are done unto you. And I pray consider, That you have an
opportunity here to express your Love unto Christ: I say, you that are Christ's
people, when ever any wrong or injury is done unto you by Neighbor or Brother,
Oh! then remember you have an opportunity of expressing your love to Christ, of
showing your obedience unto the Lord Jesus Christ in a Gospel truth, you have
an opportunity of doing some singular thing for Christ, and therefore take heed
you do not lose the opportunity.

But you will say, Here will be some Objections (for a great deal will be
objected by corrupt nature) but I shall endeavor to take them off all.

Object. 1. But you will say, He has done me the wrong, it is a hard matter
for me to go to him, or to forgive the wrong or injury which he has done to
me, flesh and blood will not submit unto it.

Answ. 1. To which I say, Though flesh and blood will not submit unto it, yet
Christ's Disciples must submit unto it; if thou be one that do profess
nothing but flesh and blood, I shall need to press this no further to you, for
you will never come up unto it: but if thou be one that do profess
submission to Christ, Then are ye my friends, says Christ, and my Disciples,
if you do whatever I command you: Then, when you yield obedience unto the
command of my Gospel.

Answ. 2. And let me say further, If he has done thee wrong, and thou seek
him first, thy acting it shall be most like unto God, for so God acts toward
the sons of men: the sons of men had wronged God, God stoops first, he seeks
reconciliation first, 2 Cor. 5. 20. As though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto him: though he be the wronged,
yet he acts first.

Answ. 3. And let me tell thee further, That the more thou stoopest to him that
has wronged thee, the more peace will redound to thine own spirit another day;
it is a hard duty when thou look upon it at a distance, but when the Lord
helps thee to come up to it, thou shall have most peace in it: and when ever it
be over, it will never repent thee that thou did seek that man that has done
thee the wrong.

Object. 2. Ay, But it will be Objected further: He has done me that wrong
that cannot be repaired, he has wronged me in my good name; oh his words have
been as sharp Arrows, and they have wounded secretly: If he had broken my head,
I could have born it, that would have been healed again, but he has wounded my
good name, taken away my good name, and therefore herein it is hard for a man
to come up to this duty of forgiving of such wrongs.

Answ. 1. But to this I Answer, Thou speak of Arrows that shall wound thee
in thy name: Oh but they are not worse than those which wounded Christ: they
wounded him in his name, in his good name, they reproached him, and reviled
him, yet he cried out, Father forgive them: they are not sharper than those
Arrows that David met with all over, when his good name was wounded; when
Shimei cursed him, he calls him a bloody man; Come out thou bloody man, here is
a sharp Arrow: Ay, but David passes by that wrong and injury in obedience to
God.

Answ. 2. And I desire thee in the second place, to Consider that those Arrows
are not shot without Gods hand, the Lord has a hand in it, and therefore eye
the hand of God: If Gods hand had not been in it, he could not have opened his
mouth against him. David considered that when Shimei cursed him, says he, It
may be God has said unto him, Go and curse David; and so his spirit submits
unto it: Ay, David considered, it is a righteous thing with God, for I have
sinned against, I have wounded the name of that Lord by my transgressions: And
therefore it is a righteous thing with the Lord that my name should be wounded
with these Arrows.

Answ. 3. And let me say further, That as God has a hand in it, so the Lord
might have shot worse Arrows against thee; the Lord might have shot the arrows
of his displeasure against thee: the Lord has shot with man's arrows upon thy
name; but what if the Lord does shoot off his arrows upon thy spirit, a wounded
spirit who can bear? And know if thy spirit be not brought off to pass by those
wrongs and injuries which are done unto thy brother, the Lord may wound thy
spirit, even as he suffers men to wound thy good name.

Object. 3. But thirdly, It will be objected further, (for it is a very hard
thing to come up to this duty, and there are many cavils) and some will say,
The wrong which he has done me, it is known unto others: If it were private I
could pass it by: But what will others think of me if I pass it by? they will
say I am guilty, and I should be counted a Child, or a Fool to pass by so many
wrongs, and such open wrongs and injuries.

Answ. 1. I Answer, Thou say thou shall be counted a Child, when Christ
says thou must be counted a Child, Matthew. 18. 3. If ever you will get to
Heaven, you must be converted and become as little Children; do not stand upon
that, that you must be as a Child; no, thou must become a Child in these
things, or no entrance into Heaven: as the Apostle said in 1 Cor. 14. 20.
Brethren, be not Children in understanding: howbeit, in malice be Children: Be
not Children in understanding unto God, but unto men in malice be Children; the
Lord would have his people be as far from seeking revenge, as a young Child: In
malice be as Children.

Answ. 2. And whereas thou say, Thou shall be accounted a fool, to put up
every wrong and injury, men will account thee a fool for thy labor; I tell
thee, thou shall be accounted a fool by none but those that are so themselves:
for the Lord does account it a point of Wisdom, high Wisdom; see what the
Proverbs of Solomon say, Prove. 14. 29. He that is slow to wrath is of great
understanding, but he that is hasty in spirit exalts folly. See now who is a
fool, he that puts up wrong, or he that is hasty in spirit to avenge himself.
The Word of the Lord says, He that is hasty in spirit, he is the fool; he that
will prevent anger, he that is slow to wrath, he is of great understanding
whatever men account of him: in Prove. 19. 11. The discretion of a man deferreth
his anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression; whereas thou say
it will be thy disgrace, the Lord says it shall be a man's glory to pass by
wrongs and injuries. Many a man whilst he seeks to shun the name of a fool, he
becomes a fool by giving way to wrath, and being drawn on to wrath and revenge
he becomes a fool; think of it, is it not better to be accounted a fool than to
become a fool, when anger lodges in the bosom of fools?

Object. 4. Ay, but it is further Objected, Some will say I never did him wrong
in my life, he has abused me so and so, and I never did him the least wrong in
all my days: here is a hard task. Well, in Answer to this,

Answ. 1. First of all, The Lord may say the same of thee, if thou be one
that the Lord has forgiven: the Lord may say, Oh, I have done such a man good
so and so, and he has rebelled and sinned so against me; I say, may not the
Lord urge this against every one of us? I have done this and that for him, and
I have never done him wrong, yet he has done thus to me: notwithstanding
which, the Lord forgives those transgressions. And let me say,

Answ. 2. Further, That this will be more praiseworthy, and more acceptable
unto God; in 1 Pet. 3. 17. It is better if the will of God be so, that you
suffer for well doing, than for evil doing: If you suffer as evil doers, you
will have little comfort in it; but if suffering in well doing, take it
patiently, and the more patiently you take it, the more acceptable it will be
unto the Lord.

Object. Ay, but I have been a friend unto him (thus will men stand to plead
for their passions, a hard matter it is to forgive) I have been a friend unto
this man, I have done him good all my days, and yet he has wronged me so and
so nevertheless; To which I say,

Answ. 1. Thou have the more cause to pity him, if he be one that does return
evil unto thee for thy good, thou have the better end of the staff; see what
Solomon says in Prove. 17. 13. Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil shall not
depart from his house: Mark, here is a sad threatening; if thou remembrest this,
thou have cause to pity thy brother that has done wrong unto thee, the Lord
has said it, and thou have cause to pity him; Evil shall not depart from his
house.

Again, The Lord may Object against thee, the Lord may say, I have been a
friend to thee and done thee good all thy days, and thou yet sinnest against
me; and if this be not any bar unto the Lord to show forgiveness unto thee, let
not it be a bar to show thy forgiveness unto thy brother.

Object. Ay, but he has done me much wrong, spoken evil of me in every company
he comes in: he has wronged me after reconciliation and peacemaking, he has
done me much wrong: this is a hard task.

Answ. But let me say unto thee, notwithstanding all this thou come short of
the rule of Christ: thou have forgiven often, thou say, have thou forgiven
one Brother seven times? why truly there are many that cannot say they have
exceeded that: But if thou have forgiven seven times, that is no great matter,
thou think it much, but Christ thinks it little: Alas! what is seven times
to seventy times seven, four hundred threescore and two times? Which when done
thou art but come up to the Letter of the Word! Thou have wronged the Lord in
his Name, thou have sinned against God again and again, thou have wronged him
in his Name and in his Glory many thousand times, and yet that is no obstacle
of the Lords mercy toward thee, notwithstanding thine often renewed
provocations. Oh let not the often renewed provocations of thy brother hinder
thee from thy forgiving him.

SERMON I.
GENESIS 5. (...) And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
YOu have an History in this Chapter of the ten first Patriarchs, from Adam
unto Noah: In every Age God had some to bear up his Name in the World; and
amongst those, these ten Fathers were choice Pillars: But here is something
remarkably spoken of Enoch, here was accounted more of him than all the rest:
Enoch walked with God, and he was not. He says of all the rest, they lived so
long, so many years, and then they died, but Enoch walked with God, and he was
not; therefore we should consider who this Enoch was: the New Testament bears
witness of him, and speaks of this Enoch as one that was a choice piece in his
Generation; the Apostle Jude tells you that he was a Prophet, as you may read
in that Epistle, the 14 Verse, Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesies of
thee, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to
execute Judgment upon all, etc. Enoch the seventh from Adam, so Jude describes
him. Some put a great deal in this mystery; The seventh from Adam; and I think
there was something in it as he was a Type of Christ: he was a Type of that
Christ that was to be the Rest of his people, that was to give perpetual Rest,
everlasting rest unto his Sains: his name Enoch signifies one that was
dedicated or separated unto the Lord; and so he was a Type of Christ that was
chosen out among his Brethren, and he was separated and dedicated unto the
Lord, He walked with God; and so did Christ, and therein he was a Type of him:
he was well pleasing unto God, He had this Testimony, says the Apostle to the
Hebrews, he pleased God, Heb. 11. 5* Christ was the object of the Fathers good
pleasure in a special manner, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. But I rather think the Apostle intended no more than Enoch: but only
to distinguish him from another Enoch that was in that Generation, as you may
read of him in Genesis 4. 17. And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bare
Enoch; and he builded a City, and called the City after the Name of his son
Enoch: So this Enoch, in Genesis 5. was a third from Adam, for he was not the son
of Cain, but the son of Jared, and of Adam's posterity by Seth and Rubin Cain;
he came of that seed that was given instead of Abel; when Abel was slain, God
gave another seed instead of Abel, and Enoch came of that seed.

The Church of Christ shall lose nothing by persecution: if Abel be taken away
by bloody hands, the Lord will raise up another seed; and Enoch a choice man is
of that seed to hold up the name of God in the World. When John Baptist was put
in Prison, Christ himself goes forth to Preach the Gospel; the Church of Christ
shall not lose by Persecution, out of the very ashes of the Saints that are
slain shall arise new ones, men upon whom a double measure of the Spirit shall
be given; as it was to Elisha when Elias was taken away. And this by the way,
Let us now more strictly consider what it is that is spoken of this Enoch:
There are two remarkable things, the one is concerning his Life, and the other
concerning his Death: Touching his Life it is said that Enoch walked with God,
he walked with God; nay, through his whole life he walked with God: so many
years as he lived after he begat his first son, three hundred years and
upwards, the Apostle to the Hebrews says, That he pleased God, that is his
walking with God; in Heb. 11. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated that he should
not see death; before his translation it is said, He had this testimony, that he
pleased God; at the latter end of the Verse, He walked with God: it was his
constant aim to please God, in all things he aimed at God in the whole course
of his life: He had this testimony, that he pleased God; he lived in Faith and
Obedience, and by Faith he pleased God, For without Faith, it is said, it is
impossible to please God. He continually exercised Faith upon the promised
Messiah that was to come, he lived in expectation to see his day: and he saw it
beforehand (as Abraham did by Faith) and rejoiced: and so he walked with God,
and by Faith he pleased God. And here is something spoken of his death, or of
his change: It Is said, that after he walked with God, He was not: He walked
with God, and he was not, for God took him.

Some conceive that all this is spoken of his walking with God: He walked with
God, and he was not, he was not in himself, he walked in God and not in
himself, he denied himself and followed God, he made a resignation of himself
up to God, God took him up to himself, but this is something strange! I rather
think the latter part does consider the change of Enoch, his translation out of
this life, He was not, for God took him; and we have good ground for this
Interpretation, because the Apostle gives it thus in that place before* in Heb.
11. 5. it is said, By Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death,
and was not found, because God had translated him: so he was not, that is, he
was not of the World, he was not found any more amongst men. He is said to walk
with God here upon earth, after he had walked with God three hundred years, and
he was not, for God took him. It implies a special way and manner of Enoch's
change, which was not ordinary: he died not as the rest did, but only he was
changed, as those shall be, that shall be found alive when Christ shall come to
be Judge of the World, they shall not die, but they shall be changed: so Enoch
died not, but he was changed, his body did put on Incorruption, it did not
cease to be, but it was changed and translated, so says the Apostle, He was
translated, that he should not see death. God took him up in some extraordinary
way as he did Elias; Elias was translated that he should not see death, he was
taken up in the sight of all his friends, Chariots and Horses of Fire took him
up, and carried him into Heaven, and so it is very likely, that Enoch was
carried up some such way to Heaven: He was taken away from his friends, and
they knew not what was become of him, God took him, they knew not where he was;
He was not found, says the Apostle, which does intimate, that his friends
sought him, as the friends of Elias, they went to seek him when he was taken up
to Heaven, so it is like he was sought for, when he was taken up to heaven, but
he was not found, God took him up; the manner of his translation was
extraordinary, even as that of Elias* Enoch before the Law, and Elias under the
Law, were taken up into heaven. But more of that hereafter. I shall only for
the present make some entrance, and look upon this Enoch as a man that was a
choice piece in his Age, in his Generation: special notice is taken of him more
than of all the rest, Enoch walked with God.

You may observe, That in all Ages God has some of his Servants that are more
eminent than others; God has some in all Ages, that walk more close with him,
that are in a very remarkable manner holy, and gracious, and hold forth a great
deal of God to the World; all the ten Patriarchs that were spoken of in the
Text, they were gracious men, and they all walked with God: but it is said of
Enoch as if he was alone; Enoch walked with God, which does intimate, that he
walked with God in a remarkable manner, he walked more close with God than all
the rest of his Brethren, than all the rest of his Generation: Enoch walked
with God; God has some choice servants in all Ages: he loves all his Children
dearly, as a father loves all his Children dearly, but some are nearer him than
others, some are set upon the knee, and laid in the bosom when others stand by:
choice affections are in the Lord to some, and made known to some. A Prince
shall carry it respectively to all his Favorites, he will show favor to all: but
yet some come nearer him than others, they know more of his mind, and are more
intimate with him, they are taken into his privy Chamber, into his secret
Galleries there to walk with him. And thus the Lord deals with some of his
Saints: Enoch was a favorite in his Generation: Afterward comes Noah, and Noah
was a favorite in his Generation; see Genesis 6. 9. These are the Generations of
Noah: Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Generation, and Noah walked with
God. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Generation, Noah walked with God
in a remarkable manner, he kept more close to God than all the World beside:
But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord, it is said, when all the World
was drowned. Abraham was such a man in his Generation, he was a friend of God,
God revealed more to him than to all the World besides: I will hide nothing
from Abraham, says God in Genesis 18. 17, 18, 19. Shall I hide from Abraham that
thing which I do, says God, he will teach his Children and Servants, I will not
hide from Abraham; he was Gods choice favorite, and therefore he will not hide
from Abraham the thing that he will do. After Abraham comes Job, he was a
favorite in his Generation: it was thought upon good ground, that he lived
betwixt Abraham and Moses; when ever it was, he was a favorite in his
Generation, Have thou considered my Servant Job, that he is a perfect and
upright man, one that fears God and eschews evil, and there is none like him on
the earth: Here is a high commendation, he is a man worthy to be considered,
God himself considers him, a perfect and upright man, one that walked up close
with God, as there was none nigher him in his Generation, there was none like
Job, he was the choicest Scholar that God had in the World, and God taught him
more than all the World besides, he was the greatest proficient in all the
School of God, God gives him high commendations. And then comes Moses, he is a
favorite in his Generation, He saw God face to face: there was none like unto
Moses, none had such communion with God as Moses had in his Generation, Come
thou up into the Mount, he was Gods favorite, he walked with God as Enoch did,
and there was none like him. And so when Moses was gone, Joshua in his
Generation was one that Followed God fully, none but Caleb and Joshua followed
God fully, they were the choice in their Generation. And so afterward David he
was a man after Gods heart, a choice man in his Generation. And so Hezekiah,
and then Josiah, of them both there was none like them in their Generation,
there was none like Hezekiah in his Generation, and none like Josiah in his
Generation, they were choice favorites in their Generation. Our Lord Jesus
loved all his Disciples dearly, and took care of them: but there was one of
them lay in his bosom, there was one that was always next him, and that was
John the beloved Disciple; Joh. 21. 20, 21. Peter saw the Disciple whom Christ
loved, who leaned on his Breast at the Supper; he was nearer Christ than all
the rest; and so he instructed all the Disciples, and revealed great mysteries
to them all, but the greatest of mysteries he revealed unto James, Peter, and
John, in the Mount; and none saw Christ's transfiguration but they three: they
were choice Pillars in their Generation. As it is in the natural body, so it is
in the body of Christ, there are some members that are nearer the head than
others: all do partake of the same life, and of the same spirit, which runs
through the whole body; Ay, but some are nearer the head than others, there is a
greater dignity put upon some than others; some are more useful than others;
some are of greater growth than others, and some have more strength than
others: So it is in the body of Christ; there are some of Christ's members that
he looks upon, and holds forth to the World as choice pieces, such as Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Job, Moses, Joshua and Caleb, David, Hezekiah and Josiah were;
all have not the same helps, and therefore all come not to the same growth, all
have not the same means of knowledge, the same means of getting nearer God, and
growing up in spiritual strength and stature, there are some that are beloved
of God that are but seldom rained upon, upon others showers of Heaven do
distill every day.

Again, All have not the same Impediments, the same hindrances that some have,
and therefore some outstrip others. Grace in some of Gods people meets with an
abundance of opposition, through the abundance of corruption; they meet with
more temptations than others, there is more blocks cast in the way of some: the
World is a great impediment, and proves a great snare to some, and they are
kept back from getting so nigh unto God as others. There are some that God does
enable to follow the Lamb where ever he goes; Oh, they get nigh God, they are
choice men in their Generation, such as are enabled to follow the Lamb where
ever he goes. There are some that God makes very attentive unto his Word, their
souls are continually bent toward God, and toward his Word, and they are
listening continually to hear what God will speak, and when God will speak, they
are nigher God than others; there are some that lay up the Word of God in their
hearts, ponder the words of Christ, as Mary did, she pondered the sayings of
Christ in her heart, and hid them in her heart, she pondered them; why, these
get nearer God than others. There are some that God makes wise to know their
time, and to take their season, to improve the opportunity that God puts into
their hands, when God calls them to follow him, when the Lord breaths and stirs
them up, then to stir up themselves, and to take hold of his name; they are
taught of God to know the opportunity and season in which they may get nighest
to God by following him. When God draws a soul after himself, when some cord of
love is cast about it, oh it breaths toward God in its spirit, when the spirit
of God is breathing in their hearts; now those whom God thus calls to improve
their opportunity, and to do the work of the Lord with all their might, and
with all faithfulness as Christ did when he was upon earth, these are the men
and women, who get near God, of whom it may be said as of Enoch, that they
walked with God above all their Generation. And for the ground of this you must
know,

That God has several works to put his people upon, he has several works,
several services, and several sufferings, and so accordingly he gives out
strength, and accordingly he draws into nigher communion with himself. There
are some that God has appointed for great services in the world, such as these
had need be exceedingly strengthened by sweet communion with God, that their
spirits may be upheld; and some God brings forth to great sufferings, and
therefore they had need have a great deal of strength from God that they may be
carried through. Job was a choice man, and God had great sufferings for him,
and there was none like him, nor no sufferings like to his in his Generation,
the Lord fitted him with abundance of grace to go through his sufferings. Our
Lord Jesus Christ before he was tempted had abundance of his Father, to his
comfort there came a Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased; a voice from heaven does evince and declare that he was the
Son of God. The Lord Jesus had great sufferings, great conflicts, great
temptations to grapple with, therefore his Father does strengthen him
exceedingly: there were some that were set upon a hill, lights set upon a hill
cannot be hid, the eyes of many are upon them, the endeavors of all the powers
of darkness are to blow out such lights, the name of God is greatly interested,
and greatly concerned in them, and therefore they had need have a great deal of
clear light from Heaven, they had need be exceedingly comforted, and
strengthened in their spirits by the presence of God, and by most near and
intimate fellowship and communion with him; therefore the Lord disposes that
some of his servants shall be choice and excellent in their Generation, to be
near to him as Enoch was who walked with God. Now therefore to apply things.

1. Use. I beseech you Brethren, That you would seek after this high measure of
Grace and Holiness, that you would labor to get nigh unto God, get as close
unto God as may be, that you may walk with God in an eminent manner in your
Generation, as Enoch did: you have God himself for your pattern before you; Oh
how the Saints should strive to be thus minded, Be ye perfect, for your
heavenly Father is perfect; you have God before you, you have Christ before you
for your pattern. I do not say, be as holy and perfect as the rest of your
friends and neighbors, and measure your holiness by theirs; but you should
strive to go beyond all, beyond all creatures, look at none as your pattern but
God and Christ: labor to get up to the height of eminency, the life of God in
Christ; you can never get too nigh God, you can never have too much of him,
there is no danger in following hard after God, there is certainty in the
things of God. A man may have too much of the things of the world, there is
danger in it, but a man cannot have too much of the knowledge of God, and of
communion with God; a man may have more, and too much of the World, as he
cannot use it to the glory of God; Oh there is danger in the World in striving
to be the greatest, to be the richest in the World, there is great danger; but
there is no danger in striving to be eminent in grace, in striving to get
nearer to God, and to walk close with God: this is the very glory of Heaven,
it is worth the seeking after. My Brethren, press hard to get more nigh to God,
to stick close to God; it is the glory of heaven: heaven differs only in degrees
from that which is given out to the Saints here; it is the same in essence; it is
the glory of heaven to know God, to enjoy God, to walk with God, To follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes; it is the glory of heaven: and therefore I beseech
you, that you would now look upon it as your glory to follow God fully, as your
glory to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes.

2. Use. In the second place, It may be a word of encouragement unto poor
Christians, weak Christians, you that are sensible you are not the Enochs of
your Generation: Oh the distance that is in your spirits (you see) betwixt God
and you! Are you pressing on after God, why then let me say to you, That you
have the same for essence, that the best of the Saints have, though you have
not the same in degree; I say, you that have the least interest in Christ, you
have the same for essence which the best Saints on earth have, and the same
which the spirits of just men made perfect in heaven have, the difference is
only in degrees, it is not in kind, and therefore press on hard that you may
have more of it. It Is not impossible that you should come to the same height
with them, because the difference is only in degrees, it is not in kind. It Is
true, where there is nothing but gifts and parts, there the difference is in
kind. If a man has the most excellent parts in the world, he can never attain
unto that which a Christian has; parts can never attain unto grace, but the
least measure of grace may grow up to the greatest in time, for the difference
is only in degree. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a grain of Mustard seed:
why, a grain of Mustard seed when it is sown, you know how little it is, but it
grows up to a great height: where there is rooting in Christ, where there is a
principle of grace in any soul, there shall be a growth, and that soul shall
never leave growing till it grow higher and higher, as tall as heaven it self,
and there it has its full growth and its full perfection. But let me tell you
that say, you shall never be eminent in your Generation; let me say thus to
you, You have the same Mediator, that the chiefest of the Saints have, even you
that are weakest; all they have, comes through his hand, and it is for his sake:
you have the same Mediator that they have, Oh why do you not improve this
Mediator more, that more may be given out through him? If you were more in
improving and more in waiting upon him, seeing you have the same Mediator, you
shall have the same welcome in heaven with the most choice of Saints: you have
the same Fountain to go unto, and therefore do not say, you shall never be
eminent in your Generation, you have the same fountain, All we from his fullness
receive grace for grace; the choicest have nothing but what they receive from
Christ and his fullness, and the same fountain is as full for you as for them;
nay, there is the same freedom of access for you as for them, there is the same
freeness in Christ to be given out to you; it is a fountain set open, set open
for Judas and for Jerusalem, it is set open for the weakest, that they may come
and drink and be cheared in their spirits; nay, let me tell you that the heart
of Christ is more careful of you than of others, the heart of Christ is most
careful of his weak ones. Oh, what provision does he make for them? Simon
Peter, do thou love me? why then keep my Lambs: if thou love me, Peter, by
all the love thou bear to me, then take care of my weak ones, Feed my Lambs:
and he takes care himself, great care; in Isa. 40. 11, 12. it is said there what
Christ the good Shepherd shall do, that He shall gather the Lambs with his
arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young: there is the special care that Christ takes of you that are weak.

Nay, Further for your encouragement, let me tell you, that there is the same
blessing upon you that is upon the strongest of those Saints that God has upon
the earth: therefore there is way made for your growth and increase; when God
makes the new creature, when ever he brings forth the new creature he blesses
it: as when he created the World, he gave it his blessing, Increase and
Multiply, and so to the Trees, Be fruitful: and so where ever the new creature
is, there is the special blessing of the Creator goes along with it: he says
to them all, Be fruitful and multiply, be fruitful in old age, and in Rev. 22.
11. Let him that is holy, be holy still: there is a blessing upon every
righteous holy man though never so weak, let him be holy still, oh let him be
more holy, let him increase in holiness and righteousness; there is the blessing
of Christ in the New Testament, oh wait and look for this blessing, and know
that the blessing of Christ is prevalent: the Curse of Christ is heavy, it made
the Fig Tree die to the very root, wither to the very roots: but the blessing
of Christ can make roots that are withered to spring up and flourish.

But again (to say no more) for your encouragement, Consider what promises the
Lord has made to the weak, to those that are weak of strength, which promises
are in a special manner to be accomplished in the latter days, as in Zach. 12.
8. In that day shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that
is feeble among them at that day, shall be as David, and the house of David
shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them. Zachariah says that
there is a time a coming, that the weak and feeble shall be as David, and they
who are as David, shall be as the Angel of the Lord. David I told you was a
choice man in his Generation, he was a man after Gods own heart, that walked
with God most part of his life, he was strong to do great things for God; now
he that is weak shall be as David, and he that is as David shall be made strong
as the Angel of the Lord. When you are in the midst of the sense of your
weakness, look upon these promises, and desire the Lord, that he would hasten
the accomplishment of them. Well, then I beseech you suffer me to press this
upon you, that you would labor to get as nigh God as possible you may, get as
nigh God as may be; do not think it enough that you have an interest in Christ,
that you have that which will carry you to heaven; Oh, let the spirit of a
Child, of a son, this day be set upon you: seek not enough only to carry you to
heaven, but seek more than so, seek that that will make you eminent unto God in
your Generation, that which will make you exceeding serviceable unto God, and
to your Generation in your Age, even this strife should there be to get into
the very heart of God, Oh that God would reveal this to you, that you are one
of his choice favorites. The nigher you are to Christ, the more you shall see
of heaven, the more you shall know of his Mind, of his Will, and of his Word:
you think that Disciple was a happy man that leaned on Christ's bosom, the
Disciple whom Christ loved, sat next him, leaned on his breast; Oh how should
you press after this in spirit, to get as nigh Christ as may be, to lean on the
bosom or breast of Christ as that beloved Disciple did! I tell you, you that do
so, you shall hear more from Christ than others do. Christ sometimes speaks
softly, and there is none hear what Christ speaks but those that sit next him;
the soul that sits next him and cleaves closest unto him, as Enoch did, hears
many a word that other Christians cannot hear: Enoch had choice things revealed
unto him, God did reveal things to come unto him, because he was the choice of
God, and sat close to God. Oh, that you would labor after this, to get near
unto God, there is many sweet refreshments that you may meet with, there is many
a good bit that you shall get of him, which others of his Children don't taste
of, by reason they follow him not close. Oh don't lose the sweetness of this!
How sweet is it to hear a word from Christ, and how refreshing is that portion
that Christ carves out. Strive in your Generation that you may be like Enoch,
who in his Generation stuck close to God, and walked with God.

SERMON II.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Made entrance the last day, where I opened the words to you, we considered
that commendation that was given to Enoch, He walked with God; so did the rest
of the ten Patriarchs spoken of, but notice is taken only of Enoch, Enoch
walked with God, he walked with God in a special manner, he walked more close
with God than the rest of the men in that Generation, and therefore it is spoken
of him as if he alone had walked with God, And Enoch walked with God.

Two things I propounded to be discust, before* I come to the main general
Proposition:

First of all, That the Lord has some special Servants that walk more close
with him in their Generation than others. And then,

Secondly, That the Lord takes special notice of such; here is a special
character upon them, some special honor that God puts upon such. I spoke of
the former the last day; and we reflected upon it in way of Application.

I desire that all Gods people would labor to get as nigh God as may be: don't
content your selves that you have interest in Christ, that you have that which
will carry you to heaven; it is a poor low spirit to take up here: but seek
after that which may make you an honor unto God, and serviceable in your
Generation, that you may walk with God in special, as sometimes Enoch did. We
spoke also by way of encouragement unto those that are weak, as if that you
should never get so nigh God, that you should never be able to walk with God as
Enoch. You have the same principle that have interest in Christ as the
strongest; though you be weak and never so weak, Christ is the same principle
of life in you, and therefore you don't differ from them; you look upon Saints
that are remarkable, and you are discouraged when you view the distance between
you and them: but know, the difference is not in kind but degree; if the
difference were in kind, there were no hopes of attaining to that measure, all
the gifts and parts in the World cannot grow up to grace; but where there is a
principle of grace, though never so small, though it be but as a grain of
Mustard seed, it shall grow, and never leave growing, till it grow as high as
heaven. You have also the same Mediator (though weak) in whose name you may
come and plead acceptance, as well as the strongest; you have the same Fountain
to go unto, infinite fullness that is ever running over, willing to communicate;
there is the same freeness of access for you, this Fountain is set open for you
as much as for the strongest; it is the blessing of the new creature, Be strong,
let him that is holy, be holy still, and him that is righteous, be righteous
still, in Rev. 22. 11. The blessing is upon him that has Christ and
Righteousness, let him be more righteous, and more holy, let him go from
strength to strength, until he appear before God in Sion; this is the blessing
upon him: therefore your weakness should be no cause of discouragement. You
have also the Promises, that the time shall come, That those that be weak shall
be as David (a Prophecy concerning the latter times) he that is weak shall be
as David, and he that is as strong as David shall be as the Angel of the Lord:
So that you that are weak in your own apprehensions should be strengthened,
even as David, who was one that walked with God in a remarkable manner in his
Generation. Therefore get as nigh God and Christ as may be: sit at his
Footstool; the nearer you are to Christ, the more you sit under the dropping
of his lips, the more sweetness of Christ will fall into your spirits; the more
his eye is over you, the better you are in his thoughts, and you shall have
many a good bit, if you follow him closer than others. To proceed to the second
Proposition,

2. Prop. That the Lord takes special notice of such as do walk with him in a
remarkable manner. The Lord takes special notice of such, there is some special
character of honor which the Lord will put upon such as walk with him so as
Enoch did: it is written twice in this Chapter, that Enoch walked with God. God
will have special notice taken of him; they all walked with God, the rest of
the Patriarchs, but notice is taken only of Enoch's walking. The New Testament
takes notice of Enoch's walking with God: The Apostle Jude speaks of Enoch the
seventh from Adam, which I had occasion to speak of the last day. And the
Apostle to the Hebrews takes notice of Enoch, as one that lived by Faith, and
by Faith was translated; and before he was translated he had this Testimony,
That he pleased God.

But I shall show you how the Lord takes notice, special notice of such of his
Servants as do walk closely with him, in diverse particulars.

1. First of all, The Lord bears witness to them, and he bears witness of them
in a special manner, I say the Lord bears witness to them, and bears witness of
them. He bears witness to them; he spoke evidently, clearly unto them; he
clears up their evidences for heaven; he speaks by his spirit unto theirs, and
they are his witnesses in the World; they bear witness to the name of God, and
the truth of God, to the Word of the Lord, the Lives of such of his Saints bear
witness to the Word, they are a Comment, an Exposition of the Word of the Lord,
and therefore the Lord bears witness to their spirits, they have special work
to do for God in the World, and therefore God comes in with a special witness
and testimony of his spirit with theirs, that he might strengthen them, and
carry them through all their undertakings which are for God. Paul was a chosen
vessel, and was to bear up the name of God before the Gentiles, and therefore
the Lord comes and speaks unto his spirit in a special manner in strengthening
of Paul, Paul fear not, I am with thee. The Prophet Jeremiah was to bear
witness for God, to do great things for God, and therefore God bears witness to
his Spirit in Jer. 1. 18. he sends him forth and tells him, He had made him a
Brazen Wall, and an Iron Pillar, and he would carry him through all the work,
and all his enemies should not be able to harm him: they wait for the witness
of God, for the witness of the Spirit of God, their souls are always
hearkening, and they are listening what God shall speak: they will not be put off
with any other Testimony till God speaks, their soul is not satisfied, God
therefore comes in, and by his spirit witnesses it himself, he writes their
evidence fair, and writes it with the blood of his Son, and casts it into their
bosom, and they are careful to keep their evidence clear when God has once
given it out to them, they are careful to keep it from blots and blurs, and to
read over their evidences in Christ, and put it into their bosom: there is
nothing they delight in, but in reading it again and again, and therefore the
Lord does witness unto such. And he does not only bear witness to them, but he
bears witness of them; a high honor for God to bear witness of poor creatures:
to bear witness of them, Have thou considered my Servant Job? Job 1. 1. God
gave witness of him, That Job is a perfect and upright man, one that feared
God; he was one that eschewed evil: God bears witness of him: and so in Job 2.
3. the Lord says, Have thou considered my servant Job, that he is a perfect
and upright man, none like him in the earth? Mark, what a high Testimony God
gives of him: Job durst not say so of himself, he durst not stand upon his own
perfection, he durst not say he was perfect, but God said so: his friends would
not say so of him, but they accused him, and said he was an Hypocrite, because
they saw the hand of God went out remarkably against him; Ay, but God bears
witness of him, whatsoever his friends say, God will convince them, that they
judged with unrighteous judgment: therefore see what God says to Eliphaz the
Temanite, Job 42. 7. My wrath is kindled against thee and against thy two
friends: for you have not spoken of me the thing that is right, like my servant
Job. Job was a perfect and upright man. Their walking with God is hid from the
World, it is in secret, their spirits are in secret carried after God, which are
the choicest, and most curious ways of their walking with him in the World,
they see not, and cannot eye their walking with God, but God will take notice of
what they have done for him in secret, and it shall be published upon the house
top; God will bear witness of such of his Servants as walk closely with him in
their Generation, he will bear witness of them before men; will bear witness of
them either in their lives, or at their death, or else after death; in their
lives, as he did of Job; at their deaths, he will give such a testimony of them
at death as shall make even their very enemies wish with Balaam, Oh that I
might die the death of the righteous, and that my latter end may be like unto
his; and then he will bear witness of them after death, when they are gone, I
say, many Ages and Generations after they are dead and gone, God will bear
witness of them, as in Heb. 11. where you have it recorded of all the
Patriarchs, that by Faith they pleased God: and thus God will bear witness of
such of his servants as will close with him in their Generation. And this is
the first thing that God takes notice of in them, so as to bear witness of
them, and to them.

2. But again, Secondly, God sets up such of his servants as Patterns to others
for them to imitate: He sets them up as patterns; this is a high honor to them
for others to look unto: they are the very Images of God, they are the very
Images of Christ, and therefore God sets them to be patterns to be imitated.
Abraham that walked with God, is made a pattern to all in his Generation; and
Moses a pattern of meekness, and Job a pattern of patience, You have heard of
the patience of Job; and therefore says the Apostle, James 5. 7. And therefore
be ye also patient unto the coming of our Lord. Be ye also patient; you have
heard of the patience of Job: It Is true, God himself is the first and highest
pattern, Be ye holy as your heavenly Father is holy, be ye perfect as he is
perfect; there is a suitableness in the spirits and affections of the Saints in
their desires unto this pattern of God himself which is set before them; for as
the perfection of God is infinite, as the holiness of God is infinite, so there
is a kind of infiniteness in their desires and affections in their pursuits
after God; but when they look upon their actings and seize, they see they
come infinitely short of God, and are apt to be discouraged, and therefore now
the Lord has set up other patterns for his weak Saints to look unto, and
therefore they are such as themselves, to see how much they have attained to in
their Generation. You have heard of the patience of Job: and so in the same
Chapter, the Apostle tells them of Elias, a pattern which God has set before
them: he calls them to wait upon God by prayer; Elias, though a man subject to
passion as we are, yet He prayed and it rained not, and he prayed again and it
did rain: A man subject to the like passion as you are, and yet he prayed and
it rained not, and he prayed, and it rained; therefore look you to be as
patterns; this is another honor that God is pleased to put upon his servants,
he makes them patterns to others. But again,

3. Thirdly, The Lord does boast of such of his servants as do thus: he boasts
and makes it his glory, he sets them before, for all the world to look upon and
behold his glory in them, in Rev. 14. 4. These are they which follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, let all the world look upon them, and behold the glory of
God shining in them: these are they that follow the Lamb wherever he goes; you
know what God said to Satan concerning Job, Job 1. 8. and 2. 3. Have thou
considered my servant Job? I have one servant that is worth the considering,
says God, Have thou considered my servant Job? Have thou set thine heart upon
my servant Job, says he? Thou have been compassing the earth, but have thou
seen such a one as my servant Job? Thou have many slaves to boast on, and many
drudges, but I Will compare with thee above all: my servant Job, have thou
considered him? he is a perfect and upright man, one that fears God and
escheweth evil. And so David, God seems to glory in him, that he had such a
servant as David, in Acts 13. 22. I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man
after mine own heart, that shall execute all my Will: as good a servant as I
desire to have, he will fulfill all my Will, and he is according to mine own
heart, he will do all my Will: God glories in it that he had such a servant as
David.

4. Fourthly, As God glories in such, so he delights exceedingly in such, as
walk closely with him, they are the Object of his delight: it is said in Cant.
7. 5. that the King is held in his Galleries: he sees such an excellent piece,
he is held by his affections, and he cannot get out, Oh thou have ravished my
heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished mine heart with one of thine
eyes, with one chain of thy neck: Behold the beauty of thine eye, that eye of
Faith, that eye of thine ravishes my heart, it wounds the heart of Christ, it
made him lovesick, there was such a dart from the eye that ravished his heart,
great delight the Lord takes in such; Oh, says the Father, here is the very
Image of my son in such and such a Saint, here is the very likeness of my son, I
cannot but look upon this picture with delight, here is the very countenance of
my son, the very eye of my son, Doves eyes, the very cast of his eye, and it is
always looking heavenward, the very cast of the eye of thee my son: here is
the very lip of my son that dropped sweet smelling Myrrh; here is the very gate
of my son, his very carriage, every foot-step is like the footsteps of my son,
I cannot but delight; the Father saw the Image of the son in such, and the son
sees the Image of the Father in such, and therefore cannot but rejoice and
delight in them with exceeding great joy. That Is a fourth. But again,

5. Fifthly, The Lord does manifest much love unto such: there is another
special favor that such as walk close with God meet withal: Oh that all this
which is spoken might refresh your hearts. The Lord manifests special love and
favor to such; he communicates more of his love, they shall have the very
heart of God, God unfolds, he will unbowel himself unto them; the Lord cannot
contain it, he falls upon them, falls upon their neck and kisses them, as
Joseph did upon his Brethrens necks, in Genesis 45. 14, 15. he could contain no
longer, fell upon their necks, discovered himself unto them, I am your brother,
says he, I am Joseph: there is abundance of love, precious love that the Lord
does reveal unto such; he will satiate and satisfy their soul with kindness;
there is a promise that is made in the Psalms 36. 8. He will satisfy their
souls with his loving kindness, they shall drink abundantly, and be satisfied
with the fatness of thy house: they shall taste abundance, not only so but be
satisfied, taste and be satisfied, with the goodness, and love of the Lord;
there is none drinks so much, nor none meet with such soul-satisfaction, as
those that walk close with God.

6. Sixthly, The Lord reveals his secrets unto them, he will withold nothing;
Shall I hide from Abraham? The Lord will reveal it unto such of his Servants,
Shall I hide from Abraham? Genesis 18. 17, 18. seeing Abraham shall become a great
Nation, and he will teach his Children: The Lord knows to whom he gives out,
such as will give out to others and be communicative to others, and therefore
the Lord reveals himself unto them: they stand nigher God than others,
therefore they see more than others, understand more than others, and standing
upon the hill top they see further than others: God reveals special things to
them: Enoch the seventh from Adam Prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord
comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they
have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners
have spoken against him. Again,

7. Seventhly, The Lord imployes such upon special Services: such as walk more
closely with him, shall do the great works of God in the world; great things
are spoken of to come to pass in the latter days, and who shall be Gods
Instruments to bring his great works to pass? Why, the Lord will make wise such
as walk closely with him, in Rev. 17. 14. The Army of the Lamb, such as he will
do great things by, they were such as are called faithful and chosen; there is
that commendation given of them, And they that are with him are called faithful
and chosen: These shall be his Instruments of the great work to bring down
Babylon by, to do his great work by, these shall be men of choice spirits,
called, chosen and faithful, God will make use of them to bear up his name in
the world, and he will use them as Instruments to bring to pass the great
things he has spoken of: they are Instruments that will give all to God, and
therefore God will make them Instruments of great work to him; and it is their
study that the Lord alone may be exalted, and therefore the Lord will make use
of such for special service. But again in the eighth place,

8. Eighthly, The Lord takes special notice of them, for he puts such a luster
upon them as shall make them to shine in the eye of the world; this is another
honor that God is careful to put upon them, as that they shall shine in the
eye of the world; that they shall either be respected or feared. Sometimes the
Lord makes the very wicked in the world to respect them. John that was a
burning and shining light, John Baptist, how did God make even Herod himself to
respect him? Even the wicked of the world are convinced by them, and God does
enforce the world to approve of them, to approve of the way they walk in, and
to approve of their Integrity. There Is a promise in Rev. 2. to the Church of
Philadelphia, that God would make their very enemies to come and worship before
them, and to acknowledge that God has loved them; there is such a luster upon
them, upon their spirits, and lives, and carriages, when they walk close with
God, that the men of the world are forced to confess as of Christ, Never man
spoke as this man, and certainly these men are gracious men, what ever the
world thinks of them, and oh that there were no worse, and that I might die the
righteous man's death, that my latter end may be as his; they are thus convinced
by that luster that is upon them, or at least, God makes the world to fear
them; they are a dread unto the world: Abraham was mightily feared by
Abimelech, and Abimelech feared him, and sent to make a Covenant with him in
Genesis 1. 22. he sent his great Captain to make a Covenant with Abraham, and why?
Because they perceived that God was with him, and God prospered him, and
therefore they are afraid that Abraham should be their enemy; though they were
strangers to God, yet the fear of his people, the fear of Abraham fell upon
them: what a dread is many a godly man unto the wicked, their very
conversations do convince them, the stirrings of God, the appearances of God in
them do convince them: and therefore they cry out many times of them as the
Devils did of Jesus of Nazareth, Why art thou come to torment us: So a man that
walks close with God is even a torment upon them: the fear and dread of them
fall upon their enemies; that is another honor that God puts upon those that
walk closely with him.

9. Ninthly, Again, To such as walk closely with God, there is an abundant
entrance for them into the Kingdom of God, I say, such shall meet with an
abundance of entrance into the Kingdom of God; so says the Apostle in 2 Pet.
1. 11. He bids them there Give all diligence to make their calling and election
sure, be not idle, do not stand at a stay, press on, For so there shall be an
entrance made, an abundant entrance shall be ministered unto you, into the
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: All Gods people do not meet with
this abundant entrance, there are some that creep in at the narrow gate, some
sail to Heaven with quarter wind, others go with full sails of Assurance. Now
this seems to be promised to those that walk most closely with God, that give
all diligence to wait upon God, and all diligence to increase in knowledge, and
grace, full sails of Assurance and an abundant entrance shall be ministered unto
them into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But again,

10 Tenthly, In the last place, Such as walk with God, God makes their memorial
to be sweet, the memory of the just shall be sweet when they are dead and gone,
their names shall not rot, they shall be Embalmed, God will have them to be
remembered unto many Generations; Abel, though dead, he is yet remembered, God
will take care that his Saints shall be remembered. Enoch walked with God, and
though he was cut off, yet Enoch must be remembered, though it were many hundred
years before Moses, yet God would have Moses to write it twice, Enoch walked
with God. Now God will have the very men in the world to honor their Names
when they are dead and gone; the Prophets many of them were cut off by the
wicked Jews, but God caused their names to be precious when they were gone: and
the Scribes and Pharisees (as wicked as they were) yet, notwithstanding, they
honored the name of a Prophet; and your Fathers killed the Prophets (though
odious whilst they lived, though cut off, as Christ himself was, and thought
not worthy to live on the face of the Earth) yet their Names are precious and
in memory: and thus you see that the Lord takes special notice of such of his
Servants as walk most closely with him; he knows that the Devil takes special
notice of them, and therefore he will take notice of them; he knows that the
world takes special notice of them to envy them, the spite of the world is
against them, and therefore God will take them into special favor with
himself: there are none so hated, none so maligned as those that walk most
close with God; there is no such eyesore to a carnal man, as one that walks
close with God: Oh, the light and glory of God that does appear in such a Saint
does convince the men of the world, and upbraids them, shames them, sets their
Consciences on work, convinces them at what distance they are from God, and
therefore it is that the world hates them, there is none that meets with more
spite from the world than they, and therefore the Lord takes special notice of
such, and there is none that the Devil strikes more at, than those that walk
closest with God: for they are like a light set upon a Hill, and the Prince of
the Air will endeavor to blow it out; they are as Beacons set upon a Hill, and
the Devil knows that if he can throw them down, there will fall many with them.
Have thou considered my Servant Job? have thou set thy heart upon him? I doubt
not but thou have considered him, thou have maligned him, sought to cast him
down from his station. Simon, Simon, Satan has a desire to have you, that he
may winnow you, but I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not; of all
others, Satan desires to have Peter, that he might winnow him. Such as are most
eminent, the more eminent, the more does Satan desire to winnow them, and
therefore the Lord steps in, I have prayed for them; Christ steps in to plead
for them in a special manner, he takes care of them: As the darts of the Devil
are thrown principally at such, so the Lord himself will be their Buckler, and
their defense.

Now Brethren, from all that has been spoken, reflect upon it; And oh that it
may stir you up to endeavor to walk more close with God; not only to walk with
God, but to walk with God as Enoch did; it is not enough to be gracious, but
what singular thing do you for God? I know that this will make you vile in the
eyes of the world, but be you resolute in the ways of God: It will be a blot
to you in the eyes of the world, but it will be an honor to you in the eyes of
God, who judges in truth and righteousness; and therefore if the world spite
you for this, for walking more close with God, for embracing the truth of the
times, say, If this be to be vile, I Will yet be more vile, and know that it
shall not be labor lost, I say, it shall not be labor lost, to endeavor to
walk thus closely with God as Enoch did, you shall meet with that refreshment
in God, which will abundantly answer what you shall lose in the world, what you
shall part withal in the world: the sweetness that you shall meet withal in
Communion with God, it shall abundantly satisfy for the loss of all creature
comforts whatsoever, if you shall lose any thing for walking thus closely with
him.

I shall say no more, Your memories shall be precious in Gods sight, when rich
men, and great men, and men of parts shall rot and perish, die, and come to
nothing, and their names shall perish with them and rot; Why, the names of the
righteous, such as walk close with God in their Generation, their names shall
be as a Box of Ointment poured forth, and they shall be sweet and precious to
God and to his Saints throughout all Generations. And thus I have showed you
these two particulars, That God has some of his Servants in all Generations,
that walk more close with him than others; and secondly, That the Lord takes
special notice of such, and sets some special badge of Honor upon them; the
main Point in hand is still behind.

SERMON III.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Have already considered two Propositions that did arise from some particular
consideration, before I came to the main; First, In that Enoch is taken notice
of above the rest; here are ten Patriarchs spoken of in this Chapter, but it is
said of Enoch only, that he walked with God: they all walked with God, but he
in a special manner. God has some of his Servants in all Ages that walk more
close with him than others; that was the first Proposition. And then Secondly,
That the Lord takes special notice of such: here is more notice taken of Enoch
than of all the rest, Enoch walked with God. And there is one particular more
before I come to the main Observation,

And that is, The consideration of the Time in which Enoch lived: It was in
evil times; men began exceedingly to degenerate, the world began to grow
exceeding wicked, and was filled with violence, and therefore it was that Enoch
did breath out threatenings against them: he breathed out threatenings of
Judgment against the men of his Generation, which the Apostle Jude does apply
to the men of that Age in which he lived, in Jude 14, 15. it is said there
(speaking of the wickedness of his Generation) And Enoch the seventh from Adam,
Prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of
all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him: the
Prophet it is very probable did Prophecy this against the men of his
Generation, they being exceedingly corrupt; and the Apostle does apply it unto
the Age in which he lived, because it was like unto the Age in which Enoch
lived, which was very corrupt; so that you see (and it is very observable) that
in the time in which Enoch lived, that Generation was very corrupt, yet he
walked with God. It affords us this Proposition to pitch upon, That

The Lord takes it exceeding kindly, when his people walk closely with him in
evil times, it is the great commendation of the Saints then to walk closely with
God: it was the commendation of the Church of Pergamus in Rev. 2. 13. I know
thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and thou hold
fast my name, and have not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas
my faithful Martyr was slain, who was slain among you, where Satan dwells.
This was the great commendation of that Church, that though she dwelt where
Satan's seat was, in the midst of wicked men where the Devil rules, where the
Devil has his Throne, yet there thou have not denied my Faith, but there thou
hold fast my truth: this Christ took exceeding kindly. It was the great
commendation of Job, that he was a perfect man, he was a perfect and upright
man, though he dwelt in the Land of Vz; he was a man that dwelt in the Land of
Vz, a perfect and upright man, he was upright in the midst of a sinful people:
they were of the posterity of Esau that inhabited that place, a crooked
Generation, and yet Job was an upright man amongst them; that was his great
commendation. It was the great commendation of Noah that he was a just man in
an unjust world; it is said, the whole earth was filled with violence in Noah's
days, and then Noah was a just and perfect man. It was the great commendation
of Joseph, that he feared the Lord amongst the Egyptians, he dwelt amongst
those that had not the fear of the Lord amongst them, and yet he retained the
fear of the Lord. And so it was the great commendation of David, that his
spirit was carried after God, not only when he was in Jerusalem, but when he
was among the Heathen, when he was amongst the Inhabitants of Meshek, when he
was in the Tents of Kedar, Woe is me, that I am to dwell with the Inhabitants
of Meshek, etc. and yet even then David's heart was carried after God, and that
was David's great commendation. It was one of the glories and beauties of
Christ himself, That he was holy and righteous in a sinful world, As the
Apple Tree in the midst of the Trees in the Forest, so is my Beloved among the
Sons, Cant. 2. 3. He was an Apple Tree in the midst of wild Trees, when he was
compassed about with Briars, Thorns and Thistles, and Crab-trees, yet he
continued a pleasant Apple Tree, and brought forth delightful fruit to God and
man. Now for the clearing of this Point, That the Lord takes it exceeding
kindly, when his people walk close with him in evil times,

I shall show you, First, What the evil times are; And then Secondly, What it
is to walk with God in evil times. And Thirdly, Make it evident, that this is
exceeding acceptable unto God, which will make way for the Application.

First, If you enquire what those evil times are in which close walking with
God is so exceeding acceptable?

1. First, Times of General Apostasy: times of great corruption, and of
General Apostasy from God, from the truth, and from the ways of God, and from
the worship of God; when men shall lose not only the power, but the very form
of Godliness; when such as seem to be like Stars, shall be swept down; and when
most men are carried away with the stream of looseness, it is an evil time, and
then to walk with God is exceeding precious: Such was the time of Noah; in the
time in which Noah lived the whole world was corrupt, and the whole earth was
filled with violence; Ay, but then Noah walked with God in his Generation, and
that was exceeding acceptable. And so again, we have other Instances of the
like in Hos. 11. 12. It was the great commendation of Judah, that when the
people of Israel had corrupted themselves, when Israel had gone astray from
God, from his worship, and from his truth, then Judah was found faithful with
God, Ephraim has compassed me about with lies, and the house of Israel with
deceit, but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints; Judah
still holds fast, or Judah leaves a witness to his God, bears witness to the
truth of God, and is faithful to the Saints, faithful to the Prophets, and that
was the great commendation of Judah, to be faithful at that time; in a time of
general corruption: And so again in Mal. 3. 14. It was a very evil, a very
corrupt time, and God took it exceeding kindly that his people did hold up for
him: Ye have said, it is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is it that
we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the
Lord? and now we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickedness are set
up, and they that tempt God are even delivered: but what follows? mark the 16
Verse, Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, etc. The
people were woefully corrupt, God had a few names there that he kept faithful to
himself, they that feared the Lord even then, when the time was so evil, they
spoke often one to another, and a Book of remembrance was written.

2. Secondly, Times of sore persecution; times of persecution are evil times,
and then to walk with God is exceeding acceptable; such was the time in which
Elijah lived; it was a time of great persecution, Jezebel had slain all the
Lords Prophets, there was none in all the Land durst appear for God, and
therefore (he thought) he had been left alone, Lord they have slain thy
Prophets, and left me alone: and yet Elijah stands up for God; there was none
in all the Land durst appear for God, and therefore Elijah thought he had been
left alone, 1 King. 19. 14. And yet Elijah stood up for God, and with an
undaunted spirit bare witness and stood up for God: this the Lord took
exceeding kindly at Elijah's hand. What a gracious promise is made to the
Church of Philadelphia, because she stood it out in evil times, Because thou
have kept the Word of my patience: Thou have kept my Word with patience, thou
have kept my truth, notwithstanding all the opposition thou have met with, that
truth which was most opposed, that truth which was most persecuted, that which
was the truth of the times thou have kept, and thou have kept it with patience,
notwithstanding all thy suffering, notwithstanding all opposition, Therefore I
will keep thee in the hour of temptation that is coming upon the World.

3. Thirdly, Times of Temptation are evil times, and then to walk closely with
God is acceptable: when Satan himself, or by his Instruments shall endeavor to
beat souls from their standing, when he shall endeavor to turn them aside from
God, then to hold fast, is taken exceeding well. It is the great design of the
Devil by himself, or wicked men, thus to strike at Gods people; what do you get
by your close walking with God? Why, you get nothing but blows, nothing but
stripes, and you are afflicted more than any; it was never worse with you, than
since you began to follow hard after God; this is Satan's temptation, and now to
hold fast is very acceptable: thus it was with Job, Job 2. 9. the Devil tempted
him by his wife, says she to him, Do thou still retain thine Integrity?
Curse God and die. Do thou still retain thy Integrity; what, will thou still
walk with God? What have thou got by walking with him? Thou see how sad a
condition thou art brought into, I would never follow that God any longer, I
would curse him and die: it is a sore temptation, but Job still stands in his
Integrity, Thou speak like one of the foolish women, shall we receive good
at the hand of the Lord, and shall not we receive evil? Thou speak like one
of the foolish women. But again,

4. Fourthly, Times of Affliction are times of trial, and then it is most
acceptable for Saints to walk with God: Times of Affliction, when God seems to
frown, and God stretches his hand out against his own people, for them yet to
pursue after God in their spirits, this is very acceptable; to run to God when
God seems to smite them, to run into his arms, when they see he is angry, to
run under his shadow, when God seems to beat them sore; Why, this is very
pleasing unto God: Thus it was with Job, though God stretched out his hand
against him, yet he would not stretch out his hand to iniquity, but still he
kept his integrity: he was in a sad condition, he was stripped naked of all he
had in the world, as you read in Job 1. 21. and though God make him naked,
he will walk with God; though God lay him naked, destitute of all comforts, he
blesses the name of God when all was taken from him, and it is said, in all this
Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. That Is the fourth evil time, in
which walking with God is acceptable. But I shall speak most to the first of
these, because that concerns Enoch most, viz. Times of General corruption,
times of declining, times of Apostasy, then to walk with God is exceeding
acceptable.

Quest. Then what is it to walk with God in corrupt times, or when do the
servants of God walk with him in corrupt times?

Answ. 1. I Answer, First of all, when they embrace the truth of the times,
those truths that are most opposed, when they shall countenance those truths
that are most discountenanced, when they will not shut out the light, the truth
that God holds forth in their Generation, though the truth cost them dear,
though they must buy it, though they suffer the loss of all for the truth,
though it cost them the loss of their comforts, the loss of their good names,
the loss of their Friends, the loss of Estate, yet it is the truth of Christ,
and it is the truth of the times: When God shall thus cause his servants to
embrace those scorned, persecuted, and opposed truths of the times in which
they live (as every Age has its special truth) wherein they are to walk with
God in a corrupt Generation. But again*

2. Secondly, To walk with God in a corrupt Generation, is to practice those
ways of holiness, and righteousness, and to show forth those graces which are
most contrary to the wickedness of the times; this is walking with God in a
corrupt time: I say, to practice those ways of holiness and righteousness, and
hold forth those graces, which are contrary to the wickedness of the times: and
therefore it was Job's great commendation, that he was upright, that he was an
upright man in a crooked Generation, he lived amongst a crooked people. And it
was the great commendation of Noah that he practiced righteousness; it is said,
he was a just man when the world was most unjust, it is said, The earth was
filled with violence; there was no righteousness in Noah's days, and then Noah
was a just man, he was a lover of justice and righteousness, he was a follower
of it, a pattern at that time when there was nothing but unjustness and
violence in those times: and thus to walk with God in a corrupt time is very
pleasing and acceptable. But again,

3. Thirdly, To walk with God in a corrupt time, is then, when the Servants of
God shall stir up others to cleave close to God at that time: this is part of
their service at such time to endeavor to strengthen, and to hold up the hands
and the hearts of one another, in declining and sinful times; you may remember
the place before, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another; when the time was woefully corrupt, this was the service of that
Generation, then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, they
spoke words of encouragement, to strengthen one another, that they might not be
dismayed, that they might go on with boldness, in professing the name and truth
of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding all opposition.

4. Again, Fourthly, When the Saints shall Rest upon the promises of God, which
seem to be far off, this is part of their walking with God in an evil time: I
say, then to act faith in the promises, which seem to be far off; when you see
nothing but corruption nothing but darkness, yet even then to look to the
promises of life, and holiness, and grace, which shall be given out, and shall
be fulfilled: when there is little or no knowledge of God, then to close with
the promise, that the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord* as the
waters cover the Sea; so the promise that God has made to roll away the
reproach of his servants, when they meet with nothing but reproaches from men,
then to look upon the promise, that he will roll away their reproach, and cause
their righteousness to break forth as the Sun at noonday. That Is another.
Again,

5. Fifthly, When they shall Vindicate the Providence of God, though never so
seemingly cross unto promises, and so clear all dispensations of God, both to
the righteous and the wicked; and though he suffer the righteous to be trodden
under-foot, yet they shall then vindicate God in his dispensations, and say,
That the Lord is good and righteous, and just, and there is no iniquity in him;
there is a time a coming when he shall clear up this truth, and they shall
discern between the righteous and the wicked; there is a time a coming when it
shall be said, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; there is a reward for
the just of the earth: they shall vindicate the Providence of God in the face
of the wicked, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to
execute Judgment upon all; there is a day of reckoning coming when the wicked
shall pay for all; this he resolves on; and this is a second part of that
service, viz. what it is to walk with God in evil times, But,

3. Thirdly, It Is exceeding pleasing to God that his Servants (thus) should
walk and stick close to him in evil times. I shall look no further than that of
the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 4. 16. which we before spoke of, Then they that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard,
and then a Book of remembrance is set before them, for them that feared the
Lord, and thought upon his Name; You may see the Lord is exceeding intent upon
his servants that walk close with him in evil times, he does eye them, and his
ear is toward them, he listens to every word they speak, They that feared the
Lord spoke often one to another; and it is said there, The Lord hearkened and
heard: the Lord hearkened: he did as if a man should listen to hear what his
servants should say one unto another; they had other listners it is like in that
evil time, the wicked hearkened and listened, that they might trap them; Ay, but
God listens for another end, he hearkened, and heard, and a book of remembrance
was written before them. There Is another particular, which does declare how
acceptable it is to God that they walk before him in evil times, a book of
remembrance is set before them while they speak, God writes and takes notice of
what they say, A book of remembrance, he writes a book of Chronicles that it
may not be forgotten what they spoke of God, and one to another: An allusion to
the custom of Princes, that they had their books, in which they writ what any
man did for them, what good service they had done for the State; as Mordecai's
good service was written in a Book, the King calls for the book in which the
services of Mordecai were writ: so the Lord looks in his Book; a Book of
remembrance was written. But again,

Further, A Book was written for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon
his name; nothing that they did for God, and spoke of God, and thought of God,
there is nothing shall be lost: it was an evil time; and it may be they durst
not speak all their thoughts; yet, all their good thoughts were taken notice of
by the Lord, they were not let go, but set down in his book, even their
thoughts were written down: God will write them that they shall not be
forgotten, Oh, I remember the kindness of thy youth, Jer. 2. 2. and the love of
thy espousal when thou followedst me in the Wilderness: to follow God alone in
a Wilderness, when there is little or no company, God takes this as a special
respect and kindness.

But why does God take notice of his people in special, who walk most close
with him in evil times?

1. First of all, I Answer briefly, It discovers that the very Life of God and
Christ is in that soul, God rejoices in the Image of his Life, which he beholds
in his Children: it is an argument that the Fish has life when it swimms
against the stream; the dead Fish, that is carried down the stream, it cannot
make any resistance: It Is an Argument the life of Christ is in that soul that
is enabled to walk with God in evil times, to go against the stream of
corruption and looseness.

2. Secondly, Again, As it is an Argument of Life, so it is an Argument of
Strength; that soul has got much strength from God, that walks thus with God
in evil times: It requires much strength to swimm against the stream, a great
stream; there are times of great opposition; the servants of God meet with much
opposition from Satan and the World, then, then to walk with God when all the
world almost goes contrary, to bear up with God then, does discover the
strength of the soul which God is exceedingly delighted with.

3. Thirdly, Again, To walk with God in evil times, is an Argument of
Sincerity: to do for God out of sincerity; Job was sincere, and still retained
his Integrity, notwithstanding all the opposition that he met with; it does
discover that the soul has a better principle; that soul that bears up with
God in evil times* it has a better principle than the men of the world; that
he does not walk by the Examples and Commands of men: it is not multitudes of
men; this carries on false hearts, which often fall in evil times; and therefore
when God (notwithstanding general corruptions) carries on the hearts of Gods
people to stick close to him, it is an Argument of much sincerity, and sincerity
is that which God is exceedingly delighted in.

And therefore I shall conclude with a word or two of Application.

1. Use. First of all, It lets us see how contrary the wicked are to the
righteous: It Is not a good time will make the wicked man good, as it is not
wicked time that will make the righteous man evil; it is neither the time, place
nor company that can change the nature of the wicked man: Saul retains his evil
heart when he is in the midst of the Prophets; though he be amongst the
Prophets, and Prophecy amongst them, his heart is as evil as ever; but on the
contrary, David retains a sweet enjoyment and breathings after God, when his
soul was amongst the Heathen in the Tents of Kedar; the wicked man will not
learn righteousness in a Land of uprightness, let favor be shown to him:
though he be in a Land of uprightness, he will not learn righteousness; on the
contrary, a gracious heart will not learn perverseness, though he be in a Land
of wickedness: For why? there is the seed of God in them, the seed of God shall
preserve them; and therefore, Oh what cause have wicked men to see and bewail
their condition! it is not time, place, nor company can make them better: in a
Land of uprightness they will be evil. Oh that the Lord would cause them to bewail
their sinful natures, and so come unto Jesus Christ, that so he may make their
crooked natures straight. And let the Saints be thankful unto God, for that
principle of God that is in them, Oh what cause have you to rejoice in it, and
to be thankful for it, that God has put such a seed of himself into you! that
he has made you partakers of his own divine nature, which all the corruption
that is in the world cannot alter! All the salt water that is in the Sea cannot
make the live Fish salt, still it retains its freshness; and all the wickedness
that is in wicked men, cannot make the gracious heart wicked. I say, improve
this that is of God in you, take heed that you be not carried down with the
stream of corrupt times; but know the worse that the times are, so much the
better should you (that are the people of God) be; you are set up as Lights in
the night, you are as the stars in the Firmament (so shall the righteous shine
one day) and you (as the stars) should ^ine brightest in the darkest night; God
has set you up for this very end, that so you may be as witnesses in the
world, that you may bear up his name in the world, that you may witness against
the general corruption of the times, in which you live: God does therefore set
you up as Pillars of Brass, on which he has set his name, and his sons name,
and you are to bear it in the world; he has set you to bear up his name, and
he has set you to bear up the earth, if it were not for the few that did walk
with God in corrupt times, the earth would fall; remember then that God has
set you up for this very end; therefore don't suffer the name of God to fall
through your loose walking with God, and through your giving way to the evil of
the times; it is special service God has for you to do, you are set here for
this very end to bear up his name, it is the work, the service in your
Generation; and therefore know that God calls for it at your hands, Oh know, he
expects that you should embrace the truth of the times that are most opposed,
persecuted and cast out, that you should practice the contrary graces unto the
wickedness of the times, that you should strengthen and encourage one another
in the way and work of the Lord, that you should rest upon the Promises, that
seem to bear up and clear the Providence of God, against the blasphemies of
the wicked, this God expects from you in evil times: and know, that if you
don't walk closely with God it goes to his very heart, I say (you that are his
people) it grieves the very heart of God when you go astray from him; says
Christ of the twelve Disciples in Joh. 6. 67. Will ye also go away from me?
It Is said, that there were many at that time that left Christ; well, he turns
unto his Disciples, and says to them, Will ye also go away from me? But Peter
said, To whom should we go? Thou have the words of eternal life; What, will
you? if you should go away, that would be a greater grief than all the rest;
you that have walked with me so long, what, will you turn aside? It was the
great commendation of Judah that she was faithful with God, and he bids her so
continue; Oh let not Judah turn aside, in Hos. 4. 15. Though Israel play the
Harlot, yet let not Judah offend: Though they play the Harlot, yet you that are
my people, that have so long walked with me, and that have kept in my truth,
Oh, have you a care, that you walk not with the multitude to do evil, and that
you be not extravagant; it goes to the heart of God your Father, if you should
walk loose and keep ill orders, this goes to the heart of God, it is more than
if twenty strangers should do it, if you in the least should turn aside; this
is a wound from a Child, and the wound of such goes to the heart of the Father:
But on the contrary, know that the Lord is exceedingly delighted with your
close walking with him; you heard before in Mal. 3. 16. how God is delighted
with the close walking of the Saints, it is kindness that God will never forget,
he will remember it to the last; in Luke 22. 28. (to name no more) says
Christ, You are they that have continued with me in my temptations, Behold, I
appoint unto you a Kingdom: this was kindly taken: they did not only follow
Christ, but they continued with him when under temptation, and when he was
persecuted, you that continued with me in my temptation and tribulation, I
appoint to you a Kingdom. The Lord says of you, that are followers of him in
evil times, that bear up against the stream, These are they that have continued
with me faithful, and I Will not forget them, thou have kept to me in the hour of
my patience, and I Will keep thee in the hour of temptation that is coming upon
the World.

SERMON IV.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Have already dispatched three Points, which were needful to be considered,
before we come to the main; the last time, we considered what an evil time it
was that Enoch lived in, the earth being so corrupt, as it appears (by that
Prophecy of Jude) that the time of Enoch was an evil time: but notwithstanding
the corruption of the time, Enoch walked with God. The Lord takes it exceeding
kindly when his people walk close with him in evil times. But I shall further
Consider what lies in the Text, Enoch walked with God. Here is nothing taken
notice of but his walking with God; he was an excellent Prophet, as the Apostle
Jude does witness, Enoch the seventh from Adam Prophesied, he was one that did
a great deal for God, he preached faithfully unto the men of his Generation:
but there is nothing said of him but this, He walked with God; he lived so long
and he walked with God.

Observation. Observe then, That it is the highest excellency of a Creature to
walk with God: For this is the greatest commendation that can be given of a man
or woman, that they are such as walk with God in their Generation. Here I shall
show you, First, What it is to walk with God. And Secondly, That this is the
excellency of any man or woman. And Thirdly, Wherein this excellency lies,
which will make way for the Application.

Our first work is to Consider, What it is to walk with God; the way of a
Christians walking with God, is either Internal or External; Internal is the
way of his spirit, the way of his heart, which is hid from the world: External
is the way of his Conversation. We shall now consider the former only.

What is this Internal way, the way of the spirit, the way of the heart in
walking with God?

First of all, Faith is the beginning of this way, I say, Faith in God and
Christ, and the Promises is the beginning of this way, for the Apostle says,
We walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7. And the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us
expressly, That Enoch walked with God by Faith, Heb. 11. 5, 6. it is said, By
Faith Enoch was translated, and was not, yet before he was translated he
pleased God: where he holds forth to us, that Enoch lived and died in faith,
and this was his first step, and this is the beginning of a Christians way in
walking with God, he begins in Faith: It Is not possible that two should walk
together unless they be agreed, so says the Prophet Amos, Amos 3. 3. Can two
walk together except they be agreed? It Is not possible till Faith close with
Christ, there is no Agreement: it is faith that makes our reconciliation, and
makes over this agreement to the soul, and therefore no walking with God before
this agreement; it is not possible for an Unbeliever to walk with God, Faith is
the beginning of this way, for the soul is filled with slavish fear, and it
dares not come to God, it dares not walk with him, it dares not come nigh him,
till such time as faith does discover the grace, love and bowels of compassion
that are in the heart of God; it runs away from God, the creature runs from God
as Adam did, God walked in the Garden, and he called for Adam to walk with him,
but he durst not, the guilt of his transgression was upon him, and he hid
himself among the Bushes in the Garden; Poor creatures! they run not only into
the bushes of the Garden, but into the bushes of the Wilderness, they would
hide themselves in the Thickets of their own righteousness, in Briars and
Thorns, rather than come in and submit to God again: There Is not only pride of
heart, but there is enmity, enmity against God, The fool has said in his heart,
There is no God; he wishes there were no God, that he might still be without
control, and give no account of his actions, there is enmity in the heart, and
this slavish fear and enmity remains till such time as God discovers it, and
roots it out by faith, and faith discovers the tender bowels, love, and
compassions that are in God toward it through Jesus Christ, so that as the
soul goes on in believing, so it goes on in walking with God: A Christians
Exercise of faith is the acting of faith, and exercising of faith every day on
the promises, is a great part of his daily walking with God, for he that walks
with God acts faith, in all conditions he runs to the Promise; when the guilt
of sin revives, he runs to the Fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to
wash in, and he rouls upon the Promise, Lord, thou have promised to blot out my
transgressions like a thick Cloud; and so when he wants holiness, when
corruption prevails he runs to the promise, Lord, thou have said, sin shall not
have Dominion over me; thou have said, If Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin, dead to sin; and so in time of temptation he runs to the
Promise, Lord thou have said that such of thy servants as walk in darkness, and
see no light, should trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon their God;
and thou have said, No temptation shall be a burden beyond their strength: And
so in all streights and afflictions, it runs to the Promise, Lord thou have
said, That all things shall work together for good to them who love and fear
thee. In a word, This is to walk with God, when the soul shall rest upon the
Promise for all supplies both for this life, and that which is to come; when he
shall trust the Lord for provision in the way, and trust him for an Inheritance
in the end of the way, he shall say, Lord, thou have given me the Word of thy
grace, and I Will venture my soul upon it, though it be for eternity I Will venture
upon thy Word, if I perish I perish; if God can deceive me, I am willing to be
deceived. Thus does faith put the soul into a capacity and posture of walking
with God, it puts the soul in a posture of walking hand in hand with God, as a
man with his friend, it puts the soul into the best posture of walking with
God, and that is, into a posture of leaning and staying upon him as it walks
with him. It Is said that the Spouse, as she came out of the Wilderness, She
came leaning upon her Beloved; The Lord knows, his poor servants are not able
to walk with him in the Wilderness, unless they lean upon him, and they cannot
set one step forward unless they lean upon him, and therefore he has given
them himself, his son, and his sons name, his Word, to stay and lean upon in
the Wilderness; and this is the beginning of all their walking with God. That Is
the first particular* Again,

2. Secondly, To walk with God is to Bow the spirit unto God; this is another
part of the Internal walking with God; I say, when the spirit bows unto God,
when the powers of the soul are overpowered by the Spirit of Christ to submit
unto him, for the very powers of the soul are resigned up to Christ; when the
soul gives him the chief place in the heart, and desires that God may be set up
in the very excellencies of the spirit; it cannot be content unless God have
that strong hold, unless he gain the inward-most Tower and Castle, the very
heart and spirit which he desires may bow to God; when it is not content to
give him the service of the outward man, but desires to serve him in spirit
also, and therefore does cry out of those inward lusts that defile the soul,
and do hinder it from acting toward God: though others, though standers by
look upon such a soul, and see that God has done a great deal for it, yet he
cannot be satisfied so long as there are any risings in the inward man, any
rebellious lusts in the heart that do rise up against God, it desires that the
Word of the Lord may bring down every Towery imagination, and that it might
lead every thought into Captivity unto Jesus Christ: when the soul makes it his
work, thus to bow the spirit, the inward man unto Christ, to serve him in
spirit, to give him the choice, the excellency of the affections, and the
highest place in the soul, and is never quiet till every base lust be cast out
of that inward Castle and Tower; this is another part of that Internal walking
with God.

3. Thirdly, when the soul is carried out with strong desires after the
enjoyment of the presence of God; when the soul delights in the presence of
God, and is carried out with strong desires after further and further enjoyment
of God, this is a part of the souls walking with him; when it cannot take up in
any thing short of God; Creatures and Ordinances cannot satisfy, if it don't
meet with God in them, and therefore it desires to use all creatures for that
end that he may see God in them, and glorify God for them, and be led unto God
by them, that still he may come nearer unto God, whom to enjoy is his
happiness; and so for Ordinances, he uses them all for that end that he may get
nigher God, and enjoy more of the presence of God, and therefore he will wait
upon the dispensation of the Word, because God has promised to be there, and
therefore he will walk with the Saints of God, because Christ has promised to
walk in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, for there he expects to meet him,
and desires to enjoy much of God and Christ; I say, when the soul thus enjoies
much of God, it is a great part of its walking with him; and therefore when God
stands at a distance and hides his face, it goes up and down lamenting; Oh,
this is the greatest perplexity in the world, for God to turn away and hide his
face, and to lead him into a poor dark condition, Oh, Lord turn again, says
he, let me see thy face; though he chide him, better than not to see his face
or hear his voice at all; and therefore its desires are vehement when God seems
to exempt himself. Therefore David breaths after God, in Psalm. 42. 1, 2. As the
Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee O God. My
soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before
God? As the Heart breaths after the water brooks; Oh, it is a mighty desire that
the poor, chased, hunted, bleeding Heart has after the water brooks, and such is
David's desire after God, Oh when shall I come and appear before God? It Is also
expressed in Isa. 26. 9. My soul sought after God in the night season (says the
Church there) with my spirit within me will I seek thee early; it is a very
Emphatical expression, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Well,
this is another part, a third step of the souls walking with God.

4. Fourthly, Again, When the soul is filled with mighty desires of being made
like unto God; his desires are continually extended this way, in being made
like unto God; it looks upon it as his glory, as his happiness: It Is the
greatest part of the glory of heaven to be made like unto God, and therefore
the Apostle cries out so much of the old man, and of the body of sin and death,
and desires so much to be satisfied and filled with the likeness of God; he
looks upon Christ for this end, and beholds the glory of God in Christ, and he
looks wistly, and would always be looking upon Christ, that so he might be
changed from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord. His desires are
mightily carried out, in being made like unto Christ, and he looks upon the
promises for this end, that they may purge, sanctify and cleanse from all
pollution both of flesh and spirit; the spirit of God shining in them and
through them, it might convey more of the divine nature to them: That Is another
part of his walking with God. Again,

5. Fifthly, When the soul is desirous to embrace all the motions of the Spirit
of Christ: I say, it is desirous to embrace all the motions of the Spirit of
Christ, and to walk up to them, and to improve them. Oh that sentence is writ
upon the soul, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
speaks; and therefore the soul is attentive, and is intent upon God for this
very end, That he may know the mind of God, and not lose its opportunity, that
it may hear when the Spirit calls, and says, Come away: There Is a great deal
in this; this is that which conduces unto a Christians peace exceeding much:
the knowing and improving such opportunities of Christ's speaking in his heart,
conduces to his peace and growth, and to his usefulness and serviceableness in
those seasons and opportunities; when the Spirit of Christ (as I may say with
holy reverence) whispers in the soul, when the Spirit of Christ says, Here Is
an opportunity of doing good to the soul, or to the body of a poor creature;
Oh, how is then the heart drawn out amain to lay out himself for God, his
strength for God, and to lay forth his Estate for God? And he says as Christ
said, Lo I come: Here Is an opportunity for service; why, then, Lo I come to
do thy Will, O God; the embracing, I say, and cherishing those motions of the
Spirit of God, which he is pleased to hint in the souls of his people, is
another part of their walking with him. Again,

6. Sixthly, In the next place, That soul walks with God when it sets it self
in the eye of God; when it eyes God continually, and sets it self in the eye of
God, in the presence of God, this is a main part of his walking with God; when
a man shall do all that he does as in the presence of God, every action, that
though it concerns man and his outward calling, yet he desires to do all as in
the presence of God: And therefore he does not only look to a duty, but he
looks to the manner of the performance of every duty, because the holy, pure
and piercing eye of God is upon him; he looks to the manner, how it is carried
on and forth, what spirit is in it, because he knows that the eye of God is
piercing, it is a flame of fire, and he does all as in the presence of God, and
unto God, in his serving of man, he does it as unto the Lord: he has a higher
end than the men in the world have, who know no other end than to gain riches
and honor, or the like; but there is a further and higher end, that he may lift
up the name of God, and serve God in serving of man, that he may serve his
Generation according to the Will of God; I say, when the soul is thus always
under the eye of God, and therefore is faithful whether man see or no, though
there is no eye to witness, no eye to overlook, yet it knows that it is in the
presence of God, for though he don't so see the transgression of his people as
to cast them off, yet he may see that which may be matter of sore displeasure
and grief; and therefore this is that which is as a bridle and a bit over all
his ways, that it is in the presence of God. Again,

7. Seventhly, In the next place, The soul walks with God when he is desirous
to embrace every truth that God shall impart; when it opens to truth; this is
another part of the souls internal walking with God: when it opens to truth, to
every truth which the embracing and professing of may cost him dear, being
opposed in the world; it matters not, if you be persuaded it is the truth of
Christ it is enough, it trusts God for the rest; oh it is greedy after truth;
that soul that walks with God, oh how fearful is it, lest it should not embrace
truth? Oh how fearful is it lest it should be left behind when God advances his
truth in the world; and when truth is advanced, Oh, how fearful is it to be
left behind? Though it would not set a step, until God goes before, and it
would not hear the voice of a stranger, yet it would not be shut up from the
voice of Christ, therefore it is fear is to be left behind, and desires that God
would take it along: when he discovers truths unto a Saint, even the truth of
the age, and the truth of the Generation in which he lives; that is another part
of the souls walking with God. Again,

8. In the Eighth place, The Soul walks with God when it can justify the Word
of God; justify the Word of God, though the Word condemn him in his practices,
yet he will justify the Word of God; though the Word be high, holy, and
spiritual, and he sees he is a poor creature and cannot come up to it, yet he
will not despise nor hate the Word, but loves, justifies and blesses God for it;
so the Apostle in Romans 7. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, says he, and the
Commandment is holy, just and good. Again in the 13 Verse, Was then that which
was good made death to me? God forbid. But sin that it might appear sin,
working death in me by that which is good: that sin by the Commandment might
become exceeding sinful. And again in the 16 Verse, If then I do that which I
would not, I consent unto the Law that it is good. Though I do the things that
I would not, yet, says he, I love the Law and delight in it in the inward man;
this is a main part of the spirits and souls walking with God, when it can thus
justify and clear the Word; and though the Word of the Lord cross him, yet it
gets to the Word of the Lord, and though he cannot come up to it, yet it blesses
the Word, that is holy and good, though I be carnal, though I be sold under sin,
it justifies the Word.

9. Again, In the Ninth place, He will Justify God; that is another part of his
walking, he will justify God, and clear God in all his proceedings, though God
go against his comforts, and smite them as he did Job, yet still he will walk and
go along with God, and clear and justify God: In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and blessed be his
name. Still he will justify God though he cannot see a reason of Gods
proceedings, yet still he will justify God; though he do him wrong, yet God is
holy, righteous, and merciful; and this is another part of the souls internal
walking with God. Again,

10. In the Tenth and last place, to name no more, The soul then walks with
God, When it is taken up with higher things than the things of this World. It
desires to look up to higher things than the things of the world, and greater
things than the world is able to present, and therefore would not have the
world for its portion at no rate, he cannot take up there, no, he has higher
things to fix his heart upon: the worldlings spend their time and meditations
upon their Silver and Gold, upon their Houses and Land, but a gracious heart
will not spend many of his thoughts upon these, it will not spend the best of
his thoughts upon these, but says to his soul as Solomon's Mother said to him,
Prove. 31. 2. Oh my son give not thy strength to women, etc. and so says he, Oh
my soul give not thy strength to the things of this world, give not the
strength of thy heart and affections, to these poor low things, thou have
better things to spend thy strength upon, there is God and Christ, there is a
Kingdom, there is the Pearl of great price, there is an Inheritance, there is an
Eternity, there is an everlasting enjoyment of God, these things art thou to be
taken up with; these things does he desire to spend the best of his strength
and thoughts upon. You see my Brethren in part, what it is to walk with God,
this is the internal way, the way of the spirit, the way of the heart in
walking with God; this the Lord will have laid before you as your duty, and
although you see you come infinitely short of it (as all Christians may see how
they come short of it) yet the Lord will have this truth discovered, and this
way laid before us, though we come infinitely short, and turn aside in our
walkings with God, yet be justifying of him, and vindicating of his Word, and
say, Blessed be thy name and the word of thy grace which thou have made known
unto us, and see that ye walk humbly wherein you come short, and get out of
your selves more unto Christ, that he may give you strength to walk with him.
So much for this time.

SERMON V.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Have handled diverse Propositions, we are now come to the main, It Is the
greatest commendation that can be given to a man or woman, that they are such
as walk with God in their Generation: it is the excellency of the creature upon
earth to walk with God. I shall come to the Second Part,

And that is, the Christians External walking with God. To show what is this
external walking with God; It is either in its general or particular calling.
Or he walks with God,

First, In those things that do more nearly concern God himself. And Secondly,
He walks with God in the ways of his Calling and Employment in the World. And
Thirdly, He walks with God in the several Relations that God has placed him
in. To speak to the first of these: And a Christian then walks with God,

1. First of all, When he walks by rule; this is the first step of his
acceptable walking with God, I say, when he walks by rule: he knows that his
heart is ready to go aside, to decline from truth and righteousness, and
therefore he continually looks back for a rule to walk by, lest he turn aside;
he knows that he is a creature, and his dependence is on God, and that the
creature must walk by rule that the Creator gives forth, he knows that
whatsoever is without rule, is an abomination unto the Lord, though it may seem
never so good, never so specious to the eye, yet if there be not a rule for it,
it is an abomination unto the Lord, and God says, Who has required this at
your hand, as in Hos. 8. 14. For Israel has forgotten his maker, and builded
Temples, and Judah has multiplied fenced Cities, but I will send a Fire upon
his Cities, and it shall devour the places thereof: One would have thought this
had been no forgetting of God, to build Temples unto God, and yet see how the
spirit of God does Interpret it, Israel has built Temples, and therefore has
forgotten his maker; they did it in remembrance of God, but God bid him not do
it, and therefore he had no rule, no command from God; nay, God commands that
there should be but one Temple, and for them to multiply Temples for their own
devotion, this was besides Gods rule, and therefore God did not approve of it.
Now he that walks with God walks by rule, and he that walks by rule has this
only rule as that which is revealed in his Word, as the Sun when it shines upon
the Dial, it directs a rule for you to walk by. There are corrupt rules; in
times past ye walked according to the common course of the world; they walked
by rule, but it was a wicked rule, not of Gods making; they walked according to
the common course of the world; some men walk by the Example of others, they
make that their rule, the example of the multitude, great men, and such as are
counted wise, learned, judicious and prudent men, and the like, but this is a
walking according to the course of the world; some make their own wills and
lusts their rule, whatsoever seems good in their own eyes, a rule to walk by:
but he that walks with God, walks by no other rule than the rule of the Word,
and therefore he stands in the way and enquires: he enquires for the way, as
God commanded the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 6. 16. saying, Stand ye in the ways
and see, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good way, and walk therein,
and ye shall find rest for your souls: he bids them stand in the way, and
enquire for the good old way, and he enquired at the mouth of God. So did
David: in all his Enterprises he takes God along with him, in 2 Samuel 1. 1.
Shall I go up and fight against this people? Shall I go up? he enquires of the
Lord, his recourse is to God continually; Shall I go up or not? Lord shall I
take such a course? Shall I take upon me such an Employment? Shall I enter into
such a relation? What is the mind of God? shall I go? or shall I not go up? And
when the Will of God is cleared up to him, he rests satisfied, he cares for no
more; he knows it is good to take God along with him, he would not go without
God, nor take any thing in hand without God, and therefore he continually looks
up to him for grace: That Is the first part, or first step, he walks by rule.
Again,

2. Secondly, No opposition, no difficulty in his way, no sad event can turn
him aside from doing his duty; this is another part of the Character of him
that walks with God; I say, when his duty is revealed to him, and made known by
the Word, there is no difficulty, no discouragement can turn him aside, or cause
him to desist from that which is his duty: though he meet with discouragements
from within and from without, even his own bowels rise up against him, the
corruptions that are within him do oppose the work of the Lord in the
performance of his duty; his unbelieving heart tells him, he had as good desist
and give over, he shall never prevail nor do good on it, nor be a proficient in
the way of God; notwithstanding his discouragements, he looks upon the strength
of Christ and goes on. Sometimes the Devil sets upon him, temptation does back
corruption, and he meets with many a storm to blow him back again from
following after God: but he looks to the promise and goes on, The God of Peace
shall tread down Satan shortly; he looks to Jesus who was tempted, and is able
to succor those that are tempted, and therefore still he goes on. Sometimes he
meets with discouragements from the world, there are reproaches cast in the
way, slanders cast in the way, Persecutions many times lie in the way; Ay, but
still he goes on, and remembers that the Lord Jesus himself went through this
way, and remembers that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must walk
through this way, believes that there is a time when God will roll away all the
reproaches of his servants, and therefore notwithstanding all opposition, goes
on, not looking to the event; such a duty may cost him his liberty and life,
but he looks whether it be his duty, and considers not the event, he will trust
God for it: So did the three Children in Dan. 3. when the King threatens to
cast them into the Fiery Furnace, the 15, 16, 17 Verses, say they, Oh King we
are not careful to answer thee in this matter, our God whom we serve is able to
deliver us; however we will not worship thine Image: he looks, I say, to his
duty, that walks with God, and trusts him for the event; nay, though friends be
against him, which is very sad, sometimes by their persuasions, sometimes by
their frowns and threatenings, it is a great temptation; Ay, but still he goes
on: So did Paul in Acts 21. 13. you shall see there when they would have
dissuaded him from his duty, because of danger that was in his way; Why, (says
he there) why, what do you mean to weep, and to break my heart? I am ready not
only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus:
What do you mean, to weep and break my heart? there is no sad event can
discourage me from that which is revealed to me to be my duty; nay, God himself
when he seems to break him, and to turn against him, to smite him in his body
and estate and Children, though the hand of the Lord seems to be gone out
against him, yet he will not desist from walking with God. Psalm. 44. 17. see
what they say there, All this is come upon us, yet have not we forsaken thee,
nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant; and therefore he follows God in the
Wilderness, when he is left destitute of all creature comforts; so did Israel
in Jer. 2. 2. I remember the kindness of thy youth, when thou did follow me
in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown; David was still carried after
God, though he was in a Land where no water is, My soul breaths after thee, O
Lord, in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is; when God and the creature
stand in competition, he falls on Gods side, and when he and the creature must
part, he chooses to follow God, though he follows him naked, though naked of
all outward comforts, yea, and God shall not have the less of him though he
takes away all his comforts: he shall not have the less love, nor the less
service, nor the less praise, though God strips him naked of all, this shall be
no discouragement; and thus it was with Job, Job 1. the latter end, when all
was taken from him he blesses the name of the Lord, The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord; in all this Job sinned
not. This is another part of his walking with God, there is no opposition, no
discouragement that he meets withal, can turn him back to decline his duty.
Again,

3. Thirdly, He that walks with God labors to do some singular thing for God,
his desire is to hold forth much of him, much of God in his conversation, to do
some singular thing for God: he knows that he has set him in the world for
this end, To bear up the name and honor of God in the world; that God has
poured his Spirit upon him for this end, that so in the light of God he might
shine, and shine gloriously in a dark world, and therefore he desires to do
something singular for God, because he has done singular things for him; as
thus, his desires, his endeavors are to promote the cause of God in the world,
to help forward the service of his Generation, to be instrumental to the Lord
(if the Lord please to employ him) for the helping forward of the great work in
his Generation, wherein God has cast him; he is willing also to lay down
himself and his comforts, at the footstool of God, this is a singular thing, I
say, to give up all to God whatsoever he has; he is willing that the Lord
should take him, his comforts, his gifts, his riches, and whatsoever he has,
and improve it for his own honor, that if the Lord should say it is mine, if
God should call for it, if it shall be said the Lord has need of it, he resigns
it, he is presently willing to let it go, though it be a comfort never so dear
to him, he counts it an honor if God will take him and his, and whatsoever he
is and has, that God may improve him and his, for his honor; he desires to
lie low before him, even in the dust. Yea, to follow Gospel Precepts is another
thing which is required, as to love enemies, this also he desires to do; these
are singular things, to pray for them that persecute, to requite evil with
good, to forgive wrongs and injuries, though thy brother offend seventy times
seven in a day, yet if he comes and says, it repents me that I have done thee
wrong; these are Gospel Precepts that are hard to flesh and blood, but he that
walks with God, desires to follow him even in this command also; That Is the
third part of this character of him that walks with God.

4. Fourthly, He desires to yield obedience unto every Commandment, I say, he
desires to yield obedience to every Commandment of the Lord, there is no jot, no
tittle of the Word of the Lord but is precious to him, and therefore he has no
reservation to himself: he does not say, I Will do any other but this, I Will obey
any Commandment but such a Precept; I cannot walk in such a way with God, though
it be cleared up to be a duty: but he that walks with God, yields Universal
obedience, he will not indent with God, no reservation to himself, no exemption
from any Word or Law of God, he says not as Nahaman, God be merciful to me in
this; no, he desires to yield universal obedience, though he sees he comes
short of his desires, and his obedience is scant, so that he dares not rely
upon his obedience, he dares not trust to his obedience, to be justified by it,
yet it is his desire to come off in all things, and he has no reservation to
himself, to say, if I embrace such a truth, and walk in such a way with God, it
will not stand with my credit, I shall lose my friends, my name, my esteem in the
world, my custom or trade, and the like; I say, he that walks with God has no
such reservation; That Is a fourth. Again,

5. Fifthly, He that walk with God will hold fast his profession, though all
the world forsake him, though he be left alone, or though there be a very few
that walk with him: so did Elijah, Lord, they have killed thy Prophets, said
he, and I am left alone, and they seek my life, and yet Elijah did not forsake
the truth, nor let go his profession, for he knows that there is a Promise that
God will be with him; God has promised to be with him, and the presence of God
is instead of all creatures, and he shall have no cause to complain that he is
alone so long as the Lord is with him: he also considers that there is a time
when multitudes shall be given in to Christ, and therefore he is not
discouraged, though there be but few for the present; he looks to the promise,
and there he sees much cheerfulness, there is a promise that they shall flow as
Doves to the windows; it is said that a little one shall become a thousand, and
a small one shall become a great Nation; the Lord has said there shall be
thousands where there is but one, and a little flock shall become a multitude:
the Lord has spoken it, and he will hasten it in his time; and therefore
though for the present he sees but few that walk with him whilst he walks with
God, yet he is not discouraged. But again in the

6. Sixth place, He that walks with God is gracious and conscientious in his
duty in private as well as public; this is another part of his character, I
say, he is kept in his duty in private as well as in public; he dare not be
remiss, though no eye see him, though there is none in the world to take notice
of it, he knows he is in the eye of the Lord, and what he does is unto the
Lord, and therefore he does it even with all his might. There are some in the
world that make a fair show before men, and in the mean time they care not what
they are in secret: zealous before the world, Jehu like, Come and see my zeal,
but cold and remiss in secret: and so will give fair words before men, good
words when there are witnesses, but when they are in secret and in private, in
their Families, and the like, they care not what rage they go in, and how they
play the Tyrants. But now he that walks with God is as careful of his duty in
private as in public: If it be his duty to give Alms, he will give as much where
there is no witness to take notice, as if there were a thousand eyes before
him, as before God and his own soul; he dare not be remiss there, if remissness
steal in upon him, it is his burden, and he is never satisfied till his soul be
brought into such a frame, to be as conscientious of that duty which he owes to
God in secret and private, as of those duties which the world takes notice of.

7. But again, Seventhly, He that walks with God is careful to use all means by
which he may get nigher God, and to shun all occasions of sin which set the
soul at a distance from God; I say, it desires to use all means that are of
Gods appointment for getting nigher unto God; he will wait upon God in every
Ordinance, and Administration of the Word, and seals, in reading and prayer, in
communion and fellowship, he willingly neglects no duty, they are the
Institutions of Jesus Christ, he looks upon them all as so many Conduit Pipes
by which the Lord conveys himself unto his people: they are golden pipes
through which the Lord pours abundance of golden oil into the souls of those
that wait for him; he looks upon the Promise that is annexed to them, that God
has promised to be there and to make them blessings to his people, he therefore
will wait upon God in them, though it may be for the present he don't find
those In-comes of grace and strength which his soul longs after, though it may
be he cannot (sometimes) relish the Ordinance and taste sweetness in it, yet
still he looks upon it as the Institution of Jesus Christ, and dares not turn
his back on it; he will rather accuse himself, his own deadness, and unbelieving
heart, and straitness, he will not accuse Christ and the Ordinance of
emptiness, for he knows Christ has blessed it, and his people have found
sweetness in it, it is the way in which Christ has promised to walk, and
therefore he will go and lie in the way, he will go and climb upon the Sycamore
Tree, as Zacheus did, he will climb up on every ordinance, if at any time he may
see the face of God, if he may see Christ passing by, for his satisfaction he
uses all means and Ordinances that are of Christ's Institution, which may be
helps to him in his way to Christ, and shuns all occasions to sin, all
provocations unto lust, he dare not meddle with sin, no not with the least sin;
he knows that sin is a most woeful deceiver, if he have but the least
countenance he soon winds himself into the soul, and it is hard to wind him out
when he has got himself in: he knows that there is a woeful corrupt heart
within, and that its natural disposition is like to dry Tinder, and is ready to
receive every spark of temptation that the Devil is like to strike in, and if a
spark falls in, how soon it arises to a flame, and how hard it is to quench it;
and therefore how does he rise against sin, and the occasions of sin! he is
afraid of those things which other men count niceties and punctilio's, and the
like, or they may go under the color of lawfulness; Ay, but he is fearful of
it, he knows that the least sin cost blood, the blood of the Son of God, and
the guilt of the least transgression cannot be washed away without the blood of
the Son of God, it will cost blood to wash away the least sin as well as the
greatest, and therefore he dare not be bold to meddle with the least sin, but
he shuns the very occasions and provocations unto sin: That Is the seventh.

8. Eighthly, He approves of, and desires to walk in the strictest way: This is
another part of his Character; he that walks with God approves of and desires
to walk in the strictest way; he knows it is a great journey, and he had need
take the straightest line, he is willing to engage himself in the strictest
way; if any way hold forth more of God and Christ, if any way be more opposite
to flesh and blood, if any way be a further engagement to him to keep close to
God, and bind up his heart that it may not so start aside, he is willing to
walk with God even in that way, there he knows that that is the rule, Be ye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; perfection is in his eye, and
therefore he knows he can never be be too strict, too holy, walk too close with
God, get too nigh God, nor do too much for God: this he lays down as a
principle. Some measure of holiness, and of strictness many of the world will
approve of, but to be so strict is to be too imprudent, in their account; but I
say, he that walks with God, knows that his engagements are such as he can
never do too much for God, when he has done his utmost, if he could do ten
thousand times more, he might say he is an unprofitable servant: That Is the
Eighth. But again,

9. Ninthly, He that walks with God will use no unlawful means to deliver
himself: this is another part of his Character; he uses no unlawful means to
free himself, though his liberty be at stake, though his life be at stake, he
will not deliver himself by any unlawful course: thus it was with Paul, Paul
might have delivered himself if he would have taken an unlawful course: in Acts
24. it is said there, that Festus did expect to have received money from him, in
the latter end of the Chapter, and if he would have given a Bribe, he might
have been delivered; but he would not use such unlawful means for his
deliverance, to open a door for such an escape, he would not give a Bribe to
the corrupt Judge, I say, he would rather wait upon God for the opening a door
that he may escape: in every estate and low condition he remembers, he that
believes makes not too much have, he remembers it is good not to make too much
have, he will not break Prison till God set him free, till God shall open a door
for his escape, out of any afflicted or tempted condition that he is brought
into: That Is the Ninth.

10. In the tenth and last place, It is his desire to gain time, to redeem time
from the world, and from his employments in the world, that he may converse
more with God, and with his own heart: I say, it is his great desire, his care
to redeem time from the world, that he may converse with God, and converse with
his own heart, and therefore he is a good husband with time, he husbands his
time well, that the great things of God may not be shut out; he knows that they
are of great concernment, the things of God, and the things of the world to
come are of greatest concernment, he is hastening to Eternity, here is no stay
here, here he is upon the bridge and going over to another world, to Eternity,
and therefore it concerns him above all to look after the things of that
Eternity; he is always best when he is with God, he has found sweetness with
God, he knows what it is to enjoy communion with God, and because he has been
with Christ upon the Mount, therefore he desires to go often thither, sets the
world apart, that so he may converse with God, that he may behold the face of
Jesus Christ: he knows how deceitful his own heart is, that he had need search
continually, make a diligent search; Oh, there is a depth of iniquity, a depth
of deceit that can hardly be found out: Oh, it will harbor some lust or other,
if diligent search be not made, it is to comply with an enemy, and to harbor
such an enemy that will seek the very destruction of the soul: I say, these
things he has known in part through grace of the great concernments and things
of the world to come, and the sweetness, preciousness of that communion which
the soul has with Jesus Christ, and therefore it is his daily care to husband
his time as well as he may, that he may gain time from the world, and from the
secular employments thereof; and this is the last Character that I shall name
of him that walks with God: And so much shall serve for this time.

SERMON VI.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Have given you part of the Character of one that walks with God. Now I shall
show you what he is in his calling, in his ordinary employment that God has
set him in, for he walks with God in his calling, as well as in those duties
that do more immediately concern God.

1. And first of all, He looks upon his Calling that God has set him in as an
Ordinance of God: I say, he looks upon it as an Ordinance of God, and therefore
he submits unto it, and endeavors to be faithful in it: He knows it is laid
upon all men, in Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread; there are some bad drones that fortify themselves against this
Scripture, and say, this is only the Curse, In the sweat of thy brows thou
shall eat thy bread: but now the Curse is taken away by Christ for his people,
and therefore they ought to work no longer; as the Lilies in the Field, they
neither sow nor reap, but yet are clothed: but now he that walks with God
looks upon that Scripture not only as a Curse, but as a Commandment, In the
sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread; it is the Commandment of God, and
the Commandment holds though the Curse be taken away: Man was enjoined to
labor in the state of Innocence, when there was no Curse; God made him, and
it is said, he put him into the Garden to dress it: yea the very Angels, Heb. 1.
14. Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth for the good of his Saints?
They all work, they have all their employment, there is not one Angel in Heaven
that is idle; God himself is a pure Actor, he is an active Spirit, he is
always working, so says our Savior, My Father works hitherto, and I work:
though he ceased from the works of Creation, yet God has been working ever
since, he works hitherto every day, and I work: So that he that walks with
God looks upon his Calling as an Ordinance of God, and sees the wisdom and
goodness of God in it, in appointing such a way for man, there is abundance of
wisdom in it; by this means wicked men are kept from being desperately wicked;
if there were no work, no employment for them, there would be a studying of
wickedness, a plotting and contriving of wickedness, sin would become out of
measure sinful, it would break from all banks and bounds, the whole earth would
commit violence; nay, it is good for Gods own people, whilst they are in the
world, to have employment, for by this means they are kept from many a snare,
and many a temptation they are freed from: an idle man tempts the Devil; the
Devil tempts man, and an idle man tempts the Devil unto those woeful snares
which others (being employed) are freed from; a man that walks with God looks
upon his Calling God has set him in, as an Ordinance of God. But then again,

2. Secondly, He desires to do all the works of his Calling as unto God: that is
another part of his walking with God in his Calling; he desires to do all the
works of his Calling as unto the Lord: he knows that he has to do with God,
yea even then when he is serving of man, that he has not only to do with God
in the things of his worship, not only when he comes before God in Ordinances,
and in duties, when he reads and when he prays, and when he hears; most men
confess then they have to do with God; but he that walks with God knows he has
to do with God, when he is in his Calling, and therefore he takes that Counsel
which is given him by the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 7. 31. And they that use this
world as not abusing it, for the fashion of the world passes away: He uses the
world as if he used it not, because he knows he has to do with God in the
things of the world. Now he has to do for God, and does all for the Lord,

First, As he sees there is a trust committed to him from God, and this is an
engagement to faithfulness; his Calling is a Talent, it is one of the Talents
that God has given him, and therefore it is a trust that lies upon him, and
therefore this is an engagement to faithfulness; yea, and he looks upon himself
as one that is to be accountable to God how he has carried himself, not only
in the ways of Gods worship, but how he has carried himself in his Calling,
with what faithfulness he has performed the works of it; thus he eyes God in
it, and he does it as unto the Lord, as he makes God the great end of all that
he does; thus he performs the work of his Calling, as in it he makes God the
great and last end. It Is true, there are other subordinate ends which he looks
at, and he may, even when he is industrious in his Calling, as to gain a
comfortable subsistence for himself and his family, and that he may give to
others as need be, and the like, but the main end is for the glory of God, that
God may serve himself of him, that God may improve him, and that he may be an
Instrument of much good in his place and Generation; and truly where men don't
propound this, and make God the great end, there must needs be woeful
miscarriages in all that they take in hand; when men know no other end but to
gain the world and heap up riches, and to build their Nests on high, and the
like; when this is the only end that they propound in the work of their
Calling, it is the way to all injustice, violence, fraud and deceit, and
forgetfulness of God, and a whole flood of iniquity comes in: but he that walks
with God, his aim is that God may have glory, and that he may be the great and
last end, and therefore though he does not gain much in the obtaining of those
subordinate ends, yet he is faithful in his Calling, he goes on in obedience to
Gods command, and to be faithful to his Generation. That Is a second particular,
he that walks with God in his Calling, does all as unto the Lord, he is the
last end he looks at.

3. But again, Thirdly, He desires to be holy and spiritually minded whilst he
is in his outward employment; that is another part of his walking with God; he
desires to be holy in the midst of the world, and therefore it is that he takes
that Counsel that the Apostle gives in 1 Cor. 7. 31. To use the world as not
abusing it, because the time is short, and the fashion of the world passes
away; he bewails nothing more than a carnal heart whilst he is in the world,
it is death to him, it is worse than death: To be spiritually minded is life and
peace, but to be carnally minded is death; therefore he looks upon that
Scripture with joy, that does prophecy of holiness, abundance of holiness that
shall be given out in that day, in Zach. 14. 20. In that day there shall be
holiness unto the Lord upon the Bells of Horses: he looks upon that Scripture,
and his heart does close with it as a gracious promise; he prays for the
accomplishment of it, his heart leaps within him to think that there is a time
coming when there shall be holiness to the Lord in the conversations of all his
people in their employments: that though their hands be put to the things of
the world, yet their hearts shall be up, their hearts shall be breathing after
God, the heart shall be conversing with Christ; he knows that his Calling was
made for him, and not he for his Calling, it was made to be subservient to his
best good, to be a servant to him, not to be his Master, and therefore still he
desires to keep his heart free for God; he knows that if he make a God of the
world, the world will make a slave of him, and therefore he desires to walk as
one that Christ has made free, and still his heart is breathing and thirsting
after God, whilst he is in the midst of worldly Employments. That Is a Third.

4. Again, Fourthly, He that walks with God in his Calling, is careful to
sanctify all by the Word and Prayer, so says the Apostle in 1 Timothy 4. 5. All
things are sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer: he knows that there is a
Curse upon the whole Creation, sin has brought a curse upon every creature,
there is a curse upon every way of man, there is a curse and a snare in every
Calling, in every Employment that man sets his hand unto, and therefore it is
his desire that all may be sanctified unto him; he knows that the creature is
not comfortable, no condition comfortable, unless God be kept close to the
creature, and therefore he looks up continually to God for his blessing, that
all may be sanctified to him; he knows that the earth can bring forth nothing
but Briars and Thorns, it is the curse of the world, and so it is the curse of
every condition, that though he plough and sow, and though he labor with never
so much industry, his Calling brings forth nothing but Briars and Thorns, he
meets with nothing but vanity and vexation, crosses and molestations, and that
which is worst of all, he is not able to bear them, therefore he desires that
all may be sanctified unto him by Word and Prayer; he knows that it is not the
industry of man that makes rich, it is not the blessing of the hand unless the
Word of God goes along with it: in all his ways to take God along, that so he
may have the blessing of the Lord upon the works and labors of his hand.
That Is a fourth. Again,

5. Fifthly, He is careful that the world and his outward employments don't
justle out the things of God: This is another part of his walking with God in
his Calling; he knows the things of God are of greatest concernment: his
Calling and the things of this world are but for a time, for this moment,
whilst he is traveling over the bridge to Eternity, and therefore he knows he
shall wrong his own soul, if the cares of the world, and the things of the
world, and over-eager pursuit after the world, should hinder him in his pursuit
after God and Christ: He looks upon that as good counsel which Christ gives in
Matthew. 5. says he there, Seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof
in the first place, and all things shall be added: Let the things of God have
the pre-eminence, he gives them the precedence in his heart and affections, in
his practice and pursuit, still the Kingdom of God and the righteousness of it
is sought in the first place: therefore he desires to set up God above the
world, and says, Lord, sit thou here, sit thou here in the highest place, sit
thou in my heart, in the excellency of my spirit, let the things of God have
the precedence; and as for the world, Thou world sit thou at my footstool; he
says to the world as Abraham said to his Servants, in Genesis 22. 5. when he went
to sacrifice his son Isaac, he says to the young men, Stand you here, and I
and the Lad will go up to the Mount and worship: and thus says the heart to
the world, World stand thou here, Calling, Employment, stand thou here till I
go up yonder and worship, till I go and converse with God, and behold the face
of Christ, stay thou here in the Valley till I go up to the Mount and worship:
for he gives the things of God and Christ the precedence, because he knows they
abide for ever, the Word of the Lord that abides for ever, and so the love of
God and Christ abide for ever, and communion with God and Christ endures for
ever, the Image of Christ upon his soul endures for ever, he therefore gives
these the precedence in his affections, and in his pursuit; therefore it is,
that he is not willing to grasp too much of the world, he is fearful to grasp
too much of the world, to have more of the world than he knows how to manage
with the performance of his duty to God, he is fearful, I say, that the world
should justle out his betters, and therefore will not grasp too much of the
world, and is careful so to order the things of the world, as that he may gain
time to seek after the great things of God and Christ. That Is a Fifth
particular. Again,

6. Sixthly, He that walks with God in his Calling lives by Faith: he lives by
faith whilst he works in his Calling; he does not only live by faith for the
things of heaven, he does not only exercise faith, for the blessings of the
world to come, but he lives by faith in his Calling, and therefore he goes on
cheerfully, he knows his person and his works are accepted, whatsover his work
is though never so mean it is accepted, and all his labors, and faithfulness in
his Calling are accepted: he exercises his faith for the covering of his
infirmities, he knows that he is subject to dishonor God continually, there is
much weakness does escape from him whilst he is in the world, and therefore he
exercises his faith for the covering of those infirmities; he lives by faith
for the protection of God in his Calling, thus he lives by faith: he knows
there is a promise, and he lives upon it, He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, that thou dash not thy foot against a
stone: In all thy ways, in every good and lawful way in thy Calling there is a
promise of protection, and he lives by faith upon this promise: And there is a
promise of blessing also, Blessed art thou coming in, and blessed art thou
going out, and he exercises faith in that promise also. That Is another part of
his walking with God. But again,

7. Seventhly, He is careful to avoid those stumbling blocks and snares that
might endanger him in his walking with God; that is another part of his walking
with God: It Is commendable for men to be industrious in their Calling, but how
many stumbling blocks on the right hand and on the left, that men dash against,
and so lose all their industry and diligence by dashing against those stumbling
blocks! One stumbles at self-end, self-seeking, he propounds himself only, and
his own good, and therefore he loses all; others meet with other snares and
fall into them, deceit, cozenage and falsehood; some are over-eager in their
pursuit after the world; and others stumble at the stone of Slothfulness and
Idleness; it is hard to walk in a middle way; but he that walks with God knows
that there is a snare in every condition, and therefore he is watchful against
those snares: Every Calling, every Employment has some special snares and
stumblingblocks; men that are employed about high things, great matters, they
meet with one kind of snare, men in low conditions meet with another kind of
snare, every high condition, and every low condition has its snares, and
therefore he is careful to observe what estate, and what the calling and
condition in that estate that he is in does most expose him unto, and he is
careful in watching against those snares therein.

8. Eighthly, Again, In the last place, He abides with God in his Calling;
that is another part of those that walk with God, he abides with God in his
Calling: the Apostle gives that counsel in 1 Cor. 7. about the 15, or 16
Verses, That every one should abide in the Calling that God has set them in:
and this counsel he labors to walk up unto, he is content in the place God
has set him, or submits unto it with contentation, and therefore he abides in
the way that God has set him in. The Apostle does not mean, that it is not
lawful for a man to change his Calling, for certainly that may be done upon
occasion; the Merchant may turn Husbandman, or the Husbandman may turn
Merchant, if he sees occasion for it: but God would have his people to abide in
their Callings, not rashly to change them, but to see God in them, and submit
thereunto with content. Thus you see what that man is that walks with God; if
you follow him in his ordinary works and employments, you shall find him such
in the ways of his Calling, and therefore oh that you would look up to the
Lord to make this truth practical to you. Truly these are high lessons, but
they are such as every gracious heart is breathing after, and following hard
unto, and bewails wherein it comes short; I say, this is or should be found in
every gracious heart, therefore look unto God that he may make you such whilst
you walk in your Callings. Oh it were a blessed time Brethren if all your
hearts were brought up to this, thus to walk with God (as you have heard) in
your Callings, we should soon see the new heavens that is spoken of, God has
promised to create new heavens and new earth, if men's hearts were once set to
walk thus with God in his ways, and in their employments, we should soon see
new earth, men must be new, new hearts, new conversations, first new men and
then a new world, look up to the Lord to make you thus faithful in your
Callings; it is the main thing that God looks after, faithfulness, walking with
him whilst we are performing the works of our Calling; it is not so much the
Calling that God regards, but your faithfulness in it let the Calling be what
it will: if a man have a Calling never so honorable, yet if he be not faithful
in it, he is no way pleasing to God; and on the other side, if a man have a
Calling never so mean, and never so low, yet if he be faithful in it, it is well
pleasing to God: oh it is that which will stick by you, yea, it is that which
will follow you when you leave the world: your Callings cannot follow you, they
must leave you, they must be left behind below, but thy faithfulness, that
faithfulness that has been exercised in thy employment, and in thy work, that
will never leave thy soul, that will follow it even unto heaven: and now you
that fear the Lord, though others be unfaithful, yet you are engaged to
faithfulness, you are engaged to walk with God in the works of your Calling,
for you have the promise of protection, you have the promise of blessing, this
is engagement to you, you have a promise that the Lord will be with you, that
his Angels shall be with you, that they shall keep you continually when you are
in your way, and in the works of your Calling, and therefore this is an
engagement unto you, and you have the promise of blessing: the Lord if he bless
you in your way, what an engagement is this unto you to be faithful! he will
not only be with you when you are in those duties that do more nearly concern
his worship, but he has promised to be with you by his protection, and by his
blessing even whilst you are in the works of your Calling, and therefore walk
up to God there in your Calling; it is a Talent left to you by God, and it does
engage an ingenious man to be faithful, therein you are betrusted, and herein
an instrument to do good to souls and bodies, and therefore you are engaged
herein as it is your duty; therefore be faithful in all; Oh what encouragement
is here, for Christians to consider this, whatsoever their Calling is, though
never so mean, they are accepted in it, the Lord accepts it, while they study
faithfulness to carry it faithfully in a man's Calling, in the meanest work that
ever they took in hand they are accepted, as if their work were the most
honorable work in the world, and therefore if you have acceptance, not only
when you come before God in his worship, but when you are in your own ways, in
your Callings and Employments your person and works are accepted, it is a great
engagement unto you to be found faithful in the works of your Calling. And so
much for this time.

SERMON VII.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Have given you part of the Character of one that walked with God, and showed
you what he is in those duties that do more immediately concern God himself: I
showed you (the last time I spoke) what his carriage is in his Calling, in his
ordinary employment: he looks upon his Calling as an Ordinance of God. God who
is an active Spirit cannot endure that any of his creatures should be idle; the
very Angels have their employment, there is never an Angel in heaven idle; Are
they not all ministering spirits, says the Apostle in Heb. 1. they are all
ministering spirits, sent forth for the good of them that shall be saved: And
therefore out of this Consideration he submits unto the way of his Calling, and
desires to be faithful in it; he also desires to do all that he does to the
Lord, even the very works of his calling he does them to the Lord; he looks
upon it as a trust from God, and by that trust he is engaged to faithfulness;
and he desires to make God his last end: there is a further end, besides the
gain of riches and living in the world, there is a further end which he eyes,
which is more honorable, more noble, and that is to serve God in his
Generation, that he may be an instrument in the hand of God to do some good in
his Generation, that God may have the glory of it; this is the last end, and so
he does all as to the Lord: he desires also to be holy and spiritual in the
midst of his Calling, though his hand be to the earth, he desires that his
heart may be upright, he groans under the burden of a carnal heart, it is worse
than death to him to be carnally minded: he rejoices in the promise of
holiness, and in that Prophecy in Zachariah, In that day holiness shall be
written to the Lord upon the Bells of Horses; there is a promise that Gods
people shall be holy when they are in the world, in the midst of their Callings
and Employments, holiness shall be written to the Lord upon them; he rejoices
to think that that time is a coming, he prays and waits to see the
accomplishment of it in his own spirit: he desires to sanctify all by the Word
and Prayer; he knows it is the blessing of the Lord, and not his own endeavors
that can make him prosperous in his Calling; he desires also that the things of
the world don't shut out the things of God; that is another part of his walking
with God. Oh how fearful is he to grasp too much of the world, how fearful is
he that the things of the world should deprive him of those opportunities of
waiting upon God, of communion with the Lord, and with his own spirit! He does
not live upon his own endeavors, but he lives by faith, whilst he works with
his hand; he exercises faith in the promise for protection, blessing and
acceptance. He desires also to shun all those snares and temptations that are
in the way of his Calling; as every Calling has its special snare and
temptation, he desires there to be most watchful where there is most likelihood
he should slip and fall, and be snared and broken; he prays and watches against
the temptations that are in his way, and is willing to abide with God in his
Calling. I shall now come to show you what this person is in his Relations: One
that walks with God you shall find active, gracious, carry it graciously in his
Relations: And I shall only speak now of Family Relations, and there is some
need we should speak of that: It seems to be hinted in the Text, That Enoch was
faithful with God in his Family; and this was mentioned, That Enoch walked with
God after he begat Methusalem three hundred years, and begat sons and
daughters; and as he begat them so he brought them up to God, and was found
faithful in his family Relations. There are three sorts, there is that of
Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, and Servant and Master: I shall not speak
largely of all these, it would be too large a Subject. I shall only now give
you some hints what that gracious person is that walks with God as Enoch did,
and how he carries it in those several Relations.

To begin with the Relation of the Wife and Husband; has God set such a person
in the Relation of a Wife; you shall behold her gracious carriage.

First of all, She looks upon her Husband as her head, and submits unto him as
one that is set over her in the Lord; she knows that there is a priority and a
dignity that God has put upon her husband: the man was first, and then the
woman, and therefore she submits unto him in all lawful things, though in some
respects he may seem to be inferior to her, though she brought more wealth,
though her birth be more honorable, though her parts be more ripe, yet she
submits unto him, as one that God has set over her; nay, though he may seem
unworthy to rule, and unworthy of the dignity, yet she submits for the Lords
sake, because it is the Ordinance and Command of God. There are diverse things
in this submission which are seen in a gracious woman that walks with God. As,

1. First, She thinks and speaks honorably of her Husband, and speaks
honorably unto him: you know what was Mary's carriage to Joseph, though she
might seem to be above him, she says, Thy Father and I have sought thee: She
does not say, My Father and I, but Thy Father and I have sought thee; and so
the Apostle Peter speaks graciously of such gracious women that speak
honorably to their Husbands, in 1 Pet. 3. 6. he does exhort women to imitate
Sarah, Sarah obeyed her husband, and called him Lord.

Again, As she speaks honorably to him, and of him, so she labors to please
him in all lawful things, to conform her self as much as may be unto her
husbands disposition, to win him with her love and gracious carriage; she also
receives his counsels, and is willing to submit to his reproofs in all things
lawful, because she looks upon him as one that the Lord has set over her to be
head. Again,

2. Secondly, She looks upon her self as one that the Lord has given unto her,
that she might be a meet help unto him; this is another part of the gracious
carriage in a woman; she looks upon her self as one that is given to be a meet
help unto her husband, and therefore she desires to do him good all his days:
so says Solomon when he speaks of this virtuous woman, in Prove. 21. 12. She
will do him good and not evil all the days of his life; she endeavors to help
him, and to do him good in his soul, body and estate, she will do him good in
every condition, in affliction, in low conditions when the hand of the Lord is
upon him, if the hand of the Lord be stretched out against his estate, and
bring him low, she submits unto it, and will not upbraid but comfort him, and
be content to take part with him in his affliction and low condition, and all
this she does as unto the Lord, because of the Ordinance of the Lord; and thus
you see how such a person as walks with God carries it in the Relation of a
wife. Well, if God set such a person in the relation of a Husband, you shall
find him also walking with God in that relation: he loves his wife dearly, and
he loves her especially for that of God he sees in her; though he dare not love
the creature immediately, nor rejoice nor delight in the creature, because he
knows that is Idolatry, yet he loves that which he sees of God in her, and under
God, he loves her next to God with the dearest love: That, that is the most
near relation, it is nearer than the Relation of Father and Mother, Sons and
Daughters; this is not only a natural but supernatural relation, it is a
Mystical relation, and there is a great deal of God in making two to become one,
and therefore, I say, of that love which is due to, and which he may give unto
the creature, he gives unto her the greatest share, as being the nearest
relation: and because he loves her, you shall see how he carries himself
toward her.

1. First, He loves her soul in the first place, and therefore it is that he
mostly desires to do her good in her spirit: therefore it is that he instructs
and prays with her, and for her, that so the Lord may do her good in the inward
man: his dearest love is toward her best part, and therefore he rejoices most
in that when he sees the work of God upon her heart: when they can live
together as heirs, coheirs of the grace of life, as the Apostle speaks, that
is it that he takes the most contentment in. Again,

2. Secondly, Also because he loves her, he will not be bitter to her, he will
remember that rule in Col. 3. 19. Husbands love your Wives and be not bitter
against them: he will not be bitter in word nor action; he considers her
weakness, looks upon her as the weaker vessel, and therefore he will not break
her; if he must chide and fight, it shall be with himself, and with those lusts
that are within him and war against his soul, and not with that relation that
the Lord has given to be such a wife and such a comfort unto him in this his
Pilgrimage.

3. Again, Because he loves her, he will defend her; this is another part of
his gracious carriage; he will be a veil for a covering to her: so Abimelech
told Sarah, Lo, thy husband is a covering to thee where ever thou go: he
will right her cause against all wrongs and injuries in a lawful way, so far as
he is able,

4. Again, He covers her weaknesses; that is another part of his carriage; he
remembers that rule that is given unto husbands, Husbands love your Wives, in
Ephesians. 5. 25. as Christ loved his Church; Why, Christ covered the infirmities
of the Church: though there be a great deal amiss, yet he puts his raiment upon
her; when ever he presents his people unto his Father, he presents them as if
there were no spot in them, as if they were holy and perfect, Thou art all fair
my love, says he, and there is no spot in thee: Why, so this man that walks
with God will not blaze abroad the infirmities of his Wife, but is willing to
cover them, for he knows what the Lord Jesus has covered in respect to him.

5. Again, Fifthly, Because he loves her he will maintain her, that she may
want no conveniences according to his rank and the condition that God has set
him in: he will not keep her short of necessaries, but provide both for her
necessity and dignity; he will not spend all her portion, and then turn her out of
doors to provide for her self: he will not keep her short, that she shall have no
opportunity to do good, but he gives her allowance to share with him, and to
take comfort together of that which God has given him.

6. Again, Sixthly and lastly, He will maintain her honor in the Family, and
therefore he commands that she be respected: he will not suffer servants nor
children to usurp authority over her, but commands that reverence be showed,
and submission given to her over all the Family; he looks upon her as one that
God has set (next himself) to be the next light of the Family, and therefore
desires that she might share and be respected; he knows that God has given her
to be a help, and (so under him) to look to the ways of her Family, Children
and Maidens, and therefore in this he does countenance her, lest the Family be
disordered, and God be dishonored in it, this he does as unto the Lord and for
his sake (though there may be unworthiness on her part) because it is the
Ordinance and appointment of God: Thus you see what is the work of the first
Relation of Husband and Wife.

2. But Secondly, The second Relation in the Family is of Children and Parents:
Now if a gracious heart, as one that walks with God, be such in either of these
relations, you shall see his gracious carriage.

1. First, to speak in relation to Children: If God has set him as a Child, he
desires to obey his Parents in all things in the Lord; he desires to give
willing submission and obedience unto them, ^ay, and that from the very heart,
he obeys them as Christ obeyed his Father, in Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Lo, I come to do
thy Will, I delight to do thy Will, O God, thy Law is in my heart; and this is
the carriage of a gracious Child, one that walks with God, to his Parents, he
obeys them from the heart.

2. Secondly, He also submits unto all their Instructions, he embraces the
wholesome counsel of his Parents, He will not despise the counsel of his Father,
nor depart from the Law of his Mother, but he wears them as an Ornament of
Grace to his head, and as a Chain, as Solomon speaks.

3. He also does submit unto all their reproofs and chastenings, because he
looks upon them as the reproofs and chastenings of a Father, and so proceed
from love, and they are for his good. He also

4. In the fourth place, Is content that they should dispose of him for
Calling, for Employment: he is willing that they should dispose of him in
Marriage, he knows that they have a great share of him, and therefore he will
not dispose of himself without their consent. He also in

5. The Fifth and last place, Looks upon himself as always bound, even all his
days, to love and honor, and to respect his Parents; though God has given
him a Family of his own, and though he be set free from their Government, yet
he looks upon himself all his days bound to honor and respect them, and to
maintain them, if the hand of the Lord be upon them to shorten their comforts,
and if his be lengthened our, he looks upon himself as bound to relieve their
wants, and to be a comfort and stay unto them in their old age: this is the
carriage of one that walks with God, if he be found in the relation of a Child.
But for the relation of a Father.

If he stand in the relation of a Parent, you shall also see his gracious
carriage:

1. First of all, He looks upon his Children as given him of God, to be brought
up for God; he knows that they are but only sent out to Nurse (as it were) to
him: God has given him such and such Children to train up in his fear, and
therefore it is his great desire to see the Image of God upon them; he is more
desirous that they should be made rich in grace than in gold, therefore he
prays for them, counsels them, instructs them, gives them good examples, and
all that so the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ may be communicated unto
them; if the Lord have pleased (at any time) to work upon the hearts of his
Children, Oh how thankful is he unto the Lord for it! And he rejoices a
thousand times more, even in this, that he knows that they are the Lords, than
that they are his.

2. Secondly, Again, He will not bear with that which is evil in them, though
they be never so nigh to him, though they be of his flesh, yet he will not bear
with that which is a dishonor to God: he will not suffer that in a Child which
he abhors in another, which he will reprove, nay (it may be punish in a
servant: but he is impartial in the matters of God, when Gods honor is
concerned in it, he will not connive at any wickedness in them.

3. Thirdly, And on the other side, He is careful not to provoke them to wrath;
for that is another extreme; he remembers that that is a Precept, Fathers,
provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the fear and nurture
of the Lord; he desires rather, if it be possible, to rule them by love than by
fear, he knows that slavish fear is the seed of a great deal of evil, and many
times it destroies Ingenuity it self; he will not provoke them by cutting words,
as Saul did his son Jonathan, in the first of Samuel, you shall see what
cutting words he gave to Jonathan, a good and gracious son, 1 Samuel 20. 30. Then
Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him, Thou son of the
perverse rebellious woman, etc.

4. Fourthly, He will not deny them conveniences, and that education that is
fit for them, but he is careful to dispose of them in the way of a lawful
Calling, he sets them in a good way that they may be serviceable to the Lord
and their Generation, according to the Will of the Lord, when he is dead and
gone.

5. Fifthly, He will not fall upon them with violence before he knows the matter
and examines the cause, lest he should smite them without cause; he will not
cast them off for every offense, but he seeks the Lord for them, and waits long
for their return: he prays and prays again that the Lord would bring them home
unto himself; and if at any time the Lord gives repentance, he looks upon it as
a great mercy, and his heart is drawn forth in thankfulness; and this is the
carriage of one that walks with God in the relation of a Parent.

There is a third relation in which I shall be more short, and that is, That of
Servant and Master. Now if God set a gracious soul in this relation, ye shall
see his carriage.

1. First of all, If he be a Servant, he is content with his condition, he
remembers that the Lord Jesus himself was found in the form of a Servant, and
therefore well may he, a poor worm, submit unto that condition if the Lord set
him in it, he remembers he is accepted of God in that condition: it is not the
work and employment that God looks at, but the faithfulness, the faithful
carriage of the heart and spirit, and the work, though it be never so mean, and
never such drudgery, if done to the Lord in faithfulness, God accepts of it;
and thus he is Christ's freeborn of the freewoman, free in the inward man, and
does more willingly and contentedly submit himself unto the condition of a
Servant, if the Lord be pleased to place him in it.

2. Secondly, Again, As he is a Servant, he yields all due honor, respect and
obedience unto his Master, or to such as God has set over him; he yields
obedience in all things in the Lord: He is also careful of the good name and
estate of his Master, whatsoever he is instructed in, or trusted with, as
Joseph and Jacob were; he is careful of all the estate that his Master puts
into his hand, he will not wrong his Master in his estate, but he labors by
all lawful means to increase the estate of his Master, though he knows he ought
not to sin and deceive for his Master, but in all lawful ways he will labor
to preserve and increase the estate of his Master; nay, this he does in all
faithfulness, whatsoever his hand finds to do in the Employment that God has
set him in, he does it in all faithfulness, whether the eye of his Master be
upon him or no, he knows the eye of the Lord is upon him; he will not only work
when his Master looks on him, but when there is no eye upon him, when his
Master is gone into a far Country; he does all to the Lord with all singleness
of heart, and therefore he is faithful in the doing of that work and employment
which is put into his hand.

3. Thirdly, Again, He submits unto all reproofs and corrections of his Master;
he will not Answer, murmur, repine, nor turn again when he is smitten, but submits
unto his Master: he looks upon him as one that God has set over him in the
Lord; yea, though he meet with much hardship, he is not willing to defame his
Master, nor that it should be known, but if he be used most cruelly, in such
cruelty as he must complain, he will complain in an orderly way, as to the
Magistrate with all meekness, that it may be remedied. There is one particular
more and I have done, and that is,

2. Secondly, The relation of the Master, you shall see a gracious heart
walking with God in this relation also that God has set him in as a Master.
Why,

1. First, He seeks after the good of the souls of his Servants: he does not
only look to their bodies and no further; he does not use his Servant, as he
does his Cattle, only to work and toil them, and seek no further, but he looks
upon them as committed by God and man unto his trust, and therefore he is bound
to be faithful to them, in seeking the good of their souls in the first place:
therefore it is that he counsels, instructs and prays for them, and above all,
he labors to give them good examples in the Family, for he knows all the rest
is nothing, his instruction will do no good, his counsels are of no efficacy,
if his examples don't go along with them; and so Servants may see his gracious
behavior and carriage, which will be exceeding convincing unto them.

2. Secondly, Again, He also takes care of their outward man; he remembers it is
written, that He that provides not for his Family is worse than an Infidel, and
therefore he endeavors to provide food and raiment for them, lest he should
put them upon temptations and provoke them to sin, and put them upon temptation
to lie and steal, and be extravagant; and this is occasioned many times through
the unfaithfulness of the Master in this particular; he is careful not to
express cruelty, one that walks with God will not be cruel to his Servant in
laying too much upon him, he knows the groans of his servant in this case will
reach up to heaven; the Israelites were servants to the Egyptians, and you know
when they laid heavy burdens upon them, then their cry was heard, and reached up
to heaven; and it was the destruction of the Egyptians: A good Master will not be
cruel in his work.

3. Thirdly, Neither will he be cruel in his correction: If he does correct he
will do it in measure, he knows he is called the Father of the Family,
therefore he ought to carry it as a Father unto his Family, and therefore if he
will correct them, he will correct them as his own Children, he will hate to be
cruel to them: And therefore he will in the

4. Fourth place, Take good counsel from him: a gracious heart, if he shall
speak to him of God and Christ in humility of any disorders he meets withal in
a Family, a gracious heart will receive counsel from an inferior; you know how
Naaman carried it, in 2 Kings 5. 23. now Naaman did not reject their counsel
though he was a great and mighty Warrier; he does not say, What have you to do
to teach me? to instruct me? Why, says he, it is good counsel, and it is from
God, and he had cause afterward to bless God, that he did through them give him
that counsel, for if he had not been, he had ever been Leprous. But,

5. Again, He takes care of his Servants: a gracious man pities them in their
need, as the Centurion, My Servant, says he, lies (at home) sick of a Palsy,
and desires that Christ would speak a word for his healing: he does not turn
him out of doors, and send him to provide for himself, but he tenders him, and
goes to the Physician Christ himself, and desires that he would please to heal
his Servant. And then

6. Sixthly and lastly, He will not send his Servant away empty; that is another
part of his carriage: when they have served him many years, and he has found
their faithfulness, and the blessing of the Lord has been upon him whilst they
have been with him in the Family, he will not send them empty away: God has laid
it as an injunction upon the Israelites, that when their Servants had served
them so many years, they should not send them empty away, but that they should
give them something, something of all that they had got: It was the sin of
Laban, Jacob had served him fourteen years night and day, and for Jacob' sake
the Lord blessed Laban, now it was his sin, The Lord has seen thy cruelty, and
the Lord has rebuked thee; This is part of the carriage of a gracious heart
that walks with God; you have seen what he is in all these Family Relations
that God has set him in, in relation of a Husband and Wife, of Parents and
Children, of Masters and Servants. And so much for this time.

SERMON VIII.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
I Am drawing toward a conclusion. I have given you the Character of one that
walks with God; I shall therefore proceed:

Having thus given you the Character of one that walks with God, I shall show
you, that this is a dignity, the excellency of any man or woman upon earth,
that they thus walk with God as you have heard. To declare unto you therefore
wherein the dignity lies; What is the excellency of a man or woman that does
thus walk with God, will appear in diverse particulars.

1. First of all, This man that thus walks with God, is nearer God than others;
he comes into the presence of God, he is nigh as a special friend and
favorite: that puts dignity upon him; it is the dignity of a man to stand in
the presence of a Prince, it is an honor, a privilege: What is it then to
stand in the presence of God! it is an Angelical dignity; it is said of the
Angels, Christ says of them, that they always behold the face of God the
Father, in Matthew. 18. 10. Do not offend my little ones, for their Angels
always behold the face of their Father; it is the glory of the Angels that they
ever stand in the presence of God, and behold his face: this is the dignity of
one that walks with God, he is nigher God than others. But,

2. Again, Secondly, He sees more of God than other men; I say, that soul that
walks with God as Enoch did, sees more of God than other men; God deals
friendly with him, he looks upon him as a fellow-traveller, he will impart his
mind to him freely, he will reveal his secrets, the mysteries of his Kingdom unto
them: he that is nigh God is nigh the light, therefore he shall not walk in
darkness; the Lord goes before him continually, he guides and leads him with
his counsel: the light shall discover the way unto him that he shall walk in,
Thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it; if
any man walks with God, it is he that walks thus with God as Enoch did. That Is a
second.

3. But Thirdly, God entertains that soul all along his Journey with profitable
and delightful discourse. God is ever and anon speaking to him that walks with
him, as a man speaks to his friend when he walks with him in his way: and this
takes off from the tediousness of the way; though the way be tedious, though it
be deep dirty way, yet if a man have a good companion, if he have one to call
often to, to discourse pleasantly, it takes off from the tediousness of the
way, it is forgotten: and thus does the Lord carry it toward the soul that
walks with him, he so speaks to the soul that it takes from the tediousness of
their Pilgrimage, that they forget the tediousness of it whilst the Lord speaks
sweetly of his love and goodness to them; he often calls upon them as a man
does to his friend that he walks with: he enquires into their states, and bids
them be of good cheer; sometimes he tells them, that the worst is past, and
there is better way behind; he tells them of the rest they shall have at night,
or of the good entertainment they shall have when they come home; or of the
glorious provision that is making ready, and though the way be tedious their
rest is long: and this takes off from the tediousness of the way.

4. Again in the fourth place, He supplies their wants; this is another
privilege that that soul has that walks with God: the Lord will bear all
their charges, and take care of them in their Journey, they shall not want any
thing that is good for them, either for the outward or inward man: this will
comfort a man upon his Journey though he have never a penny in his purse, yet
if there be a friend with him, he will say, I have good store, thou shall not
want so long as I have a penny, I will take care, make provision, and pay all;
and thus the Lord does take care of all, he gives them himself* Walk before me,
says he to Abraham in Genesis 17. 1. and be thou perfect, and I will make a
Covenant with thee: And what is that? in Verse. 2. I will be a God unto thee:
Walk with me and I will be a God unto thee, take care for nothing, I Will bear
thy charges all the way; I Will be a God unto thee, I Will supply thy wants; the
presence of the Lord shall be instead of all comforts, if thou want any thing
I Will make it up of my self: I Will be a God unto thee, what would thou have
more? And so he takes care to supply all the wants of the inward man, he will
make provision all the way, he has laid up store of provision in Jesus Christ
for them, there is store of righteousness, grace and strength, that his people
might want nothing, no not while they are in their Pilgrimage: and therefore he
says unto such a soul, as sometimes the Father said to the eldest son that was
brother to the Prodigal in Luke 15. the latter end of the Chapter, when he was
ready to murmur because his Prodigal brother had so much kindness showed unto
him; Why, says his Father unto him, Son, says he, thou art ever with me, and
all that I have is thine, therefore why should thou murmur, why should
thou repine? thou want nothing, thou art ever with me, thou enjoyest and
have interest in all that I have, it is thine; so says the Lord to every soul
that walks with him, Thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine, I Will
take care to supply all thy wants. This is another special privilege to all
those that walk with God.

5. Again, Fifthly, He supports them; that is another dignity and privilege
that the Lord will support them under all their burdens; when they are ready to
faint, and ready to give up the Ghost many times in their own apprehension, he
will support their spirits, he will take care that they shall not fall: if
there lie never such pressures upon them, the Lord will ease them, he will bear
with them, he gives them leave (all the way) to lean upon him; this is a most
sweet and excellent privilege that the soul has that walks with God, I say,
all the way of their Journey, all the way of the Wilderness, the Lord gives
them leave to lean upon him; when they are weak and fainting, and ready to be
discouraged, he gives them leave to lean upon him, his righteousness and
strength, Let him take hold on my righteousness, and make peace with me, and he
shall make peace with me; He gives them leave to cast all burdens upon him, and
to venture for Eternity upon him, to lay all the weight of all their cares and
fears upon the Lord, that he may support them, and bear their burdens; yea, he
does not only give them leave to lean upon him, but he takes them up in his
Arms if they faint at any time, if they fall into a swound that they can go no
farther, the Lord will not go away and leave his fellow-travellers, but he will take
them up in their fainting and swounding fits, he brings forth his Spirits and
Cordials, and will not leave them until he has set them up again, and made
them able to follow him: a gracious promise in Isa. 40. 11. the Lord makes
there unto his people, He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, and shall carry
his Lambs in his arms* etc. he will deal with them as a mother does with her
Child, or as a Shepherd does with his Lambs, he will not leave them when they will go
no further, but he will pity and tender them, they have his arm and his bosom
when they cannot go: he will help them in all their pressures of spirit, yea, and
in all their pressures of the outward man too; he will support and put his arm
under them in every affliction, he will take off the weight of it, and bear the
heaviest end, that end that has the curse, the bitterest, the Lord Jesus bears
that end; he will not break them in their afflictions, In all their afflictions
he was afflicted, he felt every burden: This is the gracious carriage of the
Lord toward those that walk with him; and this is a mighty privilege. That Is
a Sixth.

7. Seventhly, The Lord will knock off their bolts and fetters; this is another
privilege, and a mighty one too; the Lord will knock off their Chains and
Fetters, and he will cause them to walk in Liberty: he will deliver them from
bondage, he came and died for this very end, That through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, and deliver them, who through fear of
death, were all their lives long subject to bondage; he will knock off their
Fetters, I say, even the Chains of their unbelief; the further they go with
God, the more close they walk with God, the more liberty they meet with, the
more liberty from the chains of lusts: the more nigh they come to God, the more
does unbelief vanish, it cannot stand in the presence of God, and the more they
walk with God, the more acquaintance, and the more friendly God deals with them
as fellow-travellers; though there were a great distance between man and man
before, yet when they travel together, they will have friendly carriage; so a
man before he walks with God, there is a great distance between God and him,
till he condescend to the poor low condition of his servants, and speak more
friendly to them, that they may have more acquaintance with God; and the more
acquaintance they have with God, the more shall the Chains of their unbelief,
and the other fetters in their hearts fall off. That Is another privilege.

8. Again in the eighth place, The Lord will keep them from falling, He upholds
the feet of his servants, he preserves their goings, he is round about their
path, and preserves them, Prove. 2. 8. He keeps the paths of Judgment, and
preserves the way of his Saints. He Will discover many a snare unto them, and
teach them how to break those snares that others are taken in; and are broken
by them; and if the Lord does suffer such a soul to fall, it shall not lie
long, he will not go away and leave him when he is fallen; the Lord takes care of
him as his Fellow-traveller, and he will help him up again: when Peter fell
most grievously; Christ did not leave him so; Christ turned again, did not go
away but looked upon Peter, and helped him up again; yea, the Lord will not only
help that soul again when he is fallen, but he will make an advantage of his
falls; every slip, much more every fall shall tend to the good of that soul
that walks with God, God will bring a great deal of good out of the greatest
evil: the Lord will teach him to walk humbly when he arises, he will teach him to
walk more fearingly, more circumspectly, more dependingly, to take hold on
Christ every step he goes, and to take heed that he slide not; nay, he will cause
him to gain ground by his falls, he will make him run so much the faster, when he
shall recover himself, and see what he has lost, and how God has gone a good
step from him; Oh, it shall be a spur unto the soul, and it shall cause him to
run so much the more earnestly after God, and to cleave so much the more
closely unto him. Again,

9. In the Ninth place, The Lord leads the soul the safest and nighest way to
heaven; I say, that soul that walks with God as Enoch did, is led the safest
and nighest way to glory; the safest way, the Lord will discover those pits and
snares that lie in the way, he will deliver him from those enemies, those
robbers, those murderers that lie in his way, and he will not lead him about, but
bring him the nighest way to glory. Many a poor creature that walks not with
God, may set many a step (as they conceive) toward heaven, but they go about,
because they begin not at first to walk with God, and therefore come back, they
must come back again and lose their labor; yea, many times Gods own people go
about because they do not follow God close; sometimes they think to save
themselves, and provide for themselves, to shun sufferings and reproaches, and
go about many times to shun them, so that often they lose a great deal of way,
and come home benighted: but when the soul cleaves to God, God leads him the
nighest way, the direct way to glory, that he shall not come home be-nighted,
he shall come home in good season because he cleaves to the Lord, the Lord was
his Counselor and he follows him.

10. Tenthly, Again, In the last place, to name no more; this is another
dignity and privilege, that soul that walks with God, shall sit down with God;
There remains a rest, says the Apostle, for the people of God: there remains a
rest after their long Journey, their tedious Pilgrimage, they shall sit down
with God, they shall lie in the bosom of God; after they have walked a while
with him on earth, they shall sit down with him for ever, and with his Son at
his Table in his Kingdom. You see the dignity and privilege of that soul that
walks with God: Therefore I shall make some Application of this. And,

Use 1. First, Let me speak to those that are strangers to God; to such as yet
are found walking in the way of sinners, a way that God takes no delight in;
why, you that are walking in the way of sinners, are walking in the way that
leads to your own destruction; Oh, that the Lord would pluck you (with a mighty
hand) out of that destroying way; why, you are invited, this day the Lord
invites you to come and walk with him, all the privileges that you have heard,
do belong to those that walk with God, they are laid open before you to win
upon you, and to invite your souls to come in and walk with this God; why will
you walk with your worst enemy? Is he not a mad man that will walk with him
that seeks to destroy him? And yet this is the folly that is in the heart of
sinners: whilst you walk in the ways of sin, you walk with your worst enemy,
and walk with a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour; who would make choice
of a roaring Lion to devour him? sinners walk with one that would devour them;
Oh, that the Lord would persuade your hearts to turn in and walk with him, he
knocks at your doors to day, he stays for you: if there be ever a sinner that
has any desires cast in to walk with God, know that the Lord stays for you, he
is willing to have your company, and therefore he sends you this invitation:
and therefore I beseech you, and the Lord persuade your hearts to come up to a
resolution, to give up your selves to the Lord; this does undo men, this want
of coming up to a resolution is the destruction of many poor souls, that have
many a good motion cast in; when they hear this of God, and the excellency of
those that walk with God, they cannot but see that there is something of God
that is desirable. But alas, the misery is, men come not up to a resolution, to
a fixed resolution, to make choice of God, and to walk with him, there is
something in God that is desirable; Ay, but there is another object that the
heart is fixed upon, there is something of the world, there is something in lust;
oh, my friends know it, you cannot serve God and Mammon, you cannot serve God and
your lusts, Faith cannot endure this divided heart, and therefore I beseech you,
look up to the Lord to bring off your hearts to a resolution, that you may say,
Well, I Will make choice of the Lord, I Will make choice of the Lord for my
portion, let all the world go, so I may have God; come up to a resolution to
part with all, though you lose all, though you lose your friends, though you
lose your relations and comforts, know that whatever you lose for the Lords
sake, shall be made up abundantly in him: oh, therefore I beseech you that you
would eye that fullness that is in God, this may help to bring off the heart, to
bring up the soul to close in a resolution, to come up and walk with him: when
the soul looks and eyes the fullness that there is in God, there is whatsoever
may answer all losses, whatsoever may supply all wants, and satisfy all
desires, there is a fullness in God, a fullness of Grace, and a fullness of truth
is in Christ, there is fullness of satisfaction and contentment, and therefore
the Lord being yours, you shall not need to go from him, you shall not need to
go out to seek satisfaction elsewhere: though all the world should forsake, and
your comforts leave you, yet there is that in God may answer all; and though you
part with all your lusts, yea, though you should lose all the world for the
Lords sake, that you may give up your selves to walk with him, know assuredly
that it will never repent you, you will not repent you: the very first day that
you walk with God, the very first hour of your walking with God, will bring you
such contentment and satisfaction into your spirits that you will not repent
you that you have left all your old ways and lusts, all sin, and all your
Companions for the Lords sake, that so you may walk with him. And moreover I
beseech you, that you would make use of Jesus Christ in your coming to God: if
God shall persuade your hearts, to give up your selves to walk with God, make
use of Christ at your first coming; there is no man can walk with God at his
first coming, till the son of God makes way for him, Two cannot walk together
except they be agreed; God and man were fallen out in Adam, now these must be
agreed; now, oh let your souls breath after Christ, you that desire to walk
with God, begin first with Christ, let your hearts breath after him, look to
him as your peacemaker, to be your reconciler, to make God and you one, to
bring you into more nigh acquaintance and fellowship with the Father, that God
and you may be one in Christ: Oh, look up unto the righteousness of Jesus
Christ every soul of you, you cannot walk with God, if you be naked you cannot
abide his presence; you know Adam ran out from the presence of God when God
walked in the Garden, he could not walk because God was there, he runs and
hides himself; a naked creature cannot endure the presence of God: look up to
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, throw your selves as poor naked creatures
upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, that so coming in the righteousness of
the Son unto the Father, you may have friendly acceptance, that you may walk
with God for the future.

Use 2. One word also to those that have interest in God and Jesus Christ: Oh,
that I might stir you up also to walk with God, to walk with God as Enoch did.
Brethren, consider I pray you, Did not Christ bring you into acquaintance with
the Father for this end? Were not you at a distance? ye were strangers, ye were
enemies, you were far off from God! what pains did Jesus take to bring you
acquainted with God, that so you might walk with him as a man with his friend?
It cost Christ dear, it was a hard work to make up the breach, it was a mighty
work to bring you into acquaintance with God; do not neglect therefore your
communion with God in your daily walk, seeing it cost Christ so dear.

Consider also that God has made you all for this very end, he has given you
legs that you might walk with him, he has given some strength to those that
were lame, that could not stand; I say, when he brought you home to himself, he
gave you some strength; it was then that he came to open the eyes of the blind,
and to strengthen the feet of the lame; and he strengthens their feet that so
they may walk with God his Father: Is not the Lord your best friend? Is he not
the sweetest companion you can choose? and if so, I beseech you take heed that
you do not neglect your walking with him: what, will you leave your friend?
will you leave your friend upon the way? Oh do not give the Lord occasion to
accuse you of this Ingratitude; had you not need to keep close to God, do not
you need his presence, do not you need him to comfort you, to quicken you, to
revive you, to strengthen you, to supply your wants, to bear your charges, to
keep off the blasts, to rebuke temptations, and to vanquish enemies, to help
you up when you are fallen, to make advantage of your falls, to lead you the
nighest and the safest way to glory? Oh, that the sense of your weakness and
infirmities might cause you to cleave close to the Lord, and take heed that you
don't depart and go out from walking with him: And in your walking with God, I
shall but give you a few Directions and conclude.

Direct. 1. In your walking with God be sure that you follow him in every step,
go you where God goes, walk you where God walks, if you mean to keep the
presence of God look to this; Oh, go to the Lord and desire that he would teach
your souls where he walks, as the Spouse, Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves)
where thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon: that she may
go there; Why, the Lord walks in his Ordinances, he walks amongst his people:
the Son of God walks in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks, there is his walk;
would you know where to find him, come in his walks, in the midst of his Golden
Candlesticks, in the midst of his people, in the fellowship of his Saints,
those that worship him in the beauties of holiness, in Gospel order, there the
Lord walks; you that expect the presence of the Lord, that would not lose that
comfortable presence of his which you might enjoy, take heed you do not turn
away, where God has said he walks.

Direct. 2. Again, I beseech you, that you would be always careful to give God
the upper hand in every walking, in every passage of your life give God the
upper hand; do not ascribe to your selves, lift up the name of God, be content
that he should be exalted, and you debased, Not to us Lord, not to us Lord; put
away with both hands, give us nothing, nothing belongs to us, but all belongs
to God, glory belongs to God; why, if you be enabled to do for God, if you be
enabled to suffer for God, give nothing to your selves, give him the glory, put
it away from you, desire him to take it all, and ascribe nothing to your
selves, but what he is pleased to give in freely unto you, oh give him the
pre-eminence in all, and his Son the pre-eminence in all things; be content
that the day of the Lord should be upon whatsoever is high and lifted up; upon
all the Cedars of Lebanon, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan; upon whatsoever is
in your hearts and spirits: desire him to pull down all high thoughts, and to
lay you low at his footstool; be content that you and all creatures may be
debased, and the Lord alone may be exalted through his son Jesus Christ; it
should be a Christians care in all things, I say, to give God the upper-hand.

Direct. 3. Again, Thirdly, Take heed you do not take up where God does not
take up; do not you sit down where God sits not down, for you may happily lose
him, God may go out of sight, and you may run hard before you can find God
again; don't take up in your selves, don't take up in creatures, don't say here
I Will rest, here I Will take up, don't set up here, and say, here I Will rest and
take up in this creature; if you will take up in creatures, and rest in them,
where God does not rest, why God rests in himself, and wholly in himself for
ever: he rests in himself, and he rests in his son, This is my Beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased; all the delight and complacency of the soul of the
Father is in the person of the son, This is my Beloved Son; Oh, take heed of
creatures that your comforts be not snares to you, don't take up in them,
follow on after the Lord, let your spirits take up no where but in God himself,
and in Christ, whom he has given to be the center of your souls, and a
foundation for you to build upon for ever.

Direct. 4. Again, Fourthly, Entertain sweet intercourse between God and your
souls, I say, this I desire, that sweet intercourse with God may be entertained
by you, let God be often thought of by you; will you go with a friend and
travel with him, and speak not to him? Oh, you will speak often to him: you
that walk with God, speak often to God, keep up that intercourse betwixt God
and your souls listen to what God speaks to you; a great deal is lost because
we don't hearken to him, the soul is not intent, the ear is not bored to hear
what God speaks, therefore many a sweet word, and many a comfortable word is
lost, because the soul don't listen after God; therefore I beseech you
Brethren, know it is your duty all the time you are walking with God, it is
your duty to hear what God speaks; let your soul be attentive unto the Lord,
that so you may hear every word, whether it be a word of counsel or a word of
direction, or a word of consolation: be ye always either speaking to the Lord,
or else hearkening to hear what the Lord shall speak unto you; this becomes
those that have given up themselves to walk with God.

Direct. 5. Fifthly, And to say no more, Take heed of those rubs and lets that
are in the way: take heed of that which may hinder, of that which may take you
off from walking with God; there is many a snare, there is many a rub in the way.

1. First, Take heed of this present evil world; it is a snare, it is a bait that
draws many off from walking with God, Demas has forsaken me, says Paul, he
has forsaken me for this present evil world, the Devil caught him with this
bait: Oh, take heed of the snares of the world, the cares of the world, the
honors of the world, the riches of the world, the pleasures of the world,
these are snares, I say, in which many are taken.

2. Secondly, Take heed ye turn not out into any way of sin whatsoever, give no
countenance to any evil way in your spirits or in your courses; the God that
you walk with, he is a God of pure eyes, he cannot endure to walk in the defiled
ways; if you will walk in the dirt, you shall not have God to go along with
you, God cannot endure to walk in ways of impurity, and therefore, oh, desire
the Lord to make you watchful over the ways of your spirit, and over the ways
of your conversation, that so you may not turn aside to those defiled ways in
which God takes no pleasure to abide in. And,

3. Thirdly, Take heed of an unbelieving heart, which is another snare, and is
the cause of many departings from God, An evil heart of unbelief; and therefore
don't give way unto it, don't close with it, don't take part with unbelief
against the work of God in your own spirits, for if you take part with Satan
against the Lord, what a grief will it be unto the Lord, to whom you have given
up your selves to walk with him? Oh, that the Lord would make you that are his
people, watchful over your souls! you have given up your selves, and therefore
take heed you don't turn aside; maintain this communion, desire that it may be
upheld betwixt God and your souls: and remember this,

That it is your greatest privilege whilst you are upon earth, that you may
thus walk with God, a mighty privilege that poor dust and ashes, poor worms
should be taken to walk with the great God; that God should make choice to have
such for his Companions, his Fellow-travellers; Oh, it is infinite rich and
Free Grace, therefore do not slight it, do not contemn it, but labor to walk
up to such relation; it is your dignity, and your privilege to walk with God.
So much for this time, and for this part of the Text.

SERMON IX.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
YOU have heard of Enoch's walking, here is Enoch's Rest: here is recorded what
befell him at the end of his Journey, he went a step out of sight, He walked
with God, and he was not, God took him: He was not, the phrase is sometimes
applied unto those whom God takes away by ordinary death; so says Jacob of his
sons, whom he supposed to be dead, in Genesis 42. 36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is
not: and so in Jer. 31. 15. you shall see this phrase applied to those that God
takes away by ordinary death, Thus says the Lord, a voice was heard in Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her Children, and refused to
be comforted, because her Children they were not: and so some do conceive that
Enoch was taken away, as other men are, beca^^e it is appointed for all men once
to die; but the Apostle must be our Interpreter: he tells us the meaning of
that phrase, as applied to Enoch, He was not, for God took him; in Heb 11. 5.
By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him: he was not found, says the Apostle, for God
had translated him, he was not found amongst men, he was no longer of this
world, nor in this world, he was taken into another world, into another place,
for God had translated him, and he was not found, and it was not in an ordinary
way as other men: he was translated, God took him. And so it may be said, God
takes and receives all the spirits of his servants: but Enoch's departure, his
farewell to the world, was in an extraordinary way, God did not take him as he
takes others of his servants by death, but God took him from death, he was
translated that he should not see death, says the Apostle. There are many
particulars that may be useful to us before we come to the main, concerning
Enoch, which we shall hardly reach at this time.

But to Consider that phrase, He was not. He was not in the world, of the
world; you must not think that Enoch ceased to be, he did not lose his Being:
the Text says, He was not, neither do any of the servants of God lose their
Being when they are translated, when taken away by death, but he had no being
as to the things of this world, he had a being as to God and Heaven, and as to
an invisible world, so he was; and so it may be said of all Gods people that
leave this world, They are not, they are not as to the world; they have no
being as to their comforts, relations, friends, employments, and callings; so
they are not; but as to God, Christ, and Heaven, and to the things of an
invisible world, their being is not lost but perfected; they have no being as
to their relations, death cuts that asunder. You shall see what Job says, Job
7. he complains there, that all relations cease there, and the Servant is free
from the Master; as this relation, so all other relations when death comes, so
that a man he is not, he is no longer as to his friends and relations. And so
he is as to the comforts of this world, see Job 7. 9. As the Cloud is consumed
and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more:
he shall return no more to see his house, neither shall his place know him
more, he is consumed like a Cloud, and gone down to the Grave; and what, has
he no being? No, he speaks only in relation to the things here, and to the
comforts and enjoyments, as to his house, and so to all other comforts of his,
he shall not return to his house, neither shall his comforts know him any more.
Take notice of this, it will hold forth something that is useful to us: It will
teach you three things.

1. First of all, It will teach Christians to mind the things of God and Heaven
more, to be more taken up with the things of the world that is to come; why, as
to all the things of this life, as to all your friends, comforts, relations,
house and land, and other accommodations, you shall not be e're long, and
therefore seek more after the things of God and Christ, where you shall have a
being to eternity. Think upon this, Christians, when you are ready to lose God
in the World, when you sleep over head and ears in your worldly employments;
Oh, think of this, the time is a coming, the time is at hand when it shall be
said, That you are no more of the world, and you shall have no being at all as
to the things of the world, your friends shall know you no more, and your
relations, your comforts, your house shall know you no more, you shall be to
all these things as if you had not been, as if you had no being, or as if you
had no relation to them; Oh, then whilst you are in the world don't live as
those that are of the world, but say as Christ did, Now, Father, I am no more
of this world; live more there where your being shall be to eternity: Live more
upon God and Christ, and be more exercised in the contemplation of the things
of the invisible world, there your being shall be to eternity; and don't live
so much upon those poor low outward things, where you shall have no being e're
long; but when the world shall speak of you, they shall say, You are not, even
as it was of Enoch here, Enoch was not, as to this world he was not.

2. Secondly, This may also instruct you how to carry it toward the loss of
friends and relations: when God shall take away any of your friends and
relations, take heed you don't let out natural affections toward them when God
has taken them, for they are not, as to you they are not, they are none of
yours, you have no relation to them, death has broken it, they were given you
for a time, your Husband, your Wife, your Children, they were given you for a
time, to be comforts to you for a time, till the Lord should call for them; but
when the Lord has taken them, they are no longer yours, they are not, as to
you: It Is sinful then to let out natural affections toward them, as to look
upon them as yours, your Husband, your Wife, your Children, they are not as to
you, but they are as to the Lord, complete in him, and as to you they are not:
and therefore it is sinful unto you, to let out natural affections, when God
has broken your relations. And,

3. Thirdly, This may give some comfort in the loss of friends, when they die
in the Lord; they are not lost, they don't cease to be: If they were
annihilated and destroyed, and if they had no being any where, there is cause to
mourn, there is a loss indeed; they only disappear unto you, and unto this
visible world, but they are not lost, they appear in the presence of God,
though you see them not, and they have no being as to you, yet as to God in
heaven, in another world, they have a being, a glorious being, a perfect being,
and therefore there is no cause why we should mourn for them as if they were
utterly lost. That Is the first consideration, Enoch was not, as to this world,
and as to the relations of this life he was not. But again,

2. Secondly, Observe how easily Enoch was translated, how easy God makes
Enoch's passage to another world; he walks with God, and God took him, and we
hear no more of him: he walked all his life with God, and at the end of his
course God took him along with him; it is spoken of him as if he went but a step
further, and he was not here, he went but a step further, and he went along
with God, God took him to himself. We may observe that God can make the passage
of his servants easy to another world: such as walk with God on earth, God
makes their passage easy to another world, so it was with Enoch.

Quest. But is it so to others, Enoch's translation was easy, for Enoch, he
was not dissolved, soul and body did not part, but both were taken up to live
with God, but is it so to others?

Answ. Yea, God can and does make it so unto his people that walk with him:
though death may seem a strait passage, and a dark entry, yet the Lord can make
it lightsome, he can make it easy unto his servants: what an easy matter was
it for Moses to die, when he had walked with God all his life? It was spoken of
him as an ordinary thing, Go up and die, God bid him go up upon the Mount and
die there, go and die there, and Moses went up and God made that death easy to
him: And so it was spoken of all the Patriarchs, and those that walked with God
in those old Ages, God made this strait passage easy to them, therefore it is
called a falling asleep, after they had served their Generation they fell
asleep; or they were gathered up to their Fathers; it is set forth by such
expressions; Jacob leaned upon his staff and raised up himself and blessed his
Children, and speaking of the things of God and Heaven, and so he fell asleep;
God makes it easy unto them that walk with him, for they that walk with God
gain experiences of him, I say, they that walk with God treasure up experiences
of Gods gracious dealings, they shall see how God has been with them many a
time: he has been with them in many deaths, he has been with them in the
fire, he has been with them in the water, he has been with them in many
Jeopardies and dark conditions, he has delivered them: they have gained many
experiences of God, therefore they will trust in God, they will trust in him when
they walk through the Valley of the shadow of death, he is a sure friend, he is
a tried friend, and therefore they cannot but rest in him. But,

Again, They that walk with God walk by Faith, now it is faith makes death
easy: all those Worthies spoken of in Heb. 11. died willingly, for they died
in Faith, Faith makes the strait passage easy, For,

1. First, Faith discovers the Victory of Christ, I say, it makes discovery of
the victory of Christ over death and the Grave, presents the Savior that is
the Conqueror, that has disarmed the strong man, that has taken away the
sting of the Serpent: now when the soul by Faith sees that death is disarmed,
and the sting is taken out, it is easy then to grapple with him.

2. Secondly, Again, Faith takes hold of the promises which are grounded upon
the faithfulness and truth of God for its security, I say, it takes hold of
those promises which are made in faithfulness and truth: why, the Lord has
said that he will be with his people in all their straits, yea, when they walk
through the valley and shadow of death, that he will never leave them, he will
never forsake them; now the discovery of this to the soul makes death easy.

3. Thirdly, Again, Faith looks beyond death, it is higher, it is taller than
death, it can look over the shoulders of death, it has a piercing eye, it can
see through the darkness of the Grave, and it can behold the tops of the Towers
of the heavenly Jerusalem, it can see the Land that lies beyond the Land of
death, it sees the dark entry and the low valley that does over-shadow it, it
does lead unto that Land, that Land of blessedness that the Lord has prepared
for his people, and therefore whilst faith is thus exercised, death is made
easy, and they that walk with God walk and live by faith, and therefore to
them is death made easy. Yea,

4. Fourthly, Again, Death is made easy to them, for by walking with God they
have gained acquaintance with God, and it is acquaintance with God that makes
death easy: when a soul has walked with God as with his friend all his life,
it is not afraid to go to God at last, because he is his friend; he knows God
thoroughly, and therefore can trust him, he knows his gracious disposition, and
the love that is in his heart, He that comes to God must believe that he is,
says the Apostle, and that He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek
him: till this grace of the love of God be discovered, the soul cannot come to
him on earth, it cannot draw nigh to him by faith, much less can he come freely
to him in heaven. Why this is the cause why death is so terrible, because his
acquaintance is no more with God; but when the soul has lived as in heaven,
and conversed with God, and beheld his face, and follows him continually with
this acquaintance he has gained with God, it does make the passage of death
(though strait in it self, yet) easy: And therefore to apply this.

Use 1. I beseech you, you that walk with God, that you would not be
discouraged through the apprehension of the straitness of this passage: you
know not how easy God can make it, why should you distrust him? do not fear
the greatness of the pains, God can make them easy, God can allay them, God
can take away the sense of them, God can give in that which can sweeten them;
remember who went before you, has not the Lord Jesus gone before you? He set
himself in the forefront of the Battle, the passage was a great deal straiter
when Christ went through it, he has widened it and made it far more easy:
Believers, you have seen the worst that death can do to you, you have seen it
in Christ, if it had overcome Christ you might have feared it, but Christ would
try the experiment first upon himself, and you have seen the worst that it can
do; Jesus Christ is engaged with you, if you should perish, Christ himself had
as good have perished; it is all one whether he be overcome in his person, or in
his members; Oh, therefore, I say, be not discouraged at the apprehension of
the straitness of the passage, and darkness of the entry, but look to Christ
that has gone before you, and only let it be your care whilst you live, to
live by Faith, and to live in constant communion with God, God will take care
of the rest: And,

Use 2. Again, How should you bless the Lord Christ! What cause have you to
bless the Lord, and to admire the riches of wisdom, and the riches of power,
and the riches of goodness that has made death to be thus easy? I tell you,
it is not so in it self: Christians, you are beholding to Christ for this,
death is not easy in it self, it is most terrible in it self, it has brought
down mighty spirits of wicked men; Oh! whither shall I go, said Nero? when
death was at hand: It was not so easy with Christ; oh, it was exceeding strait
when he ventured to pass through, it was for your sakes that he entered the
passage first: Oh! admire his wisdom, goodness and power, and bless his name
for this both in life and death. That Is a second thing we considered, Enoch was
not, God took him: his translation is spoken of him as a very easy thing, he
walked a step further, and returned no more, and God took him. There is one
Particular more which I shall give but a hint on, and that is, He was not found.

So says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. 5. He was not found, for God had
translated him; He was not found, and that implies, he was sought for when God
had took him, They sought for him, but he was not found, says the Apostle: And
so it was with Elijah, in 2 Kings 2. latter end of the Chapter, the Prophet
sends out fifty men to seek after him; and it is very like they did so for
Enoch, but he was not found, for God took him.

Observe, It is usual to undervalue mercies whilst we have them, which are
prized dearly when once they are gone; I say, it is usual with the sons of men
to undervalue mercies whilst they have them, which they would seek for when
once they are gone: thus we deal with persons, and thus we deal with other
mercies; With Persons, you know how Samuel was undervalued by Saul whilst he
lived, and the Word of the Lord that he brought to Saul was rejected; but when
Samuel was gone, then Saul seeks for him; nay, he was so violent that he seeks
him in an unlawful way, even to raise him up from the dead, that he might
acquaint him with the Will of the Lord. And so John Baptist was persecuted and
banished, and Herod cut off his head, but when he was gone, then Herod prized
him; and so when Herod heard of the fame of Jesus, that he did great things,
Surely it is John Baptist that is risen up again: here is mighty works indeed:
And thus we deal not only with Persons,

But thus we deal with other Mercies, whilst we have them, we undervalue them,
that God is forced to take them away, to let us know what the worth of them is:
Israel did not prize her mercies, outward Mercies, Corn, Wine and Oil, Flax and
Wool, and therefore God was forced to take them away, to let them know the
worth of them, I will take away my Corn, my Wine and my Oil, my Flax and my
Wool, Hos. 4. Yea, thus we deal with God himself, thus we deal with God and
Christ, and with the great and precious things of God; how did Esau despise his
birthright, how contemptibly did he speak of it, whilst he had it? What will
my birthright do me good, says he, seeing I am ready to die? And yet
afterward, when it was gone he sought it with tears, when Jacob had got the
blessing he sought it with tears, and he could not obtain it. Yea, this is not
only in the hearts of the wicked; if it were only in the wicked it were the
less: but it is in the hearts of Gods own people to undervalue the things of
God, whilst they enjoy them, and so give the Lord cause to strip them of them.
Israel had the presence of God amongst them, but they did not prize God, and
therefore says God, I will go and return to my first place; in their
affliction they will seek me early. Thus we deal with other of Gods precious
ones, many times they are undervalued, and we know not the worth of them, till
such time as they are removed, till God takes them away: As it is said
concerning the Jews in Matthew. 23. that Christ was amongst them, and Preached
the everlasting Gospel to them, and they received it not: But when the Gospel
was removed from them, then they prized it, Behold your house is left unto you
desolate: Why? in Matthew. 21. there you have the same words, when the Children
cried, saying, Hosanna, Hosanna to the Highest, the Jews were offended; when
the people said of Christ, Hosanna, and blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord; they were offended in the 15 Verse, and Christ does rebuke them for
this, Well, says he, (when they cried, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord) you are displeased, the time is a coming, that you would
give all that you enjoy, to see such a man as you have seen, but I will teach
you by the absence of this mercy, of which you shall say, Welcome indeed, and
blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord: I say, what base hearts and
spirits are within us, that we should put God unto this labor, that we should
cause God to walk in this way toward us, to take away our mercies, that we may
know how to prize them! Oh, it is an unworthy heart, there is a great deal of
the spirit of Esau, to despise the blessing whilst we had it, and then
afterward weep for it, and sought it with tears, but found it not. And
therefore I shall conclude with this word of Exhortation.

Use 3. Let us learn to prize our mercies, I say, whilst we enjoy our mercies,
let us learn to prize them, because the time is coming when they shall not be
to us, they shall not be found, we shall seek them, and shall not find them:
God has given you friends and relations; Oh, my Brethren, prize them, use them
for Gods glory, do all the good you can to them whilst you have them, receive
all the good that may be from them whilst you have them, for the time is a
coming when they shall not be to you. It was Job's argument with God, you shall
see in Job 7. the last Verse, and it is a very strong argument, and Why do
thou not pardon my transgression, and take away my iniquity, and pardon it
quickly? Speak a good word quickly to thy Servant, I cannot hold out long,
Lord, says he, I cannot hold out long, now I shall sleep in the dust, and thou
shall seek me in the morning, and I shall not be: Lord pardon, pardon thy
servant Job, whilst thou have a Job to pardon, Lord, do good to me whilst thou
have an occasion to do good to me, e're I sleep in the dust: you shall seek me
then, and I shall not be: that you shall say, oh that I had such a friend to do
good to, or that I had such a friend to receive good from: Oh, take the present
opportunity therefore of doing and receiving good; and this is spoken not only
of all Persons but of all Things, prize them whilst you have them, prize them
whilst you enjoy them, for time is coming when they shall not be.

And Consider this, Let me say this to you, The Lord is this day tendering
grace to you, he stands, he knocks, he invites you, he beseeches you, he
desires you to open, he is willing to pardon multitudes of transgressions, to
wash away thousands, and ten thousands of transgressions and sins, and to
subdue them also; Oh, that the Lord would give you hearts to seek after this
present mercy, you will seek them hereafter when they shall not be; Oh, take heed
lest Christ speak to you as he spoke to the Jews, which was a fearful sentence,
because of their mistaking their time, and neglecting their opportunity, Joh.
7. 34. You shall seek me, says Christ, and shall not find me, and where I am,
you cannot come: he had said a little before, And I am with you, and am coming
to them that seek me; and afterward, You shall seek me, and shall not find me;
Christ was with them a little while preaching and holding forth, and urging
mercy and grace, beseeching of them to come in, they refuse and reject life,
Well, says Christ, I have sought you, and you would not be found; you would
not follow me; the time is coming when you shall seek me, and shall not find
me, and where I am you cannot come; and you that fear the Lord,

I beseech you, be you warned also, take heed you don't slight your mercies,
your present enjoyments of God, lest the Lord also teach you to know the worth
by the want; I say, take heed that you do not abuse your mercies, take heed
that you do not grow cold, and dead, and loose, and formal, under the enjoyment
of the means of getting nigher God, which you enjoy more than formerly, for
what pity is it that we should grow worse when God is better? That we should be
further off from drawing nigh to God, when God is drawing nigh to us? What pity
is it that the Sunshine and fair weather should do harm? Does not sad
experience teach us that many Christians are further off from God now than when
the means were lesser, in their getting near to God; take heed God don't let
you know by sad experience what the loss of his presence is, and that he don't
let you know by sad experience what the loss of Ordinances are, what the want
of mercies are; it shows abundance of corruption that is in the heart, but it
is mercy if God will teach his people any way; it is the saddest way of
teaching that God will make use of, to recount what once we had, and what once
we enjoyed, and now are stripped of, for want of improvement: we had the
Sabbaths, the teachings of God, we had the Ordinances, but now stripped of all;
and therefore may (as they) sit down by the waters of Babylon, and weep most
bitterly; it is a sad way of teaching, yet it is mercy if God will choose any
way of teaching and drawing these sad and drowsy hearts of ours more to
himself. Thus you have had some hints of what Enoch was, He was not found, for
God had translated him, God took him; the main Point is yet behind, viz. to
consider whither Enoch was translated, and wherefore he was translated, and the
year in which he was translated, which was three hundred sixty five years, and
was the shortest life of all the Patriarchs. But so much shall serve for this
time.

SERMON X.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
WE have done with Enoch's walk, we are come to Enoch's Rest, He was not, for
God took him; I have opened the phrase to you the last time I spoke. But I
shall proceed to what is still behind in the Text.

He was not, for God took him, And God took him: there is a great dispute
amongst many, to what place Enoch was taken. There are many both of the Papists
and others that place Enoch in earthly Paradise: they say Enoch was not taken
into Heaven but into Paradise, and that this Enoch and Elijah are those two
Witnesses that shall come again at the end of the world to discover and destroy
Antichrist; there is such a Tradition generally amongst them, and others have
received it from them; but there is not the least ground for it in the Word of
God, that Enoch and Elijah should be those Witnesses spoken of in Rev. 11. for
certainly those Witnesses are no other but the servants of God spoken of, that
have stood up in all Ages since Christ, to bear witness to the name and truth
of Jesus; and therefore I see nothing why we may not assert, that Enoch was
taken up into Heaven, that he ascended in body into Heaven. You shall see in 2
Kings 2. 11. it is spoken there of Elijah who was translated even as Enoch, And
it came to pass as they still went on, and talked, that behold (there appeared)
a Chariot of fire, and Horses of fire, and parted them both asunder, and Elijah
went up by a whirlwind into Heaven: if Elijah went into Heaven, why not Enoch?

Object. But it may be Objected, Is not Jesus Christ the first fruits of them
that ascend? Did not Christ open the door by his blood? How then could Enoch or
Elijah ascend into Heaven before Christ came and opened the door?

Answ. To which I Answer, It is true that Christ is the first fruits of them
that ascend, and the way to Heaven is set open by the blood of Christ, and
there was none ever ascended but by virtue of the blood of Christ, that sets
open the door to them; but the efficacy of the blood of Christ did reach to
them that lived before him; and therefore in Rev. 13. 8. he is called The Lamb
slain from the foundations of the World, in the purpose of God; yea, it was
accepted of God as if done already; God the Father took the Word of his Son for
the payment of the Debt, he knew that he was able to make good his word, and
would be faithful to him, wherefore he trusted him before he discharged the
Debt, before the price was actually paid, so that the virtue of Christ's blood
did even reach to them, even many thousand years before he came in the flesh to
suffer: for the Father took his word, and the son took the Fathers word for the
salvation of those that should be brought in many hundred years after the debt
was paid; the salvation of all that belong to God, who should live from Christ's
time to the end of the world: the son gave the full price into the fathers
hand, and he relies upon him, upon his word for the discharge of the debt, and
for the receiving of poor sinners to life and favor, as they shall be brought
in in all Ages; and therefore, Dear Brethren, I beseech you, take notice of the
mighty virtue of the death of Christ, mighty virtue was in it, that he should
be accepted beforehand, that it should reach as far as Enoch, as far as Adam,
that it should be accepted for those that lived many thousand years before
Christ, before the debt was paid, it holds forth the mighty efficacy of the
blood of Christ; if it had been only available for those that had lived after
him, after Christ was come in the flesh, and dead and risen, and had discharged
the debt, if it had reached only to those, it had not been so much: it is not
so much, says Ezekiah, for the shadow to go forward in the Dial, but for the
shadow to go backward so many degrees, that holds forth a deal of the mighty
power of God to his conviction; and so the blood of Christ goes backward so
many years to them that lived in the beginning of the world, before the price
was actually paid: O the infinite virtue and efficacy that is in this blood of
Christ! Oh, know what strong ground of consolation there is in this, to you
that are Believers now under the Gospel: if it reached so far, if it went
backward, if it went as far as Enoch, to open the gate of Heaven to him, how
much more shall this reach you that are believers under the Gospel, that live
directly under the efficacy of the blood of Jesus Christ. God bad Enoch welcome
for this blood that was to be shed; if he set the door open to him, when the
price was not actually paid, oh how much more shall God bid the Saints welcome,
to come in the name of such a Savior that was dead, is risen and ascended, now
to sit at the right hand of God, and present the efficacy of his blood for
ever? Oh! how may this be improved, and what sweet lives might Christians lead,
and with what a full wind might they fail, and lanch forth into the Ocean of
Eternity, when they live directly under the efficacy of such a blood as this
is, that reached so far backward, even as far as Enoch? for it was by virtue of
this blood that Enoch was saved.

But further, It Is said, God took him: That phrase implies three things.

1. First of all, That Enoch was taken up into a state of Communion with God,
of near Communion with God, God took him; God took him to himself. He had
walked with God whilst he was upon earth, but he was not taken up into nearest
Communion until now; the Saints in heaven are taken into highest Communion;
their Communion here upon earth is interrupted many times, God comes now and
then and gives a poor soul a visit, but they are not taken in into God till
such time as God removes the Mount of this visible world: they are here put out
to School, God will give them good education, he will bring them up for heaven;
and therefore it is not always that they have their Fathers presence, now and
then God comes and visits them: but there is another life in which God shall
take his people to himself, he shall send for his Children home, and then they
shall be for ever with the Lord, I say, for ever with the Lord; Whilst we are
here, says the Apostle, we are absent from the Lord; Whilst we are in the
body, we are absent from the Lord and therefore no wonder why the Saints are
breathing so much after that other life, ^ooking for, and hastening after the
appearance of Christ, because they are not taken in till then, here they are
strangers, and here they are absent from the Lord in a great measure, though
they walk with God as Enoch did, yet he will not take them into that nearest
Communion, till they come to end this life.

2. But again, Secondly, As it does denote a state of near Communion which the
Saints enjoy in heaven, so it does hold forth that fullness of light, life and
glory that the Saints shall there enjoy: God took him, he was taken into God,
taken up to the enjoyment of the fullness that is in God; here they are narrow
vessels, and are not capable of receiving much, but there the souls of his
Saints shall be taken into God, and so shall be filled with his fullness.
Believers here walk with God, and God does dwell in them, but so long as they
dwell below, they don't dwell so much in God: but there is a time a coming when
they shall dwell wholly in God, they shall be taken up into that fullness; they
shall be as so many vessels that are cast into the Ocean that shall be filled;
every one shall be filled full to the brim: I say, this holds forth that phrase
of fullness of glory that the Saints do enjoy in Heaven, God took him, and he
was taken into God.

3. Again, Thirdly, It holds forth an act of free grace which was put forth
toward Enoch as well as others: God took him, or received him, and to receive,
it holds forth the free grace of God; Enoch walked with God, but he was not
taken for his walking, not because he had walked so and so with God in his
Generation, he was not therefore taken, but he was received; it was free grace
received him: My Brethren, I beseech you then know, what you can only plead
before God, though you have walked with God never so long in your Generation,
yet you cannot at last plead to be taken up because you have walked with God;
Alas! the Lord sees so many slips, so many stumblings, so many falls, there is
so much crookedness in the way of the heart, in the way of the conversation,
even in the best of Saints, that if the Lord should judge them according to
their walkings, they were undone: those Hypocrites plead a great deal, when
they cried, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name
have cast out Devils, and done many wonders, and yet Christ bids them depart
for he knew them not; there is no pleading of works, there is no pleading of
worthiness, and of the creatures righteousness, when the creature comes to
stand before Christ; if you could walk with God as many years as Enoch did, yet
at the end of your walk, at the end of your course, you must lay down all, and
be willing to enter in as sinners, that is, at the door of free grace, not
through any door of your own works or righteousness.

And again, How does this call upon the people of God to be exceeding careful
to receive Christ? Oh! receive him freely, he receives you freely here, and he
will receive you freely hereafter: how are you engaged to receive him freely,
to close fully with him, and with the tenders of life and grace, of
righteousness and holiness, which are held forth in and through him? Receive
Christ freely, and receive the Word of Christ freely, though it be never so
contrary to flesh and blood, though it crosses your beloved lusts, though it
cross your profits, though it cross your delights, though it be the Word and
Truth for which you must suffer; yet, oh why should not you receive Christ and
his Word freely, seeing he will receive you so freely another day? He will not be
ashamed to take his people and to own them before all the world, these are
mine, my Jewels: and if Christ will not be ashamed of you, oh what a shame is it
that you should either be ashamed or afraid to receive him and his Word, and
his Truth, and to hold it forth in a time of opposition and suffering The
free grace of God in receiving his people at last, is a mighty engagement unto
them, now to receive Christ, and every word of Christ, whilst they are in this
Pilgrimage, where God has set them to bear up his name in the world. But,

Further, God took Enoch: When was Enoch taken? When he had lived three hundred
sixty and five years, that you find in the Chapter to be the term of his life,
three hundred sixty and five years: if you compare the years of Enoch with the
years of others, of the holy men that lived in that Generation, you shall find
his life exceeding short; his father lived above nine hundred and sixty years,
and his son Mathusalem lived longer; yea, all the time of all the Patriarchs
(there) in this Chapter, even amongst them all, Enoch was the shortest liver: a
holy man, a gracious man, and one that was most eminent in his Generation, and
none there was that walked with God in his Generation as Enoch did, and yet
Enoch's days are shortened; I say, sometimes the Lord shortens the days of
his Children, that have walked and lived with him in an abundance of love and
mercy.

You will say, What time is that? and when is it a mercy? When does God shorten
the days of his servants in love?

1. First of all, God has some of his servants that lie under great pressures,
their combatings are extraordinary, and sometimes he shortens the term of their
life in mercy and love. We shall consider those particular combats which some
of the Lords people are in an extraordinary manner exercised with, and
sometimes in pity, mercy and love the Lord shortens their days on earth. As,

1. First, There is some of Gods servants that have extraordinary warrings with
corruptions within them, I say, with corruptions within them, and this proves a
most heavy burden to them, and makes their very lives uncomfortable, a
continual burden to them: Oh, these daughters of Heth were a continual vexation
unto Rebecca; the Apostle Paul was a man able to bear much, and he bore a great
deal of affliction which he met withal in his Pilgrim^ge, that he could rejoice
in afflictions, and glory in tribulations, they were nothing to him: but when
he comes to combat with sin, lust and corruption that was within him, he was
forced to cry out, to cry out for help; he could rejoice in other affliction,
but herein he could not rejoice, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? I say, some have extraordinary combatings with
corruption more than others; Oh these Monsters! as soon as one head is cut off
another springs up in the room, never at peace, the war is never at an end: the
Lord shortens their warfare in that.

2. Again, Secondly, God has some of his servants that are extraordinarily
employed with temptation; oh they are hunted up and down, and continually
baited, baited with Satan's most horrible temptations: winds and storms are ever
beating, fiery darts are ever thrown in; before one wound is healed another is
given: Well, the Lord looks out from Heaven, he looks down, he sees the
combat, and many times he makes this the way of deliverance, he puts out his
hand, he takes his poor servants to himself, and so delivers them from the
baitings of Satan's temptations.

3. Again, Thirdly, Some of Gods servants are in extraordinary afflictions all
their days, above all the men in the world they are most afflicted; I say, the
way that God leads some of his servants to heaven, is a very dark and narrow
lane, and they see more affliction than all their Neighbors: in ^am. 3 1. well
says the Prophet there, I am the man that have seen affliction; I am the man
that have seen affliction, that is no great matter, who has not seen
affliction? Is that such a matter for the Prophet to complain of, that he had
seen affliction? Ay, but his portion was extraordinary, he had seen more than
all others in his time, and therefore complains as if he alone had been the man
that had seen affliction; Well, when afflictions are very great and of long
continuance, God has trained up some of his servants in this way in this
School; yea, he many times shortens their journey in love. But you will say,

Object. Could not God deliver them some other way? Could not God rescue them
out of the hands of affliction, and deliver them from temptation, and make them
conquerours over their lusts and corruptions? But must he shorten their lives
by it, and no other way?

Answ. Why Beloved, we must know this, the Lord sees it best, and he knows it
is needful for them to come to him in this narrow way, and they could not be
without those afflictions and warrings of lusts, and without those temptations,
and it is the best way, infinite wisdom sees it the best way to lead them to
himself, and to glory: And therefore when the case is thus, that the Lord sees
it so needful, that so long as they are in the body, they should be in these
conflicts, afflictions, and temptations, then the Lord (sometimes) sees it best
to shorten some of their days to bring them unto himself. But you must take
this caution: Take heed you don't limit the Lord to this way, for though God
does take many of his servants this way by death, yet, I say, they ought not to
limit the holy one of Israel. Let not them say as Job, Wherefore is life given
to a man that is in affliction? Wherefore is life given to a man whose way is
hid? For if God continues life in afflicted conditions, he sees good reason for
it: and therefore, I say, you may not absolutely desire death because of your
affliction, because of your temptations, because of your buffettings; not
absolutely to limit God in this way of deliverance, for though God does use
this way many times, yet he will not be confined to it.

And though the Lord does keep you in affliction, he sees it is for his honor,
it is for his own glory; that he may show his power and goodness, his wisdom in
directing you, his power in supporting you, in strengthening you, in delivering
you, and in making you able to hold out in such difficult afflicted conditions:
the Lord can find many ways of deliverance; therefore don't say you, Lord,
take away my life, my affliction is great, I see no way how I shall come out of
it; this is sinful: for God has many ways, I say, God chooses this way
sometimes to free his people from all their corruption and temptations, he
shortens their lives, and that in abundance of love.

2. Again, Secondly, God sometimes does shorten the days of his servants in
love, when they live in evil times, times in which iniquity does abound, then
God fetches home many of his servants in love: It was a very corrupt time that
Enoch lived in, The world was corrupt and filled with violence, and therefore
it was in love to Enoch that God shortened his course: the Lord knows how
afflictive it is, for his servants to live in an evil world, Woe is me, says
the Psalmist, that I am constrained to sojourn in Mesech, and to dwell in the
Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120. 5. That righteous soul was vexed, Woe is me, etc.
Nay, the Lord considers that possibly his own people may be carried down the
stream through the strength and violence of the corruption of the times, that
they may be drawn aside from their stedfastness, it is possible that even they
may be corrupted, even Gods own people may be corrupted, in a corrupt
Generation: the Lord considers this, and therefore many times he takes them
away in an abundance of love and mercy. When the Thistles and Nettles do so
enclose the Lilies, that they hinder their growth, and communicate of their ill
favor unto them, then the Lord sees it is high time to remove, to transplant
his Lilies into a better soil. And that is a second Particular why the Lord does
shorten the days of his servants, it is when they live in a very corrupt and
sinful Generation, that does both afflict them and endanger them.

3. Again, Thirdly, Sometimes God shortens the days of his servants in love;
that they may not see when great desolations are coming, either upon their
friends, their relations, their families, or upon the Kingdom they live in: the
Lord in mercy calls home those that do walk faithfully with him: and thus it
was with Jeroboam's child in 1 Kings 14. 13. Jeroboam's child was taken away,
you have the reason given there, because great desolation is coming upon the
Family, God threatens there by the Prophet, that he would not leave one person
alive, and this child shall go to his Grave in peace, Because some good thing
was found in him toward the Lord God of Israel; some good thing was found in
him when the family was corrupt, and therefore God would not have him to see
what desolation he would bring upon the family: And so when God brings
desolation upon Kingdoms and Nations, he sometimes calls home his own people.
Good King Josiah, a gracious man, was cut off betimes, because the Lord was
about to bring desolation upon Judah: a great and fearful Captivity which came
presently after, when he was gone; but he feared the Lord, and was fearful when
the Word of the Lord came to him, and therefore God took him that he might not
see that desolation with his eyes, that sad desolation, that God would bring
upon Judah. And so says the Prophet, Isa. 57. 1. he gives this as a reason why
God takes away some of his servants betimes, The righteous perishes, and no
man lays it to heart, and the merciful man is taken away, none considering
that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come: When evil and
desolation is about to come upon a place or a Kingdom, why then God takes away
many righteous and merciful men. The Husbandman, when he sees a storm is a
coming, he makes haste to gather in his Corn, especially, that which is most
ready to shake, that which is most like to take harm by the wet, that he will in
withal: And thus the Lord does with his, when he sees great desolation, that
may even shake those that are his own.

4. Fourthly, God takes way some of his servants that he may prevent their
uneven walking, and their declining and turning aside from him: the Lord loves
to take his servants when they are at the best, he pulls the Rose when it is
most sweet: sometimes the Lord sees many of his servants, that if they should
stand longer they would decline and grow worse; sad experience does teach it;
now therefore it is that the Lord takes them at the fit time, that he may
prevent that dishonor, that otherwise might be brought to his name, if he
should suffer them to stand longer in the world, they might happily blurr their
profession, they might dishonor God, they might harden their own hearts; and
therefore the Lord loves to take them when they are fully ripe: and when he
sees such a one ready to decline and grow worse, and to lose of his sweetness,
and of his savor, it may blurr the name of God, dishonor him in the world;
why, the Lord to prevent all this, takes away sometimes such a servant of his
in abundance of love and mercy: and so he took away Asa, and so Jehosaphat,
they were good men, but they began to decline in their old days; Asa was a
good man, his heart was perfect, it is the Testimony that God gives of him, all
his days; but he went and declined, he went and relied on the arm of flesh:
when the Prophet tells him of it, he was angry with the Prophet, he imprisons
the Prophet, and he began to smite the people, and God smites Asa with a
disease in his feet, and so took him away; and it was best for Asa that he was
taken away before a further declining: and so Jehosapbat did take part with a
wicked King, and the Lord did shorten his days in abundance of love.

5. Again* Fifthly, God will shorten the days of his servants, when they are
enabled to do much in a little time; when he has caused them to run amain
after himself, to follow him hard, and so through his grace have done the work
of their Generation in a little time, then the Lord shortens the days of their
dwelling in the body in abundance of love: when their work is done, the sooner
their work is done, the sooner they are at rest; the Lord will not keep his
people longer from their rest than needs must, he knows that their days are as
the days of an Hireling, as Job speaks, full of labor, full of toil, and full
of trouble, full of disquietness and hurryings, no rest; therefore so soon as
ever they have done their work, God takes them; he loves to have his children
bettered, he will not put them to School longer than needs must, when he has
trained them up for heaven, he presently sends for them home, he has longing
desires to see them: Christ would have all his children round about him, and
therefore when he has caused them to do his work in a little time, he will
then send for them, That where I am, you may be also; I am gone to prepare a
place for you, and I will come again and receive you to glory. It shows how the
Lord Christ does hasten, he has longing desires to see them, I am gone away,
and I come again as soon as ever the work is done, he will not stay a minute
when he has fitted glory for them, and fitted them for glory, I will come;
I Will come again and take you to my self, he longs for them, and causes their
hearts also to be breathing mightily after him; and therefore they shall not be
absent from the Lord longer than needs must, but when he has caused them to do
the work of their Generation, he will take them away in abundance of love and
mercy. There are some Objections to Answer, as concerning long life as a
blessing, but so much for this time.

SERMON XI.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
HE was not, for God took him. I opened the phrase to you the last day, God
took him to Communion with himself, to near Communion; the Saints whilst in the
body are at a distance from God, Whilst we are present in the body, we are
absent from the Lord, says the Apostle; though God do now and then visit them,
yet for the most part they are absent from God: they are put out to School, and
here God will have his people trained up for Heaven, but when that change comes
which is spoken of, why then, God is said to take them, he takes them home, he
takes them into nighest fellowship and communion with himself: For God took
him; the phrase holds forth that fullness of glory which the Saints are
translated out of this world into; God dwells here in them, but they dwell in
God; they here are depressed in their spirits through the weight of corruption;
it't but a little they are able to hold of God; Ay, but in Heaven there God
takes them, he takes them in to himself, Well done good and faithful servant,
enter into the joy of thy Master, enter into it; they shall be as so many
vessels that are cast into fullness of love, life and glory, they shall be
filled full to the brim: God took him. It holds forth also the freeness of
grace in receiving in any; even the best must enter in at this door of
free grace, and no otherwise: though Enoch had walked with God so many years,
three hundred sixty and five, yet it is free grace if God will receive Enoch at
last; there are so many slips, so many failings, there are so many declinings,
so many turnings aside, there is so much crookedness in the walks of the best
of the Saints, that if God should deal with them in the rigor of his Justice,
he might refuse them; and therefore it is grace, it is freegrace that they are
received, there is no other door they are to enter in at. I also considered (the
last time) when it was that Enoch was taken, when did God take him? After he
had lived three hundred sixty and five years, which was a short time, a very
short time in that Age, when the Patriarchs lived seven hundred, eight hundred,
nine hundred, almost a thousand years; Enoch a gracious man, one that walked
with God, and yet he lived not half the years of those Generations, and of his
son that came after him: God many times shortens the days of his servants in
love. I told you what are those times in which he shortens the days of his
servants in love and mercy.

1. First, When their lives are full of extraordinary warrings, when more than
ordinary burdens are laid upon them: some have fiercer combatings with Satan's
temptations than others, and some have heavier burdens both of corruptions, and
of afflictions than others, I am a man that have seen affliction, says
Jeremiah; as if none besides him had seen affliction; now many times God
shortens the days of his servants in love, when their combatings have been
extraordinary with corruptions and temptations, and the burden of their
affliction heavy; it is true, the Lord could deliver them some other way, open
some other way besides the door of the Grave, he could make them conquerours:
but the Lord in wisdom sees it best for some of his servants, so long as they
are in the body; in this condition it is needful for them so long as they are in
the body to be grappling with their corruptions and temptations, fightings and
buffetings; and therefore you ought not to call for death because of your
afflictions, and because of your temptations, for the Lord is pleased many
times in wisdom, to take this way to bring in full deliverance to his servants.
And,

2. Secondly, When his servants live in a very evil time, in a corrupt
Generation, then the Lord is pleased to shorten the days of his servants in
love: It was a corrupt time that Enoch lived in; before the Flood the earth was
degenerated, and violence covered the face of the earth before the Flood came,
and then it was mercy for Enoch to be taken away betimes; the Lord knows what a
burden it is for his servants to live at such a time when wickedness abounds,
and so the Lord delivers many of his servants by shortening of their course.
Again,

3. Thirdly, When great Judgments are coming upon them, either upon their
Families, or upon the Kingdom and place that they live in, God has then
(sometimes) shortened the days of his servants: as God when he intended to
bring destruction upon Jeroboam's Family, then cut short the days of one of
his Children, Because some good thing was found in him toward the Lord God of
Israel; God cut them off every man, but he went to his grave in peace, that he
might not see that desolation: and so good Josiah, when he was young, the Lord
was pleased to take away him, because of that Captivity which presently came
upon the Jews after his being taken away. And,

4. Again, Fourthly, The Lord does shorten the days of his servants, not
because the seed of Faith should perish, that does abide for ever: I have
prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not; Ay, but the actings of their Faith
may decline, and Christians may grow dead, and lose their first love, may fall
off* and they may fall into Scandals, and a blurr to their Conscience and
profession; now many times, the Lord to prevent this does shorten the days of
some of his servants: As I gave Instances of King Jehosaphat; and Asa began to
imprison and to oppose, and he might have done a great deal of evil, but God
smites him with a disease in his feet, and he died, and it was in love to his
soul. But again,

5. Fifthly, God loves his servants, and therefore when they have done much in
a little time, and long for his appearance, O! when shall I come and appear
before thee? So he calls alike for them, he has longing desires to see them;
when they have done the work of their Generation, he will take them to himself
in abundance of love and mercy.

Object. But you will say, Is not long life a blessing? Has not God promised
to give long life to his servants, in Prove. 10. 27. The fear of the Lord
prolongeth days; and so see what Job says, Job 5. 27. Thou shall come to thy
Grave in a full age, like to a Shock of Corn brought in in good season: Now how
is this promise made good, that God takes away some of his servants in the
midst of their days? How then do they come to the fullness of their days as in
age, as a Shock of Corn in its full season? To this I may answer in diverse
things, which you may lay up for your satisfaction.

1. First of all, This may seem to be an Old Testament Promise, the Promise of
the Old Testament or Old Covenant; for before the coming of Jesus Christ, God
walked more in this way of temporal promises, and temporal blessings; and
happily though there may come a time again when God shall walk in this way, and
give out both temporal and spiritual, yet now Gods present dispensation since
the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh, it is more spiritual, he gives out more
spirituals and less of temporals, he gives out more of his own glory which he
has pleased to reveal in and through Jesus Christ, and that which he gives out
now unto his servants in spirituals, may abundantly recompense the absence of
all temporal mercies whatsoever. But,

2. Again, Secondly, That these Promises are conditional; all outward promises,
promises of riches and honor, of health and children, and promises of long
life, these are all conditional, God has not promised them absolutely, but
with this limitation, so far as he in infinite wisdom and fatherly love and
care, shall see to be good for them; so far the Lord will fulfill any, yea all
those temporal promises which are given out, so far as the Lord shall see to be
good for them; and therefore if the Lord does take away his servants, any of
his servants betimes in the midst of their days, and don't give out these
blessings of long life, it is because the Lords sees it is best for them: they
are strangers here, and it is not good for them that they should be long from
home; he sees it in his wisdom, I say, to be best for them, because their days
are evil, it is mercy that their days are few: God in wisdom put both these
together, few and evil; says old Jacob in Genesis 47. 9. Few and evil have the
days of the years of my life been, and I have not attained unto the days of
the years of the life of my Fathers, in the days of their Pilgrimage: few and
evil; the Lord sees it is good that they should be few, because they are evil.
In Job 14. 1. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days and full of trouble;
what a mercy is it that God has put these together, few days and full of
trouble! he is full of trouble, trouble from within, and trouble from without;
he is troubled with corruption, temptation, affliction, with the sin of others,
with the dishonor that is brought to God in the world: now when he is full of
trouble, it is mercy that his days are few. That Is a second Answer.

3. But again, Thirdly, I must say to that Objection concerning the promise of
long life to the Saints, that this promise is made good to a gracious man or
woman; when God takes them away they are full of days, he shall die in a full
age, says Job, Full of days; why, a gracious man is full of days, because he
is full of grace: he is full of holiness, and goodness, and therefore he has
filled up his days. A wicked man when God cuts him off, he is never full of
days, in this respect his days are empty, his days are full of vanity, full
of sin, they are spent as a shadow; but a gracious man is full of goodness, he
is fully ripe, he is ripe for heaven, he is ripe for the grave at that time
when God cuts him down, for he is Gods Husbandry, God will not cut down his Corn
before it be ripe, if he cut off betimes, he ripens betimes, he will cause them
to fulfill their days, God will fill their days full of grace and holiness.

4. Again, Fourthly, We may see that this promise is made good, for a gracious
man has enough of life, when God calls him to die he has enough of life; so
that he is not taken away before his time, why, because he has enough of life:
It is enough, says the Prophet, Lord it is enough, therefore take me away; I
am no better than my Fathers; even so God causes his people to say, though he
takes them away betimes, yet they shall say, Lord it is enough, I have enough
of life, I have enough of the world, I see nothing desirable here, nothing that
may provoke me to live longer here, and therefore if the Lord say, It is
enough, he will say it is enough too. But this will not the wicked man, he will never
say he has enough: let him live an hundred years, twice, thrice told, yet
he will never have enough: the righteous come to the Grave, but the wicked is
dragged and haled to his Grave, he is not a Volunteer to his Grave. And
therefore here is the promise made good, if God satisfy the hearts of his
people, and enable them to say, Lord I have enough, enough of the world here,
and if thou please to expire my days, I can say, I have enough, I have
enough.

5. Fifthly, Again, The time of the full accomplishment of this promise of long
life to be given out is not yet come; there is a day when it shall be given out,
when it shall be mercy to live long, when God shall give out long life: there
seems to be such a thing spoken of; it is Prophesied by the Prophet Isaiah,
Isa. 65. 22. this Prophecy relates to the end of the world, the latter days
when there shall be a great restoration of the world, and of all things, they
shall not be cut off in the midst of their days as formerly; says God, They
shall not build, and another inhabit* they shall not build houses, and be cut
off before they can build; they shall not plant, and another eat, for as the
days of a tree, are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy
the works of their hands: they shall be as the long-lived Oaks; this promise
God will fulfill before the end, and it shall be a mercy then to live long; when
the new Jerusalem shall come down from heaven, and when the Lamb shall be the
light of the new Jerusalem, when Satan shall be bound, and shall not seduce the
Nations, and tempt them, and when all enemies shall be put under the soals of
their feet, when Jerusalem shall be a peaceable habitation, and a quiet resting
place, when there shall be peace upon Israel, then long life shall be a
blessing.

6. Sixthly and lastly, When God will fulfill this, it shall be a time of the
accomplishment of the promises, in that God gives life and length of days,
even for ever and ever; there is the accomplishment of the promise, and
therefore God is not behind-hand concerning this promise, if he promise long
life on earth, and give an eternity of life in heaven, the creature is no
loser; if a man shall promise you a shilling, and when he comes to pay, he
shall give you a thousand pounds, will not you say this man is as good as his
word? The Lord has promised a long time on earth, and an eternity in heaven,
you may well say it of him who is truth it self, that he will fulfill and make
good his word: and therefore notwithstanding what may be objected, yet still
it is true, it is not against the promise; but God may in love and mercy shorten
the days of his people.

What shall we learn from this, God shortens the days of his serv^nts in love?
It will be useful to us diverse ways. Why,

Use 1. First of all, It lets us see that life and death is in the hand of God;
God shortens, God took him, I say, life and death is in the hand of God, it is
not in the hand of any creature whatsoever, My times are in thy hand, says
David, and He that is our God is the God of Salvation, and to him belong the
issues of Death: Enemies think that it is in their power to harm or to cut off;
Laban thought it in his power to cut off Jacob; but he was deceived, it is in
the hand of no creature to cut off the time of Gods servants, but at the
appointment of the Lord; and God does it in love, when he cuts short the time
of his servants, it is in love; if any wicked man shall attempt any thing
against the lives of his servants, that is from the malice of Hell, which God
will avenge; and if any man shall attempt against his own life, that is not
without horrible sin, for though God can cut short in love, yet if thou do
cut short thine own life, it is not without horrible sin; though indeed when God
shortens, it is always in love: for what is the creature? Ah poor creature, a
worm, that he should step up in the seat of God, and should pluck the issues of
life and death out of the hand of God, which God does challenge in a peculiar
manner as his right. That Is the first.

Use 2. Secondly, It may teach us, that though God cut short the time of his
servants in love, yet he may cut short the time of many in wrath, in abundance
of wrath: when his own people are ripe for heaven, he reaps them; and when
wicked men are ripe for destruction, the Lord also cuts them down. In Psalm. 55.
23. it is said there of wicked men, That blood-thirsty and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days; God will cut them off in wrath: they shall live
out those days that God has determined, yet they shall not live out half
their days in the course of nature that they might have done: and therefore
see what Solomon says in Eccles. 7. 17. Be not thou overmuch wicked, neither
be thou foolish, why should thou die before thy time: wickedness brings men
to end their time before the course of nature be extinct; Oh, that wicked men
would think of this; it would be very sad if their own hands should be upon
themselves to bring them down: though it is mercy to the Saints at some times
to be taken away early, yet when wicked men are cut off in the midst of their
days, it is not without a great deal of displeasure and wrath of God. That Is a
second.

Use 3. Thirdly, This may teach us this Instruction, If God deal thus with his
own people, what shall be the portion of the wicked? If this be done to the
green tree, what shall become of the dry? If God cut off young Saints, what
shall become of old sinners? Oh! that the hearsay of this dispensation might
convince some, and move them to awake, and say, Come let us eat and drink, and
to morrow shall be as this day, and more abundant: Why do you put off the
thoughts of God and Eternity to old age, and speak of returning to God another
time? when thou know not what a day may bring forth, thou know not what
may lie in the womb of to morrow; God cuts off sometimes some of his people in
the midst of their days, and what shall become of you? I shall speak only to
you in the words of the Apostle James, Jam. 4. 13. and the Lord set them home
to your hearts, Go to now, ye that say To day or to morrow we will go into such
a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain: whereas you
know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? He shows the
vanity of the cares of this life, and of wicked worldly men; they dream of a
long time, of a continuance, and we will stay there a year; A year, says he?
thou know not what to morrow may bring forth; thou say, Stay, we will
heap goods up, and what know thou, O fool, but this night thy soul may be
taken away? Oh! that men, wicked men, and worldly men would look to themselves,
and not promise to themselves time for hereafter; and if this be done to the
green tree, what will be done to the dry? But again,

Use 4. Fourthly, This may be a ground of patience unto the servants of God in
the midst of all their affliction; in the midst of all temptations and
afflictions whatsoever; possess your souls in patience; Why? because the time
is short, and if it be good for you, the Lord will make your days few, because
they are evil; therefore possess your souls in patience: you complain of your
afflictions; Why? they are not for an Eternity, a few days, those days are
shortened, if you should live as long as they did before the Flood, seven,
eight or nine hundred years, and all the time be tempted and afflicted; but now
for the Elects sake, those days are shortened: your burden is but for a little
time, your rest is long, therefore possess your souls with patience; O the
wisdom and goodness of God in walking in this way, to and with his people! if
your afflictions had been heavy and long too, that had been sad. It is the
misery of Hell, heavy burdens to Eternity is the misery of Hell; Ay, but Gods
dispensation to you is quite contrary, and otherwise; when your days are evil
they shall be few, and but for a little while, but when joy comes, that shall
be for Eternity; O the goodness of Gods dispensation! few days when they are
evil, and an Eternity of days when entering into the possession of Joy:
possess your souls with patience.

5. Fifthly, Again, Will God cut off the times of his best servants? See and
take that Counsel in Isa. 2. 22. Cease ye from man whose breath is in his
nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Cease ye from man, from the
best of men, for their breath is in their nostrils: Cease from affecting them
over much, do not let the stream of your affections be any way inordinate, for
wherein are they to be accounted? Remember what the Apostle says, The time is
short, the fashion of this world passes away: when he goes about to other
things concerning this world, The time is short, says he, cease ye from man,
and cease from trusting in him, his breath is in his nostrils; don't lay too
much weight upon any man, the Lord cuts short the days of the best of his
servants; therefore trust not in, don't lay too much weight upon them, don't
say the comfort of your lives is bound up in them, and you cannot live
comfortably without them: oh, cease ye from trusting in man, it is much better
to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man: by laying weight upon the
creature you may break the creature; therefore take heed, though God may take
away them that you trust in, in love and mercy, he may shorten their days in
love, yet cease ye from trusting in man. That Is a fifth. Again,

Use 6. Sixthly, This may teach you to take heed of murmuring and repining when
God takes away any of your relations in the midst of their years and days; Oh,
how full of carnal reasonings are they? Oh, you conceive it much better if they
had lived longer, if they had lived to man's age; what an honor might they have
been to God, and a comfort to you if they had lived longer? These are carnal
reasonings that arise from the flesh; know assuredly that if God shortened
their days it was in love, it was best for them that they were so taken away,
taken away at that time: why will you teach God? Will you teach God to gather
in his Corn, in what season he shall do it? Know assuredly he will take them at
the best, he will crop them at the best season, he loves his servants well, and
he will put them off at the best advantage, both in life and death: and
therefore know assuredly that whatsoever carnal reason may say on the contrary,
it was according to the dispensation of Gods love, though he takes them away in
the midst of their days. That Is a sixth.

Use 7. Seventhly, It may be a word of conviction to such as have lived long,
and have lost of their former forwardness and zeal for God, such as have lived
to grow worse; lived to be scandalous to the name of God, and to a holy
profession; Oh, my friends, what shall we say? But that God orders things in
infinite wisdom, you might say, poor creature, how much better had it been if
God had taken you away before! Oh! to live to be a dishonor to God, to live to
lose thy first love, and thy first zeal and forwardness for God, to be a
scandal to profession, oh better that you had been taken away at the first,
better that you had been hid in the Grave many years ago, that now your
corruption should be discovered to the dishonor of your profession! and yet
don't you say, there is no hope, and therefore we will wait no longer; the Lord
invites you to return; return; oh that you would seek after your first love,
and first zeal: strengthen the feeble hands and knees; if the Lord should come
and take you away whilst you are in this condition, oh how uncomfortable will
it be unto you, very uncomfortable! you lose your Crown; though I know (if you
have interest in Christ) the Crown of glory is safe, yet there is a Crown which
you will lose, if you return not speedily to the Lord; the Crown of a Christian
is to flourish green, and be fruitful in old age, fat and flourishing in the
Courts of the Lord; to be fresh and sweet, and to send forth an excellent
savor, this is the Crown of a Christian, and this Crown you may lose, if death
comes upon you whilst you are in that declining condion. Oh, therefore make
have to the Lord, pour out your cry continually that the Lord would be pleased
to restore you again, and to establish you with his free spirit, that you may
be fresh, fruitful and sweet, and may not be withered in time of gathering,
when God shall come to pull and gather you; if you be dead and withered, you
lose all your sweet scent. Oh, beg of the Lord that you may not be in that
condition at that time when he shall come to gather you into his Barn. That Is a
seventh.

Use 8. Eighthly, Let us pray and wait for that time which before was spoken of,
when there shall be no danger in long life, when long life shall be a mercy
unto all the Saints, when the days of the Lords people shall be as the days
of a tree, and the Elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands; Oh, pray
for the accomplishment of that promise, it will be very sweet: how much shall
the Saints gain at that time, how much knowledge? yea, how much shall they do
for God? Alas! we are of yesterday, and know nothing; oh get large experience,
renewed experience: they shall grow in that day like an Oak tree, or a Cedar;
there shall be no hindrances of growth; pray and wait for the accomplishment of
that.

Use 9. Ninthly, This may support against the extreme of a short life, and a
long uncomfortable; Oh, says the soul, I am pressing after the Lord, and
breathing after him, and this is my fear, I shall be cut off before his work be
done in me.

Fear it not, the Lord will not cut off the days of his servants but in love;
if it be not for thy good, it shall not come unto thee: Old Simeon waited for
the consolations of Israel, he might have many discouragements, what hopes had
he to see Christ when he had one foot in the Grave? And yet at last he saw
Christ the hope of his Salvation. But they may think if they should live, they
should live to decay in profession, and to go backward; Oh fear not, I am
persuaded, neither things present, nor things to come, even old age, shall
separate you from the love of God in Christ Jesus: Though God do send for some
of his servants, it is no argument that he don't love you though you live long;
Mathusalem lived nine hundred years, the rest of the Patriarchs were holy men
as well as others. That Is a Ninth.

Use 10. Tenthly, This may teach to covet to desire to live much, rather than
to live long: Oh, labor to do much for God while ye live, to do much for God
in the service of your Generation; What ever your hand finds to do, do it with
all your might; labor to redeem time, and take all seasons, and all
opportunities of getting nigher God; Oh, lose no opportunity, lose no part of
precious time: A Heathen could say, There Is no time past, but there is something
is worth the writing; let no part of your precious time be waste and nothing
done; time is short, and therefore you had need live every part of time, live
every hour, and live every moment; rather covet to live much than long: Oh,
labor for an eternal life, this life is short, in a moment God shortens the
time of the best of his servants; and therefore if this time be short, oh
labor for an eternal life; and do what you do for God, with all your might,
and with all your strength. He is an unwise man that will protract time, that
will do that in a year which he might do in a day; Oh, covet much, you have a
pattern of the Lord Jesus Christ, he lived not long on earth, but he did much
in a little time, he wrought whilst it was day, he knew the night was coming;
Christ did so, and Satan does so, he knows his time is short, and he bestirs
himself, he knows it must be now or never: if Satan be thus wise for his
Kingdom, shall not we that profess our selves to be Christ's, be thus wise in
the matters of his Kingdom? Here is all the time you have to work in, oh you
have no more working days, work apace for God, for in the end of the six days
of this life there is a rest a coming; there is no work beyond the Grave, either
in heaven or in hell; you that are Christ's, you shall not work after this life
is at an end, your rest comes then; yea, that is the time of your sitting down,
this is the time of your walking, not the time of your rest; and seeing you
have no more time to eternity to work in, there is no more working days, be
content to work now, be earnestly desirous to do all you can to lift up God and
Christ, and his Kingdom, whilst you are on earth; for what know you, your time
is short, and what know you, but that you may live even as Enoch, whose life
was but half the days of the rest of the Patriarchs? Thus I have shown you at
what time Enoch was taken, at three hundred sixty and five years: It remains
further to enquire, Wherefore did God take Enoch away, and why he did take him
away at that time? and wherefore Enoch was taken in that extraordinary way,
both soul and body to Heaven?

SERMON XII.
GENESIS 5. the latter end of the 24 Verse. -- And he was not, for God took him.
I Showed you the last day at what time God took Enoch, it was when he had not
attained to half the years of the rest of that Generation. God sometimes
shortens the days of his own servants in Love. I answered an Objection the
last day.

Object. Is not long life promised as a blessing to the Saints? Thou shall come
to thy Grave in a full age, as a Shock of Corn in its season; How is this
promise made good, when God takes away some of his people before they have
attained to half their days, that they might have lived unto in the course of
nature? I answered in many things.

Answ. 1. First, That this is an Old Testament promise: God walked then in a
way of temporal promises more than now in this dispensation under the Gospel in
which he gives out less temporals, and more spirituals. Besides, I told you it
was a conditional promise; as in all the promises of outward good things that
are made to Gods people, the promises of health, strength, riches, and honor,
and of long life: they must be taken with this limitation; so far as God in
infinite wisdom shall see to be best for them, so far shall he give out to
them; and therefore if God do take away any of his people at any time, it is
because God sees it best for them to be taken home to himself, it is best for
them to have a short time, because that their days are evil, Man that is born
of a woman, says Job, is one of few days, and full of trouble; and there is a
mercy that both these go together, few of days and full of trouble. Besides I
answered, That the promise is made good, though God do take away some of his
people whilst young, yet the promise is made good; they come to the Grave in
full age, because they come to the Grave full of grace, he is not cut down
before he is ripe, they are not like the Corn on the house top that is burnt up
before it is ripe, but God can make them full of grace, which is a full age;
and herein his promise is made good. Besides, his promise is made good, because
God makes them willing to leave the world when he calls for them: the righteous
man when God calls for him, he says as Elias said, Lord it is enough, if thou
say it is enough that I have lived so long upon earth, I will say so too,
Lord I have enough of living here, I have enough of this world, here is nothing
that is desirable, or that may draw forth my affection to live longer, if this
be the determined time of God. A wicked man has never life enough, though he
lives a hundred years, twice told, yet he is as greedy to live longer, as at
first; but God satisfies the hearts of his servants, in that they have lived
long enough, and their time is come, and that satisfies them; and thus they
have length of days continued. And besides, God does promise to his people a
great restoration that is to be before the end of the world: as the days of a
tree, so shall the days of my servants be, and mine Elect they shall long
enjoy the work of their hands; it shall then be a mercy to live long, when the
new Jerusalem shall come down from heaven, and when the Lamb shall be the light
of it, when Satan shall be bound, and the Accuser of the Brethren cast out, and
wicked men put under, when corruption shall be subdued, then long life shall be
a mercy. But however I answer, That if God do shorten our days here and give
us an Eternity in heaven, we are no losers, but God is as good as his word. If
a man promise you a Shilling, and shall at that day give you a hundred or a
thousand pounds, he is not unfaithful, but he is as good as his word; and thus
the Lord promised long life, which is an eternity, better than life here, and
wherein he fulfils his word. It should and ought to be the desire of all to
live much, rather than to live long, to live much in a little time; thus did
Christ, he lived much, he glorified the name of his Father in the time he
lived, he did much in a little time; and thus it should be our care, to do much
for God in a little time, and to lay hold of eternal life betimes; because this
life is momentany and vanishing; the Devil takes his opportunity, he works
much, knowing he has but a little time, because he knows his time is short,
therefore he works with all his might, and plyes his work to deceive the
Nations.

If he be so subtle for his Kingdom, how wise ought we to be to promote the
Kingdom of Christ? Oh! whatsoever we find to do for God, let us do it with all
our might, and with all our strength; for thus has Christ given us his
Example. I shall proceed to that which remains, God took him.

I showed you before, Whither Enoch was taken: He was taken up into Heaven, he
was not dissolved, he died not as other men; I proved it from the Epistle to
the Hebrews, that he was translated that he should not see death.

Quest. But you will say, Wherefore was Enoch thus translated? Why was he not
dissolved? Why died he not as others? Why translated that he should not see
death?

Answ. I answer, First, Because he was a remarkable Type of Jesus Christ; I
say, he was a remarkable Type of Christ. For,

1. First, He was matchless in his Generation, There was none like him, above
all the men in the world Enoch walked most close with God in his time, he was
matchless and none like him, and herein he wa^ a Type of Jesus Christ, who was
matchless in the world; whilst he was in the world, he was as the Apple Tree in
the midst of the Trees in the Forest, there was no guile found in his mouth; he
walked exactly with God when he was here upon earth, there was no stumbling
blocks, no slips in the whole course of Jesus Christ. But,

2. Secondly, Enoch was a Type of Christ, in that God was so exceedingly well
pleased with him; He received this Testimony, says the Apostle in Heb. 11. 5.
that he pleased God; God was pleased with him, and herein he was a notable Type
of Christ: the Father is pleased only in him, Behold my servant whom I uphold,
says he in Isa. 42. 1. mine Elect in whom my soul delights: he was
infinitely well pleased with Christ; the good pleasure of God toward Enoch, it
was but a drop of that love, and that good pleasure which was poured out upon
the head of Jesus Christ; the Father was pleased with his Person, infinitely
pleased in his righteousness, pleased in all that he did, and pleased in his
sufferings, Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Father to bruise him; he was pleased
with all those that Christ represented, he is pleased with the whole Family of
Christ, even with all that belong unto him in Heaven and Earth, and that only
for his sake; it is said of him in Matthew. 3. the latter end, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased. So then my Brethren, is there ever a soul that
is seeking after the good pleasure of God? the manifestation of the love of God
unto it? that is looking and waiting for some token of acceptance from heaven?
Would you be in the ready way unto it? Then look unto the Lord, even Jesus
Christ, of whom Enoch was a Type, look unto him in his love, all the love and
all the good pleasure that is in the heart of God, runs down through Jesus
Christ unto poor creatures: Oh, run to Christ, make have to Christ, throw down
your selves at the Footstool of Christ, and clasp about him by Faith, and know
that there is a plentiful Box of good pleasure and love broken upon the head of
Christ by the Father, that will run down unto every soul that sits under the
skirt and shadow of Christ. That Is a Second thing, wherein Enoch was a Type of
Christ.

3. Thirdly, Enoch was a Type of Christ, as Christ was a Conqueror over Death;
and this was held forth in Enoch's translation, He did not see Death; Enoch did
not see corruption as the bodies of others do, and he was in this a Type of
Jesus Christ, that was the holy One of God, that he should not see corruption;
he did not see corruption; Enoch's conquest was but a Type of this conquest and
victory of Jesus Christ, that he got for his people over Death and the Grave:
and therefore you that desire not to be dismayed when Death comes, when this
enemy shall set upon you; Oh, that you would beforehand look unto the conquest
and victory of Christ. There is a time when this your enemy will meet you all
in the Field: Would you not be dismayed? Would you be able to look Death in the
face? Then I beseech you, beforehand, live upon Faith in Christ, upon the
conquest of Christ, upon the victory of Christ, he has broken the force of
death, taken away the sting of it, he has dismayed it. Oh, live upon the
conquest that Christ has made over death, that so your hearts may not fail
when you come to grapple with this last enemy, which is Death, Christ has
overcome Death gloriously; and Enoch was but a Type of Christ, and a shadow of
it in his translation. That Is the first, wherefore Enoch was translated in an
extraordinary way, because he was an extraordinary Type of Christ.

2. But Secondly, Enoch was thus translated, because Enoch whilst he lived,
exercised a special faith; I say, Enoch had a special Faith, a most remarkable
faith, in some good and great deliverance that God would work for him either in
Death or from Death: He trusted God whilst he lived in victory over Death, that
Death should be conquered for him, and Death if it came should do him no harm;
I say, he had a special faith in this respect; It appears by two Demonstrations.

1. First, In respect of that bold, that holy bold profession that Enoch makes
of God in his Generation, which was a most corrupt time, and dangerous to make
any profession of God in: righteous Abel was killed for his profession, for his
walking with God, his Brother arose up and slew him, and yet Enoch is not
dismayed, he will not turn aside from God, he will not balk his profession for
fear of death, for fear of the sons of violence; the posterity of Cain was
multiplied, and the earth was filled with violence at that time, and there was
enmity in that seed of Cain, against the seed of Seth, which God raised up
instead of Abel, so that it was dangerous for Enoch to make any profession of
God in his Generation; and yet Enoch was not dismayed, he feared not the hand
of violence what it could do to him, but he trusted that God would deliver him
either from Death or in Death. And,

2. Secondly, It appears that Enoch had such a remarkable faith, if we consider
what was the name that he gave unto his Son, as in this Chapter, He begat a
Son, and called his name Methuselah, that is, Mortis gladium, the sword of
Death, or the dart of Death, he believed there was one a coming that should be
the death of Death; one that should overcome death for him, and for all the
people of God, and therefore called his son after that name, The Sword of
Death: He knew there was a Messiah a coming that should send a challenge to
death, as in Hos. 13. 14. O death, I will be thy Plague; O Grave, I will be thy
destruction; Christ sent a challenge and performed this; Enoch saw this by
faith, and all his days he lived in the contemplation of it, and sucked
sweetness in the thoughts of it, and when e're death came, he believed it
should do him no harm. This will teach us three or four Lessons.

1. First, There is nothing lost by making a bold profession of Christ in evil
times, in the midst of dangers: Abel was slain because he walked with God, and
yet Enoch will not go back, and Enoch lost nothing in conclusion; Oh, how often
does our Savior call upon Christians, his Disciples and others, Fear not them
that can kill the body, and can do no more; the fear of man brings a snare; how
many poor creatures are ensnared through this fear, the fear of man? That when
God convinces of the truth, and of the way of God, the soul submits unto it,
and yet dares not hold it forth, because of the fear of man, because it is a way
that may be persecuted, that the Powers of the world will persecute it, and
oppose it; O this fear of man brings a snare; what says our Savior in Matthew.
10. 39. He that will save his life shall lose it, but he that will lose his
life, shall find it; it is made good many times in this world: He that will
save his life shall lose it; when a man will turn aside from God, when he will
balk any way of God to save his life, or to save some comforts of his life, Oh,
it will befall that poor creature as with the Prophet, Some Lion comes in the
way, he meets him and slays him: But he that will lose his life shall save it;
he remembers the three Children spoken of in Daniel, they lost nothing by their
bold profession, they were willing to lose their lives, and so they saved their
lives: and thus did they, and so did Enoch.

2. Secondly, It does teach us how much God is delighted with the faith of his
people: Enoch lived by Faith in a special manner, and how was the heart of God
taken with Enoch? He was well pleasing unto God, so well pleasing that God
could not long be without him; puts forth his hand and takes him up to himself;
Oh, how greatly is the heart of God and Christ taken with Faith! We never read
that Jesus Christ wondered at any thing but at Faith: twice he wondered at the
Faith that was given out to some of his servants; as in Matthew. 8. Christ
wondered at it, O, says he, at the 10 Verse, when Jesus Christ heard it, he
marvelled and said to them that followed him, Verily I say unto you, I have not
found so great a Faith, no, not in Israel; When Jesus Christ heard it, he
marvelled; and so the heart of Christ was taken with the Faith that was given
out to the woman of Canaan, in Matthew. 15. O woman, great is thy Faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will: Faith gains the will of Christ; what a great deal
has God done to encourage his people to believe? Faith finds not what it
expects, but it finds more than ever it expected; certainly Methuselah
believed death should do him no harm, and therefore he feared not death, and
thought not of such a way as this is, but God was better to him than his Faith.
You have a strong God, what encouragement is here? You have a strong Savior; O
let not your faith be weak, especially seeing the Lord is so delighted with it;
he gives faith whatsoever it expects; nay, even beyond it is expectation. Again,

3. Thirdly, This teaches us, That to live much by faith is the way to make our
translation easy; thus it was with Enoch, he lived all his days by faith, and
see how easy his translation was to him: there is nothing honors God in the
world so much as faith does; now therefore God delights to honor Faith,
because it honors him, it has the promise, They that honor me, I will
honor; I beseech you then, you that would have an easy change (and who would
not have an easy change, an easy translation? when death comes who would not
have a large door set open to them, and go with full sails for heaven?) If this
be the desire of your hearts, then labor to live much by faith; it is faith
that will set the door wide open, it will minister abundance of entrance into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord; the spirit of faith will fill the soul
with full sails, it shall go to Heaven with full sails; thus it was with Enoch,
who lived by faith.

4. But again, Fourthly, A fourth thing that we may learn is this, that when
God does give out a special faith, he does give out some special mercy; when
God gives out a special faith, a particular faith, he that persuades the heart
to believe it, it shall be easy to him. Enoch was persuaded in a special faith
to believe something concerning death that God would do for Enoch, and he did
believe; it is rare and extraordinary; this special faith that does concern
such and such as a special mercy that God does put the soul to seek after it,
if the heart be persuaded by God to believe such a particular mercy to be given
out, certainly if God do persuade the heart to wait for that mercy, that mercy
shall be given out: see David in Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the
Lord: that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his holy
Temple. There he had a desire to come back again to Jerusalem to see the Lord
in his Temple, and his heart was carried out strongly to believe it; he was
banished by Saul a mighty King, and he durst not come into the Land, and how
then could he come to the Temple? yet he would not fear, for that one thing
that God had put in his heart to seek after, for that his heart was upheld in
it. And thus God may deal with some of his servants, when he does raise up his
peoples hearts to believe some special mercy, that mercy shall be given out
according to their faith. That Is a second mercy why Enoch was thus translated,
he was one that had a special remarkable says, that something God should do
for him in or about Death.

There Is a third Question follows, Wherefore Enoch was thus translated?

The Answer is, That so his translation might preach unto the men of that
Generation, yea, to all succeeding Generations, that there shall be a
Resurrection of the Body: I say, therefore did God thus translate Enoch, that
his translation in body to heaven might witness to them, and so to all other
Generations, that there is a time when that the bodies of the Saints shall be
copartners with their souls in Glory: Here God Preached the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Body, by Enoch's translation; in all Ages God has not left
himself without witness, concerning this great truth, the Resurrection of the
Body; and certainly the Lord saw that there was need that he should bear
witness of this truth: there was need then, and there is need now, even in this
Generation, that we should be informed, persuaded, and rooted in this Doctrine
of the Resurrection of the Body; there is great need that Christians should be
confirmed in it, in the knowledge and in the full persuasion of it. For,

1. First of all, It is the Doctrine that the Devil has always sought to
overthrow, the powers of Hell have bandyed against it, and how has the Devil
by his Instruments, by Atheistical men opposed this Doctrine in every Age? It
has been opposed, and it is still opposed. I shall show you what opposition is
made against it, that so you may be confirmed in it. It Is sad to think that
some that have formerly made a profession, should fall so far as to deny a
Resurrection; and yet such a seducing spirit is gone forth in the world: I
shall show you what the Atheist has against it, that your hearts may be
confirmed in this Doctrine.

Quest. Why, First, Say they, it is against reason: How is it possible that the
bodies of men should be raised up again, whenas their bodies are devoured and
consumed in the heart of the earth, they are turned into the very elements
again, into their first principles, and how is it possible that the same bodies
should be raised up again?

Answ. To this, I Will answer in the words of our Savior Christ, O, says he,
you err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God; for that was the
answer that Christ gave unto the Sadducees, that denied the Resurrection, in
Matthew. 22. 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures; he tells them, they were
not acquainted with that which God had spoken in his Word, he brings one
Scripture that they did not know, and therefore they erred because they did not
know it: Have not you read, says he, that which was spoken unto you by God,
saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; they
said there was no Resurrection; says Christ, Poor creatures, you say so,
because you don't know the Scriptures, ye err therefore because you know not
the Scriptures: God says, I am the God of Abraham; God says this after
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are dead and gone, that he is the God of Abraham,
therefore there is something of Abraham yet remains, and Abraham shall live
again, for God says he owns them, and says, ye know not the power of God, Ye
err not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God: you measure God by the
arm of flesh, because it is impossible to you, you think it is impossible to God,
whenas God is infinite, and can do whatsoever he please; if you did but
consider the power of God, says he, you would not err on this manner, even to
deny the Resurrection as a thing impossible: Why, who made the world? Who made
all things out of nothing? Who brought light out of darkness? Certainly to
raise up the dead is not a greater matter than to make the World of nothing;
certainly if you had known the Scriptures, you would not have denied the power
of God in raising from the dead. But the Devil is subtle, and therefore when
reason will not do, he flees to Scripture, he will bring you Scripture to deny the
Resurrection; that Scripture is urged by some Atheistical spirits, 1 Cor. 15.
50. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God; therefore, say they, the Scripture is against the Resurrection, there
shall be no resurrection, because flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God.

To this I answer,

1. First, That sinful flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
corrupt man cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; but the bodies of the Saints
shall be raised without sin, there shall be no defilement when they come out of
the Grave, they shall be purified sufficiently; and therefore then they may
inherit the Kingdom of God. And,

2. Secondly, It Is true, that weak, frail, corruptible flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, but when the bodies of the Saints be raised up,
they shall not be weak, frail and corruptible as their bodies are now; no, they
shall leave all their weaknesses, all their frailties shall be left behind
them, all these shall be left in the Grave; therefore the Apostle answers
sufficiently in the 53 verse of that Chapter, For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on Immortality; frail corruptible flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: but it shall not be so at the
Resurrection, but this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this poor
mortal body shall put on Immortality, it shall no more be clothed with frail
flesh and blood, but it shall put on new robes, new robes that shall not be
changed, and that are not subject to change, that shall not wear away, but
shall abide for ever in the Heavens, and therefore there is nothing in this
against the Resurrection of the body, but it shall be partner with the soul in
the blessedness of Heaven.

But there is another place that the Atheist does allege from Scripture, and
that is from Solomon, what he says in Eccles. 3. 19. For that which befalls
the sons of men, befalls Beasts, even one thing befalls them: as the one
dies, so dies the other; yea, they have all one breath, so that a man has no
pre-eminence above a beast: for all is vanity. Hence the Atheist concludes that
there is no Resurrection, for when death comes, it is with man as a beast; who
knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that
goes downward?

To this I answer, That Solomon does not speak in his own person, he speaks in
the person of the Atheist, he tells you what is the Atheists conclusion, what
he says in his heart because of those oppressions that he saw under the Sun, I
said in my heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that God might
manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are beasts. There
you have the thoughts of Solomon, there he speaks his own, it was a conclusion
of his from the observation that he saw under the Sun, to see how one man
oppressed another, even like beasts; and there he brings in the conclusion of
the flesh, and the conclusion of the spirit: the conclusion of the spirit is,
God shall judge betwixt the righteous and the wicked, and so he brings them in
scoffingly, Who knows the spirit of a man that goes upward, etc. you see it
was not Solomon's, it was far from Solomon's thoughts that there should be no
Resurrection, in Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let
thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the light of
thine eyes: But know thou, for all these things God will bring thee into
Judgment. Solomon concludes with the Resurreon, and it was the conclusion of
his Book, in his last Chapter, 13, 14 verses, Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter: Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of
man. For God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. You see how the Devil by his Agents
does strike at this Doctrine of the Resurrection, he destroies all Godliness,
all the power of Godliness, he destroies the Kingdom of God at once, and he
builds up his own Kingdom for ever; If there be no Resurrection, then says the
Atheist, Let us eat and drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and more
abundant: If our hopes were only in this life, we were of all men most
miserable; it destroies the whole mystery of Godliness, then all should be in
vain, Preaching and Hearing in vain, and your faith in vain, if there be no
Resurrection: Now therefore, I beseech you, get your hearts established in this
Resurrection. The Devil plays not at small game, but he strikes at the fullness
of the root, at the Scriptures, he strikes at the Resurrection. O get your
hearts established. Some that have been as stars in the Firmament, have been
swept down so low as to deny the Resurrection of the body: know therefore that
it is the Will of the Father, that Jesus Christ should raise up; all his people
at the last day; so he tells them, and so he would have all his people believe
it, it is the Will of the Father, that of all that he has given me, I should
lose none, but he will raise them up at the last day: and know that your bodies
shall as certainly be raised up again, as the body of Jesus Christ was raised
up, there was a seminal virtue in Christ, but it was not so in others, they did
rise, but Christ arose as a common person, and his Resurrection is as the seed
of the Resurrection of their bodies in the conclusion; even as certainly as
Christ's body was raised from the Grave, so shall thine; and know if it were not
so, Christ should not be complete, the body of Christ should not be complete;
for all his people are a part of his body, if the head be risen, the members
also shall rise, for Christ without them is not complete: and the body shall
arise, because without the body the man is not complete; I say, man is not
complete without the body; the soul waits for the Resurrection of the body, it
is not complete, it has not its fullness of joy until the Resurrection: and
therefore it is said in Rev. 6. 10. the souls under the Altar cry out, How long
Lord holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth? The soul thinks long when it shall meet with its old friend
again, the body: Oh Lord how long, say they, shall we be in this condition? Now
seeing it is so, there shall certainly be a Resurrection of the body at last:
and if there shall be a Resurrection of the body, then I beseech you, consider
what manner of persons we ought to be, how should you endeavor after holiness
in the body, seeing there shall be a Resurrection of the body; whilst you are
in the body, how should you demean your selves in all holiness? O what need is
there that you should get faith in Christ, to cover, and to wash away all those
sins and defilements of the body? And how careful should you be to keep your
bodies holy, as the Temples of the holy Ghost? That so when your souls and
bodies are parted, there may be a longing for a Resurrection, that your soul
may say, Lord how long, how long, when shall that poor body that sleeps in the
dust be raised up? It will not be so with wicked men, they will not call for a
Resurrection; the souls of the wicked had rather their bodies should sleep
perpetually, that there should be no morning, that there should be no Gaol
delivery, rather be in Prison than come forth to the Assizes; but it shall not
be so with the Saints in their state of separation of soul from the body, they
think long that their bodies may be raised from the Grave, that their souls may
be copartners with them in the glory that Christ shall give out. And to say no
more, in the

Last place, I beseech you (with the Apostle) comfort one another with these
sayings. Do but consider how comfortable this Doctrine of the Resurrection is in
it self; O the Resurrection of the body, a great deal of a Christians comfort
is laid up in it: The Resurrection of the body may be comfort to you in all
your afflictions that you meet withal whilst you are in the body; in the midst
of all your infirmities and weaknesses and troubles whilst you are in the body:
When this corruptible shall put on incorruption; Oh! how willingly should we
spend and be spent for Christ, because he will give it all back at the
Resurrection again? How willingly should we lay down our bodies, our lives for
Christ, if Christ call for them, because there is a Resurrection of the body:
All that the Father has given him, it is the Will of the Father that he should
raise them up at the last day. It will be comfort to you when you come to lay
your heads in the Grave at rest, you shall not be in Prison for ever, your
bodies shall not lie in the dark Dungeon for ever; No, Christ has taken away
the horror of the Grave, and he would not have you meditate horror there; the
Covenant of God, (you that are his people) holds with your bodies, where ever
you are, the Covenant of God lays hold upon your scattered bones, the Covenant
of God holds with their very bones, and Christ will come to open those Prison
doors: the Apostle says, the whole Creation groans, Romans 8. 22. For we know
that the whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until now,
waiting for that deliverance in that great day, the day of Resurrection, the
very earth shall travel, and it groans to bring forth, even all those sons and
daughters that have lain so long in the bowels of the earth, even all that have
been buried in the Earth and Sea, it groans to be delivered of them; and
therefore what matter of comfort is this? The Lord would have you assured of
this, That there shall be a Resurrection of your bodies, he has taught it in
the Type, whilst you have seen Enoch, Enoch translated in the body; and he has
given you a greater confirmation by Jesus Christ, who is risen and sits at the
right hand of the Father: he is the seminal Comforter, therefore O ye Saints,
be ye comforted waiting for that day of Resurrection. And so much for this time.

SERMON XIII.
GENESIS 5. the latter end of the 24 Verse. -- For God took him.
I Desire you with patience one hour longer, then I hope through Gods
assistance to finish that which I have been so long insisting upon, from this
Text. The last day we enquired wherefore God took Enoch in that extraordinary
manner, why was he translated that he should not see death: I gave three
Answers then. I shall proceed to a further Answer to this Question.

Quest. Wherefore Enoch was thus Translated that he should not see Death?

Answ. It was, That so the Lord might be a defense to that great Mystery, even
in that Generation, that he might give them a taste, and so see of that
wonderful good that God should work toward the end of the world, when Christ
shall come in his glory, when the bodies of all the Saints that are alive shall
be changed, when they shall not see Death (as Enoch was translated that he saw
not death) I say, here God gave some first fruits of that wonderful work that
he should do for his people at his next coming, when the Saints that are alive
shall not die, but shall all have their living upon the face of the Earth, and
be taken up as Enoch was, and as Elias was, even so shall they be taken up, and
lifted up to meet the Lord in the Air: and here is a Mystery which is more
fully made known to us by our Lord Jesus, since the coming of Christ in the
flesh; see what the Apostle speaks concerning this great mystery of the change
of those at Christ's coming, in 1 Cor. 15. 51. Behold, I show you a mystery, we
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last Trump (for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed:) Again the same Apostle does
plainly declare this mystery to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4. 15, 16. For this
we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain
unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the
Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:
then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
He does reveal this mystery in all the parts of it; we that are alive shall
not prevent them that sleep: Christ shall first descend, and the Trumpet shall
blow, and they shall be raised, and then shall we be changed.

But you will say, Does not this cross other Scriptures? Is it not said, that
it is appointed for all men once to die? Why then does the Apostle say, We
shall not all die, we shall not all sleep?

I Answer, First of all, That this Word of the Lord is not crossed, though the
Lord is pleased to mitigate the sentence: there shall be a kind of death to the
Saints that are then alive when Christ shall come, they shall not die properly,
there shall not be a separation of body and soul: yet there shall be a
metaphorical death, there shall be a change, and so great a change, even as
death is (the change of the Resurrection meeting together) which certainly is
very great: and this cannot be without some fear, and some horror, which shall
be even as the horror of death unto the Saints: for though there shall be no
harm, they shall not be harmed when the first Trumpet shall blow, no harm to
the Saints, all the woe shall be past; but yet I say, there may be a great deal
of cause of fear of death, for Christ shall first descend before they be
changed; and therefore there is room left for fear and horror, the Text says
Christ shall first come with thousands, and ten thousands of Angels, and the
Trump shall blow, and the dead shall be raised, and all this before those that
are alive shall be changed; and then, says he, we that are alive shall be
changed, and be caught up even with them. Now Brethren, seeing God has seen
this needful, that this mystery should be revealed in all Ages, therefore a
glimpse of it must be given out to those Generations in which Enoch lived when
he was taken up: and so afterward the same was thought of Elias when he was
taken up into Heaven; The Lord has seen it needful, I say, that this mystery
should be known, and if it were needful for them, then it is much more needful
for us; it is needful for us upon whom the ends of the earth are come, that we
should know this mystery, and that being in a continual expectation of the
fulfilling of it; it is needful both for the consolation, and for the
instruction of the Saints that this mystery should be made known.

For their consolation, Why, the time is coming, when Death shall be swallowed
up, when the Saints shall not die, but they shall be changed: this change is
more desirable than death; Gods people in all Ages have longed after it, and
therefore God has revealed that there is such a change to be, and that all his
people might take in the comfort of it beforehand: God has in all Ages given
warning, as if it might be in that very Age; that his people might beforehand
take in the comfort of it: the Apostle Paul declares that he and the rest of
the Saints were more desirous to live to this time than to be dissolved by
death, 2 Cor. 5. 2. We groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our
house which is from Heaven: we would not be uncloathed, says he, there is a
kind of reluctance in Nature to be uncloathed, to put off from the body, we had
rather be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven: we had rather, if
the Lord please, that a change of raiment might be given out that shall endure
for ever, that Mortality might be swallowed up of life, and that this
corruptible body might put on incorruption; Now, I say, it being so desirable,
and the Saints had rather, and are very desirous to see this change, God
therefore in all Ages will not conceal it but make it known (as not impossible
it might come in that very Age in which they live) that so possibly they may
take in the comfort of it beforehand: at least the Saints, though they don't
see to this day, you shall not be any losers, you may die in the Faith of it,
and take in the sweetness of this promise, you shall be no losers, you shall
not be prevented, they shall not be in Heaven before you, with Christ before
you, but even you that lie in the Grave shall be first raised, and then those
that are alive shall be changed.

The Lord would also have you be instructed by this mystery; he sees it
needful to be declared, that his people, his Saints might live in a continual
expectation of this change, this great change that shall be when Christ shall
come again, and therefore the time was concealed that the Saints might live in
a continual expectation of it, and the Apostle speaks it as to his age, Even we
that are alive shall be changed; because the Lord would have his people in
every Age to live as those that do expect the coming of Jesus Christ, when this
great and wonderful change shall be: you had need always stand upon your
watch, you know not when your Lord will come, at what hour he will return from
the Wedding, and therefore we had need be always prepared, and stand with our
loins girt, and Lamps trimmed, for there is some dread (for a moment at least)
to the Saints when Christ shall come, it will be worse if you shall be found
slumbering and sleeping in carnal security, it will be a great amazement when
Christ shall come, and thousand of thousands of Angels shall come with him and
proclaim his glory, when there shall be a great cry at midnight, The Bridegroom
is come, certainly it will be a great amazement even to the Saints themselves
that shall be in carnal security; therefore it concerns us every moment to be
upon our Watchtower. You see wherefore it was that God took Enoch away in an
extraordinary way that he should not see death: there is one Question yet
behind.

Quest. Why did God take Enoch away at this time?

The main Answer which I shall give, is this,

Answ. The Lord when he takes his people away does thereby give warning; by
taking Enoch away, That there was a deluge of wrath coming upon the old World:
the Lord would put them upon it to consider what his event should be in this
providence, that so if possible they might prevent that deluge of wrath, that
Flood of water that came and swept them away. When the Lord does suddenly take
away those that are found faithful in their Generation, it is a warning of
wrath to come: I say, when God does suddenly snatch away those that are found
faithful in their Generation, it does often presage some great wrath to come;
you have an express Scripture for it, in Isa. 57. 1. The righteous perishes,
and no may lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous are taken from the evil to come: When God takes
away righteous and merciful men, and those that are left behind, do not lay it
to heart, if they don't consider it, and make use of it, it is a certain sign
of evil that is to come upon them. God took away Enoch in his Generation, and
he took away all the rest of the Patriarchs that are spoken of in this Chapter,
they were all taken away before the Flood of waters came upon the world;
Methusalah (he that was Enoch's son) lived the longest, and it is thought he
was taken away either that very year, or the year before the Flood came upon
the old World, God swept away them all, even those that were remarkable in
their Generation, and then wrath comes upon the world: O that thou would hide
me in the Grave, says Job, in Job 14. 13. O that thou would hide me in the
Grave, and keep me secret until thy wrath be past; God has some hiding places
or other for his people, and sometimes the Grave is a hiding place: though
sometimes Job does not bespeak the Grave, yet here sometimes God hides in the
Grave till such time as wrath be over. Such as walk with God in their
Generation, they are Christ's Flock, though they be Pilgrims and Strangers upon
the earth, Sojourners, Travelers, yet they are Christ's Flock, here they rest,
and many times Christ will Fold his Flock; before a Storm comes the Shepherd
gathers his Flock together: When a great Storm of Hail and Fire came upon the
Egyptians, the Israelites that were in Goshen gathered all their Flocks
together, and then they were safe; Christ shrouds the most of his Flock, the
chief of his Flock from some approaching wrath that draws near.

2. Secondly, They are the Lords Household Stuff; I say, his people are his
choice Household Stuff, they are my Jewels, In the day that I make up my Jewels.
When a man removes away all his best Household Stuff, and carries away his
Jewels, you may guess that man does not intend to be robbed: and so when the
Lord does remove his Jewels, his choice Household Stuff, it is a sure sign of
his departure, at least God gives warning to that people, and if they will not
take warning, and cry unto the Lord as they did, O why go thou away and
stayest for a night? And if God depart from a place, what follows, your place
is left to you desolate, and woe be to you: What a woe does he threaten by the
Prophet Hosea, Hos. 9. 12. Woe also to them when I depart from them: Woe,
desolation, and ruin certainly comes upon a people when God departs from them.

3. Thirdly, Again, The righteous they are the Pillars of the place: such as
walk with God in their Generation, they are the Pillars of Families, the
Pillars of Cities, and the Pillars of Kingdoms, nay, they are the Pillars of
the whole World: so says the Psalmist, The earth shook, O Lord, and I will
bear up the Pillars of it; If the Pillars of the House be plucked down, how can
the House stand? If you see one Pillar after another fall, you will conclude
certainly that House will not hold long; Why, the Saints are the Pillars of the
World, and if it were not for their sakes, the earth would mingle together
presently; but you must know this is not from any merit, worth, or
righteousness of theirs, though they are thus called Pillars, I say, it is not
for any worth or righteousness of the Saints, or the best on earth: but they
are called Pillars, and they bear up Kingdoms, and they bear up the Earth,

1. First, Because God is entreated by their supplications; I say, they
prevail, they stand at the gap, they prevail with God to keep out wrath and
Judgment, that it may not break in: and so you know Moses pleads with God, and
so long as Moses pleaded with God, God could do nothing against Israel, Let me
alone that I may destroy them: and so Abraham pleads for Sodom that God would
spare that City for ten righteous men's sakes, and God grants that request: and
it is very observable that Abraham gave over first, God did not give over
first, it is like if he had gone lower he might have prevailed; but there was a
holy ingenuity and faithfulness in him, when he considered, that in so many
Cities there should not be ten righteous men there, why, he could not in
ingenuity ask any less: and so by their supplication they bear up Kingdoms and
Nations.

2. Secondly, And then again, The Lord does spare places and people many times,
from the care that God has of them, for the care that the Lord has of his own
people, Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? Rather spare the
wicked for the righteous sake: and God does choose this way, this is Gods way,
he will rather spare the wicked for the righteous sake, because God is
exceeding careful of his own people, he fears lest they should suffer, he will
rather have the tares grow with the Corn together, than the good Corn should be
in danger of being plucked up; and therefore he tells Lot of making haste, in
Genesis 19. when God was about to destroy Sodom, Haste thee, escape thither: for I
cannot do any thing till thou be come thither; I am so careful of my Lot, that
I can do nothing in way of Judgment till Lot be out of fear and danger; this
was not for desert of Lot's righteousness, but the free grace of God toward
him, for it is said in that Chapter, When the Lord delivered him, he was
merciful to him.

3. Thirdly, The Lord spares (many times) evil wicked men, for the love that he
bears to his own: he gives to his people the lives of others, because he loves
them so dear; so God gave Paul, in Acts 27. 24. he gave him the lives of a
great many, the lives of all that were in the Ship, which were two hundred
threescore and sixteen souls, because the Lord loved him dearly: O how good is
it to be with the righteous? It is good to be in their very company; one
righteous man, one Paul saves a Ship-ful: ten righteous men may save Sodom, and
four Cities more; and a considerable number of righteous men may save a
Kingdom; for a few righteous men's sakes the whole world is preserved, that fire
and wrath is not mingled in a moment, heaven and earth mingled in a moment, it
is for their sakes. And therefore I beseech you, consider and take notice of
the infinite goodness and patience of God even to the worst of sinners, that he
should be pleased thus to give warning before he strikes, to give warning to a
sinful Generation, by his own people before he destroy the world; O the
abundance of the good patience of God! God seldom smites by a remarkable
Judgment till he gives warning, it is sad warning, and of all warnings this is
a warning when God is a taking away his own people, to take them away from the
evil to come: it is a sad warning unto a people in that condition, that takes
not this warning, when God is at so much pains and cost with them. Therefore in
the second place,

I beseech you, when God gives this warning, O let us be careful to take it; it
is the greatest provocation to God when he gives warning, and we take it not:
in this regard Christ upbraids the Scribes and Pharisees, and says to them,
Can you discern the face of the Skies, and cannot you see these signs? Do you
see the signs there, and cannot you discern the signs of the times? Cannot you
discern when full wrath is coming, when Judgment is a coming? Cannot you
discern it by Gods signs? O how many signs has God shown, what abundance of
his Noah's has he Shipped? How many Enochs have been translated by death? How
much blood has been spilt, precious blood? O that God would make it to be a
warning to this Generation, that the Lord would stir us up too, to revive and
run after him; that God should give us warning, O that we could say, Thou hope
of Israel, why should thou be as a stranger, and as a wayfaring man, that
stays but for a night, and is gone in the morning? But,

Again, This upbraids the World for their former Ingratitude to the Saints, it
is for their sakes that you wicked have your lives continued, and all your
comforts continued, and how is the enmity of the world let forth against those
for whose sakes they are preserved? What folly is it that men should go about
to pull down the Pillars of that house in which they dwell? It was an extreme
desperate action that Sampson did, when that he should pull down the Pillars of
the House, and it cost him his own life? O this is the folly of the wicked in
the world that rage against the Saints, that pull down the Pillars; well, know
of a truth, when those Pillars are down, the House will fall upon your head,
and to pull down these Pillars, will be to pull down the house to your own
destruction.

Again, This may teach the people of God to submit willingly, to lie down
willingly in the dust, when God shall call them: it is possible they may be
taken away from a great deal of evil to come, it should make them willing to
lie down in the dust when God calls; God may take you away from many an evil
day that is coming, many an evil day of persecution, and many an evil day of
old age; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; through the
infirmities that do accompany old age, it becomes an evil day.

Again, There Is danger then of declining: O David prayed, and prayed heartily,
that God would not leave him to his own will, and that he would take him from
the evil to come.

Object. But you will say, There may be hopes of good days, and that might
make us unwilling to die, in hopes of good days.

Answ. Why, God may make you willing as Moses was; though at the Borders of
Canaan, yet God would have him die, and he goes up to the Mountain and dies
very willingly: there may be a great deal of evil before the good come, a great
deal of shakings, sore shakings before the good day come; the passage to the
Land may be very strait, yet Christ will bring thee along with him when he
comes; I say, when ever Christ comes he will bring the Saints along with him,
We that are alive, shall not prevent those that are dead; No, they shall rise
first, and then shall we be changed. Therefore God took away Enoch at this
time, that he may give warning to the World that wrath was a coming.

2. Secondly, Again, God took away Enoch at this time, that he might declare,
that he had respect unto his people, though the World was never so wicked,
though they are never so cruel, yet they shall not be forgotten, but the Lord
remembers, the Lord takes notice of them, If I find ten righteous men in Sodom,
says God, I will not destroy that City for tens sake; God seeks his own
people, and if he finds but ten righteous souls in a City, for their sakes it
shall not be destroyed, not an Enoch shall be forgotten: Men may cast away much
chaff, and though there be two or three Corns or more of Wheat, they will not look
for them; but God will not do so; if a heap of chaff be never so great God will
look over it, and he will not lose one Corn though in abundance of Chaff; his
people do glorify him much in an evil time, and grace is remarkable then, when
it shines bright in the midst of a dark night, the Lord will remember you: and
therefore if the Lord will find you out, and remember you in an evil World, Oh!
how should you remember him? He will do the more for you, and deal the more
remarkably with you, because you are found faithful in an evil time, in an evil
World, even as Enoch: therefore be ye careful to walk with God. Again,

3. Thirdly and lastly, God will declare hereby that the perfection and
happiness of his people is not here below, and therefore he would have them,
and all the world to know that the perfection and happiness of the Saints is
not below: Enoch enjoyed as much of God as ever man did, and yet Enoch must be
translated before he comes to perfection; God witnesses to this in the lives of
the best of the Saints in that Generation: there is none that lived a thousand
years, though there came many nigh to a thousand years, which is the perfect
number, the perfect account. The Lord would teach that perfection is not here,
but he would have us to know where we shall enjoy it: therefore let us see what
necessity there is to live upon Jesus Christ by Faith in the worst of our
days; if perfection be not here, O what need then have you to live in Christ?
You are perfect in him, says the Apostle, complete in him, and therefore in
the sense and greatness of your Imperfections, you had need live upon that
fullness, and breath after that fullness of time and perfection whither Enoch was
translated unto. So much shall serve for this time.

SERMON I.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain*
THE Apostle was now in Bonds for the Gospel of Jesus Christ: he takes care
that the Philippians might not be offended at it, that his sufferings might not
be any stumbling block to them, in Verse 12. he tells them that whatsoever
befell him it was for the furtherance of the Gospel, I would have you
understand, says he, the things which happened unto me, have fallen out rather
to the furtherance of the Gospel: he gives two particular Instances how the
Gospel of Christ was furthered by his sufferings, the one is in Verse 13. My
Bonds in Christ are manifest in all the Palace. By his sufferings many in
Nero's Court came to enquire after the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for which Paul
suffered; and by enquiring into it, were convinced of it. Another benefit of
these his sufferings, is in Verse 14. Many of the Brethren in the Lord waxed
confident by my Bonds: They were more bold to speak the Word of the Lord, they
feared not sufferings, because they saw how God carried Paul through his
sufferings, They waxed more bold through my Bonds. You see what improvement the
Lord makes of the sufferings of his people. Truth never thrives better than
when it is most trodden upon; the more the wind blows upon this fire, the more
it kindles, the hotter it burns, and the clearer it shines: when the stream is
dammed up, it rises higher, so it is with Truth; this was the advantage that
God makes of the sufferings of his people, for though the Truth was upon trial,
yet Paul may suffer, and Paul may lose by it, Paul was in danger of his life:
Well, take no care for me, says he in Verse 19. For I know that this shall
turn to my salvation through your Prayers, and the supply of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ; according to my earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing I
shall be ashamed: but with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall
be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. Take no care for
me, says he, I desire nothing but your Prayers, for I am confident that God
will carry on his Work, it shall turn to my good, and what ever befall me, the
Lord shall be glorified in it; I am confident of it, says he, that Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. You see the
breathings of a gracious heart, it cares not what becomes of it self, so God
may have his honor, Take no thought, says Paul, whether I live or die, it is
all one to me, so the Lord Jesus may be magnified in my bonds, by my life, or
by my death, if Christ be glorified it is enough, it matters not what becomes
of Paul, so Christ be magnified in my life, or in my death, For to me to live
is Christ, and to die is gain. Christ is gain to me both in life and death; so
some read the words, For Christ is gain to me both in life and death: Others
make two Propositions of it, Christ is life to me, or, to me to live is Christ;
Christ is my life, and death is my gain: Why, if I live, says he, Christ shall
be magnified, for Christ is my life; if I live, I shall gain, and if I die, I
shall gain: If I live I shall gain more of Christ, I shall gain more knowledge
of him, and more communion with him here in the way; Ay, but what if Paul die?
If I die, says he, I shall be no loser: death is looked upon as a loss,
therefore as Paul should have said, For me to live is Christ, or, to die is
Christ; but he rather says, It is gain, it is Christ that makes it gain to
him, or else it is a loss to me, but Christ who is my life shall make death
gain; So take no thought of me, says he, whatsoever befalls me I shall do
well, if I live, or if I die. And because you are more solicitous concerning my
death, says he, know that death is my gain; if I lose my friends and my
comforts, if I lose life it self, it shall be no loss, it shall not undo me,
for I shall find all in Jesus Christ, and so death shall be my gain.

DOCT. Christ is the Believers Life.

That Is the Proposition that lies before us. For me to live is Christ, or,
Christ is my Life; it is all one: Christ is the life of every believing soul.
By Life sometimes it is understood whatsoever is excellent, whatsoever is
excellent in its kind, it is set forth by life, because life is the most
excellent thing in nature, Skin for Skin, and all that a man has will he give
for his life; and therefore the Bread which Christ gives, is called, Living
Bread, Bread of Life, and so Water of Life, for the excellency of the spiritual
things that the Lord gives out to his people; and truly Christ is instead of
all excellencies to a believing soul, he is the life of all their comforts; the
comforts of the World are dead until such time as Christ shines in them, there
is no life until such time as Christ shines through them, for riches are dead,
and honor is dead, and friends are dead, all comforts are dead till the life
of Christ be in them. But more particularly,

1. First, Christ is the Life of Righteousness to the believing soul: every
child of Adam is dead, condemned, and so he is dead in Law: there is no life
but by the righteousness of Christ, that righteousness which Christ brought in
by his blood: He gave life by making satisfaction to Justice, by paying the
debt unto death; therefore the Apostle says, that Righteousness reigns by
Christ, in Romans 5. sin entered into the world by Adam, speaking there at Verse
17. For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life by one, Jesus Christ: Righteousness raigns in a believing soul by Jesus
Christ, it has the pre-eminence of all, all is dross and dung in comparison of
this righteousness of Jesus Christ, it reigns gloriously in a believing soul;
it is Christ that procures this righteousness, and it is Christ that applies
this righteousness by his Spirit, I say the Application of this life of
righteousness, is from Christ, it is he that reveals this righteousness, it is
he that discovers it to the soul, it is Christ by his eternal Spirit that
causes the soul to know this life and righteousness which is given to it: now
as Christ does discover this righteousness, so he causes the soul to close
with this righteousness, it is he by his Spirit that overcomes the heart to
rest upon this righteousness, and to look upon this righteousness as its life;
for there is a principle in the creature to seek after life in it self; man
would seek righteousness in himself; and it is a hard matter to bring the soul
off of this rotten sandy foundation; Christ only by his eternal Spirit when he
has revealed this righteousness, persuades the soul to rest upon it, and to
look upon him as its life.

2. Secondly, Again, As the life of righteousness is from Christ, so the life
of holiness is from Christ: all those gracious dispositions, and all those holy
actings that do at any time shine forth in the hearts and lives of Gods people,
they have no other foundation but Christ, the holiness of Christ: From his
fullness have all we received grace for grace; if there be the life of any grace
in the soul, it is from Jesus Christ, from the fullness of Christ: there is no
man lives the life of holiness, till Christ becomes a principle of life to him;
there is no breathings in the heart after Christ, there is no holy motion in
pursuit after Christ, till Christ first breaths upon the soul: The hour is
come, and now is, that they that are in their Graves shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live. There is no man lives the
life of holiness until such time as he hears the voice of the Son of God: there
may be Carcasses of grace, outsides of grace, and there may be Carcasses of
duties and performances, but no living graces, there are no living performances
until such time as Christ be a principle of life unto the soul; the beginning
of the life of holiness, and so the increase of the life of holiness is from
Christ: I came that you might have life, and that you might have it more
abundantly; Christ decreed that you might have life, and that you might have
abundance of life, that you might be filled with the Spirit of Christ, that you
might have abundance of the life of Christ, that his people might be ready in
his strength to every good word and work; this was the end of Christ's coming
that they might have life more abundantly; he is the life of holiness. But
again,

3. Thirdly, Christ is the Life of Consolation unto his people: He is the life
of all their comforts, and the comforts that Christ gives they are living
comforts: my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you;
for no man shall take away your peace, the world shall not take it away, my
Spirit shall be an everlasting living principle of consolation in you, which
shall not be taken away: Christ is the life of all a Christians comforts, he is
the life of friends, the life of all refreshments that a Christian has, and
they are all dead to him when Christ does not shine through them, he is the
life of comforts, and the life of Ordinances; there is no life, there is no
refreshment, if Christ be not in them; if the soul meets not with Christ in
Ordinances, they are but dead Ordinances, truly Christ is the life of all. He
is also,

4. Fourthly, The Life of Glory, Christ is the life of glory to his people: It
is he that has purchased glory for them by his blood, it is he that has made
the way plain, it is he that has made a new way to glory, when the old way was
shut: you read in Heb. 10. 19, 20. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he
has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh: A new and
living way to God, a new and living way to the bosom of the Father, it is
Christ that is this living way: For he lives for ever to make Intercession for
them that come to God by him: He it is that removes all the blocks out of the
way of his people to glory, that helps them over all rubs they meet with, it is
he that has born down all oppositions, when he traveled in the greatness of
his strength, he has set Heaven door open to his people, he has removed the
Cherubims that kept the way with a flaming sword, and kept the Tree of Life,
yea, Christ is the subject matter of their Glory; it is the presence of Christ
that makes Heaven to be Heaven, it is the glory of Heaven to know God in
Christ, and it is the glory of Heaven to enjoy God in Christ, Joh. 17. 3. And
this is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent: Thus you see how Christ is the life of Believers, what life he is to
them; he is the life of righteousness, the life of holiness, and the life of
their comforts; yea, and he is the life of Glory. And it will appear that
Christ is the life of the believing soul, if you consider,

1. First, That there is none lives but Christ, He has life in himself; as the
Father has life in himself, so it is given to the Son to have in himself:
There is none lives but God: and therefore when God will confirm a thing, he
swears by his life; you have often that Oath, As I live, says the Lord; As I
live, says the Lord: there is none can say, I live, but only God, he that is
Jehovah, that has life in himself. Now therefore, if any creature have life,
if there be any spark of life in any soul, it must be from this life in Christ,
there is no principle of spiritual life in a soul, but it must be from Christ,
if there be any life, it is from the life of Christ, from the Resurrection of
Christ, and from the discoveries of Christ.

2. Secondly, It was the end of Christ's coming in the flesh, That he might give
life to his people, as you heard before, I came, says Christ, that you might
have life; Christ came in the flesh for this end, he had nor lived in this
world, if it had not been to give life to his people, it was the end of his
life, and so it was the end of his death also; he tells us in Joh. 6. 51. If
any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the Bread which I will
give, is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world; I will give my
flesh, my body to be crucified, that so my death may be the life of the world;
and it was the end of Christ's living again, it was the end of his rising again,
that he might give life to his people, Joh. 14 19. Because I live, says he, ye
shall live also; my life is the cause of your living, I live for this end, and
arose for this end, I am he that was dead and am alive, and live for ever, and
because I live, ye shall live also.

Quest. But you will say, When may it be said that Christ is the Life of any
soul?

Answ. 1. First of all, When the soul prizes Communion with Christ as life: And
mark all the way, so much as the life of Christ is in any soul, so far will
these effects and operations of life be found in him; Christ is life, when
communion with Christ is prized as life; when the soul shall prefer communion
with Christ above all other comforts whatsoever, when he seeks after it as
life, and when he has found it he prizes it as life, and is as fearful to lose
it as he is to part with his life; and he cannot be satisfied without it,
though he enjoies never so much of the world, though he has never so many
friends, and they shine upon him, and they speak comfortably to him, yet if
Christ speak not, it does not satisfy: though he has never so good trading in
the world, and prosper in his Estate, yet if he has not trading with Christ,
if he has not his mercies come in through Christ, he looks upon himself as a
loser; so far as the life of Christ prevails with a soul, so far will the soul
prize communion with Christ. Again,

2. Secondly, When the life of Christ is in a soul, the Soul does judge of it
self, not by what it is in it self, but by what it is in Christ, by what it is
in another; the life of Christ was Paul, and how did Paul judge of himself, by
what? By what he was in Christ, and by what Christ was in him, and to him; I
live, says he, and yet not I, but Christ lives in me, in Gal. 2. 20. how does
he judge of his life, not by any principle of self that was in him, but by
Christ that was in him, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; Surely,
shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45. 24. When
he shall see that he has no righteousness in himself, no strength in himself,
he shall not judge of his present state or future happiness by what
righteousness, or what strength he has in himself, but by what Christ has
promised him, he shall judge by the Word of the Lord, and by what life of
Christ is made over to him; and he shall say, Surely, I have righteousness and
strength, I have all in another, at that time when I have nothing but vileness
and deadness in my self; so that the soul judges of it self and its condition,
not according to what it finds in it self, but according to what the Lord has
promised to be unto him. Again,

3. Thirdly, Where Christ is the life of a soul, there is Christ the principle
of all holy actings in that soul: The soul when ever it sets upon any duty, or
upon any holy work, presently it looks up for the power and spirit of Christ,
it gives up it self to be acted by Christ, to be carried on by the spirit of
Christ; Christ opens the sails of the soul to the gales of the spirit, for it
knows that if the spirit of Christ do not breath, the soul is calmed, it can do
nothing, it desires that Christ may have the glory of all that it does, that
Christ may be the principle of all its workings for God; all the fruit that a
gracious heart brings forth to God, it desires that Christ may have the honor
of it; and therefore it bears as it were upon Christ's knee, as the women of old
took their Handmaids when they were barren, and they bare upon their knees,
and the Children were called theirs, not the Handmaids: And truly so the
beliving soul always bears and brings forth fruit upon the knee of Christ, and
it calls them all the Offspring of Christ; whatsoever it does for God, whatever
it brings forth to God, it looks upon it as the fruit of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ; it desires that Christ may have the name, that Christ may have the
glory of it, that Christ may be continually lifted up in all that it does: and
therefore when it is assisted to do for God, or to suffer for God, it does not
reflect upon it self, but upon Christ; these are the breathings of the spirit
of Christ, and this is the strength that comes from Christ: and therefore it is
said of David, Lord what am I? when he was enabled to offer willingly, Lord
what am I, and what are my people, that we should offer in this wise? When ever
it meets with any assistance, it says, Lord what am I, that I should do any
thing for God? It looks upon all as coming from Christ, and desires that Christ
may have the glory of all; and so far as the life of Christ prevails upon the
soul, so far the soul is acted by the spirit of Christ. But again,

4. Fourthly, Where Christ is the life of the soul, the Soul desires that
Christ may be magnified, whether by death or by life; so it was with the
Apostle, This is all my care, says he, that Christ may be magnified, take you
no care for me, for Christ shall be magnified, and I will rejoice in it,
Whether I live or die, Christ shall be magnified in my body: He desires that
Christ may be magnified in his life, a gracious heart does not desire to live
to satisfy its own lust, it would not live long in the world to enjoy the
pleasure of the world; no, if it lives, it desires to live that Christ may be
magnified, and therefore if I may be useful, if I may be serviceable to do good
in any place or relation the Lord is pleased to cast me in, I am content to
live: and so for death, he desires that Christ may be magnified there too, a
gracious heart don't desire death to be rid of the troubles of life, to be
freed from those troubles and vexations that it meets withal in the world,
that is: no good desire, but if it desires death, it desires that Christ may be
magnified, that the Lord may be magnified in my death, that Christ may be
magnified, that I may get nigher Christ, that I may not dishonor Christ, that
that corruption may be subdued, which is a grief to the spirit of Christ, that
I may magnify Christ eternally without ceasing: that Christ may be magnified,
this is the desire of a gracious heart; and so far as the life of Christ does
prevail in any soul, so far does that soul live unto Christ, and is willing to
die for Christ, and cares not what becomes of it, so the Lord, and his son
Christ may be exalted. Again,

5. Fifthly, When the life of Christ is in a soul, It makes a man to die; to
die to sin, and to die to the world, and to die to self. Where the life of
Christ comes in, it makes the soul to die to sin; that still as the life of
Christ prevails in the soul, so sin dies in the soul: Knowing this that our old
man is crucified with Christ; the old man is Crucified with Christ, and the
life of Christ will be the death of the old man: He makes a man to die to sin*
where the life of Christ is in a soul, the heart is dead to sin, it carries to
sin, as to a dead man, it is cold at the very heart, no desire to satisfy the
lusts of the flesh, but to live unto Christ; it makes the soul desirous to cast
out all those lusts which it has rejoiced in, and been the very life of the
soul before Christ came. See what is said in the Prophecy of the Prophet
Hosea, Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols?
And so shall the soul say, where the life of Christ prevails, What have I to do
any more with Idols? It looks upon all base lusts as so many dead Carcasses,
they lie in his House and he knows not how to be rid of them, but the life of
Christ is in him, and what has the living to do with the dead? What have I any
more to do with dead Carcasses? O Lord bury them, bury them out of my sight;
the life of Christ will dead the heart to sin.

2. Secondly, Again, This life of Christ will deaden the heart to the world;
see what the Apostle says in the Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 6. 14. God
forbid that I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world: The world
looks upon me as dead, and I look upon the world as dead; the world does not at
all esteem of a gracious man, and a gracious heart does esteem the world as
little, the vanities of the world as little; the world looks upon me, and I
look upon the world as dead: Paul looked upon it as dead, and therefore Paul was
willing to part with it, in Phil. 4. 12, 13. men are willing to part with their
dead friends, and Paul was willing to part with the world, it was dead to him;
I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound; I know how to want, if God
calls for it; I know how to spare, and I am content to be without it; thus does
the life of Christ make the heart dead to the world, deadens the affections,
and makes a man to use the world as if he used it not.

3. Again, Thirdly and lastly, The life of Christ does make a man to die to
self: it makes a man to die to self-principles, and self ends, and
self-seeking, to self-righteousness and self-strength, it makes a man die to
all these; where the life of Christ prevails, the creature is nothing, self is
nothing, it makes a man debase himself, and lie low at the footstool of the
Lord, it makes him lie low in a way of humiliation: Paul was less than the
least of all Saints, so he calls himself; Less than the least of all Saints;
and he was the greatest of sinners, so he calls himself; the life of Christ
made him lie low, he had no life in himself. I will speak no more, says Job, I
abhor my self in dust and ashes; let God have all for the future, it desires to
exalt him, to admire that which he cannot find out: I desire to lie at his
footstool, and to exalt his name; it makes a man lie low in a way of
submission to God as well as in a way of humiliation, the life of Christ makes
the heart submissive to Christ, self is nothing, self is laid aside, content
that God should rule, that the creature should be disposed by him, makes him
willing to drink of every cup that his father puts into his hand, to stoop down
to every yoke, and every burden that the Lord will put upon his neck, and lay
upon his shoulder, it makes a soul submissive unto Christ, submissive to the
Will of God in all things.

And then the life of Christ it empties of Self, for it makes a man to
condescend to those of low degree; though never so high, yet if the life of
Christ be in them, it makes them to look down unto the lowest degree, and the
life of Christ in the meanest and lowest Christian is very high and honorable
in his esteem: and as the life of Christ does prevail in any heart, so there
will be all these operations, as the life of Christ does increase, so the life
of sin does decrease, and self will decrease, and the soul is content with it,
and it rejoices abundantly that it should be so; it says of it self as John
Baptist did, when they told him that all men ran after Christ, and he would
have no Followers, I am glad of it, says he, that he may increase though I
decrease; and truly where the life of Christ is in a soul, it will break forth
into these Expressions, Let Christ be all, let me be nothing, let me lie low at
his footstool, let me not be thought of when that day of Christ's Exaltation
shall be, let him be exalted in the riches of his grace which he has
manifested unto poor creatures. And thus you see what the life of Christ is in
a soul, so far as the life of Christ is in the heart, so far will there be
special operations in the soul toward Christ again. But so much for this time.

SERMON II.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
JEsus Christ is the Life of every Believer; that is the Point in hand: He is
the life of righteousness; he it is that gave life unto all those that were
dead, dead under the Law, though reprieved for a time. He is also the life of
Holiness to his people, the beginnings of all grace, and the increase of all
grace is from Christ; there are shadows and carcasses of grace, but there is no
life until such time as Christ be found in the soul. He is also the life of all
the Believers Comforts, they are no comforts till Christ be in them, the best
of his comforts, even the very Ordinances of God are but a dead letter if the
Spirit of Christ be not in them, it is he that makes them to be life, to come
with power and efficacy. He is also the life of Glory to a Believer. He has
purchased Glory, he has made the way plain, a new and living way, he has set
the door wide open, it is he that takes all rubs out of the way: It Is he that is
the very Subject matter of Glory; for it is the presence of Jesus Christ in
Heaven that is the greatest glory and comfort of Heaven. I showed how it may be
known that Christ is the life of Believers in five Particulars.

6. A Sixth Particular is, Where the life of Christ is in any soul, it makes
that soul in some measure conformable to the life of Christ; so far as the life
of Christ does prevail in a soul, so far it makes the soul conformable to that
life of Christ which he lived when he was upon earth, it makes the soul
desirous and willing to live to God: it looks upon it as the great work and
great end of Christ's coming, to lift up his Fathers Name, to make God glorious
before the eyes of the sons of men, that is the work that his servants have to
do for him whilst they are here upon earth. But more particularly,

1. First, If you look upon the life, you shall find that the life of Christ is
an active life, it is said of him, That he went up and down doing good; he was
never well but when he was doing good; he took opportunities, and he sought
opportunities, he sought occasions of doing good to the bodies of men, and to
the souls of men, I have meat to eat that you know not of; it is my meat to do
the will of my Father; he was never well but when he was doing something by
which he might glorify God and edify in love.

2. Again, Secondly, If you look upon the life of Christ, it was not only an
active life, but it was a passive submissive life, it was a self-denying life.
He left all his glory in Heaven when he came to live here upon earth, that he
might live and die for the good of the sons of men; though he was the son of
the most high God, yet he was pleased to condescend to the lowest of men, he
emptied himself and became of no reputation, he was in the form of man, but yet
came in the form of a servant, he emptied himself and became of no reputation,
that so he might glorify his Father; I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do; it was a self-denying work. Again,

3. Thirdly, It was a holy gracious life; he conversed with sinners, but he was
the Lamb of God without spot; he was numbered amongst the Transgressors, but
there was no guile found in his mouth, he was gracious in the midst of a sinful
world, and therefore the Spouse styles and resembles him to the Apple Tree in
the midst of the Trees in the Forest, in Cant. 2. 3. he was full of sweet
gracious fruit, even then when he was in the Forest, when he was compassed
about with wild Trees, as Crab-trees, Pricklingthorns, Prickling-brambles, even
so was the Lord Jesus amongst such: But the Lord was found in integrity, he was
not levened with corruption, though he conversed with sinners, yet he was no
sinner, the life of Christ was a gracious life, even then when he was in the
midst of sinners. But again,

4. Fourthly, The life of Christ was full of patience, and full of meekness; he
was very admirable in that patience and meekness which he exercised and
expressed in his whole life; he was not easily provoked, for he endured alone
all the contradictions of sinners, and he was dumb even before the shearer, he
opened not his mouth; he did not render evil for evil, He came to his own, and
his own received him not; What a provocation was there that his own should not
receive him? And Christ could not easily be provoked, he bare with that people,
and though they would not receive him, yet he spent his whole Ministry among
them, and he sent forth his Disciples to pluck them in if possible, and gives
them a charge that they should go to none else; in Matthew. 10. 5. Go not into
the way of the Gentiles, and into the City of the Samaritans enter ye not, but
rather go unto the lost Sheep of the house of Israel: Though they sought to
destroy him, yet he endeavors to save them, he bears with them; But rather go
to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel: What forbearance was there in him! In
their ignorance he opened unto them those things which he spoke in Parables to
the world; what abundance of patience and meekness did he show to Thomas,
notwithstanding all that unbelief? Says he, (in his unbelief) I will not
believe, says he, except it be so and so, except I put my hand into the hole
of his side; and yet this did not provoke the Lord Jesus Christ to leave him,
but he condescends to his weakness, heals his weakness, and plucks him out of
that mire in which he stuck: And if you look upon his carriage toward his
enemies, and see what a spirit of meekness there was in Christ, even toward
his enemies; the Samaritans in one place, would not receive him; and see the
Disciples they were for fire from Heaven to consume them, in Luke 9. 53, 54.
And he sent Messengers before his face, and they went and entered into a
Village of the Samaritans to make ready for him, and they did not receive him,
etc. And when his Disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord will thou,
that we command Fire to come down from Heaven, and consume them, even as Elias
did? You think it is the spirit of Elias, but you are deceived, You know not
your own hearts; there is a great deal of the wild Fire of revenge in this
your motion, it is not well grounded zeal for God, therefore Christ says, the
son of man came not to destroy but to save them: and you know when they came to
take him, in Luke 22. 50, 51. They came with Swords and Staves against him: and
one of them smote the servant of the High Priest, and cut off his right ear.
And Jesus answered and said, Suffer thus far, and he touched his ear and healed
him. But see how Christ bare not only with his Disciples, but even with his
very enemies. But again,

5. Fifthly, You shall find that Christ in his life was exceeding
compassionate, he was not only meek and patient, but he was exceeding
compassionate: Oh! how often did the bowels of Christ yearn toward poor
creatures? He never saw an object of pity, but his heart was drawn out to
relieve, in Matthew. 9. 36, 37. But when he saw the multitude, he was moved with
compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad as Sheep
without a Shepherd: The very bowels of Christ were moved, he was filled with
compassion toward their souls, nay, he was filled with compassion to the very
bodies of men, in Matthew. 14. 14, 15, 16. he takes care that they should not be
sent away fasting, but makes provision for them, Let them cat lest they should
faint in the way. When he beheld a poor obstinate sinner, his heart was drawn
out in pity: the woman of Samaria, when she came first, she was a very jolly
sinner, she laughed, but Christ pitied her, his bowels were toward her, and
would not give her over till he made her to know that he was the true Messiah
the Savior of the World. When he saw a desolate soul, his bowels were drawn
forth with abundance of tenderness and compassion; as in that woman that was
accused, those that did there present her unto Christ laid a heavy accusation
upon her, in Joh. 8. 10. Jesus lifted up himself, and said unto the woman,
where are those thine accusers? The poor creature sat trembling at the feet of
Christ, and she expected a fearful sentence of condemnation, but the bowels of
Christ were drawn forth to pity and compassion: Is there no man accuses thee?
What are they all gone that accuse thee? Well, Neither do I accuse thee, go thy
way and sin no more. Now you see what the life of Christ was; now I say, where
the life of Christ is in any soul, it makes that soul some way answerable to
the life of Christ in these particulars. It is true, the best of Saints come
short, infinitely short of that which is their duty; but yet I say withal, that
so far as the life of Christ prevails in his people, so far does the life of
Christ produce these operations, and it will bewail it self for its unlikeness
to Christ in these particulars.

Object. But you will say, If the life of Christ produce these operations,
where shall we find the life of Christ? If we look upon our selves we shall see
sin, and if we look upon other Christians, where ever we look, there is so
little of this to be found, that it is hard to say the life of Christ is in
them.

Answ. 1. To this I answer, First of all, I do confess that Christians do
mightily come short of that which is their duty, and therefore may take up a
sad complaint and lamentation, they may lament over their own hearts, and
lament over one another, and bewail their case; but yet let not them be
disquiet, for I shall show you, that the life of Christ may be in a soul, that
is not so conspicuous in all these particulars. In way of answer, if you say
that this is the life of Christ, the life of Christ is scarce to be sound in
any man in the world.

1. First of all, Let me tell you, the life of Christ is a hidden life. It is
hid from themselves that it is not discerned; and as it is hid from themselves,
so it is hid from others, that they cannot see the life of Christ in them; and
especially it is hid from the men of the world, from a carnal man: there is the
life of Christ, and the world cannot see it, the world cannot see the inside
of a Christian, he sees the outside, but he cannot see the inside, The Kings
Daughters are all glorious within: There are special times in which the life of
Christ is hid in a Believer, that there may be life, though it may be others
may not discern this life. As,

1. First of all, When God begins his work in a soul, the work of the Lord goes
on gradually in the heart, step after step. You say Rome was not built in a
day; even so the new Jerusalem, the beginnings of the life of Christ in a
Christian, they are very small, sometimes they are scarce discerned; and
therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a grain of Mustard seed, which
is the least of all seeds; Ay, but afterward it springs up (and you must not
judge of the beginnings but of the latter end) the lattter end will be
glorious: it is with a young Christian as it is with an Infant in the womb,
when it begins first to live there is but a little, and but a very weak motion,
that it can scarce be discerned whether it move or no, so is the life of
Christ: it is like the tender plants and herbs that put forth in the spring,
they are hardly discerned, hardly discerned from weeds, though you look upon
them, though you pluck them, though you smell them, yet when they first put
forth they do so smell of the earth, smell of the soil, as you cannot discern
them: why, truly, so it is with the work of God upon the spirits of his people;
look upon young Beginners, it is hard to be discerned, they smell so much of the
soil, so much of corrupt nature that is not yet subdued, that it is hardly
discerned, but yet there is the life of Christ in them. And so

2. Secondly, Again, In a time of temptation, in them (in whom the life of
Christ is hid) it is hardly discerned; and you must not judge of a Christian in
that time; I say, in time of temptation, for it is a time of Winter; now you
know in time of Winter the life of the Tree is not discerned, there is no
appearance of life in the Tree, but yet without doubt, there is life, there is
life in the Tree, the life is still in the root, and it will put forth. Again,

3. Thirdly, A time of temptation is a time of swoonding: it is as a man in a
swoond, the operation of life ceases, it is out of view, ye can hardly discern
that there is life, when a man is in a swoond, if you look upon him you see no
symptoms of life, his countenance is changed, his lips are pale, death sits
upon him; Ay, but let a skilful Physician come, and he shall feel some motion
of the pulse, or some breathings of the nostrils, though it be very weak, that
it will scarce move a Feather, yet there is some hope: why so take a poor soul
that is under temptation, he is as in a swoond, you say there is no life in
him, but yet let Christ the Physician come, and he will discern the pulse, and
he will discern some motion, some movings of spirit, some breathings of heart,
though it be not obvious to the view of others. Thus you see that the life of
Christ is a hidden life, and therefore don't you say that there is not the life
of Christ in such and such as profess themselves to be Christians, because you
see not those operations, it may be Springtime, or it may be Wintertime with
them, or it may be a time of swoonding; well, notwithstanding there is life,
though thou discern'st it not.

2. But again, Secondly, to give another Answer, If this be the life of Christ,
if the life of Christ does produce such operation in the soul, when shall we
find life?

Take this Answer, That though the* life of Christ does produce such operations
in the soul where it is* yet the life of Christ is communicative to every one
according to the place that every member is set in; you know the soul being in
the body, does inform every part of the body, and it grows, but yet every
member does not grow alike, and one member has more strength than another.
Will you say, that the soul is not in the finger, because the finger has not
so much strength as the arm? Will you say, the soul is not in the foot, because
it has not the strength of the leg? Why thus, Brethren, it is with the body of
Christ, all have not the same parts, and therefore all have not the same
strength; though the same spirit of life that was in Jesus Christ does inform
the meanest of his members, though it does not grow so big and so strong as in
other members, yet the Lord has provided (by this dispensation) to make up a
sweet harmony in this body, that every member shall have its strength, and
every member shall have its proportion, its growth and increase, according to
the place it is set in: that it shall not be shrunk up in the body, nor extended
above what is meet, but every member in the body of Christ shall have its
strength, and its growth in proportion. But then,

3. Again, Thirdly, If you say that the life of Christ is such, where shall we
find the life of Christ in any if it works so?

I Answer, The life of Christ does not work eminently in every operation that
is put forth in every Saint, but one Saint excels in one particular, and
another in another, and herein is abundance of the wisdom of God; I say, the
life of Christ runs in several veins; in one Christian it is more eminent in
the vein or chanel of Faith, in another Christian there is the same life in the
vein or chanel of humiliation, and selfdenial; and in another it runs in the
vein of prudence, holy wisdom and activity, so that you cannot say, there is
not the life of Christ in such and such because you don't see an eminency in
some particulars which it may be you fasten upon; why, though the life of
Christ be not eminent in that, it runs in another; in such a vein as is (as it
were) under ground, as is not obvious to thy eye, which thou see not; nor
take no notice of.

Quest. But you will say, Why is not every grace in its operation eminent, in
every Saint, and in every Believer?

Answ. I Answer, First, Because the Lord will maintain in this way, a sweet
communion with his Saints: the Lord intends to maintain sweet communion with
his Saints, he therefore gives out to one, one grace more eminent, and to
another, another, that so the eye may not say to the head, I have no need of
thee, nor the hand to the foot say, I have no need of thee: So that every
member shall have its proportion, but if you look upon the best Saints, you will
see how they come short of the life of Christ, how defective they are in this
and that particular; what need then have we to live upon imputed righteousness?
And what need have we to keep in a continual dependence upon Christ, that so he
may supply all our wants out of his fullness?

2. Secondly, Again, The Lord does withold his hand in abundance of wisdom
and goodness: if he should give too much, he knows what poor weak creatures we
are, and what poor weak vessels we are, and if he should pour in too much, he
knows we were not able to bear it; If you pour new Wine into old Bottles, the
Bottle will break; and the Lord considers that we are old Bottles, and his new
Wine would break our old Bottles, we are not able to contain much, if the Lord
should give out much of himself, the visions of the Lord would break these old
Bottles that we were not able to bear up. Christ tenders his people in this,
that when they come to Heaven, he will fill them full; then there is no fear of
breaking their old bottles, he will fill them to the brim, and no fear of
breaking: but now there is fear of the best of Saints; Paul had great raptures,
and was exalted above measure, therefore it is to be marked, he had a check; but
the life of Christ, and the strength of Christ does not thus appear in eminency
in every Saint.

Object. But some poor soul will say, Whatsoever there is in others, I will not
judge others, the life of Christ may be in them, and I am persuaded the life of
Christ is in such and such; I see the very Image of Christ in them, and these
operations of life spoken of, I discern the life of Christ in others: But alas,
I see nothing but deadness in my own soul, nothing but a body of sin and death;
I say it is the burden of my soul every day I rise, O miserable man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death, I fear the life of Christ
is not in me?

Answ. Is not the life of Christ in you, Whence then are those complaints that
thou make? Did you ever hear a dead man complain, did you ever hear him cry
out of his burden? Surely there is some life of Christ, or else whence are
these complaints* of that body of sin, that body of death which is more heavy
to the soul than the burden of the Mountains? If the life of Christ be not in
thee, whence are those desires? Thou breathest after Christ, ay, with all thy
soul, thou could even expire, that the life of Christ might be more manifest,
more evident in thee; why whence are those desires? Did you ever know a dead
man breath? or the Pulse of a dead man beat? Surely these motions of the soul
after Christ, these breathings of the heart after Christ do testify there is
something of the life of Christ; but if thou can not find the life of Christ,
and see nothing but deadness* yet look toward him as a living Savior, let
thine eye be toward him as one that is set up to give life; he is a Tree of
life for this end that is in the midst of the Garden, and it is the Will of the
Father that thou should come to Christ: thou that art sensible that there is
nothing but deadness in thee; come to Christ for life. Christ complains that
you will not come to me, that I may give you life; you that complain of your
deadness, give not Christ cause to complain that you will not come to him that
he may give you life; therefore seeing the way of the Tree of life is not shut
up, but it is set open, it is left open, there is no Cherubim set before thee,
but come and eat, eat of the Tree of life and live; Christ presents himself to
thy soul, that thou might put forth thy hand and eat of the Tree of Life,
and though thou say thou have not the life of Christ, yet look up to Christ
that so thy soul may have life: and know for thy encouragement, that the time
is coming, and is at hand, that more of the life of Christ shall be given out
than ever it was unto the Saints; I say, it shall be as life from the dead when
the Jews shall come in again, there shall be a new Resurrection* the people of
God shall differ most exceedingly from what they were before; the time is
hastening, and abundance of the life of Christ shall be communicated unto every
member of Jesus Christ, and all the Saints, they shall die more to sin, die
more to the world, and die more unto self, and shall live more unto God, and
lift up the Son of God, for the day of the Lord is high, and shall be lifted
up, for in that day the Lord alone shall be exalted. But so much for this time.

SERMON III.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
CHrist is the life of every Believer: I showed you how the life of Christ
works in every soul where it is, I come to the Application.

Use 1. First of all, Let it be a word of Examination. Know it is not enough to
have a name to live if Christ be not the principle of life; it is possible (as I
have showed you heretofore) that the children of the Kingdom may be cast out
into utter darkness, to have a name and only a name to live, it will do men
little good: therefore I beseech you, examine whether the life of Christ be in
you or no; whence came your life first? What way came into your oul that life
which you have? Did it come by hearing the voice of Christ? That life which is
from Christ comes into the soul by hearing the voice of Christ, in Joh. 5. 25.
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live: There is no man that lives, but he shall
hear the voice of the Son of God; can you say that the life that was in you, it
was thus brought into your souls* it was by the voice of the Son of God, it was
Christ spoke, Christ spoke in your souls, and you were revived; it was Christ
in a Promise, or Christ in an Ordinance, or Christ in the breathings of his
spirit; Ay, you know it was Christ that spoke, for you were so sensibly, deeply
sunk in unbelief, you were so dead, that if an Angel from Heaven should have
sounded a Trumpet, you could not have heard, nor have believed the Gospel. Ay,
you know it was the voice of Christ, for you heard the same word many a time,
the same promise was given in; you read it, you heard it, it was urged upon
you, and yet you found no life in it, but when Christ spoke, then your spirit
was revived. Nay, you are persuaded it was the voice of Christ, for it was at
such a time when you were farthest off from light, then was your spirit
revived; when your condition was, those dead and dry bones which the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks of in Ezekiel. 37. you were furthest from life, when not only the
flesh was consumed, but the bones were dry, scattered and consumed, even in
such a spiritual sense were you broken, and when the Word of Christ came to
your soul you were revived from this Word of the Lord, and therefore certainly
it was Christ that spoke, I cannot but assent unto it: the life of Christ that
thus comes in by the voice of the Son of God, it is Christ in the soul.

2. Secondly, Again, Did not this life come in in a way of dying? I say, did it
not come in in a way of dying? For so is the life of Christ; where the life of
Christ is, it kills the creature, it strikes him stark dead, the creature is
nothing, it dies to self, it dies to his own righteousness, it dies to his own
strength, to his own wisdom, have you thus found it? Thus it was with Christ,
the life that he purchased for his people, he purchased it by his death, it was
made evident in a way of dying: when he arose from the Grave, then it was
evident, and he is declared with power that he was the Son of God; life came in
by death in a way of dying: and truly, thus it is with a soul where the life of
Christ is, when Christ comes the soul dies, it says as Christ said, when he
was ready to give up the Ghost, in Luke 23. 46. Father into thy hands I commend
my Spirit; so that soul where the life of Christ comes in, expires into God,
the soul expires into God, into the hands of God, the creature becomes nothing,
it desires to be nothing, nothing in it self, content that the creature should
be dead, looked upon as dead, that God alone should be exalted, that he should
be all unto it, and that it should be all in all unto him; thus the life of
Christ, where it comes into the soul in this way.

3. Thirdly, But again, Examine how your life is maintained; if the life of
Christ be in you, How is that life of Crist in you, that spiritual life
maintained? the life that is from Christ is maintained by Christ, it came in at
first by the voice of the Son of God, and so it is maintained by the voice of
God, and every time that Christ speaks, it is further into life, every time that
Christ speaks in a promise, every time that Christ speaks in an Ordinance, it
runs further into life, and every day it is dying, the life of Christ is
increasing, and triumphs in the victory, by killing and slaying the creature to
it self in its own apprehension, and it is maintained by the voice of Christ, or
by a sight of Christ, so that where this life of Christ is, the soul in all its
deadness runs to Christ; when it wants life at any time, it looks to Christ for
it, it runs to Christ for this life, Lord maintain this life. A soul has its
life from the Father originally, instrumentally from God, and it depends upon
the Father for life, and where the soul is begotten by God, its life being in
Christ, it is maintained by Christ, and it never lives so well as when it sees
most of Christ, it is a sight of the glory and beauty of Christ, of the grace of
Christ, and love of Christ that does mightily affect the heart, and raise the
spirits of the soul, it is mightily stirred up, the operations of the soul are
stirred up, and it looks upon Christ and it is revived, it looks upon Christ and
is strengthened, and is beholding the glory and strength of Christ, is most
ready to act for Christ, and to work for Christ, whenas the soul has much of
Christ in his eye. Well, is your life thus maintained? certainly this is the
life of Christ.

Use 2. But if I would speak in a way of discovery unto poor creatures that are
without the life of Christ: It will be an easy Test unto the discovery of many
that they are without the life of Christ.

How many poor creatures in the world death sits on their sore-heads, upon
their faces! Christ is not their life, but the world is their life, and their
lusts is their life, and the creature is their life, for they live upon these,
the life of many a poor soul is bound up in these, his life is bound up in the
world, and bound up in his lusts, and if the world be taken from him, or his
lusts taken from him, he cries out, O he is undone, what has he more? And what
will God do him good, or Christ do him good, or communion with the spirit do
him good? his lusts are his life, and his life is taken away when he is robbed
of his lusts. When a man does live to the satisfaction of his lusts, and makes
them the whole end of his living, not to lift up God and Christ, but to live to
the satisfaction of the lusts of his heart, I say, here it is an easy matter
to say without breach of the law of love, the Lord be merciful to such poor
creatures, for the life of Christ is not in them, they lay rotting in their
Graves of sin, their throat is an open Sepulcher, there is no appearance of the
life of Christ in such. And therefore I shall desire the Lord would convince
such poor creatures, how miserable their condition is without the life of
Christ: they are like so many dead Carcasses, and what a sad object is that, to
look upon so many men as dead carcasses though they be never so lively, never
so full of strength, activity, and of beauty here before the eye of the World,
yet in relation to the invisible World, which is many thousand times more
considerable, such men are as dead carcasses, I say, in the eye of God and of
his Angels, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the invisible World, such poor
creatures are as dead carcasses, as dreadful an object to them, as a walking
Ghost is to you: a carcass that lies rotting in the Grave where there is
nothing but putrefaction, it is a noysom, an offensive object, every one turns
away from it; and truly every one is such, who is a sinner, an obstinate
sinner, the Lord cannot away with them, that if they continue in trespasses and
sins, being dead in sins and trespasses, the Lord will bury them out of his
sight, there wants nothing but a burying them out of the sight of God to make
their misery complete; rejection from the presence of God, to be cast out of
the sight of God, and his presence for ever, never to behold his face in glory,
and communion with him, it shall be the completion of the misery of such poor
wretches: And therefore I shall desire you in the fear of God to look after the
life of Christ; O that the Lord would persuade you to look after the life of
Christ, He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has not
life; Look after Christ for life; O that you would consider the excellency of
the life of Christ, is it not worth the seeking after? Shall I set it out to
you, by comparing the life of Christ with natural life, which is accounted most
excellent in this lower world, and you shall see how infinitely excellent the
life of Christ is? What is the most excellent thing in the World, the best
thing in nature? Why life, natural life is the best thing in nature; Skin for
skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life: the least worm is
more excellent than the Sun in that respect, because it has life, life is most
excellent in its nature: But now compare the life of nature with the life of
Christ, and you shall see how far it goes beyond it, and therefore infinitely
more desirable than the life of nature. For,

1. First of all, The life of Nature is a vain life, a life full of vanity: Eve
was convinced thereof by that time she brought forth a second Son, she called
his name Abel, that is vanity; she now knew that was the condition and case of
the sons and daughters of fallen man, of all she brought forth, with all the
world that followed her, their lives shall be vanity, Man walks in a vain
shadow, in a vain show, Psalm. 39. 5, 6. Surely every man walks in a vain show,
surely they are disquieted in vain: the life of Nature is full of vanity, it
appears in that it satisfies not; it is empty and vain, for it proves many
times a burden, even vanity: life it self, which is the most excellent thing in
nature, it proves a burden if you declare the vanity of it: and so many times
it is so to the wicked, and to the Godly. Life is a burden to the wicked: there
is a principle in nature in a man to live, to desire to live, to live always,
and yet man many times is weary to live; the wicked man would live long, and
yet his life is a burden, he would live longer, he never dies willingly, though
sometimes he be the instrument of his own destruction, he dies not willingly;
It is said of the wicked man, That be shall not live out half his days; Why,
though they may live longer than the righteous, though he live a hundred years,
yet he may not live out half his days, he desires to live long, and yet life
is a burden to him, here is a vanity: especially when the Lord shall break in
upon his soul with apprehensions of wrath, and when he meets with vexations and
disquietments from the world, many times he speaks against his life, and acts
against his life, which is a great sin: here is a vanity.

Nay, natural life is a burden many times to Gods own people; you may see how
it comes short of the life of Christ, though it is the most excellent thing in
nature, yet it is a burden to the Saints; the corruption that is within their
own hearts, which does follow them all the time of life, makes life a burden: O
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death?
The workings of corruption have made his very life a burden to him, who shall
deliver him from it? And so through the temptation of Satan the life is made
burdensome, through the evil of the times, through the dishonor that is
brought to God in the world, whilst they look upon it their life is made a
burden to them; Lot's righteous soul was vexed, his life was a burden to him:
though they dare not think against their lives, and act against their lives,
yet many times life is a burden to Gods own people, not but that they are
willing to bear their burden whilst God is pleased to let them live here. But
now,

Turn your eye to Christ's life, and you shall see the life of Christ is full of
satisfaction, full of contentment: It Is full of satisfaction, you don't say of
that as sometimes Job said of his life, you may see in Job 7. 15, 16. he was
under sore temptation, and in great affliction, I loath it, I would not live
always; why Job never said so of the life of Christ, he never said of that, I
loath it, I would not live always; No, on the contrary, a gracious heart says
thus, I love it, I delight in it, I would live always, let me live to Eternity,
to lift up the name of God, to behold his Glory, to wait at his footstool, to
extol his glorious name for ever and ever; thus you see how contrary the life
of Christ is unto the life of nature, in respect of the vanity of it.

2. But again, Secondly, The life of Nature is a sinful life, and that makes it
worse than vanity; sin does accompany it all along, yea in its first rise, in
its first being, In sin was I conceived, says David. A man that has nothing
but the life of nature lives to nothing but to sin: he lives to dishonor God,
he lives to wound and to destroy himself, he lives to do hurt in the world, in
injury to others; and these are the fruits that nature brings forth: but the
life of Christ is pure and holy, it is without sin, there is no principle of
corruption in it; and therefore it never dies, it never expires, it has no
principle of corruption in it self, but it is pure as the life of God is pure.
But again,

3. Thirdly, The life of Nature is a miserable life; it is full of misery; see
how Job speaks of it, speaking of the life of Nature, he says, That man is
born to misery as the sparks fly upward, that is, Naturally: the sparks
naturally fly upward, and so there is all the portion that a man is born unto
by nature; if he has any besides his misery, it is besides his portion, he has
more than he was born to, for he was born to misery: But the life of Christ
has no sorrow in it, for he that is born again to God, is born to happiness,
he is born to joy, he is born to glory, even as the sparks fly upward; this is
the portion that he is born to, and if he comes short of this, it is accidental,
because he comes short of the life of Christ, if he comes short of this glory
and joy in the Holy Ghost, it is because he comes short of the life of Christ,
for the life of Christ shall be completed in Heaven, where it shall not be
interrupted in its actings, then there shall be nothing but peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost; there shall be then no sorrow, for all tears shall be wiped
away: this is the excellency of the life of Christ. Again,

4. Fourthly, The life of Nature is a decreasing life: it decreases as soon as
ever it comes into the world, as soon as ever a man begins to live, He comes
up, and is cut down like a flower: The Candle consumes as soon as it is
lighted: and even thus is the life of Nature; and it is like a Garment that is
eaten with the Moths; it is continually decreasing and waxing worse and worse.
There are so many worms at the root of the Tree, gnawing at the root of our
Tree, that as soon as ever we spring above ground, our natures decrease
continually: but the life of Christ is an increasing life, there is a period
beyond which a Christian shall not grow, he does not come to his height, and
then go downward, there is no period in his growth so long as he is on this
side Heaven, there is no old age in which his life decreaseth; it is true, the
operations of life may be destroyed in a Christian, but the principle of life
increases continually: and therefore the promises are made that they shall be
as Trees which bring forth fruit in old age; and that they shall grow from
strength to strength, until they come to appear before him in Sion; and thus in
the strength of Christ they shall go from strength to strength, which is far
more excellent than the life of Nature.

5. But again Fifthly, The life of nature is an uncertain life: there is no man
has any lease of life, but our times are in the Lords hand, and there is no
man living has certainty of life for a moment: It Is true, the Fool in the
Gospel makes large promises, and makes a large lease to himself of that which
was not his own, he would lease our life for years, for many years, but he
reckoned without his Landlord, and you know that that night his soul was taken
from him. Of all things in the world, life is the most uncertain thing, but the
life of Christ that Christ gives is most certain, it is a life that cannot be
taken away: it is as sure to a Christian as the life of Christ in Heaven is
sure, a Christian can no more die than Christ can die, Because I live, says
he, ye shall live also; as sure as I live, ye shall live also; as my life is
certain, so your life also is certain; for your life shall no man take from
you. Though there be many that seek to take away a Christians life, yet none
shall be able to do it. 1. The World shall not rob them of life, Be of good
comfort I have overcome the world, says Christ. 2. Sin is another enemy to the
life of Christ, but yet it shall not prevail. Sin shall not have dominion over
you, for you are not under the Law but under grace; there is the bond of the
Lords faithfulness. Again, 3. Satan is another enemy to the life of Christ, but
he shall not prevail neither, Christ has spoiled Principalities and Powers,
and has triumphed over them; for it is said, the Lord Jesus shall tread down
Satan under your feet shortly, that the life of Christ shall not be taken from
you; here is the excellency of it. Again,

6. Sixthly, The life of nature is a deceitful life, both for time and
continuance, and also for the comforts of it; it promises a great deal but
performs little or nothing: riches, and honor, and pleasures, and the rest of
the good things of natural life; it promises much but performs little: but
when the creature comes to experience, as Solomon did, why, he is deceived,
deceived in his expectation, for he finds nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit: let a man try, if he will, he shall never find so much comfort as it
promises him; but the life of Christ is no whit deceitful, it does not promise
more than it performs, there is always more found in the enjoyment of the life
of Christ than was promised, and more than the soul did ever expect; how often
does the poor soul cry out (with the Queen of Sheba) that is taken up into the
Mount and sees Christ transfigured; Do but behold a little of his glory, she
cries; behold there was no spirit left in her when she saw Solomon's house, for
she did not believe what was told to the half of what she saw; Why, so when the
life of Christ is given out to the soul, you shall find more than ever was
told; God will be more and better in the performance than he was in the
promise; and truly, the life and glory of Christ is Incomprehensible in respect
of the creature, the largest capacity and understanding, though enlightened and
sanctified, is not able to take in the least part of the glory of the life of
Christ, it is not able to comprehend the notion of it, much less the life it
self, the great discoveries of it shall be reserved for heaven, and then it
shall be found of all Saints that the life of Christ was not like the life of
man, there was no deceitfulness in it. But to say no more:

7. Seventhly, The life of Nature is a momentany life; therefore often compared
in Scripture to things that are not, or are gone in a moment; the breath, the
shadow, the wind that passes away, there is no continuance, it comes up and is
cut down: there is no continuance compared with Eternity, it is but a moment,
the longest life is but a passage, there is no stay, it is but a Bridge to go
over, it is but a Bridge to Eternity; life is but a moment, but now the life of
Christ is an eternal life, the life that Christ gives to the soul is eternal,
he that lives in Christ, and with Christ, shall live for ever, it shall never
be taken away, it shall never be blown out, but the soul that has the life of
Christ, shall live as long as Christ lives, it can no more die, than Christ can
die; now he died but once, and being risen from the dead, he can die no more,
but he lives for ever and ever; and thus is the life of Christ when ever it is
communicated to a soul, that soul can die no more, it has died when Christ
died, and therefore shall die no more, but it shall live, it shall live even to
Eternity, and to Eternity it shall lift up the name of God and Christ. You see
how excellent the life of Christ is, how far it surpasses the life of nature;
every man desires to live, and to live long, because the life of nature is
apprehended to be excellent; but you have seen what a poor life it is without
the life of Christ: it is a poor, vain, sinful, miserable, wretched, decreasing,
uncertain, deceitful, momentany life: O that that which has been spoken of the
life of Christ, might stir up all your hearts to enquire the way of life, that
you may sit and wait at the footstool, and wait for the givings out of his
life, for he came to this end that you might have life, and that you might have
it more abundantly.

SERMON IV.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
DOCT. Christ is a Believers Life.

That Is the Proposition in hand: I have concluded the Doctrinal part the last
day, and I made Application. I put you upon examination, to see whether the
life of Christ be in you or no: It is not enough to have a name to live, for
many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, when
the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness; and
therefore you that have a name to live, examine whether is Christ your life or
no. But to proceed by way of Instruction,

Use 3. Let us take notice, in the third place, of the excellent state of every
Believer; I say, take notice of the excellent state of every Believer that is
made partaker of the life of Jesus Christ. If the life of nature be so
excellent, and makes the creature so excellent in its kind, why then how
excellent is this life of Christ, which is communicated and made over unto his
people? I say, the life of nature is so excellent, as that the least worm that
creeps upon the earth, is of more noble account than the Sun in the Firmament;
the most inanimate creature in all the world is worth the Sun, in respect of
its life; truly, the meanest of Saints, he that is least in his own eye, and it
may be, in the eye of the world, he is most excellent in the eye of God, in the
eye of Saints and Angels; I say, in the eye of the invisible world, he is more
excellent than the greatest man on earth, that shines with the greatest worldly
glory that can be, for why? this little worm has life, this worm Jacob has
life; whereas a natural man is dead, and without life; in Eccles. 9. 4. A live
Dog is better than a dead Lion; Why, Brethren, it is true in this sense also;
the woman of Canaan knew she was called Dog, and so she was in respect of her
outward condition, for she was one of the outcast Gentiles, a stranger to the
children, not worthy to eat of the crumbs of the Table; but though she was a
Dog, she was a living Dog, and though a Dog, yet she was accounted by Christ
far better than the great Rabbis of the World, she was a living Dog, though
they were but dead Lions, and she shall shine in the Firmament, whenas the dead
Lions of the World shall rot and their carcasses; the living Shrub that shall
grow and flourish, when the dead Oak shall be cut down and made fuel for the
fire. And therefore, I beseech you Brethren, that you would learn by this how
to judge of your selves, and how to judge of others, and not according to that
mean condition that (happily) God has cast you in, in the World; but by that
principle of life which is within you: if Christ be your life, if Christ be in
you the hope of Glory, why, though in respect of your natural life and outward
accommodations, your life is but as the life of a worm, yet your spiritual life
being in you, is a life better than the life of Angels, which is a spark of the
life of Christ himself, of God himself; which though their life be hid, it is
hid with God in Christ, And when Christ who is your life shall appear, then
shall you also appear with him in Glory; and therefore notwithstanding all
those hindrances of Clouds in the World that are cast upon you, yet know that
this your life is hid with Christ in God. So much by way of Instruction.

Use 4. A word of Exhortation, And first of all I shall speak unto such as are
strangers unto the life of Christ. And Secondly, To those in whom Christ is a
principle of life.

1. First of all, To those that are strangers to the life of Christ. My desire
and request is, That the Lord would cause you to come to Christ for life, the
Father has made him the principle of life unto all that shall live in his
sight; you that are dead in sins and trespasses, that it may be easily seen and
said of you, that the World is your life, and that your lusts are your life,
that your life is bound up in creatures, and not in Christ; I beseech you, that
you would this day come to Christ that he may give you life; know it, that the
Lord does this day tender life to you, the Lord Christ stands weeping over you
in this Ordinance, as sometimes he wept over Lazarus, in John 11. 35. Jesus
wept. And truly I may say, Christ stands weeping over you; poor sinners that
are standing with your trespasses and sins, the Lord Christ stands weeping over
you, he sounds forth this Word, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee life: know that you are in a dead sleep; such
as are strangers to the life of Christ* they are like men in a sleep; they are
filled with fancies and dreams, and conceits, that they have life and strength,
righteousness and glory, they dream of a Feast, but when they awake they are
hungry; thou conceitest thou art Rich, and stand'st in need of nothing, and
know not that thou art poor, miserable, blind and naked: now it is to you
that the Lord says, Arise, awake thou that sleep; it is high time we should
awake, the Apostle says, The night is past, the day is at hand, and therefore
it is high time that men should awake; there is a glorious day that the Gospel
shall now shine, in which the Lord makes gracious discoveries of himself; light
shines round about you, and therefore awake thou that sleep: It is a shame
for men to lie a bed Sleeping and Snorting when the Sun shines on their faces,
and calls them to labor: what a shame is it for men to lie asleep in the day
of the Gospel, when the Sun has risen and visited our coasts? O know! the Lord
bids thee to awake, and stand up from the dead thou that sleep; I beseech
you, be not found amongst the dead; when God shall find you amongst the dead,
for him then to cast you among the dead, and bury you out of his sight, cast
you for ever out of his sight to Eternity; O let this awaken your souls, when
God calls you to awake.

Object. But you will say, If we be dead men, why do you speak to us? Can the
dead arise? Can the dead hear the voice? Why do you bid us stand up and awake,
if we be as dead men?

Answ. I Answer, It is true there is no principle of life in a natural man: the
Lord does not speak to you, because you have a principle of life in you, he
does not speak to you, because you have life in you, but he speaks that so you
may live, he speaks that so he may convey life to you, for you must know that
the Lord Jesus is the Prince of life, he is the Lord of life, he can command
life, he gives life by his Word, he gives life by the breath of his mouth; and
therefore know it is not an empty word, when the Lord calls upon you to live
and to stand up, for he that speaks to you is the Lord of life. When Christ
spoke to Lazarus, Come forth, he knew Lazarus had no power of himself to come
forth, but when he speaks, he gives life to Lazarus and enables him to live,
and to arise, and so he comes out of his Grave; Why, so it is, the Lord Jesus
speaks and call upon you to live, and he will give you life: it is the
prerogative of God, he calls things that are not, as if they were; he speaks to
dead men as if they were alive; and when the Lord speaks he acts upon the soul;
there is an effectual operation in the Spirit of Christ that goes along to the
giving of life to every soul that belongs unto God by the Word of the Lord. If
a man go to a heap of Wood, and he commands the Wood to burn, he may command
long enough before he shall see any such effect upon it; but if this man take
fire in his hand, fire in one hand, and bellows in the other, and lay fire to
the wood, and blow upon the fire, he shall presently see it arise up to a
flame: And thus the Lord soeaks, his Word is not an empty Word, but he carries
fire along with it: when he says, O soul live! O soul be inflamed with desire
after it! this is not an empty word, but there is efficacy goes along with it,
the Lord pours out (going along with it) pours out a spirit of burning, and
breaths upon the same Word, with command that sparks be blown up to a mighty
flame; so that the Lord speaks, and when he speaks, his words are not in vain;
when he speaks that he would have you to live, do not you make objections
against the life of Christ, do not say we are dead creatures, how should we
live? Consider what Abraham did; it is said, He considered not his own body,
when it was dead, neither the deadness of Sarahs womb; he did not look upon it,
in Romans 4. 19. Not being weak in Faith; it is said he considered not his own
body now dead, dead as to generation, nor the deadness of Sarahs womb, but he
eyed the Word of the Lord, the faithfulness and truth of God in his Word, he
looked to the all sufficiency of that God which had promised, he knew that he
was able to perform what he had spoken, though it seemed never so unlikely unto
sense, therefore he staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but he was
strong in faith giving glory to God: and so also you poor creatures, do not
look so much upon your own deadness, but know that God can out of very stones
raise up children unto Abraham, he can quicken thee by the Word of his mouth,
and the breath of his nostrils: though thou lie before him as Adam did, who
was as a lump of clay, liveless and useless, but the Lord made a body thereof,
and made it to become a living body; though thou art dead, the Lord can breath
life in thee by the Word of his Spirit, and so it shall burn unto Eternity; all
the life and breathings, and motions of the Spirit after the Lord, these are
kindled by the Spirit of the Lord: therefore look not so much after thine own
deadness, but look to the faithfulness of him that has promised, that thou
may not stagger at the Promise through unbelief.

Object. But I am not only without the life of Christ, says some poor guilty
sinner, but I have been an enemy to the life of Christ, I have opposed the life
of Christ both in my own soul and others; I have smothered those motions of the
Spirit, that he has often cast in, I have persecuted the appearances of the
life of Christ in others, and the Lord cause me to lie under the apprehension
of the guilt of it, and now I am ready to think and conclude that I am cast out
of sight, the time of life is past, and the Lord has for ever excluded me, and
shut me under death, darkness and horror; I shall not see the life of Christ.

Answ. Why even to thee let me say that eternal life is the free gift of God, I
say, this life is the free gift of God, there is no gift more free than this
life which God does impart unto poor sinners: It was said when Christ ascended
up on high, he led Captivity Captive, and he received gifts for men, even for
the rebellious also, that God might dwell amongst them: Christ received life
for Rebels, he received gifts for Rebels, and this was not the least of gifts,
this was the greatest of gifts that Christ received for Rebels, this gift of
life: and therefore you shall see how Christ gave life unto that evil
generation that did so persecute him even to the very death; though they cut
him off from the Land of the living, as not being worthy to live among them,
yet to many of those that were the chief actors, the chief instruments of the
Crucifying of the Lord of life, there was life given them; as we may see by
those that were converted at Peter's Sermon, and made partakers of the death of
Christ and life of Christ; the Apostle tells them in Acts 2. 23. He was
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God* him ye have
taken, and by wicked hands have Crucified and slain: And afterward in that
Chapter you shall read that even those he speaks to here, at Verse 37. were
converted, life was dispensed to them, pardon to them, mercy to them, grace to
them, even to them that had with wicked and cruel hands slain and crucified the
Lord of life and glory; and therefore also Christ says in John 6. That he came
to give his life for the World; he gave his flesh for the life of the world;
the world that lay in wickedness, that was in darkness, that was filled with
enmity against Christ, and against his people whilst they were here in the
world; Christ gave his flesh to be life unto the world, therefore see that
eternal life is the gift of God: he gives it so freely to Rebels, to such who
had their hands embrewed in his blood, that had with wicked hands crucified and
slain him. See what a door of Hope is set open for poor guilty sinners that
they may come in and be made partakers of this life of Christ.

Object. But it may be that soul will further Object and say; I have not only
been an enemy to the life of Christ, but I have continued so long dead in sins
and trespasses, that when I look upon my condition, it seems unto me like unto
the state of dead and dry bones, and I am ready to say, Is it possible that
such dead and dry bones should live, that have lain so long in the Grave of
sin, so long rotting and stinking in their lusts, is it possible that such
should live?

Answ. Let me tell you That the Lord carries on his work, though under great
disadvantages; that Parable or Vision that was represented to the Prophet
Ezekiel, concerning the Jews, is very remarkable, in Ezekiel. 37. 3. And he said
unto me, Son of man can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord, thou know;
Go Prophecy upon them, and the Lord says then he would give life unto them: I
know no way how they shall live, it is beyond the reach of the creature to
know, thou art infinite in wisdom and power, O Lord thou know the way how to
give life and being to them; Well, says God, they shall live; the Lord often
gives life to such poor creatures in such a condition when they are like unto
dead and dry bones, when furthest from life: the skin was not only broken, and
the flesh consumed, and the bones loosned and disjointed, but they were
scattered abroad, broken and dry, and so they were in such an estate as was
farthest off from life, but even then the Lord delights to communicate life.
When Lazarus had lain four days in the Grave, then the Lord Christ raised him
up, he could have raised him as soon as his breath had gone out, but the Lord
Christ let him go four days, when he seemed to be farthest off from life, when
his sister had said, Lord by this time he sti keth; says Christ unto her, Did
not I tell thee, if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God?
What says Christ to the poor soul, when the soul says, Lord I have lain so
long stinking in my lusts, and how is it possible I should believe? Have not I
told thee (as he said to Martha) that if thou would believe, thou shall see
the glory of God, the glory of his Power and the glory of his Grace, to give
life to these dry bones? So say I to you, notwithstanding all these
discouragements, go and wait upon the Lord, and sit at the footstool of Christ
and wait for the giving out of life, and know that Christ said, The hour is
come when they that are in their Graves shall hear the voice of the son of God
and live: Sit down at Christ's foot, and wait to hear his voice, hearken
diligently when Christ will speak, and what Christ will speak to thy soul, for
certainly the hour is come when such as are in their Graves shall live: wait
for the voice of Christ, and wait for the pourings out of the Spirit of Christ,
the Spirit of life, and the Spirit of faith that may carry up thy soul to
believe in Jesus Christ, and know that he is the Resurrection and the Life, and
though thou be never so dead in thy self, yet by faith in Christ thou shall
live. Thus much to those that are strangers to the life of Christ.

Let me speak a word to those that have interest in Christ.

Use 5. If Christ be your life, then I beseech you, that you would live upon
Christ, fetch life from Christ, let it appear to all the world that Christ is
your life; let it appear in all your actings, in your conversings with God, and
in your conversations in the world. O that you would make Christ your life!
What a shame is it that Christians should live no more upon Christ? see that
you look unto him as your life, as your life of Righteousness, as your life of
Holiness, as the life of all your Comforts, as the life of all Ordinances; live
upon Christ, upon the strength of Christ in all your works, and in all your
duties: it is a blessed frame of spirit when the soul can say as the Apostle
did, in Gal. 2. 20. I live, says he, and yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
When a man can say it is I, and yet not I, it is Christ that lives in me, it is
the Spirit of Christ that speaks in me, and it is the strength of Christ that
acts in me, it is the arm of Christ that supports me, and it is the wisdom of
Christ that guides me: it is no more I that live, it is not I that work, but it is
the Spirit of Christ that does all this in me, and for me: why then I fear we
are debtors to this exhortation, and what a shame is it that we should live so
little upon Christ, that we should live so much upon the creature, and so much
upon self? Truly, the Lord may take up a complaint against most of this
Generation, as sometimes he did against his people Israel; These people had
committed two great evils, they had forsaken me the fountain of living water,
and dug to themselves broken Cisterns: To go for the living amongst the
dead, to live so much upon creatures, to live so much upon outward things, for
a Christian to have his life bound up in them, so as he knows not how to live
without them; and says, if I lose such a comfort, and am deprived of such a
relation, O I am undone for ever; what a dishonor is this to Christ, and to
that principle of life that is in you? That your life should be bound up in any
creature whatsoever: know that a Christian cannot be undone; so long as Christ
lives he lives, Christ can die no more, and therefore his life cannot be put
out; the life of his righteousness, and the life of his comforts shall not die,
they shall be put out no more than the life of Christ is. Therefore let me
desire that you would look to Christ for an abundance of life, I say, look to
Christ for abundance of life: it is not enough that Christ be a principle of
life in you, but a Believer should look to Christ for abundance of life, it was
the end of his coming, I came that they might have life, says he, and that
they might have it more abundantly: Christ came that his people might have
abundance of life, and therefore do not straiten your selves, be not straitened
in your own bowels, when you are not straitened in Christ, you are not
straitened in your principle, With thee is the fountain of life, says the
Psalmist, and therefore in thy life we shall see life: The fountain of life is
in Christ, and therefore there is abundance of life for all Believers; there is
no man need to make spare of the fountain head, if a man be owner of a
fountain, surely he need not make spare, he may drink abundantly, hearty
draughts, and not to sip when he has a fountain to go to: with Christ is a
fountain of life, he is a fountain, and a fountain set open; therefore I
beseech you go to Christ for abundance of life, let all your actings be
proportionable to that principle of life that is in you: What a shame is it
that we should have a living head in Heaven, I say, a living head, and that we
should be such dead members? O that the Lord would cause all our souls to look
unto this Fountain, that so we may be filled and satisfied. What do you more
than others? says Christ unto his people. There is some singular thing that
Christ expects his people should do, they have a principle above others, and
therefore their actings should be above others; the life of a Christian or a
Believer, is as much above the life of the natural man, as the life of man is
above the life of beasts, or the life of a Tree or a Plant; and therefore the
operation of their life is far more excellent: what a shame is it that it
should be said of a Christian, such as profess the life of Christ, what do they
more than others? Wherein do they differ from the World? What difference
betwixt them, and those that have their portion in this life? O my Brethren, if
Christ be your life, then let all the breathings, and motions of your spirits
be high, noble, and lifted up, let them be carried after God, and let all the
actings of your spirits be in a proportion to that principle of life that is in
you to Christ, who is your hope of glory.

But again, I beseech you, take heed that you do nothing against the life of
Christ that is in you: It is a sin for a man to act against his life, against
his natural life, to do that which may shorten his life, to do that which may
hinder the comfort of life; and if so, then what an evil is it to act against
the life of Christ, seeing the life of Christ is far more excellent than the
life of Nature, as you heard before; it cost Christ dear, that life which he
communicates to his people, it cost him his blood, it was not purchased without
the laying down of his life, and therefore take heed that you do not act
against him: Let Christians take heed that they do not neglect communion with
God; neglecting of communion, and sleighting of communion, is an acting against
the life of Christ in them; for why, the life of Christ comes in that way, it
is maintained by the souls conversing with God, and therefore when a man turns
his eye so from God, when he is looking downward, continually poring upon the
things of this World, neglecting the things of Eternity, and does not eye God,
and does not converse with God in all Ordinances and Duties, why this is an
obstructing of the life of Christ in you.

Again, Take heed of giving way to any vanity, take heed of making bonds with
sin, that you do not step out from God in the least, it is destructive to the
operation of the life of Christ, sin weakens the inward man, as sicknesses and
diseases do the body; take away the natural strength, that a man cannot act
with that strength as before: so it is with sin, when the soul gives way to
lusts and corruptions whatever they be, he weakens his own strength, he
entertains fellowship with that which is an enemy to the life of Christ in him.

And then take heed of giving way to sinful passions and unbelief, and
dejection of spirit, for these also are great enemies to the life of Christ; I
say, dejection of spirit is an enemy to the life of Christ, as well as to the
life of Nature: therefore reason with your passions, as sometimes David did,
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?
Know that he has made you Kings, he has set you upon the Throne that you may
judge your own hearts: that holy and sanctified reason may call all your
inordinate lusts and passions to account in thy soul, and say as David did, Why
art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Take heed
of neglecting Ordinances, of sleighting Ordinances, it is by them that the life
of Christ is maintained and cherished, they are the Pipes, they are the Golden
Pipes, though empty in themselves, yet they are the Pipes through which the
Lord is pleased to convey life; and therefore the sleighting of Ordinances, and
casting of them off, must needs make way for the hinderance of the life of
Christ: Christians should take heed, I say, in any case, that they do not that
which may be an obstruction to the life of Christ, to the actings, and to the
motion of the life of Christ in them.

Again, To say no more, Let all Believers consider what matter of consolation
the Lord has laid up for them in this, in that he has made Christ to be their
life; I say, what matter of strong consolation is it in the midst of all their
deaths and dangers, in the midst of all their miseries, in the midst of all
their corruptions and enemies, that they are compast about with here in the
World? Here is a hidden ground of consolation: There is a principle of life in
them, Christ is their principle of Life, and such a principle as shall never
decay in them, they have such a life as endures for ever; Why, it is comfort in
the midst of all the want of outward necessaries; if Christians want, they have
a more excellent life than creatures, and if creatures say natural life is
better than raiment, then how much more may it be said of spiritual life that
it is better than food and raiment, and all outward things below? And so in the
midst of all afflictions that do lie upon Gods people at any time, they may
comfort themselves with that hidden life that is within them, though the World
see not, the world takes no notice of it, the Lord looks upon them as excellent
because of that life that is within them: yea, even death it self, the people
of God may comfort themselves as Job did in the thoughts of death, in the
apprehension of death, though it seem never so terrible, they have a living
Savior; they who have interest in Christ, he is a principle of life unto them:
I know that my Redeemer lives, and I shall see him again at the last day, says
Job, he lives, and he will be life to me, I shall stand up with him, and I
shall live in his sight, this was that which Job did solace his soul in, in the
midst of all those afflictions, in the thoughts of death it self, when it was
presented to him as the King of terrors, yet let the Saints rejoice in this
life, for it is such a life as shall never be put out, though it be compassed
about: it is a life that is compassed about with enemies; and all that is in a
man, and all that is without him, are enemies to the life of Christ; O how many
temptations, and how many lusts and corruptions do beset it round about every
day? Well, here is comfort to every one to whom Christ is a principle of life,
that this life of Christ shall prevail, and it shall continue to see all its
enemies put under its feet, thou shall live to see them all put under thy feet;
Christ indeed when he came in the flesh, was persecuted in his very infancy, he
was driven into a strange Country, but he lived to see his enemies put under,
in Matthew. 2. 19. the Angel comes and tells Joseph, he may return with safety,
for they are dead which sought the young Child's life, to destroy him: it shall
one day be said so unto every Believer, to every soul that has interest in the
life of Christ, though for a time they may be persecuted, and hurryed and
driven up and down with the lusts and corruptions of their hearts and this
wicked world, yet it shall be said one day, Lo, they are dead which sought the
Child's life. But so much for this time.

SERMON V.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
I Have concluded the first of these Propositions, That Jesus Christ is a
Believers life. But I shall proceed to a second Proposition in the Text.

For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. I shall propound it as
exemplary unto all the Saints.

DOCT. That it is worthy your imitation to converse with Death at a distance;
to prepare for Death before Death comes.

You shall find it the practice of the Saints in Scripture: so did Moses, and
so did David; Moses as you have it recorded in Psalm. 90. 12. which is a Psalm
of Moses, So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom. Teach us so to number them as we may know our own frailty; so as we may
have the impressions upon our hearts that we are but Grass, and as the Flower
in the Field that withers in a moment; and David puts up the like Petition, in
Psalm. 39. 4. Lord make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, what it
is, that I may know how frail I am: Teach me to know my end, that I may know
how frail I am: He does not desire to know how many days he shall live, or
when his end shall be, but to know how frail a creature he was, that it may
take impression on his heart. And truly these teachings are such as none but
God can teach, to teach a man to know how frail he is, and every day to look
upon himself as a Spire of Grass, or as a Flower in the Field, that is in a
withering and decaying condition every moment. The Apostle Paul also tells what
his practice was, in 1 Cor. 15. 31. I protest by your rejoicing, which I have
in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. He died in affection to the World: I fit
loose to the World, I die to it in affection, but I also die daily, I put my
self into a dying condition, I know that I walk in the midst of Jeopardies, and
therefore I fit loose from all, yea from life it self, I protest I die daily.
The Prophet speaks of some that put the evil day far from them, it is a sign
that the day of Death is an evil day when men put it far from them; it is a
good day to the soul that has interest in Christ, it is the best day that ever
came to him, Eccles. 7. 1. you shall see what the wise man says there, A good
name is better than a precious Ointment: and the day of death than the day of
ones birth: It is not so to every one, but to the righteous it is, to him that
has a good name, a name that is better than precious ointment; to him that
has the new name better than that of sons and daughters, to him the day of
death is better than the day of his birth; therefore says the Apostle, For to
me to die is gain; and therefore it is good for Christians to look upon death
at a distance, for death in it self is an enemy: The last enemy that shall be
destroyed, said the Apostle, is Death; it is an enemy, such an enemy as has a
terrible visage; and therefore let us look death in the face often, that so we
may be acquainted with the visage of death, that the terror of this enemy may
be taken away: it is an enemy, and such an enemy as is armed, such an enemy as
has a sting with him, The sting of death is sin; and therefore it is a great
deal of wisdom to combat with this enemy at a distance, to disarm him, to take
away the sting before he comes upon you, that you may be the better able to
grapple with him when he draws nigh; it is good therefore for men to consider
whether they be able to grapple with and meet this enemy or no, whether they be
able to look him in the face, to put themselves in a posture of combating, and
how you may meet with him without fear, how you may overcome him by the blood
of the Lamb, to exercise faith and to eye the conquest that Christ has gotten
over death, to see how he has taken away the sting and horror, and to
sanctify the Grave, this is a great mercy.

1. First, And therefore let me speak to you one word, you whose life is thus
to die, do it daily with the Apostle: it is exceeding beneficial to the Saints
this kind of exercise; the Lord himself does commend it as a point of high
wisdom by Moses, O how does he wish his people, that all his people were thus
wise, in Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that
they would consider their latterend: it is a point of high wisdom for men to
consider their latter end, and through grace it proves a great help, even unto
the people of God, it proves a spur to them; I say it is a spur to the works
and services of their Generation, when they consider their latter end: I must
work the work of him that sent me, says Christ, the night comes when no man
can work; and so again says Solomon, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it
with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor counsel, nor
knowledge in the Grave whither thou art going: If therefore it lies before
thee, neglect not the work of thy Generation; if he say, This is the way, walk
in it; if he say, By this or by that thou shall be for my Glory in the World,
take heed you neglect it not, no, not a minute, for how soon may thou go to
thy home, thy long-home! and there is no work in the Grave; this, through grace
I say, proves a spur to God's people, the consideration of their latter end; I
have but a little time in which I can gain glory to God's name, O take it, O
soul improve it for God's glory; this I say puts a man to consider his latter
end.

2. Secondly, Again, It is that which will make the soul truly Magnanimous,
truly valiant for God, it will beget a mighty Heroic spirit, this conversing
with death at a distance, this considering of a man's latter end; see what God
says in that pathetical wish I before spoke of in Deuteronomy. 32. 29, 30. If they
did but consider their latter end, how should one chase a thousand, and two put
ten thousand to flight: the consideration of this would make a man Magnanimous
for God, it would make a man to carry his life in his hand, and venture it
freely if God should call him forth: such a righteous man has conversed with
death at a distance, and has seen and knows that it will be gain; he fears not
a thousand, he is truly Magnanimous, he only looks at the cause, and goes forth
willingly; for though there be a thousand to one, he fears not, for he has
considered his latter end. Whereas on the contrary, the neglect of this, the
neglect of conversing with death daily, makes men liable to the snares and
temptations of the world; I say, the neglect of this does expose men to a
thousand snares in the world: how does this world keep many from seeking after
the life of Christ? House, Land, Friends, Riches, Honors and Pleasure, what
snares are these to thousands? What Is the cause of this? It is because men do
not consider their latter end, it is because that men have a kind of fancy, or
dream that they shall always possess these things below: men dream of an
Eternity here, and they are not indeed persuaded of parting, that they are a
parting from them, and so prove woeful snares: they are neglecting the great
things of God, and the great things of Eternity, because they do not look upon
all as Grass, as withering Grass, themselves also as fading Flowers, therefore
they are exposed to these temptations; yea, therefore it is that many a poor
creature is brought down wonderfully, because they do not converse with death
at a distance, they do not consider their latter end, in Lam. 1. 9. She
remembered not her latter end, therefore she came down wonderfully; because men
do not converse with death at a distance, they do not consider their latter
end: the rich Fool in the Gospel remembered not his latter end, and therefore he
came down wonderfully; men are brought^ down wonderfully, suddenly they are cut
off e're they are aware of it, and all because they do not converse with death
at a distance; and therefore when it comes, it is wonderful strange to them,
because they do not die daily, they do not consider their latter end.

Object. But you will say, there are many that converse with death, and look
death in the face every day, and yet we see they are not the better for it: as
many that carry their lives in their hands when they go upon the Sea, and see
the wonders of God in the deeps; and when they go into the high places in the
Field, to engage and venture their lives, such men look death in the face, yet
we see not that they are the better for it.

Answ. I Answer, It is true, there is a conversing with death, which makes not
men the better but the worse: for there are many men, as Solomon says, It is
better to go into the house of mourning than into the house of feasting, for in
the house of mourning the living they will lay it to heart; but it is possible
for men to go so long in the house of mourning, to be hardened so as they
cannot lay death to heart, that they look upon it as a matter of custom to die,
and to be buried, and there is an end: it is possible for such, the Prophet
speaks of, who have made a league with Hell and Death; but Paul's conversing
with death at a distance, was of another stamp, for his conversing with death
was from an impression that God had made upon his spirit of the frailty of the
creature, it was the Lord that taught him for to number his days: till God
teach this lesson, no man can converse with death daily from an inward real
apprehension of the vanity of the creature, with the perishing condition of
this Tabernacle of Clay, this was Paul's conversing. The wicked man converseth
with death, when he is bold to die (as it is possible he may) his familiarity
with death, it arises it may be from some ignorance or hardness, he takes his
leap, as a blind man may do, when he skips down a Hill; he knows not how far it
is to the bottom; through ignorance men know not what death is, know not what
the condition is that death leads to, they do not consider of the consequence
of it, and of that Eternity that follows death, and therefore it is ignorance
of this that makes the wicked man desperate: but when the righteous man is bold
as a Lion, and death is familiar to him, it is from a principle of knowledge,
and not from ignorance; he knows what death is, he knows that in it self it is
an enemy, it is an enemy to nature, and it is destructive to all outward
comforts, but he knows also that death has lost his sting, he knows it is
conquered, it is an enemy, but it is a conquered enemy, he knows that Christ
was the death of it: O Death, I will be thy death, it is Christ that has
fulfilled and made good that challenge, he knows there is an Eternity beyond
the Grave, and can look upon it as gainful, he knows it is gain that is laid up
in Heaven, and it is death that makes him so gainful, and it is this that makes
him so bold as a Lion. This leads me more particularly to consider the
Proposition as it is in it self.

To die is gain. It is a strange Paradox, that none can reveal but Christ, and
such as have Christ for their life, that death should be gain to: that that
should be gain that seems to be the greatest loss, that strips a man naked of
all his comforts, that does at once take away the desire of the eye, and the
delight of the heart, this is that which a natural man cannot understand, or he
cannot believe it at least: but it is made good unto all the Saints, and
therefore I shall lay down this as the Position which I shall insist upon.

That where Christ is Life, there Death is gain. You see there is a connection
betwixt this and the former part of the Text: and therefore Solomon says (as I
told you before) That the day of Death to the righteous, is better than the day
of ones birth; and says the Apostle, We groan to be clothed upon with our
house which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 4. There is a groaning in all the Saints
to be clothed upon with that House which is from Heaven, that so mortality may
be swallowed up in life. Now death is gain to every Believer, whether by Death
you understand lesser Death, afflictions, losses, crosses, bonds and
imprisonments, persecution; bonds for the Gospel as the Aposte was in; here I
say, if you understand by Death these lesser deaths, it is true, that all these
deaths are gain, the Lord makes his people gainers by all their losses: they
gain by every condition that they are brought into; though the outward man
lose, the inward man gains. The Prophet Habkakuk, if you look upon him in his
great distress, you shall see what a gainer he was by it: he was in sore
affliction, he says, his very belly trembled, his very bowels trembled within
him, but he was a gainer by this, he gains in faith, his faith broke out
gloriously, Hab. 3. 17, 18. he gained faith, and faith is precious, The trial
of your faith is more precious than that of Gold; so did David, he was in great
distress, in Psalm. 46. 2. but he was a gainer by it, he gained in faith and
confidence, Though the earth be removed, says he, and though the Mountains be
thrown into the Sea, though the Waves thereof roar, yet there be professes that
he will hold fast his confidence in God. If you look upon Job, you shall see
what a gainer he was by all his losses, and those sore afflictions and trials
that he met withal, he gained abundance of experience of God, experience of his
wisdom, experience of his power, and experience of his faithfulness, experience
of his goodness and kindness: he gained the knowledge of God, and he gained the
knowledge of himself, that when he came out of his affliction, he throws
himself at the footstool of God, in Job 42. 6. Now, says he, I abhor my self
in dust and ashes. The Apostle Paul was a man of great affliction, there were
bonds that did attend him in every place almost where he came, yet he was a
gainer by all; he gained in confidence, in holy boldness, The Lord has
delivered, and he does deliver, and he will deliver; he gained abundance of
submission to the Will of God, by contemplation on his condition, and by this
he knew how to want as well as how to abound, and he could do all things
through Christ that strengthened him, and it was his obedience to the Will of
Christ which strengthened him; and I believe there is none of Gods people that
will bring in their experiences, if they will truly and impartially cast up
their accounts, but they will and shall find that God has made them gainers by
their losses, and by their several afflictions that God has laid upon them,
they have gained at least this, to know that they are nothing, they see
themselves what fruitless unprofitable creatures they are, and they have known
what the creature is when God is at a distance, they have seen something of
themselves, and something of God, and if there be no more than this, this is a
great deal of gain; and that it is true of all these Deaths, the Lord makes his
people gainers by them, and he leads them through these conditions, because he
intends to make them gainers by them; every affliction that he sends, is a
servant of Christ, every afflicted condition is a servant of Christ, and is
sent with a good message, is sent to communicate some good thing to the soul of
every Believer: God stands up and says, as in another case, Who will go and
persuade Ahab? And the Spirit answers, I; God says, Who will go and carry
tidings of love from Heaven to such a soul, something of himself, something of
the Divine nature? God has store of Messengers; That will I, says one mercy:
and that will I, says another; afflictions are all ready to communicate some
good thing to those that love the Lord Christ; and indeed they are narrow
Pipes, all these conditions that the Saints are brought into, they are narrow
Pipes, they can convey but a little, a very little of God by them; now God is
an infinite fountain, and he can convey much of himself, one condition is too
little, too narrow for God to work in, too narrow a Pipe for God to pour in all
that good which he intends for his servants, therefore he chooses variety of
works, great mercies and variety of afflictions, they are all the servants of
God, and they have commission to go and work for such a man, to work for such a
man's good, the promise is given to the Believer, That all shall work together
for good, so that all are his servants, all deaths, afflictions, persecutions,
whatsoever distresses his people shall meet withal, shall work together for
good, they must needs gain: a man that has a multitude of servants that work
for him, it is all for their good as well as his; why, Believers have a
multitude of servants, all is yours; all, Christ is yours, every condition that
God has brought you into, shall work for your good, for they are Christ's
servants, and you must needs be gainers; and truly, God knows that their gain
is his gain, he will gain by their gain, and therefore will make their deaths
to be gain to them, for it comes back again to his Treasury, he knows that his
people will not purse his glory, will not put up that which is Gods: if God
does come in and make them gainers by their afflictions; if God does enlarge
their hearts, and set them free, they will not say, By my own hand have I made my
self rich, by my own industry I have gotten this wealth, this strength, this
peace, this liberty; for what are we, that we should be able to walk answerably
to any measure that God gives out unto us? But,

Again, God will make Death it self gain unto us, not only lesser deaths but
the greater death, it shall be gain, even that separation of soul from body,
which to the wicked man is the worst of deaths, Christ becomes gain to that
soul whose life Christ is. I will tell you in one particular (and leave the
rest) wherein death is gain to that soul, whose life Christ is, and that is
this:

He shall gain Rest: Blessed are those that die in the Lord, in Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them:
that is their nature; he speaks in a time of persecution, when the Beast came
out of the bottomless pit, to make war against the Saints, the Lord gives
encouragement from hence, they are blessed though Antichrist curse them as
Heretics, but from henceforth they are blessed that die in the Lord,
especially that die in the Lord as these did: but wherein are they blessed? In
this, That they rest from their labors, there is a part of their blessedness:
see what the Prophet Isaiah says of the righteous man; he speaks of this
blessedness, they shall gain rest, in Isa. 57. 1, 2. He shall enter into peace:
they shall rest in their Beds, each one walking in his uprightness; they shall
rest as a man rests in his bed, so shall the righteous man rest in his Grave:
the Grave shall be as a bed to them, upon which, they that die in the Lord,
shall rest sweetly from these their labors; this World is a troublesome World,
a very turmoiling World, full of troubles and labors both to flesh and spirit,
and they that die in the Lord rest from their labors. This World is a place to
work in, When the Sun arises, man goes forth to his labor till the evening
comes. But you will say,

This is no great matter, what gain is here? The gain of Rest, rest to the
flesh, is this any great gain? Job says, in Job 3. 13. For now should I have
lien still and been quiet, I should have slept; then had I been at rest. Wicked
men rest in their Graves, they that could never rest well but in wickedness,
they rest in their Graves; but what then, where is the gain that the righteous
man rests in? For they both rest in their Graves.

1. First, There is a difference in their rest, the wicked man's rest is
partial, it is but the rest of the body, the flesh only, it is not the rest of
the spirit. It is an imperfect rest, they do not lie down to rest sweetly on
their beds with those peaceful thoughts that the righteous man has in his
going to bed, to the Grave, O their rest is a troublesome rest; It is said in
Psalm. 16. there in the person of Christ, My flesh rests in hope, and shall not
see corruption; his very flesh should rest in hope, the very flesh of the
righteous man, when it is in the Grave rests in hope; his very bones when dry
and scattered, still they rest in hope, hope of a Resurrection: But now we may
say on the contrary, that the very flesh of the wicked man rests in fear, his
very flesh rests in fear, he fears the Resurrection, that which is the
righteous man's hope, is the wicked man's fear, he fears to see the morning; he
was loath to go to bed, but will be more loath to rise, for his flesh rests in
fear; he rather says, Lord let me lie here always, let me never go out of this
Dungeon, better lying here always than going to Execution.

2. But again, Besides, the rest of the righteous man is not only the rest of
the flesh, but the rest of the Spirit; he ceases from all the assaults of
Satan, from his own crooked nature, burdens of sin and corruption, whilst he
was in the Land of the living, and those outcries, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death; the burden of death and
sin is taken away, it shall be put under his feet for ever; he shall not see
any more any of the motions of sin, any of those lusts and corruptions that
formerly did war in any of his members, he shall no more cry, O Lord deliver me
from a hard heart, a corrupt spirit, a passionate heart; O, says he, my life
is a burden to me, to see these daughters of Heth, these Canaanites, because of
these corruptions of mine, my life is a burden to me. Well, there shall be no
such complaints beyond the Grave, and therefore, says he, death shall make the
Saints gainers.

But again, They shall gain freedom from all the temptations of Satan; this is
great gain, if well considered, they shall no more be assaulted, no more fiery
darts thrown at them: Here they are battered with temptations, that through
temptations their lives many times become a burden to them; Ay, but death shall
set them free out of Gunshot; here they are tossed up and down, turmoiled by
Satan, as Christ was carried up to the Mountain, and then to the Pinnacle,
tossed up and down from Mountain to Pinnacle; Ay, but then there shall be no
tempter, no temptation shall enter any place of that Jerusalem that is above in
Heaven, and therefore to the godly man death is gain.

Besides, They shall gain freedom from all the oppositions and oppressions of
the World; I say freedom, they shall rest from the oppressions of men; and Job
did account that, and look upon that as a great mercy; he did envy men in their
Graves, says he, They are at rest: the poor man is freed from the Oppressor,
from all persecutions of men, and from all the slaveries and bondages, and
tyrannizing of them; why, death shall set them free from the oppressions of
men, from all evil of men, from all wars, and rumors of wars, and sad effects
of wars, death sets them free from these. O, say you, I have lost a friend, but
you know not what he gained, he is taken from the evil to come in the
Generations after him; he shall rest from all sorrows, from all afflictions,
from all passions: the Lord God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
there shall be no mourning beyond the Grave, no complaining in the streets of
the new Jerusalem.

Brethren, Lay all these together, and see if this be not gain to those in whom
the life of Christ is: to gain nothing but this; Rest from their labors, and
rest from oppression and tyranny, to rest from sorrows, passions, tears and
mournings, this is a mercy; but to rest from temptations, to rest from sin, and
from all those lusts and corruptions that did war in their members and in their
minds, this is a great mercy, if there were no more; see how you are beholding
to Christ for these, if you find no more gain that death brings you in that are
in Christ, how are you beholding unto Christ for it? Death is not gain in it
self, but you are beholding to Christ that has made it so. It is said of Noah
in Genesis 5. 29. when Noah was born, it is said, this same shall comfort us
concerning our work and toil of our hands; This man shall comfort us, for he
shall be a Preacher of righteousness, he was a Type of Christ, and a Preacher
of righteousness through faith, and therefore Noah did comfort them through
Preaching of Christ the righteousness of Faith, an object of rest, a place to
take up in, in the midst of their toil and labor; they were beholding to
Christ, o whom Noah was a Type, who is this rest: and to you death would not be
thus gain, if Christ had not made it so; no, this man, this Lord Jesus has
brought in comfort concerning that estate of separation of soul from body; it
is not gain in it self, but Christ has made it so unto his people. O how are
you engaged unto Christ! say even for this, if you should hear no more of this
rest, I will bless his great name for it.

SERMON VI.
PHILIP. 1. ^1. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
THE Apostle, I told you the last day, does converse with Death at a distance.
But I entered into the main Point, which I shall prosecute at this time.

For to me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain.

DOCT. Where Christ is life, there death is gain.

See the Connection, For to me to live is Christ; Christ is my life, and death
is my gain: Death is gain to that soul that has Christ for its life. One
particular I named, I shall prosecute the rest.

1. First, Their gain is a gain of rest; I say, every Believer by death gains
Rest, a rest from toil and troubles of an evil turmoiling World; Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their labor, they rest the
rest of the righteous man: When he is in the Grave, it is another kind of rest
than the rest of the wicked; it is said of David who is a Type of Christ that
his flesh rests in hope: the flesh of the righteous man rests in hope, but the
flesh of the wicked man may be said to rest in fear, he may fear the
approaching day of light, he may fear to lie down, but more to rise up; he
cries out, O Lord, let me lie here to Eternity, for the chains of darkness are
better than the light of a new day; but the flesh of the righteous man shall
rest in hope, he shall have no more fiery darts of the Devil thrown at him, he
rests from temptation and oppression of the World, and from the tyranny of man,
he rests from all griefs, sorrows, tears and complaints, where all tears shall
be wiped away, and no complaints in the streets at that day: here is a great
deal of gain, the righteous man gains rest in the day of death.

2. Secondly, As he gains rest, so he gains perfect peace, and fullness of joy;
it is said in Isa. 57. 1. The righteous are taken away from the evil to come,
etc. and it is said, he shall enter into peace, They shall rest in their beds,
every one walking in his uprightness; they shall not only rest in their bed, in
the Grave, but they shall enter into peace, and they shall enter into joy, in
Matthew. 25. 21. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord: he enters into peace, he
enters into joy, that he shall thenceforth dwell in it; he shall dwell in joy,
he takes full possession of it, it is no more shut out: peace does enter into
the righteous man's heart whilst he is on earth, but till death comes, his peace
here shall be interrupted, he shall enter into it, and it into him; what Job
says of the body, so of the joy of the righteous man, it continues not at a
stay, his peace and joy is many times interrupted, but in Heaven he shall meet
with no more Clouds, there shall be a morning that shall drive away all Clouds,
he shall enter into joy, and he shall dwell in the fullness of it; Christ has
purchased it, and he has given out the first fruits of this peace and joy, but
the full possession is no till death, and therefore it is said in Psalm. 97. 11.
That light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart: he
reaps something here, but it is but a little in respect of the harvest that he
shall reap afterward, it rather seems to be a sowing time than a reaping here,
but afterward he shall reap the fullness of it; peace is sown for the righteous,
and joy for the upright in heart: so that here is another benefit of gain to a
Believer by death, he shall then drink to satisfaction of those Rivers of joy
and pleasures for evermore that do run at the right hand of God.

3. But again, Thirdly, As he gains joy and peace, so by death the believing
soul gains enlargement and liberty; this is a great part of his gain: the soul
by death is set at liberty; for the spirit even of a righteous man, though it
be the Candle of the Lord, and though it be enlightened from Heaven, yet whilst
it is in this body, which is now corrupted, it is like a light that is in a
dark Lanthorn, the light of those excellent faculties of the soul are eclipsed
and darkened; I say, so it is with all mankind, the curse came by the fall of
Adam, that the body is as a dark Lanthorn to the soul, and it does hide that
light which should otherwise be revealed; as the soul acts most highly when it
has least of the body, as when the body is asleep, it sees not, it hears not,
it reads not, yet the soul then sees, and mourns, and joys more exquisitely
than it does or can do in the body; and therefore when the soul is nigh parting
with the body, it acts most highly, and so it shall do in its separation, when
separated from his body, it shall be freed from his dark Lanthorn, it shall be
taken out from his Dungeon, as it were, and all the faculties of the soul shall
be enlarged, the understanding, the apprehension, the capacity of the soul
shall be mightily enlarged. The Prophet speaks of a time a coming, that there
shall be no more an Infant of days, the beginnings of it shall be on earth but
the perfection of it shall be in Heaven, There shall be no more an infant of
days, there shall be no more a child of understanding, but he that is weak
shall be as David, and he that is as David, shall be as the Angel of the Lord;
the capacity of the soul shall be wonderfully enlarged, as it shall comprehend
most of God; here it is straitened, and it could not receive much of God, it
could not receive much of the mysteries of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, it is
not large enough to take in much of the notion of those glorious things, but
when death comes, it shall be enlarged: And then, says the Apostle, I shall
know, even as I am known. It shall be exceedingly enlarged to take in very much
of God. And as the understanding shall be set at liberty, so all the faculties
of the soul shall be set at liberty. They shall be greatly enlarged toward
God, and run toward God, the desires of the soul shall run like a mighty
stream toward God; here there was but a little drop of the affection, but then
a mighty stream shall run; not only faith but love shall be perfect.

A believing soul shall be enlarged in respect of action; as the faculties, so
all the actings of the Soul, shall be set at large, at liberty: here the soul
cannot act according to its desires, it would do more for God, but there is a
clogg that lies upon it, it has mighty wings, wings like the Ostridge, but
there is such a heavy body, as it cannot get up: there is wings would carry the
soul up to Heaven every moment, but there is a heavy body; in Romans 7. 19, 20,
24. For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I
do. Now, if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I say there is infiniteness in a believers desires to do for God,
and he would enjoy more and more still, and he would do more and more for God,
ay, but he is straitened up in his actings, there he is narrow, he cannot act
according to his desire: but now when death comes, the believing soul shall be
set at liberty, it shall be able to act according to its desire, it shall be
whatever it desires to be, and it shall do whatever it desires to do, and it
shall have as much holiness as it will desire to have; this is a mighty
privilege, and a great deal of that gain that comes in by death unto that soul
where Christ is its life; it meets with this liberty and enlargement. But again,

4. Fourthly, The believing soul by death gains not only liberty but abundance
of life: it gains life, it has more of the life of Christ, it enjoyes more of
the life of Christ, and has the fullness of it communicated; and now Brethren,
this is a mighty gain to gain life: what would a man gain more, and what is a
greater gain than life? It is beyond the gain of all treasure whatever. Natural
life is the greatest of all mercies; Thou shall have thy life for a prey, and
that is the greatest mercy, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give
for his life: and in this the believing soul shall come nearer to the life of
Christ, for he shall have the life of Christ, who is the fountain, and so more
of it communicated to him; and therefore it was that, for which the Apostle
desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all, for there
he should have perfection of life in Christ, there shall be nothing there to
hinder the life of Christ from flowing in unto the soul, there shall be no
cloggs, no rubs in the way, but there shall be a full enjoyment, and a full
manifestation of that life of Christ, which is the life of the soul, is made
over to the soul for its life even to Eternity; this is another part of the
great gain that comes in by death to believing souls. But again,

5. Fifthly, As it gains life, so it gains victory by death; the believing soul
gains Victory, full, complete victory and conquest over all its enemies: He
does not only rest, as I said before; it is a great gain to rest, rest from the
motion of sin, and lust, and rest from the motion of temptation, but that is not
all; it rests and sits down as a Conqueror, the Palm of victory is then put
into the hand of every Believer, and he shall stand upon that Mount Zion, and
shall sing Hallelujah unto the Lord, he is then made a Conqueror there, for
all enemies at that day are put under; all the lusts of his heart, and all
Principalities and Powers, and whatsoever was a vexation and disquietment,
shall be put under his feet, and he shall sit down with Christ as a Conqueror,
I have fought the good sight says the Apostle in 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have
finished my Course, I have kept the Faith, and now is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness: my lifetime, it was my time of combating, but now I am ready to
be dissolved, to be offered up, I shall sit down as a Conqueror, and I shall
have a Crown of righteousness; that is another privilege, another part of the
gain that comes in to the believing soul by death. But,

6. Sixthly, It gains a full sight of God: I say, the believing soul by death
gains a full sight of God, a full vision of God; this gain is glorious and
unspeakable: it is that which the Saints do press after to see the face of God;
it was Moses's great request, I beseech thee show me thy face; mighty desirous
to see the face of God: and indeed it is a completing of their happiness that
they shall see the face of God; Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God, in Matthew. 5. 8. here is the blessedness of that people whose heart is
purged by faith, they shall see God; they shall see him here, ^ay, but in
Heaven they shall see him face to face, in 1 Cor. 13. 12. We now see him
through a glass darkly, but we shall see him face to face, and then shall we
know him as we are known: It is true, God cannot be seen with the eye of the
body, neither here nor in Heaven, so the Saints cannot see him, for he is an
infinite Being, a Spirit invisible, invisible to the eye of the body, but he
shall be held forth clearly, God will hold himself forth to the eye of their
understanding, and his people shall have full and clear visions of him: they
shall know him in his Nature, and they shall know him in his attributes, they
shall know him in all his works, and they shall know him in his Word;
whatsoever was hid from them in the days of their flesh, shall then be
revealed, they shall know him in his Counsel, in those secret ways which God
walked in from Eternity, which no creature can give a reason of, God will then
unfold himself, they shall have continual visions of God, visions of grace, and
visions of love, and visions of light, and visions of glory, which shall
continually flow forth from the Throne, this will be a mighty gain. When the
Queen of Sheba came to Solomon to see his House, in 2 Chronicles. 9. 7. she said,
Happy are thy servants that stand in thy presence, to hear thy wisdom; if they
were happy that saw Solomon and his wisdom, and looked him in the face, then
much more shall they that stand for ever in the presence of the great God, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and shall see his face and behold his wisdom, and
shall for evermore be satisfied with a full vision of God, so much as the
creature can hold. It Is true, the creature is finite, it shall not be infinite
as God himself is, but they shall behold the glorious visions of God himself,
which will be mighty gain. But again,

7. Seventhly, Believing souls by death shall be gainers in respect of their
habitation: here they dwell in a house of Clay, so Job calls it, Job 4. 19. it
is a house of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust, and is crushed before the
Moth. It is a poor house that a Moth can throw down, that the Moth can crush,
and yet this is the house, the house of the body, and this is the house that
the soul lives in whilst it is here; a house of Clay that has no foundation
but the dust: a house without a foundation, it cannot stand, it is down in an
instant, every storm of wind will blow it down, it has only its foundation of,
and from the dust; exceeding frail is the body set forth by this expression:
now what shall the soul gain when death comes, It has a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens, in 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know, that if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands eternal in the Heavens: It Is a mansion, or dwelling house,
it is not a Tabernacle; In my Fathers house are many mansions, Job. 14. 2. It Is
not made by the hand of man, it is made by God himself: It Is glory that was laid
up before the foundation of the world; it is uncreated glory, God himself will
be the heaven, he will be the dwelling place of his people, and they shall dwell
in him, throughout all Generations for ever and for ever: here is a change you
see, in respect of the habitation, and it will be much more gain, than for man
to change a Dungeon for a Palace, the soul comes out of a Dungeon, and it is put
into an Inheritance, an Inheritance with the Saints in light. But Again,

8. Eighthly, They gain in respect of their company: our Savior says in
Matthew. 8. 11. They shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom
of God; no worse company than Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the spirits of
just men made perfect: there shall be no failings, nor defects, there shall be
no want of love, there shall be no blemish to take off love, but they shall
enjoy the company of the spirits of just men made perfect, this will be a
mighty gain. Here there are many failings, failings in the best of Saints, the
best company that believers have, even Saints, there are failings in the best
of them; but there shall be nothing seen there, but the Image of God, nothing
but the Image of Christ; when they look upon one another, they shall see
nothing but an attractive love, there shall be no emulation there, they shall
not envy one another glory, but every one shall glory in his own happiness as
his own gain: they shall gain in respect of company. Again in the

9. Ninth place, They shall gain Confirmation and Establishment by this blessed
condition, all this that is spoken of, he shall be established in it for ever:
there shall be no more returning to sin and sorrow, no more returns of former
temptations, there shall be no more possibility to fall again, but it shall be
confirmed and established in blessedness, it shall no more lose his happiness
than Christ can lose his, no more turned out of heaven than the Son of God can
be turned out, they shall be confirmed and established for ever, there shall be
no robbers, nor no fear of danger; this is another part of their gain.

10. Tenthly, To name no more, Believers shall be gainers in respect of their
body; for their bodies shall be new molded at the Resurrection of the great
day, the body shall be made new and serviceable to the soul, every way fitted
and Organized for the soul to work: This corruptible shall put on incorruption,
says the Apostle, and mortality shall be swallowed up in life; God will make
up these vessels of the bodies of his people again at the Resurrection, and
when he has raised them up, he will raise them as vessels of honor, and
vessels of glory. And as it is said, that that matter whereof is made the
purest China, is buried many Generations in the earth before they take it, and
of that they make the purest China* so though you be buried in the earth, the
Lord will raise you up, though many Generations after, and they shall be raised
up, and fitted for the spirits of just men made perfect, that God may be
glorified both in soul and body to Eternity. This is the gain of that soul by
death* to that body whose life Christ is: And there must needs be gain to those
that are Christ's. For,

1. First of all, It were not possible that Believers should be willing to
part, and leave all comforts behind them, and that they should so part with all
willingly, with that which is so desirable in the world, I say, it could not
be, if there were not gain behind: for Gods people have nature as well as
others, and they have natural affections, and nature seeks its own
preservation, and it looks upon death as an enemy, and yet that this enemy
shall be entertained so willingly, that when the Lord calls, he should open his
bosom to receive the stroke that he shall send; and be a volunteer in his
death; certainly there is something in this, there is that which the World
knows not of: how willingly did Christ send forth his spirit? It Is said, He
cried with a loud voice, and gave up the Ghost, his spirit was not snatched away
violently, but he gave it up willingly; it is not so with the wicked man, and
it was not so with the rich fool in the Gospel, This night shall thy soul be
required at thy hand; his soul was commanded, it was taken from him by force
and violence, whether he will or no, he was not a volunteer, but his soul was
plucked from him; but that a man shall give his life up voluntarily, that he
should entertain death voluntarily, and part with all friends, Wife and
Parents; why, surely it is because the Lord gives a greater assurance of gain,
which is to be found beyond death it self. But again,

2. Secondly, If there were not such gain by death to the godly man, it were
not possible that he should make such a venture as he does. If a man venture
into a far Country, he will not venture for a little, he will venture for gain,
and good gain, or else he will not venture: there is a venture at death with
the godly man, he makes a venture, and it is the greatest venture that ever was
made, he does not venture his estate, but he ventures his soul which is
infinitely of more worth than his estate, and the venture is for Eternity, and
if that venture be lost, all is lost, and he is undone for ever, yet thus he
ventures and lancheth forth into the Gulf of Eternity: but he has a word from
the Lord, and he says, Well, if God will deceive me, let him, I will venture;
now the believing soul does see the future great gain that will follow death.
But again,

3. Thirdly, If it were not so, Believers were the miserablest creatures of all
men; If it were not for Christ, we were of all men most miserable, if there
were no hopes of better, then we were the miserablest of all men, for we are
the lowest of all men: Afflictions, Persecutions, Griefs and Sorrows of all
sorts is the portion, many times, of Gods dearest people and children; now if
there were nothing beyond the Grave, we were of all men most miserable; the
Apostle was in deaths often, he was dead every way, he carried his life in his
hand, he was the offscouring of the world, so accounted, and now if there were
in this life no hope, no hope of a Resurrection, no hopes of a better world,
then we were miserable indeed; but the believing soul knows that the end of the
righteous man is peace, and the end of the transgressour is, to be cut off. But
again,

4. Fourthly and lastly, to name no more, Death must needs be gain to believing
souls, because it was gain to Christ: Christ's gain came in by death, and
therefore so shall theirs: Ought not the Son of man to suffer these things, and
so to enter into his glory? It Is the way to his glory, by way of sufferings. He
was led along all his life in this way, his gain came in by losses, his honor,
his greatest honor came in by dishonor, and that reproach and that low
condition that befell him whilst he was in the World, he found honor in
dishonor, and his exaltation came in in a way of humiliation, and life came in
for all his people in a way of death, by his own death, He took upon himself
the form of a servant, etc. his exaltation came in in a way of humiliation, and
life for his people came in by his death; as it was with Christ, so shall it be
with his members; for there shall be a conformity, and there shall be an
uniformity betwixt Christ and them; as it was in the head, so shall it be with
the members; as his exaltation came in in a way of humiliation, so shall
theirs, and their life in the greatest of it shall come in by death; God the
Father delights to walk in this way, for it is contrary to the World, and God
delights always to do the greatest things by contraries. In the Creation of the
World, and so in the new Creation, when he made the World he made all things of
nothing: and so of the new Creation, he converts a sinner by that which is most
opposite, by the Word of the Lord, which his soul hates, and yet that Word of
the Lord does conquer him, and change him into his own likeness: and so God
leads his people to glory through a low way of suffering, and when he brings
them to the full possession of it, he carries them through the dark entry,
through the dark narrow strait entry of death, and through that place he leads
them to the enjoyment of that glory which comes in by death. I have no time for
Application: But Brethren consider it, death is gain to those whose life Christ
is, but it is loss, and the greatest loss that ever was met with, unto those
that have not Christ for their life; I beseech you to look to your selves, and
to look about you before death comes: when death comes you must venture such a
venture as never was made, you venture your souls and your Eternity, and by
that venture you are made or else you are marred to Eternity; look about you,
examine, Is death like to prove gain to you or no? What assurance have you that
death shall be gain? I should press this further, but the time is past already,
I shall reserve it for another time.

SERMON VII.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain:
YOU may remember the Point that we are insisting upon.

DOCT. That where Christ is life, there death is gain.

I have opened the Point, and showed you wherein death is gain to believers in
several particulars. But I shall proceed in answering some Objections before I
come to the Use.

Object. It may be, may some carnal heart say with Nicodemus, how can these
things be? how is it possible that death should be gain, when it strips a man
of all his comforts, turns him out of possession of House and Land, it is no
longer his, if death comes it deprives him of all his friends, he is left
friendless, it turns him naked out of the World, and how is it possible that
that should be gain?

Answ. I Answer, If there be not something beyond the Grave, if a man has not
an Inheritance laid up in Heaven, I grant it, that death is the greatest loss
of all, for it robs a man of all comforts at once; therefore I say, if a man
has not a share in the Land of Promise, if he has not a more endurable
substance in Heaven, I grant that death is a great loss; therefore what I say
concerning those who are gainers by death, it concerns them only that have
interest in Christ, and to them it is not loss to be stripped of all comforts;
for why? It puts them into possession of their Inheritance; and what though
death does strip them of a few outward comforts? It Is no great loss, or it is
not considerable. If a great Heir be gone home to his own Country, if he gets
to his own door, his own house, and his purse be taken from him, what are a few
pence? It Is no great wrong, because he has now taken possession of an
Inheritance that will bring him in a yearly Revenue, thousands it may be; the
loss of his few pence from his purse is no great matter.

2. Secondly, Besides, Whatsoever is lost in death, it is no great matter to a
gracious heart, because the World is Crucified to him, and he to the World
beforehand; I say, however the World may look upon death as a loss, yet a
gracious heart does not, because the World is dead to him beforehand, and if
it be dead, if it be a dead Carcass, it is no great loss to part with it; and
though a man loves his Friend never so dearly, as Sarah, she was the beloved of
Abraham, Abraham's beloved wife, and yet when death came, Give me a burying
place, says he, that I may bury my dead out of my sight, it was no matter to
be parted with, when she was dead; and so says a gracious heart of all the
things of the World, they are dead, The world is crucified to me, says the
Apostle, and I to the World, and therefore no great loss to him to part with
them, because they are dead to him.

3. Thirdly, Besides, A believing soul shall find all to be made up in God
abundantly; whatsoever seems to be a loss shall be made up in Heaven, with the
presence of God and Christ: Is there a loss of house and Land? The Lord will be
the dwelling place of his people throughout all Generations; do thou lose the
light of the Sun? the Lamb is the light of that City: thou shall find all
relations in God, Husband, Wife, Brother, Sister, whatever relation is broken
by death, it shall be made up in God, he shall be their friend instead of all,
and you shall find the comfort of all relations made up in Heaven; in Genesis 17.
7. I will be a God to thee: it comprehends all relations, that is, Friends,
Father, Husband, Wife, House, Land, all creature comforts whatsoever: I will be
a God to thee, they are to be found in God. Therefore whatsoever, I say, seems
to be lost by death, shall be made up in the enjoyment of God himself, and of
his Son Jesus Christ: so much in answer to that. But,

Object. 2. Some poor hearts that are taken with this truth, and with the great
gain of Heaven, will try out, O Lord, why do I live in this miserable world?
and why is light given to him that is in misery? and why is life given to the
bitter in Spirit? Job 3. 20. I have heard of the gain of death, and I cannot be
content any longer in this vale of misery, to be kept from my gain, I know not
how to bear it any longer: O that the Lord would make haste, and let loose his
hand upon me, and cut off this thread of my life.

Answ. Now good Christian, let me say a little to thee; do not make too much
have, do not make more have than thy Father would have thee. I remember the
Apostle in Ephesians. 4. 26. says, Be angry and sin not; so say I to thee, desire
death but sin not in thy desire: every desire of death, is not a good and a
warrantable desire; there is a holy desire of death, and there is a sinful
desire of death, and have a care thou sinnest not.

Quest. But you will say then, How far may a man desire death? When are his
desires holy, and when are they sinful? This is a Case of Conscience, that is
very obvious and obnoxious to most of Gods people at one time or other, and
therefore I shall spend some time in answer.

First, I shall show you when a man's desires of death are sinful. And secondly,
When they are holy and good.

1. First of all, Desires of death are Sinful, when a man shall act any thing
against his own life: I say, when a creature shall act any thing against his
own life, when a man or woman shall do any thing that shall shorten their own
days, or when they shall refuse the comfort that God has given, or helps to
prolong life: if a man's hand be found against his own life, it proceeds from a
sinful and wicked desire of death. There Is great evil in this, let me show you
the evil. For,

1. First, It does pluck that out of Gods hand, which God has challenged as
his right: the issues of life and death they belong to the Lord; my times are
in thy hand, says David; now it is wicked boldness for a man to pluck times
out of Gods hand; when a man will have them in his own hand, and not that God
should have the disposal of them.

2. Secondly, Besides, There is this evil in it, A man casts away the most
precious Jewel, when he acts against his own life; he casts away the most
precious Jewel in nature: Life is the preciousest of all natural gifts; Life is
a Talent, a great Talent, it is a Talent given thee for to improve it for God,
not to waste it away; God gives thee this Talent, that it may be laid out for
him, that thy life may be laid out for his name and glory, and not to cast it
away at thy own pleasure, or displeasure: know therefore, that if any man shall
at any time act any thing against his own life, God will call him to account
for it; if the wicked servant was condemned, because he did not improve his
Talent, what shall become of him that threw away his Talent? Life is precious;
when a man shall act any thing against his own life, it proceeds from sinful
desires of death.

3. Thirdly, Again, Desires of death are sinful, When a man shall desire to
die, before he knows what it is to live or to die; when a man desires to die,
before he has begun to live, or before he knows what it is to die. There is
many a poor creature will be speaking against his life: O that my life were at
an end; O that God would take me out of the World: But have thou begun to live
yet to God? Many a poor creature will speak against his own life before he
knows what God has done for him: have thou done the work God has sent thee
into the World for? Have thou glorified his name on earth? Have thou finished
thy course? Have thou considered these things before thou desire to die? Do
thou know what it is to die? Have thou considered that death is a door that
opens to Eternity? It opens to an Eternal condition, to a place whence there is
no return: Have thou considered what door death will open to thee, whether to
the inheritance of the Saints in light, or to an inheritance with the wicked in
utter darkness? If thou have not well considered of these things before thou
desire to die, then these desires of death are sinful desires: No, rather go
first to God, and desire him to teach thee to live. It may be thou have been
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years in the flesh, have thou begun to live? have
thou made him the end of all thy services? do thou bring forth fruit to him,
and not to thy self? is it he that strengthens thee and carries thee out to all
thy duties and services? is Christ thy life? Thou had need know what it is to
live: desire that God would teach thee, what is the end he sent thee into the
World for, the cause of thy coming, rather that thou may know how to live,
and when to die, that when death comes it may be gain, for if thou do desire
death before, thy desires are sinful.

4. Again, Fourthly, Desires of death are sinful, When a man desires death in a
passion: It is a failing that is incident unto Gods own people, and therefore
you had need take heed of it: It was Jonah's fault, and also Elias failing, in
Jonah 4. 3. says he, Take away my life, it is better for me to die than to
live; and when Jonah spoke this, he was in a great passion: says God in Verse
9. Do thou well to be angry? I do well to be angry even unto the death. Was
Jonah fit to die now? to die in an anger, to die in a passion? Certainly if at
any time, Jonah was now unfit to die. It was a strange passion he was now in,
and at this time he was angry with God himself, and yet this man will needs
die; did he know what he said? O, passion, passion is blind and unreasonable;
he will go to God, he will go to the Throne of God, to dwell with God for ever,
when he is angry with him, he is angry with the grace and mercy of God, in
Jonah 4. 2, 3. For I know that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil: Therefore now, O
Lord, take I beseech thee, my life from me, for it is better for me to die than
to live. Certainly Jonah was now unfit to die, to go to God, whenas there were
such contrary distempers prevailed in his spirit, such a distemper as was most
contrary to God; God was full of love, full of bowels and pity, full of
meekness, patience, compassion, calmness and quietness of mind: contrary to all
this, Jonah must and would needs die; here is a passion which is a sinful desire
of death; and so Elijah in 1 Kings 19. 4. But he himself went a days Journey
in the Wilderness, and came and sat down under a Juniper tree: and he requested
for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my
life: for I am no better than my Fathers; Jonah will die in a passion of anger;
Elijah would die in a passion of fear: he was afraid of Jezebel, afraid that
she should cut him off, but it was his failing; what was Elijah loath to be made
a Martyr? would he die? and is he loath to die in Gods cause? to die for the
truth? why, would Elijah die, yet afraid that God will not support him, and uphold
him in his way? This is his infirmity, like unto those of Moses's; therefore,
Brethren, take heed of Elijah's fears, and Jonah's passion. It is common, if
they meet with any discontent, O then that God would take away my life, O that
I were out of the world; thus to desire to die when in passion, thou art least
fit to die; and therefore it is a sinful desire. That Is a Third. Again,

4. Fourthly, Desires of death are sinful when a man shall desire to die, only
to gain ease to the Flesh, to be rid of some troubles or afflictions that lay
upon him: When a man says, O I lie under a heavy burden, and I know not how to
get rid of it, O that God would make an end of my days, for I see if such or
such affliction comes upon me, I know not how to bear it when it comes; O that
God would take away my life beforehand; this is a desire of the flesh, which is
a sinful desire. I will show you the sinfulness of it, when a man desires to
die only upon these grounds, to be rid of trouble and affliction.

1. First, He does charge God foolishly: It is said of Job in the latter end of
the first Chapter, In all this he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. But
afterward Job did charge God, when he came to consider the day of his birth, he
spoke against his own life, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,
and life given to the bitter in soul? There Job did charge God foolishly, as if
God were not wise enough to measure out thy portion* O thou would die that
thou may be eased of such and such an affliction, thou chargest God with want
of faithfulness, want of wisdom, want of love: see what Absalom said when he
flattered with the people, O that I were Judge, says he, I would hear every
man's Cause, and it should not be so and so, I would rule better than my Father
David; he charged his Government with folly, I would do Justice better than he.
And truly so thou say, O that I were in Gods place, O that I sat upon the
Throne, I would dispose better of my own condition, I would dispose of it with
more wisdom, and more love, and more compassion. What a high charge is this to
lay upon God! O, have a care thou do not charge God; thou say, wherefore is
life given to thee in such an affliction? thou chargest God foolishly: Do
thou not know? why God knows (it may be) that the life of Nature is continued,
that so he may increase the life of grace in thee, or that he may kill the life
of sin in thee, or that he may give thee more of himself, that thou may have
more experience of his love and goodness, or that thou may be a pattern to
others, a pattern of his patience, of his power and goodness, and therefore is
life given thee.

2. Secondly, Nay further, When thou speak against thy own life, and
desire to die, thou do limit the holy one of Israel, and commit that sin
which the Children of Israel did, they tempted God, and limited the holy one of
Israel. When thou say, O that God would take away thy life, that thy
affliction may may be taken away; why, cannot God take away thy affliction, and
not take away thy life? has God no other way? He can make a hundred doors, and
find out a thousand ways; must he needs open that door, the strait door of
death, or else he cannot open a door of deliverance for thee? why do thou
limit and tempt the holy one of Israel? If thou desire death because thou
would be delivered, thy desire is sinful. O desire rather that the Lord would
be with thee in thy affliction, and make thee a Conqueror over thy affliction,
that thou may get above thy affliction to glorify God in the fire. That Is a
Fourth. But,

5. Fifthly, Thy desires of death are sinful, When as thy desires are
unlimited, when they are not subjected to the Will of God, when they are
absolute, when a man will have no denial whether God see it good or no, whether
the Lords time be come or no; thou say it is gain, shall I not desire gain?
No, thou may not desire gain with an immoderate desire. The Apostle James
reproves those that say, We will go, and buy, and sell, and get gain, no, but
says he, Stay and ask God leave, If God will, we will do so and so, etc. When
you would go to the new Jerusalem for gain in that City, say not, We will go,
we will go; no, say, If God will let me go: God will have thee to finish thy
course; there are many that would go, though the Lord has no need of them;
these unlimited desires of death, are unlawful desires.

Quest. But you will say, When are desires of death Lawful? I shall desire to
speak a few words to that briefly.

Answ. First of all, When a man does not desire death for death, but death for
life. There are many poor creatures are desirous to die, but they know not
wherefore, but now a holy man has holy desires, his desires are not death for
death, but death for life: for death is an enemy; to desire death, only to
cease to be, only to lie still in the Grave and cease to be; the Apostle in 2
Cor. tells you wherefore he desired death, he don't desire to be uncloathed,
But to be clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed up in life; not to be
uncloathed, to lay aside the body, to be in the Grave, and to cease from being,
but to be swallowed up in life, to be clothed upon, to desire death for life:
seek for that life which we are sure shall come into us by death, this is a
lawful desire.

2. Secondly, Desires of death are lawful when a man desires to die, that he
may sin no more against God, that corruption may be fully mortified, that there
may be nothing left in the soul to provoke the Lord any longer, that may
displease the eye of his glory, that it may be holy in all things, made like
unto Christ, even without sin: a gracious heart says and believes, because the
Lord has spoken it, that death shall be the death of sin, as well as the death
of the body, sin brought death into the world, and death shall carry sin quite
away, that at death it shall be abolished, that there shall be no more sense of
sin, no sense of lust; to desire death for this end, that the creature may sin
no more, that God may be displeased no more, and grieved no more, this is a
lawful desire.

3. Thirdly, When a man desires death, that he may enjoy communion with Christ,
this is lawful, to enjoy full communion with Christ, that was the Apostles
desire, Phil. 1. 23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ which is
far better; wherefore does he desire to be dissolved? he tells you, To be with
Christ, to see the face of Christ, to enjoy the presence of Christ, that he may
be filled with the love of Christ, and behold the glory of Christ, and may be
for ever in the presence of Christ, and never look off his face, but to enjoy
full and perfect communion with Christ: to desire death for these ends is
lawful.

4. Again, Fourthly, When a man desires death, That he may lift up the name of
God in Heaven, that he may do the Will of God perfectly, as it is done in
Heaven by the Saints and Angels. O here he comes short in all the works and
services he desires to do, he cannot do the thousandth part of that which he
desires to do, and therefore desires death, that he may lift up the name of God
fully in Heaven, that he may there be swallowed up in the present enjoyment of
God and Christ, that he may be infinitely enlarged to sing Hallelujahs unto God
to all Eternity; thus to desire death is lawful. But,

5. Fifthly and lastly, to say no more, This desire of death must be with an
indifferency to the Will of God: though it be for never such good ends, though
a man desires death for life's sake, though he desire death that he may sin no
more, that he may be with Christ, that he may lift up the name of God fully in
Heaven; yet if it be not with an indifferency to the Will of God, it is not a
holy and lawful desire: and therefore the Apostle in the Text, refers himself
to the Will of God, I am in a strait, I know not what to do: it is best for me
to die, I am in a strait, I will not determine: though I shall be deprived of
my gain, and be a loserby it, yet it is no great matter, if God may gain any
thing by my life, if his Church may gain any thing, if any poor soul may gain
any thing, if God has any further work for me, I am content to live, I know
not what to choose, says he, but I refer my self to God, this makes the
desires of death lawful. When a man has considered all, and yet
notwithstanding he knows death shall be gain to him, yet he refers himself
still to the Will of God. If thou have any service which may be for the good of
thy people, and for the advancement of thy name, if thou have any message,
though it is hard to keep from home, if the Lord will have me do any service
for him, why, I am willing. When the desires of death are thus referred to the
Will of God, submitting to his Will, whether by life or death; thus are the
desires of death holy and lawful. Thus have I shown you when desires of death
are sinful, and when lawful. The Application of the Point is yet behind.

SERMON VIII.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
THE Subject in hand is Gain, and therefore I hope you that are wise Merchants
will not be weary of it: the whole World is for gain; every man says, Who will
show us any good? I have showed you a great deal of gain that is by death, for
those that have interest in Christ: and O that the Lord would make your hearts
desirous to know how you shall get this gain, how you may so live as that the
great venture you make of death may be gain unto you. But I shall prosecute
that in its time. You may remember the last day we spent most of the time in
Answering a Question.

Whether it be lawful to desire death or no? I told you there is a good desire,
and there is a sinful desire of death, and I showed you the differences. But I
shall wave repetition, and come to the Application of the Point.

Use 1. It lets us see what a fancy or conceit that is that men have taken up,
That the soul has no existence without the body, but that it ceases to be,
whenas the body is laid in the dust: there is such a conceit that the soul
sleeps, or that it ceases to be until the day of Resurrection, that God should
give life again to the body.

This Text does confute that opinion; though it may be matter of temptation,
even to Gods own people: if it were so, then it should not be gain to die, if
the soul cease to be, when separated from the body, it should not be gain to
die. I might bring many places to confute this: what think you of that in Luke
23. 43. where Christ says unto the good Thief, This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise; surely Christ speaks not of the body, it could not be understood
of the Grave that his body should rest in, for to be with Christ in Paradise
implies more: Paradise was a place of pleasure, it was a place in which Adam
did enjoy the presence of God: therefore certainly the soul has existence when
separated from the body, the souls of the righteous are where they do enjoy the
presence of God. Again, that in Rev. 6. 9, 10. where it is said of them that
are under the Altar, they cried out, How long Lord, holy and true, will it be,
e're thou avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Then the soul has
existence when it is out of the body, for these souls cried, How long Lord? It
is true, there are diverse operations of the soul which do cease, which do
depend upon the operation of the body; but there are many operations in the
soul which the soul does most excellently exercise, notwithstanding its
separation from the body: the Apostle Paul was in a holy, ecstasie as out of
the body, and when he was in the body it is said, His soul saw such things as
were unutterable, not to be seen nor heard. But I shall not need to go any
further to strengthen you against this temptation; the Apostle in this Chapter
says, I am in a strait between two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better. Where you may see, first, That the soul when it is
separated from the body, it does not cease to be, for it is only departed: I
desire to depart, an active expression; some Translate it, to flinch, or move,
to remove from one house to another; or to be loosed, or dissolved, so some
Translate it: I desire to be set free from this my prison; my soul is in prison
while I am in the body, now I desire to depart from this house, to be fetched
from this house, to depart from, this Prison, and to be with Christ, to depart
and to be with Christ: so then there is a being with Christ in a state of
dissolution, for the Apostle does desire to be dissolved for this very end,
that when he was dissolved, he might be with Christ; there is a being with
Christ, there is an enjoyment of Christ in a state of dissolution. Nay, he
says, It is far better: he knew that he should enjoy more of Christ when he
was gone, he should have more intimate communion with the Lord Jesus in a state
of separation, than when he was in the body, that condition was far better; now
I say, if the soul do sleep, if it ceases to be, or to act or to enjoy Christ,
when it is separated from the body till the day of Resurrection; why, then he
could not have said, it is far better to die, and to be with Christ. But it may
be said, it is better to die, because death frees from the miseries of life,
and so the Apostle might say, It is better to die, because death frees from the
miseries of life, because there is a rest and a cessation from the present
troubles and turmoils in the world. If there had been nothing else, he could
not have said, It is better to die; for I say, to live, to live the most
afflicted life, and the most troublesome life in the world is better than to
die, and to cease to be, if there be not an enjoyment of life after that
departure. Yea, it had been better for the Apostle to have lived, if there had
been no existence of the soul, for then all knowledge of God and of Christ
cease, and no actings for God, no lifting up of the name of God, it had been
better for him to have lived to have been serviceable to God in his generation,
to have lived to have known Christ, for all knowledge of God, upon that
supposition, is to be lost and gone; to rest thus, his gain is no better than
the beasts gain, the very beasts gain rest to the flesh: If there had been no
more gain by death, he could not have said, It had been better to die than to
live; and to live, it had been far better than to die and rest, if there had
not been a further enjoyment of God in Christ, in that estate of separation and
dissolution. And therefore I beseech you that you would hold this fast, that
you may be strengthened against this temptation, that there is no enjoyment of
God and Christ in a state of separation, when the soul is loosened from the
body: though it is true, the full enjoyment, the full revelation of heaven is
not until the Resurrection, when soul and body shall both enjoy the glory of
heaven. But so much for the first Use.

Use 2. Secondly, If death be gain where Christ is life: then this may comfort
you in the loss of your friends, you should not mourn inordinately for the loss
of your friends, when you have hopes of their death. It is true, it is not only
lawful, but it is a duty to mourn. I shall show you how far it is lawful to
mourn in the loss of friends.

1. First of all, As seeing that the hand of God is gone out against you: If
the Lord comes and makes any breach in a Family, and the hand of God is gone
out against you, the Lord would that men should lay it to heart, in Heb. 12. 5.
My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked: there are two great extremes, either to despise the chastening of the
Lord, or else to faint under it; the Lord would that we should lay his hand to
heart when it is upon us; to consider what is the voice of the Rod, what is the
message that is in its mouth, and what it is that the Lord speaks by such and
such an affliction. Again,

2. Secondly, Our mourning ought to be either more or less according as those
that we part with are more or less useful and serviceable in their Generation;
when God plucks away those that are Pillars, those that should stand in the
gap, those that should prevent Judgments, that should hold his hand from
striking a Nation; in such a case the Lord allows, nay, he calls for a great
deal of sorrow: and it is made a sign of a hardhearted people, and a people
that are fit for destruction, and nigh to ruin, when the Lord shall take away
such Instruments, and it is not laid to heart, in Isa. 57. 1. The righteous
perish, says he, no man lay it to heart, none considers that they are taken
away from the evil to come; It is a sign that there was evil a coming to that
people, when the righteous are taken away, and they do not lay it to heart. But
I say, when that we have no hopes in the death of Friends, when we see the hand
of the Lord is gone out to cut off men in sin, when God shall meet them in a
way of rebellion, I confess there is more cause of raking up a sad lamentation.
You know what was David's carriage in this case, when God smote his son
Absalom, he was smitten in his rebellion, he died in his sin, and therefore
David takes up a sad lamentation, O Absalom, my son, my son, would God I had
died for thee; but in another case, in the case of another Child, when his
Child died, in whose death he had hopes, David did not mourn with bitterness
then, he rather was comforted: seeing it is the Will of God, I shall go to him,
says he, he shall not return to me. Thus you see how far it is lawful to
mourn, whenas God takes away a friend by death; but when we have hopes in their
death, that death is gain unto them, this should exceedingly compose and calm
and quiet our spirits.

Object. But you will say, Your loss is great, your loss is exceeding great,
such a dear Husband, such a loving Wife, such a beloved Child, there is none
know how great my loss is, and therefore do not condemn me in my mourning.

Answ. I Answer, How dear so ever thy friend, and how great so ever thy loss
be, if thou have interest in Christ, thy loss cannot undo thee; if the Lord be
thy portion, thy loss cannot undo thee: Baruch was reproved because he took up
so sad a lamentation in Isa. 45. 3. Woe is me, for the Lord has added grief to
my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest: woe is me, etc. he had
interest in God, and therefore he did not well so to complain, because his loss
could not un* do him; yea, thy loss is not so great but God can make it up in
himself, and if God give thee more of himself, though less of the creature,
thou shall have no cause to complain.

3. Thirdly, But again, Consider, and look upon not only thy loss, but look
upon the gain of thy friend: if thou have hopes in his death, look upon his
gain, and let that quiet thy spirit; why, he gains rest, he is laid down to
sleep, will you mourn when your friends lie down in their beds to sleep? The
righteous when death comes, it lays them upon their beds to sleep; if thy
friend gain rest, why then should thou disquiet thy self by inordinate
mourning? He gains peace and joy: the righteous enter into peace, and therefore
why should thou so mourn, as to disturb thy peace, or to quench and damp the
joy of the Lord in thee? Why, it is thy friend that dies in the Lord, it is the
time of his advancement, he is advanced, it is his Marriage-day, or a day of
Coronation, and therefore there is no cause of inordinate mourning. And you
that are Parents, that love your Children never so dearly, you will be willing
to part with them for their preferment, though you marry them, when it may be
you shall enjoy little of them, when they shall go hundreds of Miles from you,
you shall enjoy little of them; But you will say, it is to a man that has a
great Estate, and why should I hinder them? Now are you willing to part with
your Children for preferment when you see they may enjoy a little of earth, and
shall you be unwilling to part with them, when they may enjoy the fullness of
Heaven? Will you trust a man, a creature with them, and will not you trust the
Lord with them, who has more right to them than you, and has more bowels
toward them, and more power to do them good, infinitely more than you? Why,
you are willing to part with your friends for their safety; if dangers are
coming, you are content that your friends should be hidden in places of safety,
and shall you mourn, if the Lord shall take your friends to hide them? for if
God do take away the righteous, it is but to hide them, he will hide them from
the evils to come, he will take them and hold them in the Grave, that they
shall not see the evil that is coming, he will hide them till all calamities be
past and gone, and they shall then come again in the time of the Resurrection.
If you love me, says Christ, you would rejoice because I say I go to the
Father: Do you love your friends, and will you mourn inordinately because they
go to their Father, when they go to lie in the bosom of their Father?

But you will say, Did not Christ weep when Lazarus was dead? Christ wept and
mourned. It is lawful to mourn, I told you before, and how far you may mourn;
But it is conceived, our Lord did no mourn nor weep so much because Lazarus was
de at as because Lazarus was to live again; our friend Lazarus sleeps: Christ
did not weep because of that, Christ knew what he intended to do, that Lazarus
should be raised again, therefore he did not weep for the loss of Lazarus, but
rather he wept that Lazarus was coming into a troublesome World, for he knew
that his friend Lazarus should be a loser by it, though Lazarus was content
that Christ might be glorified to come again; even as Christ was content to
leave the glory of Heaven to do his Father service. Christ knew Lazarus should
be a loser, and therefore he was very loath to awake him, to stir him; his
friend was now lain down to sleep, and shall he awake him before the morning?
Therefore was it that Christ wept. Still, I say, retain this as a ground of
Consolation, in the parting with your friends, when ever you have hopes in
their death, know that it is a time of their advancement, and therefore whilst
you have your friends; do all the good to them you can, and get all the good
from them you can, so that that neglect of yours may not be a burden to you,
and be a gaul to you in the loss of friends, but when God shall call for them,
when you have hopes in their death, do not grieve inordinately, but know and
rest in this, and rejoice in it that it is their gain, and their greatest
advantage. So much for the second Use.

Use 3. Let this stir up every one to be inquisitive, how death shall be made
gain to them; I say, let every one seek after this, it is a point of as great
concernment as you have met with, and therefore you should spend many thoughts
upon it; how shall you know, and how shall you get assurance of this, That when
death comes it shall be gain unto you? Let me stir you up to seek after this,
to get the knowledge and assurance of it. Why Consider,

1. First of all, That you cannot withstand the stroke of death, you had need
make have in this work, I say, you cannot out-stand the stroke of death when it
comes; the stroke is unavoidable. Poor man! he is crushed before the very Moth,
there is a decree, and an appointment of God concerning it, and therefore it
cannot be withstood. O how little do men exercise themselves in the thoughts of
this? That man does not only die, because he is made of dust, and so must
return to dust, all creatures must be dissolved into their principle; but he
dies by his Statute Law, he dies by the decree and appointment of God, which
was inflicted by way of punishment, and this still makes it more certain: In
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death, which was appointed for
all men once to die; there is no man can redeem his soul from going down to the
Grave; what man is it that lives and shall not see death? It is every one of
your conditions, every fool that is here: and therefore what need of looking
out to get assurance that death shall be gain!

2. Secondly, Nay let me tell you further, that you may make the more have in
this work, This time is like to be a time of great Mortality, Judgments will
sweep away many, Plagues shall be poured out upon the World, till the World be
reconciled to God and his Truth; and now in this latter time, there shall be
greater opposition than ever, and so greater Plagues than ever; now that Christ
is making way for his Kingdom, he will bear down thousands before him. Look to
your selves, you had need get assurance that death shall be gain: If his wrath
be kindled but a little: blessed are they that trust in him; blessed are they
that know death is gain; I tell you Christ shall go forth in a great deal of
wrath now to smite and bring down his enemies to make his way to his Kingdom;
and certainly the appearances of Jesus Christ shall be exceeding glorious, and
terrible to the World; in Rev. 6. 16, 17. see how terrible Christ's coming shall
be, which certainly is at hand! even the Kings and Counselors, and the great
men in the World shall cry; when the appearances of the wrath of God do come
even amongst the Saints, what flinching shall there be of great men, to be hid
from the wrath of the Lamb? Still this calls upon us to get assurance that
death shall be gain. Nay, let me tell you, that many of Gods own people may be
born down in the brunt, for Antichrist will cost something in his fall; as he
cost a great deal in his rise, so he falls by violence, and by the sword, and
it is possible his fall may crush many of Gods own people.

Nay, let me propound this to your Consideration, That it is the greatest
adventure that ever soul can make, this of death; and let that be another spur
to you where death shall be gain: you do not venture your Estate, but you
venture your souls, and a greater venture cannot be made; it is the venture of
the soul, and it is a venture made for Eternity; that, that can be but once
done, had need be well done: It is appointed for all men once to die, and but
once, they cannot die it over again, they had need learn to die well when death
comes, that you that are Believers may trust God in the venture, you may shut
your eyes and follow God, as Abraham did, when as God led him forth from his
Kindred, from his Fathers house, he follows God no man knows whither: and so
must you do when death comes, shut your eyes, and believe, and venture, and
follow God whither he will lead you, though from your Kindred, and from your
Fathers house to a Land you know not: and therefore before death comes, your
eyes had need be opened. Look about you and consider seriously of the venture
that you make of death, and how it is that you shall be able to go through.
What is it that shall carry you through this venture? you had need take a great
deal of pains in searching after this, you had need learn to get assurance that
death shall be gain, how else shall you be carried through this venture?

And let me tell you, It is strange to consider that rational men that have
rational souls, should be no more moved in such a point as this is; when a man
shall know that it is appointed for him to die, and that in death he does make
an adventure, the greatest venture that he can make, he ventures for Eternity,
the greatest venture that ever was, and yet whilst it is high time, that he
does make no more inquisition after the knowledge of this one thing, that death
might be his gain. And let me speak a word to you who are in Christ, that I may
press it upon you. Labor to get the knowledge of this, that death may be your
gain; you that do walk in the dark, and at uncertainties concerning this, you
that fear the Lord and have given up your names to him, and now walk in the
dark, and at uncertainties, and know not whether death shall be your gain; No,
my Brethren, this is a sad condition, next to the condition of the
unregenerate, this is the saddest; O that the Lord would cause you to wait upon
him till he clear up this truth to you; why, how mightily are your spirits
disinabled! the want of the knowledge of this, that death shall be gain, it
keeps you in bonds; in Heb. 2. 14. Who through fear of death, were all their
lifetime subject to bondage: you are kept all your life-long in bondage,
through the fear of death, because you know not whether it will be your gain or
no; O it is a sad condition that Gods own people should be all their life-long
subject to bondage. Nay, if you have not this knowledge, that death shall be
made gain, your spirits will be weak and feeble, it will weaken your hands and
knees, and make you unable to do for God; the want of this knowledge will make
a Christian to walk basely and cowardly, it will make him servile, and make him
slavish in what he does for God, and make him fearful to stand for God, and to
hold up the name of God in evil times, and in suffering times, it will make a
man be base, and betray his trust, the want of this knowledge will make a
Christian betray his trust, it will make him deny Christ and his truth many
times, as Peter did, when he was pressed with this fear.

And therefore to say no more, As you desire to have your spirits raised
mightily for God, and for the service of your Generation; would you do great
things for God, (and truly God has great things to do for his people, even in
these last and latter days, even such things as eyes have not seen, nor ears
heard, God will work in these latter days, and his people shall be his
Instruments.) What shall raise up your spirits, make them noble and suitable to
the great work and enterprises that God has now in hand? If any thing in the
World will do it, it is this, the knowledge and assurance that death cannot
hurt you, when it comes nigh: death shall be an advantage to you, you shall
find gain in death, and whatsoever you shall lose, you shall find it infinitely
made up in God; the knowledge of this that death shall be gain, it heightens
your spirits, and raises up your spirits in the great things of God, in the
service of your Generation. But you will say, How shall we come by this
knowledge, by the assurance of this, that death shall be gain? It is a great
Question which will take up much time, therefore I shall not enter into it. So
much for this time.

SERMON IX.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
WHere Christ is life to any soul, there death is gain; That Is the Proposition
in hand. I have entered the Application, and drew several conclusions the last
day by way of Instruction.

But I shall spend the remainder of my time in Answer to this Question.

Quest. But you will say, How shall we come by this knowledge, the assurance of
this, that death shall be gain?

Answ. That you would all labor to get assurance that death shall be gain to
you. It is a point that concerns every soul in the Congregation, and therefore
it calls for your attention; get assurance that death shall be gain to you. And
let me speak,

1. First, To such as have not interest in Christ, but are in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity, under the power of sin and Satan, and
so necessarily under bondage and fear of Death.

You had need look about you betimes, there is a time a coming when you must
make such a venture as you never made in all your lives; you Ship all that you
have, and all that you can carry with you for another world: when death comes,
there is such a venture as never was made in respect of the distance of place,
you do not venture to the Indies, but you venture to another world, a world
which we had known nothing of, if the Lord had not pleased to give us a glimpse
of it in his Word, for else we should have known nothing of it; you venture
more than all your Estates: for, my friends, you venture your souls; the soul
that is more worth than all you have in the World, if you were Masters of the
whole world: What! will a man venture for the gain of the World, to lose his
own soul? Your loss is irrecoverable, there is no hopes of any future trading,
for you venture once for all, sor it is for ever.

And herefore, I beseech you, Consider what need you have of looking to this
venture, and to get assurance that it shall be made a gainful venture to you.

But you will say, What directions will you give us, that we may have assurance
of gain in this venture? I shall speak but one word to you.

Seek after an interest in Christ, get Christ to be your life, and then you
shall be assured that death shall be gain: I will not give you any other
direction, I will not set you any other way, it will but lead you about; and
alas, poor souls, you had not need be led about, you know not how soon the Wind
and Tide may serve, and you may set Sail for Eternity. And therefore again, I
say, seek after an interest in Christ, get him to be your life: If death shall
find you whilst you live to the World, and live in your selves, whilst you live
upon your works, upon your righteousness, upon your riches, upon the creature;
I say, if death shall find you before Christ be your life, it is not possible
that it should be gain: know that there is none can give you assurance but only
Christ, there is none can assure the commodity that you Ship for Eternity, but
only Christ, he is the Master of that Insuring Office, and there is none can
assure the soul but only he; I tell you, the venture that you make, is more
worth than all the world, it would break the whole World to make good the loss
of the soul, and yet not able to effect it; Christ sits in the Insuring Office,
and he only can give you assurance that death shall be gain, and therefore go
and wait upon the Lord for the promise of Christ: Christ is made over to poor
sinners in the promise of free grace, and when Christ is given, all other
promises are given with him, and if Christ be given with them, then this
promise is true, that death shall be made gain to you: go and wait at the
footstool of grace, and say, Lord, give out one word, one promise, and that
shall be my assurance for my venture for Eternity; do not rest till you get
Christ into the Ship, till you get Christ into the venture to venture with you;
when Christ comes once into the soul, he will be a good Pilot, he will carry
you through all straits and difficulties, he will save you in the midst of all
storms you shall meet with in your passage to Eternity, he will rebuke the wind
and the waves, though the Ship were ready to be overwhelmed: he can stop every
leak, he will throw out every thing that is burdensome unto the Ship; then death
lightens, and out goes sin, and out goes self; Micah 7. 19. And thou will cast
all their iniquities into the depth of the Sea. Well then, go to the Lord and
say, O Lord, the time is a coming when I must make a venture; I must venture my
soul, I must venture for eternity and to another world, and I would fain have
my Goods insured before hazard comes, before I shoot the Gulf; give me a word
of promise from thy self, and I shall rest upon it, if thou will come into the
Ship, if thou will be my Pilot, I know then that all shall be safe, and I shall
not only meet with safety, but I shall make the most gainful voyage that ever
was made; I say, get Christ to be your life, O rest not till Christ have
Insured you that all shall be safe: this is the only way to make death gain.
But,

2. Secondly, I shall speak to such as have interest in Christ, and yet do walk
in the dark, and still are as if they walked in the region and shadow of death;
they have chosen the Lord for their portion, and they have cleaved to him, and
yet are not able to say that death will be gain to them. I beseech you labor
to get your hearts fortified, and your souls strengthened against the fears of
death, O how unuseful will you be until that be done? What bondage are your
spirits in through fear of death till that be done? How low are your spirits,
how unsuitable unto Gods glorious dispensations until that be done? Therefore
look unto the Lord this day to strengthen your selves against the fears of
death. What shall strengthen you, you will say, how shall our spirits be
fortified against these carnal sinful fears of death?

1. First of all, Labor to understand clearly what is the nature of the
Covenant of Grace; I say, labor to understand clearly the nature of the
Covenant of Grace, what that Covenant is by which now God saves his Children,
and brings all his Sons unto glory: The ignorance of this keeps Christians in
bondage through fear of death; know therefore, that the way of salvation now,
it is by a Covenant of free Grace, God engages for all, and it is even of free
promise, I will pardon, and I will save, and I will sanctify, I will give
salvation, and I will give faith to apprehend that salvation; Ephesians. 2. 8. By
Grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God; there is an abundance of the Covenant of Grace in these words, You are
saved by grace, through Faith; Ay, But that Faith is not of your selves, but it
is the gift of God: know that all is given out freely unto poor creatures under
the Gospel; and that all that God requires to be done, it is not to make any
purchase of Love, or Grace, or Heaven, there is no sacrifice or oblation to be
offered any more: Christ has offered himself a sacrifice once for all, and
there needs no more oblation, no more sin-offering, but that all the sacrifices
of the Saints now under the Gospel, are sacrifices of thanksgiving only; it is
only to render unto the Lord for what he has done, for what he has given out
freely by Jesus Ch^^^^. Brethren, labor to know the freeness of Gods Covenant
in this and the like particular, it will be an excellent preparatory to thee to
die well, and to fortify thy self against deaths approaches, viz. the clear
understanding of this Covenant; it is said in Heb. 2. 15. That when Christ
came, he delivered them who through fear of death, were all their lifetime
subject to bondage; In the Gospel men are delivered from the fear of death,
because that the Gospel does clearly unfold the Covenant of grace. Before the
coming of Christ they were trained up in a more legal way, they did not fee the
clearness of the Covenant until Christ came, and therefore till Christ came
they were in bondage through fear of death; but when the Gospel was once given
out, and where that comes, it dtoh unfold Gods Covenant, the Covenant of his
Grace in the freeness of it, which does mightily fortify and strengthen the
hearts of his people against fears of death; and truly, so long as any of Gods
people do act legally in their spirits, I say, though they be under a Covenant
of Grace, yet if they act legally in their services, not clearly understanding
the Covenant they are under, it is not possible that they should meet with
perfect peace, or be strengthened to this venture of death with freedom of soul
without abundance of fear: Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on thee, Isai 6. 3. because he trusts in thee; when the soul trusts
only in God, when it rests only in the Word of God as a foundation of the
Covenant of Grace, then it rests in peace; but when the soul does act legally,
and thinks he shall purchase something by his actings, O how unquiet and legal
will those services be to him? When he works for life, how will he know he has
wrought enough? If he stays himself on his own righteousness, and not on the
righteousness of Christ, there will be mis-givings of heart, and no perfect
peace; Ay, but is this righteousness complete? Have I done enough? But are not
my works defiled? Is not my righteousness spotted? or is it not short? or is it
not scant? does it not want something of length and breadth? will it wholly
cover my nakedness? Thus the soul does question with it self when it is looking
after the Covenant of Grace, and thus the soul is carried out to act in the
Covenant, and to look upon all as purchased by Christ, there is the mighty
foundation laid, free grace and the righteousness of Jesus Christ; the soul may
even venture upon it when it walks through the Valley of the shadow of death;
that is the first Direction. I beseech you labor to understand the nature of
the Covenant of Grace by which he brings his people to glory. But again,

Direct. 2. Secondly, As you desire your hearts should be fitted against the
fears of death, look up to the Lord to enable you to live by Faith; whilst you
look up, learn to live by Faith; to live by Faith is the way to die in Faith,
and the more Faith the less fear, the less carnal fear: and therefore, O look
up unto the Lord to help you to live by Faith, to exercise Faith in every
condition; it is said, The just shall live by Faith, in Habak. 2. 4. Ay, in
sorrows, in afflictions, in distresses, in the darkest condition he shall live
by Faith; he shall exercise Faith in the promise, and live above the darkness
of his condition, through the love of God in Christ, in him he shall thus live
by Faith: Go to Christ therefore to strengthen your Faith, you that are weak in
Faith go, and say as the Disciples did, Lord increase our Faith, for it is he
only that can draw forth the soul to acting of Faith, Psalm. 119. 49. Remember
thy Word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope; The Lord
caused his soul to trust in his promise: Labor to exercise Faith, Faith in
every condition; there is some promise that God has suited for his people in
all conditions, and he expects that they should live by Faith upon those
promises; the more that you live by Faith in the promise whilst you live, the
more able shall you be to look death in the face without terror; exercise
Faith every day on the promise, and Faith will grow so strong as you shall be
able to say with David, I will not fear, though I walk through the Valley of
the shadow of death, for thou art with me. That Is a Second Direction.

Direct. 3. Thirdly, That your hearts may be strengthened against the fears of
death, look up to Christ to strengthen you whilst you are in the World; to die
to the World, to Sin, and to Self; remember that you are Pilgrims here on
earth, O entertain such thoughts continually: I am a stranger on earth, I am
upon my travel, in my journey, this is not my home, I must e're long depart
this World, I came not here to rest, is not this the bridge to Eternity? it is
a bridge to pass over, and shall I build upon this bridge? shall I think to
dwell here? shall my affections take up here? No Lord, I am a Pilgrim and a
Stranger as all my forefathers: I am crucified to the World, and the W^^^^ me;
Paul could look death in the face beyond (...) I am crucified to the World, and
the World to me; labor to die to sin and to self, be willing to cast out self,
be willing that the Lord alone should be exalted: he that has made it his work
to lay self aside in all his ways and actions, he will be very willing to lay
himself aside, if it shall be for the honor of the Lord Jesus Christ; and when
he conflicts with sin, he will rejoice at the reproaches of death, that that
enemy that has done him so much injury shall be fully conquered. That Is a
Third Direction.

Direct. 4. Fourthly, Desire the Lord to teach you what is the service of your
Generation, and to help you to perform it; desire that the Lord would help you
to know what is the work of your Generation, and to enable you to perform it;
this will fortify the soul against the fears of death: It is very sad to a
servant when his Candle goes out before his work be done, he cannot lie down
with comfort, his Master has given him a piece of work, and he has wholly
neglected it whilst his light was given, and what comfort can he have in his
lying down; our Lord Jesus Christ has finished the work his Father gave into
his hand, and then he was willing to be gone; in John 17. 4, 5. I have
glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do, and now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the World was. And so it is said of David, After
he had served his Generation according to the Will of God, he fell asleep;
death was welcome to him, as sleep is to a weary man; when his work was done he
lay down with comfort, there is nothing to trouble him, his work is done: after
he had served his Generation he fell asleep. There is some work God has
appointed to every one of us, O desire the Lord to teach you to know what that
work is he has put into your hand, and sent you into the world for, O do that
work with all your might, that when death comes it may be welcome, as welcome to
you as sleep is to a weary man. But again,

Direct. 5. Fifthly, To fortify your hearts against the fear of death whilst
you live, Live much upon Christ, make Jesus Christ your life continually, where
Christ is life there death is gain; be looking up to Jesus Christ to be a
principle of life to you, and to act you continually, live upon him for
Justification, live upon him for Sanctification, live upon him for all your
comforts, make much use of Jesus Christ continually; the soul that has lived
upon Christ, that has made him the beginning of all, and made him the end of
all (for then is Christ their life) it will be exceedingly strengthened against
the fears of death: Let him be the beginning of all your works and actions,
take nothing in hand without the strength of Christ, look for the strength of
Christ to act you, to breath in you, and to fill your sails in your motion
Godward and Heavenward, and let Christ be the end of all that you do; I say,
propound Christ as your end, do what you do as unto Christ, whatsoever you do
in your services to men, do it as unto the Lord, do your common work as unto
the Lord, let Christ be the end, propound him as the end of all that you
undertake; I tell you, if Christ be not the end of a man's works, all his works
are lost; Christ speaks of some that shall come and say, Lord, Lord, have not
we prophesied in thy Name, and in thy name we have cast out Devils; and yet in
the very next words Christ says unto them, Depart from me you workers of
Iniquity: here is a strange Epithete, you workers of Iniquity; they did
abundance of good, Prophesied (...) Name, and cast out Devils, etc. and yet he
call (...) workers of Iniquity: if they be not done for C^^^^ to Christ, Christ
will interpret them work (...) Iniquity. Make Christ your life, and live upon
him, and that will fit you to look death in the face without fear.

Direct. 6. Sixthly, Converse with Death continually; that is another Direction
that I desire the Lord might set it upon our spirits: converse with death
continually, behold death at a distance, even all your lifelong; see death both
in the death of Christ, and in your own death. Here you may converse with death:

1. First, In the death of Christ, and then with your death, which is
approaching: Christians, Behold your own death in the death of Christ, look
upon a dying and a bleeding Savior, behold him as dead, and laid in the Grave,
and what was the end of all this, but that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, and deliver his poor people from fear of death?
Behold Christ as a mighty Conqueror by Faith every day, and see death
conquered: and know that when Christ conquered, he conquered as a common
person, he conquered death not only for himself but for his people; O
Christians, if you were wise to make improvement of the death of Christ, how
might your spirits be strengthened against fears of death? The death of Christ
would kill all the fears of death in you; I say, if you made improvement of the
death of Christ, you may go and bury the fears of death in the Grave of Christ,
for he has swallowed up death: make it your work t^ converse with death in the
death of Christ.

And again, Converse with your own death which is approaching: O, how is this
neglected? how seldom do men look for a dying hour, or a departure? how loath
are men to entertain thoughts of death? I have read of an Emperor that gave a
Comm^^^^ That no man should name Death in his Palace, he (...) afraid of death
that he gave a Command upon pa^^^^^ death not to hear death named; what
advantage do men gain by this? This strengthens the enemy, and weakens their
own hearts and spirits, because they are afraid to think of death before death
comes: this does exceedingly weaken a man against the time of his coming. I
have heard of a Serpent that is called a Cockatrice, that if it sees a man, it
kills him, but if he sees it, it does him no harm: why, it is true, in this
sense we are upon, If death comes upon a man it kills him, but when the soul
has seen death, and has digested and seen death at the worst that it can do,
and has lived in a dying condition, death when it comes is able to do no harm;
and therefore that is a sixth Direction; I desire the Lord would teach us to
converse with death, and to die daily, with the Apostle.

Direct. 7. Seventhly, I desire that you would labor that your hearts may be
thoroughly rooted and established in the promises; this will fortify you against
the fears of death; upon the promises, and upon that free grace, and that
infinite righteousness that is held forth unto you in the Gospel. Many men
content themselves with common thoughts and ordinary notions of Christ and the
Gospel, and way of Salvation in his free grace, and of the power of Christ in
saving of poor creatures; but this is like the stony ground, they are not
persuaded of the truth of it, and so settled. And therefore how should this be
fortifying against the fears of death? This cannot bear them up in the time of
death. Go to the Lord, desire him that he would realize things to you, and that
he would make real and deep impressions by his promise upon your souls, that so
you may be supported and carried out in the midst of all fears and dange^^

(...) Eighthly, Here is one more Direction, wh^^^^ give you, which may help to
strengthen your ^^^^ts against the fears of death, and that is, Whilst you
live, labor to live in constant communion with God; desire that the Lord would
uphold your spirits in constant communion and fellowship with himself, and with
his son Jesus Christ: Labor to walk with God as Enoch did, He walked with God
and was translated; walk with God in your Generation, and labor to enjoy
communion with God in all Ordinances, be thoroughly acquainted with God, with the
goings of God in your spirits, with the counsels of God, with the promises of
God, that the Word may be your Counselor and your guide, and your comforter,
seek acquaintance with God: What is it that makes men afraid to die? It is
because they are not acquainted with God; a man fears in going into a strange
place and strange company that he knows not, it makes him fearful: O, if men
were acquainted with God, if they did walk with God whilst they lived, and were
acquainted with God in life, it would take away the fears of death. And truly,
Brethren, you had need get extraordinary acquaintance with God before you leave
your Country and Fathers house, and follow him to a place you know not; you had
need be well acquainted to follow God, and in making such a venture as you have
heard of: therefore make all improvement that may be to get more acquaintance
with God under the Gospel: Gods people are more generally freed from the fears
of death, because they have more acquaintance with God; We are come, says the
Apostle, Heb. 12. 23. we are not only come to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the
Covenant, but we are come to God the Judge of all: Now under the (...) there is
the way for Christians to come with (...) and boldness to God, even to God the
Judge (...) to have a sweet familiarity and acquaintance w^^^^ God, even that
Judge who judges all; and that soul that has been acquainted with God, will
not fear to go to God when God calls. There was a gracious man I have heard of,
when he came to die, says he, I shall change my place, but not my company; he
had walked with God all his life, God was his companion, he had walked with God
in all his ways, and had done his work, though he does change his place,
having walked with God on earth, he should now walk with God in Heaven: Now, O
that we might thus walk with God, and not be afraid to walk with God, my
Friend, my Father, my Companion. Thus much for Direction, the Lord sanctify
them to you I shall conclude these Words and this Text with one word more.

I beseech you, you that have interest in Christ, that have Christ for life,
and death for gain,

1. First of all, That you would see how you are beholding to Jesus Christ for
this, that ever the Lord should make death to be gain. What a loss is there in
that? What is there more dreadful than death? That the Lord Christ should make
this to be gain to his people! O stand and wonder: death is not gain in it
self, it is the greatest loss in the World; Ay, but this man shall comfort us
concerning the toil of our hands: this man comforts, this Lord Jesus comforts
concerning death as he makes it to be gain; that which separates soul from
body, which might have separated soul from God to Eternity, shall not only
separate soul from body, but set it nearer unto God and Christ, and carries he
soul into sweet enjoyment of himself, it leaves the body in the Grave to refine
it, and God will at the last day (...) it up unto Glory. And therefore, I
beseec^ (...) that you would endeavor that your lives man (...) to Christ;
Has he made death gain to yo^ (...) he make it the most gainful venture that
ever you made? How ought you to desire, by all means, that your lives may be
gain to Christ? Be you willing to suffer any thing for him, for his sake: you
may well do it, he has made death to be gain to you; you may well labor,
there is a Rest for you: Be you willing to do and suffer for Christ. Nay, you
should lay out your lives for Christ, O put them off at the best advantage, to
die for Christ is the best advantage, O, put off life for the best gain for
Christ: you may well do it, for he has made death exceeding gainful and
advantageous to you. To conclude all with a word of consolation: You that have
interest in Christ, is he your life?

What strong Consolation does this minister unto you? O, blessed are the people
that are in such a case; Christ to be gain, Christ to be advantage in life and
death? There is a blessed condition, why, all you that have interest in Christ,
what need you fear death? I say, what need you fear death? It cannot hurt you,
it is an enemy disarmed, the sting is taken out: you may take a Wasp in your
hand and put it into your bosom when the sting is out; the sting of death is
out, and it cannot separate you from the love of your Father.

Nay, it will carry you unto nearer embraces of God and Christ; I am persuaded,
says the Apostle, that neither life nor death, can be able to separate from
the love of God in Christ; Death cannot separate from Gods Covenant, though it
may separate from body and soul, though the body lies in the Grave, yet the
Covenant of Grace holds: I (...) God of Abraham, Isaac and of Jacob; the (...)
^^^^nt of God holds; now the Lord takes care of (...) ^^^^ones of the Saints in
the Grave, they shall (...) by virtue of this Covenant. O what! do not you fear
death? you may make a bold venture on death, you that have Christ for your
life, I say, you may make a bold venture, you may shoot the Gulf of Eternity,
and venture all upon him, for he is your life, and he will not fail you, you
have his example, and he is gone before you, he would fortify your hearts, he
has gone before you, he was the Captain of your Salvation, and he first broke
the Ranks; he was partaker of flesh and blood with us that he might suffer
death, and so that he might destroy death, and therefore Christ has given you
his Example; he intended that you should see the worst that death can do, and
it can do you no more hurt than it did him, you that have interest in Christ it
can do you no more hurt than it did him; he is in the Ship with you, he is
Partner with you in the venture, and if you lose, he shall be the greatest
loser: Christ is Partner with you in the venture; and if you shall lose in this
venture, Christ had as good never have risen again, it is all one whether he
suffers in his person or in his members, if they should miscarry in this great
venture of death, Christ had as good never to have risen again, it is all one;
O, what has the Lord done for you, thus to fortify your souls, and to
strengthen you by his own venture in that Partnership that Christ has
undertaken with you, that this may spur you on? Consider it well, is not this a
blessed privilege? O that I might die the death of the righteous, says
Balaam; no wonder he desired it; what a gain does the righteous man get in his
(...) at the Lord would persuade you to live the (...) righteous, to see the
life of Christ, and (...) Faith of the Son of God: whilst you liv^^^^ ^^^^ath
engaged that you should live the life of (...) ^^^^teous; but if Christ be not
your life, you will never partake of the life of the righteous; for where
Christ is not life, death cannot be gain.

But you will say, Do not Gods own people fear death, even as well as others?
Why, we see they are subject to fears; where is the difference betwixt their
death and others? they may have fears of death as well as other men.

I Answer, It is true, even the righteous man may fear; nay, not only the fear
of nature, but his fear may be sometime inordinate and sinful; Ay, but in his
fear he runs to the promise, even as Jacob did when he was greatly distressed
when he came to his brother, Lord, says he, I fear my Brother, but he runs to
the Promise, but Lord, thou have said, thou will be with me, and do me good and
bless me; he fears as well as others, but in his fears he runs to the Promise.

Yea moreover, To say no more but this, The righteous man shall be delivered
from all his fears; therefore he does not upbraid the righteous, they have
Promises to run unto, and the Lord their God will save them from their fears:
even our Lord Jesus feared when death approached, he was greatly afraid, he put
up strong cries with tears and groans, and yet was heard in that he feared, in
Heb. 5. 7. In the days of his flesh he feared, and his fears made him cry
aloud, and his Father that was able to save him, is able to save thee from all
thy fears: these fears shall make him cry to his God, and he shall be certainly
heard in that he feared, and so was made a Conqueror: And so shall it be with
those that are in Christ, they shall be Conquerours over all their fears; this
poor man cried, and the (...) saved him and delivered him from all his fears.
(...) shall serve for this time.

FINIS.

