ARISTOTLE'S MASTERPIECE: OR, THE SECRETS of GENERATION Displayed in all the
Parts thereof.

CONTAINING 1. The Signs of Barrenness. 2. The way of getting a Boy or Girl. 3.
Of the likeness of Children to Parents. 4. Of the Infusion of the Soul into the
Infant. 5. Of Monstrous Births, and the reasons thereof. 6. Of the benefit of
Marriage to both Sexes. 7. The prejudice of unequal Matches. 8. The discovery
of Insufficiency. 9. The cause and cure of the Green. Sickness. 10. A Discourse
of Virginity. 11. How a Midwife ought to be qualified. 12 Directions and
Cautions to Midwives. 13. Of the Organs of Generation in Women 14. The Fabric
of the Womb. 15. The Use and Action of the Genitals. 16. Signs of Conception,
and whether of a Male or Female. 17. To discover false Conception. 18.
Instructions for Women with Child. 19. For preventing Miscarriage. 20. For
Women in Childbed. 21. Of ordering New born Infants, and many other very
useful Particulars. To which is added, a word of Advice to both Sexes in the
Act of Copulation, and the Pictures of several Monstrous Births.

Very necessary for all Midwives, Nurses, and Young-Married Women.

LONDON: Printed for W. B. And are to be sold by most Booksellers in London and
Westminster, 1694.

The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy, and a Infant that was black by the
Imagination of their Parents.


The Introduction.
IT plainly appears in Holy Writ, that this glorious Universe, be spangled with
gaudy Fires, and every where adorned with wonderful Objects, proclaiming the
Wisdom and Omnipotence of the Great Work-Master, who in Six Days Erected all
Things for his Pleasure, was at first drawn out of Nothing, or at most a
Formless Chaos of Confusion, a Disordered and Confounded H^ap of Iarring
Elements, tossed and jumbled together under the Dismal Shades of Dying Night,
Eldest of Things; no Fruits nor Pleasures, no Creature that has Breath had
Being in the place this lower World possesses, till GOD out of the Abundance of
his Goodness, sent forth his Holy Spirit, who Dove-like, with mighty out-spread
Wings, sat brooding on the Vast Abyfs, and made it Pregnant: Then Light put
Darkness soon to flight, and all the glorious Lamps of Heaven appear, all
Creatures soon had being, and every Plant, Tree, Herb, or Flower of fragrant
smell, sprung from the Verdant Earth, raised by Command above the Water; every
thing of use having Seed in it self, that no second Creation needed. But still
that Lordly Creature, wh^ should rule the Creatures being wanting, he was
framed more glorious than all Creatures, as not made without mature Counsel and
Deliberation, and stamped in the divine Similitude, inspired with the infused
Breath of Life^ beyond what any other Creature durst to boast: The
contemplating of which, long since made the Royal Psalmist break out into this
Rapture, What is Man that thou art mindful of him and the Son of Man that thou
visitest him? Thou made him a little lower than the Angels, and have Crowned
him with Glory and Honor. Thou make him to have Dominion over the Works of
thy Hands, and thou have put all things under his Feet, Psalm. 8. 4, 5, 6.

Thus I say, when God has created the World, and furnished it with whatsoever
seemed good in his sight^ and that there was nothing wanting for necessary use,
commodity and pleasure, it seemed good to him then, to make one that might use
them to his Glory, and take delight in rejoicing in them. Wherefore, when
Natures Ornaments were all complete, He brought Man into the World, as into his
own Possession; and that he might not be disconsolate nor solitary, gave him a
Woman for a Helper and Compani^n, infusing into them a source of Love and
Desire toward each other, and of procreating their Likeness, having prepared
for that purpose a swelling Humor or Spirit, and Organical Parts; and that the
one through fear of neglect should not be induced to decline the Society of the
other, he added Allurements, and desire of mutual Embracing, that so they might
in Procreation, be sweetly affected and delighted by wondrous ways: For unless
this was natural to all kind of Creatures, they would be regardless of
Posterity and Procreation would cease, whereby Mankind would quickly be lost:
and the affairs of Mortals of no continuance. But that this Passionate Desire
might strongly operate, as well in Sensual Felicity, as on the Imagination, GOD
has firmly impr^ssed it in all Creatures subject thereto, both Male and Female;
but more especially on Man: And least it should prove unruly in him, and not
easily subdued, He has thought it convenient to prescribe him Bounds, and
confine him to the Use of the Matrimonial Bed, that so they might not defile
themselves with wandering Lust, who want the gift of Continency. Wherefore, so
soon as Copulation is finished, and the Woman happens to prove with Child,
great is Natures Cunning in furnishing the Embryo with convenient Nutriment,
that at the set time, when Nine Months are run over, Man, that Ruler and
Ornament of the Sublunary World, may come forth; in relation to which Mystery
of Generation, Holy Job, in the Tenth Chapter of his Book thus expresses
himself: Have thou not poured me out as Milk, and curdled me like Cheese? Thou
have clothed me with Skin and Flesh, and have fenced me with Bones and Sinews:
Thou have granted me Life and Favor, and thy Visitation has preserved my
Spirit.

But not to be too tedious upon this Subject, I shall proceed to unravel the
Mystery of Generation and diverse other Mysteries, which I hope will be to the
Satisfaction of the Learned and Ingenious of the Age, whose Discretion I need
not doubt, will keep them from wresting it to any other end than what it was
designed for, viz. The Benefit and Advantage of the Modest of either Sex; not
d^siring that this Book should fall into the Hands of any Obscene or Wanton
Person, whole Folly or Malice, may turn that i^to Rid^cule, that loudly
proclaims the Infinite Wisd^m of an Omnipotent Creator, who by his mighty
VVorking, is able to sundue all things to H^ms^lf.

Gloria DEO in Excelsis,
Aristotle's Masterpiece: OR, The Secrets of Generation DISPLAYED.
CHAP. I. Of Maeriage, and at what Age Virgins and Youths are capable of the
Marriage Bed, and the Reasons that prompts them to desire it; with the Signs of
Barrenness, and how long a Man or Woman are Capable of having Children.
THAT Marriage is an Honorable State, ordained by God in Paradise, and since
Confirmed by our Blessed Savior, who wrought his first Miracle at a Wedding, I
hope none will deny; therefore it is convenient that Parents will take care of
their Daughters Chastity; and when they find them inclinable and when they find
them inclinable to Marriage, not violently to restrain their Affections, but
rather to provide for them, if possible, such Husbands as may be for their
Advantage, and with whom they may live comfortably in that blessed State, lest
being crossed in their purposes, and delayed, they part with their
Honour-dishonourable ways.

The propension and inclination of Maids to marriage, is to be discovered by
many Symtoms: For when they arrive to Puberty^ (which is usually about the
Fourteenth or Fifteenth Year of their Age, according to their respective Habits
or Constitutions) then their Menses, or Natural Purgations begin to flow: And
the Blood, which is no longer taken to augment their Bodies, abounding, incites
their Minds and Imaginations to Venery. External Causes also may promote and
incite them to it; for the Spirits being brisk, and in a manner inflamed when
they arrive at this Age, if they eat salt sharp things, Spices, etc. whereby
the Body becomes still more and more heated, than the irration and proneness to
Veneral Embroces, is very great, nay, sometimes almost insuparable. And a due
use of these Enjoyments being denied to Virgins, very often produces very
dismal Effects, as Green and Weasel-Colour, short Breathings, Tremblings of the
Heart, etc. But if they happen to be married to their own Content, those
Afflictions vanish, and their native Beauty returns more gay than before. Nor
is their eager gazing, and desiring to associate themselves with Men, a lesser
sign that Nature prompts them to desire what she ordained their due; of which,
being sometimes by obdurate Parents debarred in a lawful way, they break the
bounds of Modesty, rather than endure such violent Agitations, and Conflicts
within themselves, and so satiate their desires in unlawful Love. The same may
in all particulars be observed in young brisk Widows, whom Death (that Enemy of
sweet Conjugal Love) has separated from the Bosom of their Husbands.

At Fourteen years of age, commonly the Menses in Virgins begin to flow, and
then they are capable of conceiving, and so continue generally to Forty-four;
at what time for the most part, they are no longer capable of Generation,
unless such as are exceeding healthful, strong of Body, and have used
themselves to Temperance, who have appeared to be delivered of Children till
Fifty five years; but such Prodigies rarely happen, although the Menses continue
longer in some Women than in others; but many times such Eflux proceeds not
from any natural cause, but by reason of some violent straining, or other
violence, and does often endanger the Life of the Party: And therefore young Men
that Marry Women surmounting the Age aforesaid; if they expect Children, unless
by Miracle, must labor against the Wind: Though if an old Man, that is not
worn out by Diseases and Incontinency, Marry a brisk lively Lass, there is
hopes even to Threescore and Ten, and some that are extraordinary lusty, till
Fourscore.

Hypocrates, that Famous and Learned Physician, is of Opinion, that a Youth at
Sixteen years, or between that and Seventeen, having much vital strength, may
be capable of getting Children, and that force and heat of procreating matter
continually increases till 45,50, and 55. And at the end of the latter begins
to ^lag; the Seed by little and little becoming unfruitful, the natural Spirits
being extinguished, and the humors dried up; and in general, most Physicians
at this day do observe-it, but as to particulars, as I have before mentioned,
it often happens otherwise; nay, it is reported by a credible Author, that in
the Reign of Erecus, King of Sweedland, a Man was married at an Hundred years
old, to a Bride of Thirty, and had many Children by her, but looked so fresh^
that such as knew him not, took him not to exceed half that Age.

In Campania, where the Air is temperate, serene and calm, Men of 8^ Years
usually Marry young Virgins, and have Children by them, which argues, that Age
in Men hinders not Procreation, unless they be exhausted in their Youth, and
their Members shrivelled up. If any ask why a Woman is sooner Barren than a
Man? I answer, The Cause is the natural Heat, which is more predominant in the
latter, than in the former: for since a Woman is more moist than a Man, as her
Monthly Purgations do most evidently demonstrate, as also the softness of her
Body; it is also apparent, that he does exceed her in Native heat; and as for
that heat, it is the chief thing that concocts the Humors into good and proper
Aliment, which the Woman wanting, grows fat, when a Man, by reason of that
heat, melts his fat by degrees, and his Humors are dissolved, but by the
benefit thereof they are elaborated into Seed: And this may, for the better
Confirmation of what I proposed, be added, That the Woman generally is not so
strong as a Man, nor so wise and prudent, nor has so much reason, nor is so
ingenious in contriving her Affairs, whereby the Faculties are hindered in their
Operation. And so I conclude my Assertion:

CHAP. II. General and Particular Rules laid down by Learned Physicians, how to
proceed in getting a Male or Femal^ Child, and of the Embryo, and perfect
Birth, and the fittest Season for Copulation.
WHen a young likely Couple have entered the holy state of Wedlock, and are
desirous of mutual Enjoyment for Generation sake, which is the chief end for
which Wedlock was ordained, and rather covet to be blessed by one Sex than
another, let them know first for certain, that the success of such things
depends upon Divine Providence, tho'secondary Causes must be active and
instrumental therein; and those are especially two: First, the Genital Humor,
which is brought by the Arteriae Preparantes to the Testes, in the form of
Blood, and there Elaborated into Seed by the Seminifical Faculty resident in
them. To which may be added, the Appetite and Desire to Copulation, which fires
the Imagination with unusual Fancies, or by the sight of a brisk charming
Beauty, whose wit and liveliness may much incite, and more inflame the Courage:
But if Nature be enfeebled, then are there fit Artificial Remedies to restore
it, viz. Such Meats as most conduce to the affording such Aliment as proves to
make Seed abound, and restore the Decays of Nature, that the Faculties may
freely operate: For as dung and good manuring restores ground that is worn out
and heartless, even so seasonable and proper Diet operates to the resto^ing the
faint heart, weak Spirit, coldness and dryness of the Genital Parts, and
reduces the weakness of the Nerves, to their Temperament, and removes
Impediments, obstructing the Procreation of Children. Then, since Diet may and
will alter the evil state of the Body to a better, it i^ necessary that such as
are subject to Barrenness should eat such Meats only, as tend to render them
fruitful; and among such things as are inducing and stirring up thereto, are
all Meats of good Juice, that nourish well, and make the Body lively, and full
of Sap, of which faculty are all hot moist Meats; for according to Galen, the
substance of Seed is made of the pure concocted and windy superfluity of Blood;
from whence we may conclude there is in many things a power to accumulate or
heap up Seed, as also to a^gment it; and other things of force to cause
Erection, as Hen-Eggs, Pheasants, Woodcocks, Gnatsappers, Thrushes,
Blac^-Birds, young Pigeons, Sparrows, Partridge, Capons, Almonds, Pine-Nuts,
Raysons, Currants, all strong Wines moderately taken; especially those made of
the Grapes of Italy; but Erection is chiefly caused and provoked by Satyrium^
Eringoes, Cresses, Erysimum, Parsnips, Artichoaks, Turnips, Rapes, Asparagus,
Candid Ginger, Gallinga, Acorns bruised to Powder, and drank in Muscadel,
Scallions, Sea Shellfish, etc. All these, though excellent Restoratives, will
not have present Operation, but you must use your self to them for a
considerable time, or else you will reap little or no benefit by them. The Act
of Coition being over, ( wherein the force of Imagination is certainly very
prevalent in the causing of the Child to be of this or that Sex, the Woman (
say tbe Ancients) must gently repose on her right side, with her Head lying
low, and her Body sinking down, that by sleeping in that posture, the Cells on
the right side of the Matrix, may prove the Place of Conception, in which is
the greatest force of Generative heat, which it the greatest Inducement to
Procreation of Male Children, and rarely fails to answer the expectation of
those that experience it, especially if they keep themselves warm, and without
much motion, leaning for the most part to the right, and drinking a little
Spirit of Saffron, and Juice of Hysop, in a Glass of Mallaga o^ Aligant, when
they lie down and rise, for the space of a Week. Now the fittest time (say
they) for the Procreation of Male Children, is when the Sun is in Leo, and
Moon's Signs is Virtigo, Scorpia, or Sagitarius.

This Order will they also have observed for a Female Child, by lying as
aforesaid on the left side, and strongly fancying a Female in the time of
Procreation, especially if the Woman drink the decoction of Female Mercury,
four days from the first day of Purgation^ the Male Mercury (both Herbs so
called) having the like Operation in case of a Male Child; for the Juice or
Decoction of these Simples, are of force^ the one to purge the right, and the
other the left side of the Womb, and thereby open the Recepticles, making a way
for the Seminary of Generation: And the best time to Copulate for this Sex, is,
when the Moon is in the wane, and the Sign in Libra or Aquarius, for when they
will be of a most gentle affable temper, very fair, and perfect in all their
Members. Avicenna, an Author of good repute, describes the time of Procreation
thus: When (says he) the Menses are spent, and the Womb is cleansed which is
commonly in five days or seven at m^st, if a Man lie with his Wife from the
first day she is purged to the fifth, she will concoive a Male; but from the
fifth to the eighth day a Female, and from the eighth to the twelfth, a Male
again: But after that number of days, peradventure neither distinctly, but both
in an Hermaphrodite.

In a word, They that would be commended to their Wedlock actions, and be happy
in the fruit of their Labor, must observe to Copulate at distance of time, not
too often, nor yet too seldom, for both these hurt Fruitfulness alike; for to
eject immoderately, weakens a Man, and wastes his Spirits, and too often causes
the Seed by long continuance to be ineffectual, and not Manly enough. And thus
much for the first general and particular; from whence I shall proceed to the
second; which is, to give the Reader to understand how the Child is formed in
the Womb, and what accidents it is incident to, how nourished, and when
brought forth.

Certain it is, there are various Opinions concerning this m^tter; therefore I
shall, for the satisfaction of the Curious, lay down the Opinions of the
^^a^ned^ as thus: Man consists of an Ovum or Egg, impregnated in the Ovaria, or
Testicles of the Woman^ by the more substile part of Man's Seed; but there is a
forming Faculty and Virtue in the Seed from a Divine and Heavenly Gift, it
being abundantly endued with Vital and Etherial Spirit, which gives shape and
form to the Embryo, so that all the parts and bulk of the Body which is made up
in the space of many Months, and is by degrees framed and formed into a decent
and comely Figure of a Man, do consist in that, and are adumbrated thereby: On
which holy David contemplating, fell into his Divine Rapture and Admiration,
expressed in Psalm. 138. I will praise thee, O Lord because I am wonderfully
mad: Thy Works are wonderful: My Soul searches and knows it right well. Thou
know all my Bones when I was fashioned in the secret place, and when I was
wonderfully formed in my Mothers Womb. T^y Eyes beheld me yet unmade, and in
thy Book were all my Members written, which day by day were fashioned. Thy
Knowledge is wonderful unto me^ whereby I was made, I cannot understand it,
etc. And Physicians that have nar^owly contemplated Man's Nature, constitute
four different times, wherein this Micro^m or little World is framed and
per^ected in the Womb.

The first is immediately after Coition, and is said to be perfected in the
first Week, if no Eflux happen, which sometimes fall out through the
slipperiness of the Matrix, or Head thereof that shifts over like a Rose-bud,
opening on a sudden by reason of some cold distemper, or overweariness in
Travel.

The second time of forming is constituted when Nature and the force of the
Womb, by the use of her own inbred forces and Virtue, makes a manifest mutation
in the Conception, so that all the substance seems Congealed Flesh and Blood,
which happens about the 12 and 14 day after Copulation; and though this
Concreation or Fleshy Mass abound with hot fiery Blood, yet it remains
undistinguishable without form of figure, and may be called the rough draught,
or Embryo, and well likened to Seed which is sown in the Ground, which through
kindly Heat and Moisture grows up by degrees, into a perfect form, either in
Plant or Grain; or as when a Potter Fashions a Vessel out of a rude Lump of
Clay.

The third time to make up this Fabric, is set when the principal Parts show
themselves evidently and perspicuously, as the Heart, from whence proceeds the
Arteries, the Brain from which the Nerves proceed like many small Th^eads
running through the whole Body, and the Liver, whose Office it is to separate
the Bile from the Blood, brought to it by the Vana Portae. The two first are
the Seeds and Fountains of Life, that nourish and support each part of the
Body; in framing which, the Faculty of the Womb is busied from the time of
Conception to the Eighteenth Day of the first Month.

But lastly, which time reaches to the 28 or 30 th. day, the outword parts are
seen exquisitely elaborated and distinguished by Joints, and then the Child
begins to grow and pant: from which progress of days, by reason the Limbs are
divided, and the whole frame is perfect^ ^t is no longer held an imperfect
Child o^ Embryo, that is, a Concretion that springs forth, but is held to be a
perfect and absolute Child. Males for the most part, are perfect by the 30 day,
but Females seldom till the 42 or 45 day; and the reason why the one is sooner
perfected than the other, is, That the heat of the Womb is greater in producing
the Male than the Female: For heat extends the Humor like soft Wax diffusing
and dilating it, and then by its force, Contracting, Framing, and Fashioning
it, so Heat and Vigor of the Body, and Alacrity of Nature in the Man, makes
the Male to move in 3 Months, but the Female rarely under 4, at which time,
also his Hair and Nails come forth, and the Child begins to stir, kick, and
tumble in the Womb; so that the motion is plainly perceived, and the Women are
troubled with Nauseating, and Loathing of their Meat, and oftentimes covet, and
greedily long for things contrary to the Nutriment, as Coals, Rubbish, Chalk,
Lime, Starch, Oat-meal, raw Flesh and Fish, or the like, which desire proceeds
from a former contraction of evil Humors, occasioning impure Blood in their
containing Vessel within, and often occasions Abortion and Miscarriage; some
Women, as it has been noted by diverse Authors of Credit, have been so
extravagant in their longings, that they have coveted Hob-Nails, Leather,
Man's-flesh, Horseflesh, and the flesh of diverse Ravenous Beasts, for want of
which they have cast their Birth untimely, or the Child has continued dead in
the Womb for many days, to the eminent hazard of the Woman's Life: But to
proceed in this great Mystery, I shall unfold by what means the Infant is
sustained in the Womb, and the posture it there remains in.

The disputes among both Philosophers and Physicians, with what, and by what
way the Faetus is nourished, have been very great; some affirming, by Blood
only, from the Umbilical Vein; others only by Chyle, received in by the Mouth;
but the Truth is, it is nourished diversely, according to the different degrees
of Perfection, than an Ovum or Egg passes from a Conception to a Faetus ready
for the Birth.

But before we proceed; it will not be amiss to explain what we mean by this
Ovam, or Egg. You must know then, that there are in the Generation of the
Faetus two Principles, Active and Passive: The Active is the Man's Seed, which
is elaborated in the Testicles out of the Arterial Blood, and Animal Spirits.
The Passive Principle is an Ovum or Egg, impregnated by the Man's Seed. For to
say that Woman has true Seed, is false and erroneous. But the manner of
Conception is thus: The most Spirituous part of Man's Seed, in the Act of
Generation, reaching up to the Ovarium or Testicles of the Woman (which contain
diverse Eggs, sometimes more sometimes fewer) secundates one of them, which
being conveyed by the Ovi-ducts to the bottom of the Womb, presently begins to
swell and grow bigger, and imbibes the moisture that is sent plentifully
thither, after the same manner that Seeds in the Ground suck the fertile
moisture thereof to make them sprout.

Then the parts of the Embryo begin to be a little more perfect, and the
Chorion becomes so thick, that the Liquor cannot soak through it, that
Umbilical Vessels begin to be formed, and to extend to the side of the Annios,
which they pass through, and also through the Allanteides and Chorion, and are
implanted in the Placenta, which gathering upon the Chorion, joins it to the
Uterus. And now the Arteries that before sent out the nutritious Juice into the
cavity of the Womb, open by their Orifices into the Placenta, where they
deposite the said Juice, which is drunk up by the Umbilical Vein, and conveyed
by it, first by the Liver of the Faetus, and then to the Heart, where its more
thin and spiritous part is turned into Blood, whilst the grosser part of it,
descending by the Aorta, enters the Umbilical Arteries, and is discharged into
its Cavity, by those Branches of them that run through the Amnios.

As Soon as the Mouth, Stomach, and Gullet, etc. are formed so perfectly that
the Faetus can swallow, it sucks in some of the grosser Nutritious Juice, that
is deposited in the Amnios, by the Umbilical Arteries, which descending into
the Stomach and Intestine, is received by the Lacteal Veins, as in Adust
Persons.

The Faetus being perfected at the times before specified, in all its parts, it
lies equally balanced, in the midst of the Womb as in the Center, all on a
Heap; and being something long, is turned round, so that the Head a little
inclines, and it lays its Chin on its Breast, his Heels and Ancles upon its
Buttocks, its Hands on its Cheeks, and its Tumbs to its Eyes; but its Legs and
Thighs are carried upwards, with its Hams bending, so that they touch the
bottom of its Belly; the former, and that part of the Body which is over
against us, as the Forehead, Nose, Face, are turned toward the Mothers Back,
and the Head inclining downwards toward the Cocyx or Rumpbone, that joins to
the Os Sacrum, which Bone, together ^ith Os Pubis, in the time of the Birth
parts, and is loosned; whence it is, that Male Children commonly come with
their Faces downwards, or with their Heads turned somewhat Oblique, that their
Faces may be seen; but the Female Children, with their Faces upwards, though
some^imes it happens, that Births follow not according to Natures Order, but
Children comes forth with their Feet stradling, their Necks bowed, and their
Heads lying Oblique with their Hands stretched out, which greatly endangers
themselves and the Mother, giving the Midwife great trouble to introduce them
into the World: but when all things proceed orderly and naturally, the Child,
when Natures sets bounds are accomplished, is desirous to break its bounds, and
come forth of the Womb; and by inclining himself, he roles downward; for he
cannot longer be obscured in those hiding places, and the heat of the Heart can
subsist without external respitation; wherefore being grown great, he is more
and more desirous of Nutriment and Light; when coveting the Etherial Air, he by
struggling to obtain it, breaks the Membranes and Coverings, whereby he was
restrained and fenced against attrition; and for the most part, with bitter
pangs of the Mother, issues forth to view the Days, commonly in the ninth
Month; for then the Matrix divided, and the Os Pubis being loosened, the Woman
strives what she can to cast forth her Burden, and the Child doing the like to
get forth, by the help of its inbred strength, the Birth comes to be perfect;
but if the Child be dead, the more dangerous is the Delivery; though Nature, as a
kind Commisserator, often helps the Women's Weakness herein: But the Child
that is quick and lively; labors no less than the Woman.

Now these are Births at Seven or Eight Months, and some Women go to the Tenth
Month. But of these, and the reason of them, I shall speak more largely in
another place, and at present proceed to unravel other Mysteries of Nature.

CHAP. III. The reason why Children are often like their Parents, and what the
Mothers Imagination contributes thereto, whence grows the Kind, viz. Whether
the Man or Woman is the cause of the Male or Female Child^ etc.
THAT if a Woman in the Act of Copulation afford most Seed, her likeness will
have the greater impression upon the Child; but if on the contrary, then will
follow the contrary effects; or if a proportionable quantity proceed from
either, then will the Similitude depend upon either.

Lanctantius is of Opinion, That when a Man's Seed falls on the left side of
the Womb, a Male Child may be gotten; but by reason it is the proper place for
a Female, there will be something in it greatly resembling a Woman, viz. It
will be fairer, whiter, and smoother, not very subject to have Hair on the Body
or Chin, long lank Hair on the Head, Voice small and sharp, and the Courage
feeble; and arguing yet further, he says, that a Female may perchance be
procreated, if the Seed fall on the right Side; but then through extraordinary
heat, she will be very large boned, full of Courage, endued with a big Voice,
and have her Chin and Bosom hairy, not being so clear as others of the Sex;
subject to quarrel with their Husband when married, for the Superiority, etc.
In case of the similitude, nothing is more powerful than the Imagination of the
Mother; for if she conceive in her Mind, or do by chance fasten her Eyes upon
any Object, and imprint it in her Memory, the Child in its outward Parts,
frequently has some representation thereof; so whilst a Man and Woman are in
the Act of Copulation, if the Woman earnestly he hold his Countenance, and fix
her Mind thereon, without all peradventure, the Child will resemble the Father;
nay, so powerful is its Operation, that though a Woman be in unlawful
Copulation, yet if fear, or any thing else, causes her to fix her Mind upon her
Husband, the Child will resemble him, though he never got it. The same effect,
according to the Opinion of the Learned, proceeds from Imagination in cause of
Warts, Mold spots, Stains, Dashes, and the Figures of strange things, though
indeed they sometimes happen through frights or extravagant Longings: Many Women
there are, that seeing a Hare cross them, when great with Child, will, through
the strength of Imagination, bring forth a Child with a hairy Lip, Some
Children again are born with flat Noses, wry Mouths, great blubber Lips, and
ill sha^ed Bodies, and most ascribe ^he reason to the strange conceit of the
Mother, who has b^sied her Eyes and Mind upon some ill-shaped or distorted
Creatures; therefore it greatly behooves all Women ^ith Child, to avoid any
monstrous sight, or at least, to have a steadfast Mind, not easily fixed upon
any one thing more than another. And this Opinion Pliny confirms in his 7th
Book of natural things, and the 12th Chapter. The famous Sir Thomas Moore
likewise con^irms it, and discants merrily on a Passage of his times, wherein a
Person having diverse Children, would own none but one that was like him, when
in the end it proved, by the asseveration of the Mother, that all, except that,
were of his own begetting; but whilst another Man was mounted in his Saddle,
she fearing that he would come and detect her in the Act, had her Imagination
so fixed on him, that as she conceived, the similitude could proceed from no
other cause; wherefore it is apparent, that likeness can confirm no Child to be
a lawful Fathe^'s own: Yet in manners, wit, and prophension of the Mind, daily
Examples teach us that Children are commonly of the same condition, with their
Progenitors, and of the same nature, but there is much in this; whether venery
be used with great or weak desire, for many are less inclined to it, and not so
hot, and consequensly not so desirous of Copulation, but rather decline it,
unless Civility to their Wives cause them to compliance therein, and then they
proc^^d fainting and drowsily, whence it happens that the Children fall short
of the Parents nature, wit and manners, and hence it is that wise Men
frequently beget stupid sloathful Children of feeble Minds, because they are
not much given to these delights. But as I said on the contrary, when the
Progenitors are not in venerious Actions, and do liberally and abundantly
employ themselves therein, it oftentimes happens that the Children are of the
same desires, manners, and actions of the Mind, with their Parents. And thus
much for the first point, now I shall proceed to the second, which is to show,
what share each of the Parents have in begetting the Child, etc. And first we
will give the Opinion of the Ancients about it.

Though it is apparent (say they) that the Seed of Man is the chief efficient
and beginning of Action, Motion, and Generation, yet that the Woman does afford
Seed, and effectually contributes in that particular to the Procreation of the
Child, is evinced by strong reasons. In the first place, Seminary Vessels had
been given them in vain and genital Testicles interverted, if the Woman wanted
Seminal excessence; for being Nature does nothing in vain, therefore it must be
granted, that they were made for the use of Seed and Procreation, and fixed in
their proper places, both the Testicles and Receptacles of Seed, whose nature
and force is to operate, and afford fruitful virtue to the Seed; and to prove
this, there needs no stronger Argument (say they) than that, if a Woman do not
use Copulation, to eject her Seed, she oftentimes falls into strange Diseases,
as appears by young Widows and Virgins. A second reason they urge, that
although the Society of a lawful Bed consist not altogether in these things,
yet it is apparent, that the Female Sex is not better won^ and appear more
blithe and jocund than when they are often satisfied this way, which is an
inducement to believe that they have greater Pleasure, and receive more Conten^
than a Man: For since by Nature much Delight accompanies the Ejection^ by
breaking forth of the swelling Spirit, and the ^^iffness of the Nerves, in
which case the opera^ion of the Woman's part is double, she suffering both ways,
even by ejection and reception, whereby she is more recreated and delighted in
the Veneral Act.

Hence it is (say they) that the Child more frequently resembles the Mother
than the Father, because the Mother confers the most toward its Generation:
And they think it may be further instanced from the great love they bear them;
for that besides their contributing Seminal matter, they, during the time they
are in the Womb, feed and nourish the Child with the purest Fountain of Blood;
which Opinion Galen confirms, by allowing the Child to participate more of the
Mother than the Father, and refers the difference of the Sex to the influence
of menstrual Blood; but the reason of the likeness he attributes to the force
of the Seed; for as Plants receive more from fruitful Ground than from the
industry of the Husbandman, so the Infant in more abundance receives from the
Mother than the Father; for first, the Seed of both is heaped and fostered in
the Womb, and there grows to perfection, being nourished with Blood. And hence
they will have it, that Children for the most part effect their Mothers best,
for it proceeds from the nearness of Nature, by a natural instinct, because the
Mothers forces were most employed about 'em? For 9 Months, and sometimes 10,
she nourishes the Child with her purest Blood, then her love toward it newly
born, and the likeliness do clearly demonstrate, that the Woman affords Seed,
and that Women do contribute more toward making the Child than Men. But in all
this, the Ancients were very much in an Error, for the Testicles (so called) in
Women, do not afford any Seed, but are true Eggs, anulogous to those of Fowls,
and other Creatures; neither have they any such Office as those of Men, but are
indeed Ovarium, wherein these Eggs are nourished by the Sanguinary Vessels
dispersed through them, and from whence one or more (as they are secundated by
the Man's Seed) separated, and are conveyed into the Womb by the Ovi duces. The
truth of this is plain; for if you boil them, their Liquor will have the same
color Taste and Consistency, with the white of Birds Eggs, to say that they
want shells, is nothing at all; for the Eggs of Fowls, while ^hey are in the
Ovary, nay, after they have fallen down into the Uterus, have no shell, And
though when they are laid they have one, yet that is more than a Fence, which
Nature has provided them against outward Injuries, while they are hatched
without the Body, whereas those of Women, being hatched within the body, need
no other fence than the womb, by which they are sufficiently guarded.

And thus much for the clearing of this point also; and now to the third thing
proposed, viz. Whence grows the kind, and whether the Man or the Woman is the
cause of the Male or Female Infant.

The primal cause is, as is justly due in this and all other Causes, we must
ascribe to God the Ruler and Disposer of all things, yet many things by his
high Sufferance, proceed in regular order, by the Rules of Nature, and are
carried by their inbred motion, according to their usual and natural Course,
without variation, though indeed by favor from on high. Sarah conceived Isaac;
Hannah Samuel; and Elizabeth, John the Baptist; but these were to fulfill the
Almighty's Decree; nor since those times have the Prayers of the righteous been
unsuccessful in obtaining Children; but passing over such Supernatural and
Extraordinary causes that have their peculiar effects: I shall proceed to speak
of things natural and common. The Ancient Physicians and Philosophers say, that
since there are two Principles, out of which the Body of Man is made, and which
render the Child like the Progenitors, and to be of one of the other Sex, viz.
Seed common to both Sex, and menstrual Blood proper to the Woman only; The
Similitude (say they) must needs consist in the force of the Male or Female
Seed^ so that it pgoves like to the one or the other, as more or less plenty is
afforded by either: but that the difference of Sex is not refered to the Seed,
but to the menstrual Blood, which is proper to the Woman; for were that force
(say they) altogether retained in the Seed, the Man's Seed being of a hotter
quality than the Woman's, Male Children would be superabundant, and none of the
other Sex (or very rarely) would be propagated, whereof the kind of the
Creature is attributed to the temperament of the active qualities, which
consist in heat and cold, and to the substance or nature of the matter under
them, that is to the flowing of the menstrual Blood: Now the Seed (say they)
affords both force to procreate and form the Child, and matter for its
Generation, and that in the menstrual Blood there is both matter and force; for
as the Seed most helps the material Principles, so likewise the menstrual
Blood, the potential Seed, is, says Galen, Blood well concocted by the Vessels
that contain it, so that Blood is not only the matter of generating the Child,
but also Seed, in possibility that menstrual Blood has both principles, as
matter, and faculty of offering. The Ancients say further, that the Seed is the
strongest efficient, the matter of it being very little in quantity, but that
the potential or efficient faculty of it is very feeble: wherefore, if the
material part or principle of Generation, according to which the Sex is made,
were only (say they) in the menstrual Blood, then would the Children be all, or
mostly Females, as if the efficient force was in the Seed, they would be all
Males: but that, since both have operation in menstrual Blood, Matter
predominates in quantity, and in the Seed, Force and Virtue. Deservedly, says
Gal^n, the Child receives its Sex rather from the Mother than from the Father,
although his Seed do contribute something to the material Principles though
more weakly. But as for similitude, although Imagination (say the Ancients) be
of extraordinary force, it is referred rather to the Father, than the Mother,
as to the quality of the Seed, at, or for a short time after Copulation, but
continues not long so to do, for that the Woman's Seed receiving faculty from
the menstrual Blood, for the space of Nine Months, over-powers the Man's, as to
that particular, because the menstrual Blood flowing into the Vessels, rather
cherishes and augments the one than the other; from which it may be more easily
conjectured, that the Woman not only affords Matter to make the Child, but
force and virtue to perfect the Conception, though the Woman's Seed be fit
Nutriment for the Man's, by reason of the moisture and thinness of it, being
more fit to frame, and make up Conception thereby; for as soft Wax, and moist
Clay, the Workman can frame what he intends, so, (say they) the Man's Seed
mixing with the Woman's, as also, with the menstrual Blood, helps effectually
to make the form and perfect part of Man; but (with all the respect and
deferance imaginable to the Wisdom of the Ancients) we must needs say, that
their Ignorance in Anatomy has led them into many and great mistakes; and their
Hypothesis of the formation of the Embryo, from a Commixture of Seeds, and the
Nutrition of it from the menstruous Blood, being altogether false, their
Opinion in this case must needs be false also.

Therefore, to conclude this Chapter, we say, that although a strong
Imagination of the Mother may sometimes determine the Sex (that is make it Male
or Female, according as her imagination is) yet the main Agent in this case, is
the Plastic or formative Principle, which is the Efficient in forming the
Child, that gives it this or that Sex, according to those Laws and Rules that
are prescribed to it^ by the wise Creator of all things.

CHAP. IV. A serious Discourse of the Soul of Man, That it is not propaga^ed
from the Parents, but is infused by God; and can neither Die nor Corrupt; and
what day of Childbearing it is infused. Of the Immortality thereof, and
certainty of the Resurrection.
THE Soul of Man is of so Divine a Nature and Excellency, that Man himself
cannot in no wise comprehend it, it being the insulted Breath of the Almighty,
Immortal and Incomprehensible, but by him that gave it, it being, as it well
may be termed, a part of himself; for Moses, by Holy Inspiration, relating the
Original of Man, tells us, That God Breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of
Life, and he became a living Soul. Now, as for all other Creatures, at his Word
they were made, and had Life; but the Creature that God has appointed to set
over his Works, was favored with the more immediate hand of the Almighty,
forming him out of the Dust of the Earth, and secondly^ condescending to breath
into his Nostrils, the breath of Life's, which implies that there was more care,
and (if we may so term it) labor used about man, than about all other
Creatures, or created things, he only partaking and participating with the
Divine Nature, being made in his likeness, bearing the Image of God, that is,
in Innocence and Purity, whilst he stood firm, but in his Fall, that lively
Image was defaced; yet such was the infinite Love of God toward him, that
although he Rebelled against him, he would not altogether cast him off, but found
a way to restore him. Nay, so much in esteem was he thought, not deservlng the
least favor, that the Son of God, the second Person in the glorious Trinity:
when the fullness of time was come, laying aside his Crown of Stars, left the
right hand of Glory, Majesty, and the bright effulgence that adorned him, and
descending, took upon him our Nature. O infinite and unspeakable Love. Nay
more, endured shame, reproach, scourging, buffetting, spitting on, and the
Death of the Cross, that he might bruise the Head of the Serpent, and deliver
Beloved Man from the Jaws and Brink of utter Ruin. And the better to confirm
his love toward us, is ascended on high, leading Captivity Captive, where he
is so far from forgetting us, that he is become our Mediator, and makes daily
Intercession for us to the Father, whose offended Justice he has satisfied as
to the original Sin. But to come nearer to my purpose:

If Man would understand the Excellency of the Soul, as far as it is capable of
comprehending it self, let him, after serious Recollection, descend into
himself, and search diligently his own Mind, and there he shall find so many
admirable Gifts, and excellent Ornaments, that it must needs strike him with
Wonder and Amazement, as Reason, Understanding, true Choice, ability of Wit,
Memory, and diverse other Faculties, that absolutely approve the Soul to be more
admirable, than that any should imagine it to be finite, or subject to
Annihilation, yet by reason of its many Offices and Operations, whilst in the
Body it is specified under sundry dominations. For, as St. Augustine says,
when it enlivens the Body, it is called the Soul; when it gives it knowledge,
the judgment, the minp, when it recall things past, the memory, whilst it
discourses and discerns reason, whilst it contemplates the Spirit, whilst it
is in the sensitive parts of the Senses; and these are the principal Offices,
whereby the Soul declares its power, and performs its actions; for placed in
the highest part of the Body, and nearest Heaven, it diffuseth or disperseth
effectually its force into every Member, not propagated from the Parents, nor
mixed with gross matter, but the infused Breath of the Almighty, immediately
proceeding from him, nor passing from one to another, as fond and absurdly the
Pithagoreans have insinuated in their Opinions about the Transmigration of the
Soul; and so vain were they, that they did not only imagine the Souls of
deceased Men passed into now-born Infants, but into Beasts also; and from
thence it was they forbid the eating of Flesh, and abstained themselves from so
doing, lest, as they fondly fancied, they might, as Tertullian records it, Eat
their Grandfather in a Calf. But such frivolous and superstitious Notions are
to be rejected by Christians, and those true ones observed, which are both
reasonable and agreeable to humane Capacities; for Orthodox Divines conclude in
general, that the Soul is given to every Infant by Infusion, when he or she is
perfected in the Womb, which happens about the 45the day after Conception,
especially for Males, that in likelihood will be born at the end of Nine
Months, but in Females (who are of a weaker Constitution, and not so soon
formed and perfected through the defect of heat) not till the Fiftieth day.

And although this day in all cases cannot be perfectly set down, yet
Hypocrates has undertaken to give his absolute Opinion, when the Child has its
perfect form, when it begins to move, and when born, if in due season; for in
his Book, of the Nature of Infants, he affirms, That if it be a Male, and he
be perfect on the thirtieth day, move at the sixtieth, he will come forth at
the seventh Month; but if he be perfectly formed on the 35th. day, he will move
on the 70th. and be born in the 8th. Month. Again, if he be perfectly formed on
the 45th. day, he will move on the 90th. day, and be born in the Ninth Month.
Now from these passing of Days and Months, it plainly appears, that the day of
Forming being doubled, makes up the day of moving; and that day three times
reckoned, m^kes up the day of Birth.

As for Example, where 35 perfect the Form, if you doubled it, it makes 70; the
day of Motion and th^ee times 70 amounts to ^60 Days, or 7 Months, allowing 30
days to one Month, and so you must consider the rest: But as for a Female, it
is longer perfecting in the Womb, and the Mother ever goes longer with a Boy
than a Girl, so that there is difference in the Account; for a Female formed in
30 days, moves not till the 70 day, and is born in the 7 month; when she is
formed in the 40 day, she moves not till the 80 day, and is born in the 8
Month; but if she be perfectly formed on the 55 day, she moves on the 90, and
is born on the 9 Month; but she that is formed on the 50 day, moves on the 100
day, then will she be born in the 10 Month. And thus have I more largely
demonstrated it to the Reader, that he may know the reasonable Soul is not
propagated by the Parents, but is infused by God, when the Child has its
perfect Form, and is exactly distinguished in its Lineaments.

Now as the li^e of every other Creature, as it is testified in the 17 Chapter
of Leviticus, is in the Blood, so the life of Man consists in the Soul; the
which, although subject to Passion, by reason of the gross composture of the
Body, in which it has a temporary confinement, yet it is immortal^ and cannot
in it self corrupt or suffer change, it being a spark of the Divine Mind, and a
blast of Almighty Breath, that distinguishes Man from other Creatures, and
renders him Immortal; and that every Man has a peculiar Soul, it plainly
appears by the vast difference between the Wit, Judgment, Opinion, Manners,
Affections, etc. in Men. And this David observes, when he says, God has in
particular fashioned the Hearts and Minds of all Men, and has given to every
one its own Being, and a Soul of its own Nature. Hence Solomon rejoiced, that
God had given him a happy Soul, and Body agreeable and suitable to it.

It has caused many disputes amongst the Learned, especially Philosophers, in
what part of the Body the Soul chooses to reside; and some have given their
Opinion, that its residence is in the middle of the Heart, and from thence
communicates its self to every part; which Solomon, in the Fourth of his
Proverbs, seems to assert, when he says, Keep thy Heart with all thy diligence,
because Life proceeds there from: but many curious Physicians searching the
Works of Nature in Man's A^atomy, etc. do give it as their Opinion, that its
chief Seat is in the Brain, from whence proceed the Senses, Faculties and
Actions, diffusing the operation of the Soul, through all parts of the Body,
whereby it is enlivened with heat and force; but it does communicate particular
force to the Heart by Arterie^, Carotides, or sleepy Arteries, that part upon
the Throat; the which, if they happen ^o be broke, or cut, cause Barrenness,
and if stopped, an Apoplexy; for there must necessarily be some ways, through
which, the Spirits Animal and Vital, may have intercourse, and convey Native
Heat from the Soul. For although the Soul is said to reside in one place, it
operates in every part, exercising every Member, which are the Souls
Instruments, by which she manifests her power; but if it so happen, that any
of the Organical parts are out of Tune, the work is confused, as it may appear
in case of Idiots, Madmen, etc. Though in some of them, the Soul by forcibly
working, recovers her supernatural vigor, and they become right, after a long
dispondency of Mind, and in some it is lost in this Life: For as Fire under
Ashes, nor the Sun obscured from our sight by thick Clouds, afford not their
full luster, so the Soul overwhelmed in moist or faulty matter, is darkened, and
Reason thereby overclouded; and although Reason shines less in Children, than in
those that are arrived to maturity, yet no Man must imagine that the Soul is an
Infant, and grows up with the Child, for then would it again decay; but it
suits it self to the weakness of Nature, and the imbecility of Body, wherein it
is placed, that it may the better operate. And as the Body is more and more
capable of receiving its influence, so it shows its self in its proper luster,
having force and endowments at the time it enters the former Child in the Womb,
for the substance of it can receive nothing less: and thus much to prove that
the Soul comes not from the Parents, but is infused by God. And the next thing
now to be handled is its Immortality, and thereby I shall demonstrate the
certainty of its Resurrection.

That the Soul of Man is a Divine Ray, infused by God, I have already made
apparent, and now come to show you that whatever immediately proceeds from him,
must participate of his Nature, and from thence consequently, be as immortal as
its Original; for although all other Creatures are endued with Life and Motion,
yet want they a reasonable Soul: and from thence it is concluded, that Life is
in their Blood, and that being corruptible, they perish, and after their
expiring are no more. But Man being endued with a reasonable Soul, and stamped
with the Divine Image, is of a different nature; and though his Body be
corruptible, yet his Soul cannot perish, but must, when it is expelled its
Earthly Tabernacle, return to God that gave it, either to receive reward or
punishment; now that the Body can sin of it self it is impossible, because
wanting the Soul, it cannot act nor proceed to any thing, either good or evil;
for could it do so, additional Sins might be accumulated even in the Grave; but
it is plain, that after Death there is a cessation; fox as Death leaves us, so
Judgment finds us. And St. John, in the Fifth Chapter of his Gospel, tells us,
That the hour shall come, that all that are in the Grave shall hear his Voice,
and they that have done well shall come forth to the Resurrection of Life; and
they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation, And Holy Job, in
the 14 and 19 Chapter, speaking to the same purposes, says, For I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth: And
though after my Skin Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God,
whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall be^old, and not another,
though my Reins be consumed within me: By this it is plainly proved, that the
Soul is made of immortal Essence, incapable of Death, having a place assigned
it after its separation from the Body, till the day of the general
Resurrection, not in the Grave, but in a Mansion^ prepared by the Almighty for
its Reception; and that through the mighty working of him, that is able to
subdue all things to himself, it shall again enter the same Body that was laid
down, though the dust thereof be scattered to the ^our Winds of Heaven; nay, such
force and vigor shall it have, that it shall (as it were) take up the Body;
for Job positively says, I shall rise out of the Earth at the last day, etc.
Which being applicable to the future Tense, may be meant two ways^ I shall. or
will rise; plainly foreseeing the Re^urrection, he claimed it as the promise of
his Creator. Nay, so far were the Heathens, by the Light of Nature, from
doubting the Immortality of the Soul, tha^ Plato in his Phaedro thus reasons;
viz. Wha^ consists out of Elements (says he) is Immortal and can never dye. The
Soul is not made o^ Elements, nor of created matter, but came from God, and
therefore it cannot dye, etc. The^ may it be without difficulty granted, tha^
the Body which has been a long Companion of the Souls, will once again enjoy it
never more to be separated; for the Bod^ at the Resurrection shall be
incorruptible and so as far from a capacity of perishing any more as the Soul,
made so by him, that first created it. For St. Paul speaking of the
Resurrection, says, He shall change our vile Bodies, and make them like his
glorious Body. The consideration of which, makes him in another place cry out,
O the depth of the Riches, of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out. For who has known the mind
of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? For by him, and through him, and
to him are all things. Nay, the Resurrection of Man's Body may be proved by the
renewing of many inconsiderable Creatures, and their returning to Life after
they seem dead; nay, some of them thereby also changed; as who has not
observed, that when a Grasshopper is grown old, and has cast his Skin, a lively
new shrill insect will come forth of it. From a dying and sluggish
Catterpiller, comes out a lively painted Butterfly. From Ants a winged Fly. The
Silkworm having spent her Bowels in weaving out her Web, after many days,
seeming dead and motionless, becomes a Butterfly, proving for increase, by
laying a number of Eggs, and then expires. But above all, the Phaenix, that the
Learned Lactantius writes of, may put us in mind, if not confirm to us the
Resurrection, for after she has lived in the Arabian Fields (as some affirm)
about 600 Years, and finding her self wasted with Age and Infirmity, she
gathers the Sprigs of Cassia, Myrrh, Frankincense, and other Aromatic
Combustibles, when laboring with her Wings, she firing them by the heat of the
Sun, which in those Countries is excessive, she expires upon the Funeral-Pile,
when out of her Ashes springs a Worm, and from that Worm another Phaenix, to
supply her place; nay, further do w^ not behold Grain thrown into the Ground,
continue there for a season, as if lost and dead, but when warmth and moisture
gives it force, it springs up, and bears a hundredfold: Yea, Herbs and Plants,
whilst Winter with his Icy Arms grasps the Earth, seem dead, retiring, as it
were, into the Grave, and wait the Resurrection of the Spring. But to conclude,
as to this point, the infinite love toward Man, may convince him that he was
not made to be annihilated, since the second Person of the Trinity condescended
to take his Nature upon him. Even he who is the Wisdom of the Father, and of
whom the wise Man testifies in the 3 d. of his Proverbs, viz. I was with God in
the beginning, before any thing wa^ made: I was with him from Eternity, wh^^ be
made the Heavens, I was there when he compassed in the depth by a Law: I was
present when he sustained the Heavens above, and the Earth beneath: I was with
him, ordering all things, and was continually delighted before him, recreating
my self in the Earth, and my Delight was with the Sons of Men.

CHAP. V. Of Monsters, and monstrous Births, and the reason thereof, according
to the Opinions of sundry Learned Men, with serious Considerations, whether
Monsters are endued with reasonable Souls.
THAT many monstrous Births have happened, contrary to the course of Nature, is
evident, not only in this, but in former Ages; wherefore I shall take some
pains, for the satisfaction of the Reader, to inquire into the cause of such
preposterous Forms.

Now a monstrous Habit or Shape of Body, is contracted diverse ways, as from
Fear, sudden Frights, extraordinary Passion, the influence of the Stars, the
Mothers strange Imaginations, and diverse Phantasms, which the Mind conceive,
deform the Body, and render the ^hildren of an improper shape, and many times
not perfect in eit^e^ Sex; sometimes the whole course of Nature is changed,
either when the Principles of Generation are vitiated, or the Organs unfit, so
that the natural Faculties, to propagate and form the Child, cannot perform
their Office exactly; for as the most ingenious Artist can bring nothing to
perfection, if his Materials be bad, or out of order, so Nature wanting the
^orce of her Faculties, or not having fit matter, must of necessity proceed
preposterously in forming the Child. As in the Art of melting Metals, it may be
observed, if the matter be impure, and not well cleansed, the Vessels or
Receiver Oblique, and full of windings, not well joynted, the Corners set awry,
and full of Chinks or Plates; if loosed or holds ill together, it is apparent
Men cast ill-shaped Figures. So if the Womb or the Matter be unfit, or ill
tempered, it is possible, without an extraordinary overruling Providence; but
above all, unseasonable or intemperate Venery, is the cause of so many
monsterous shapes.

So the Low Country Women, especial^y those living near the Sea ^ide, being
^estless, and troubled in Copulation, bring forth misshapen Embry's, or rude and
deformed Burdens, not only without motion, but some that pant, and are alive,
and these most commonly happen in case of Sailors or Mariners, who coming home,
rashly marry, or run upon their Wives, without any due regard to their
Menstrual Flux, or the Wombs cleansing it self to the Season of the Year, or
the Moon, or Suns progress through the Celestial Signs; nor are the Women
without regard to the Health or Shape of their posterity, less desirous to
receive them, after a long separation, which is not only exceeding hurtful to
themselves, from thence proceed not monstrous and untimely Births only, but
dangerous Diseases often, to those who rashly proceed. The first (say the
Ancients) ^s, because the Seed mixing with Menstrual Blood, contracts an
unnatural Mass of corrupt Matter, which either turns to Miscarriage, Abortion,
or a monstrous and deformed Birth; for by that means the Faculty of the Womb
(say they) loses its force to Generation, and success of Breeding the Child,
or if it try to come to any thing, it is at most some monstrous Form, not
shaped like a Man, unless in some parts, which after a long continuance in the
Womb, will come forth with great pain and labor, not like to this: there is an
Efflux, that greatly troubles such, as by their inconsiderate rashness are
subject to it.

Our Women, because Conception begins in the fourth Moon, when the Menses flow
down by force, and that Planet in conjunction, call it a Moon-Birth, or many
kinds. And some are of opinion that this Conception, may be made without the
help of a Man, by force of Imagination, in those that are extremely Lascivious;
for that by often seeing, and touching their Husbands, at the same time
strongly fancying themselves in the Act, their Seed flows to the Blood, and is
by the Heat of the Womb formed into a foul Mass, but arrives at no perfection.
And to the same purpose is it when Men strive against the stream; entering into
Copulation in the fourth and silent Moon, and in the fourth day of its
Conjunction; for then not observing Natures Rules, he either loses his labor,
or Generates a monstrous Birth, or if it change, which is almost next to a
miracle to be perfect, it is by the Latins called a Birth of the fourth Moon,
because the product is commonly unhappy in all the Series of its Life, having
had its entrance by Generation, contrary to Nature's Orders; which Moses
considering, or being so commanded by God, strictly commanded the Hebrew Men
not to touch a Woman that was unclean of her Blood; and these that have been so
rashly profligate of either Sex, have many times by sad experience, found their
wilful folly too late, but especially the Female Sex; for by the violent
concussion and motion used in Copulation an^ evil Mixture, the contagion by
degrees, will seize upon the whole Body, causing the Pox and Leprosy: The like
effects it has upon Men, if the Woman be infected, especially, if he deal with
Whores at such times, who commonly are infected, and may be accounted, so many
walking contagions, or Emissaries of the Prince of Darkness, for the
Destruction of Mankind, and at this day the gr^^^^st pest and grievance of the
Nation.

These things rightly considered, no Man need wonder at so many misshapen
Births, and monstrous People, with Scald-Heads, bowed and distorted Legs, Arms,
and Backs, wry-Necks, crumpled Feet, incident to Swellings, and indifferent
Diseases, especially Swellings in the Groin, Buboes, and Emerods; as also that
their Minds are dull, stupid, forge^ful, foolish, mad, and un^easonable, which
are indeed the effects of unseasonable and unreasonable Venery, which every
Creature but Man observes in the Season Nature has alloted and when their
Female have conceived, they desire no lnnger, but rest satisfied.

Therefore let Man, who is endued with a rational Soul, and ought above all
other Creatures to have dominion over his Appetite and Affection, consider how
cruel he is to his Posterity, that brings such mischief upon them, and chiefly
they are here to be understood, that are conceived in the fourth Moon, when the
Woman's Natural Flux is upon her; therefore all Men ought to restrain; neither
should the Woman dare to copulate with Men, as better knowing when that is upon
her, than some rash inconsiderate, and un-experienced Novices of the
Masculine-Gender do; for the Children then conceived, want all, or most of
those Gifts and Properties, that Children begotten at seasonable times, are
endowed withal, being capable of nothing that is good nor great; and if it so
happen, they do any thing well, they have ill success in their Undertaking^ by
reason their natural Faculties are short, not by their own, but their Parents
fault, who undecently in Procreation violate Natures Law, whence it is that
many things are wanting to them, or else given them sparingly, and with some
ill qualities that others obtain bountifully, and then suffer no less loss in
their Mind, for they want almost their common Senses, and are extreme dull,
without the sharpness of Wit, quickness of Invention, Coun^il and Prudence,
that others have. Lavinus Leminus, a famous Physician, tells of a monsterous
Birth from his own knowledge, the Relation of which I take in his words, as I
find them in his B^ok of Generation: In former years (says he) there was a
Woman, an Islander, who had married a Mariner that took Physic of me; and
after C^pulation, having C^nceived by him, her B^lly began to swell to such a
vast magnitude, that one would have thought it c^uld not have held to support
the bur^h^n: When 9 Months were expired, the M^dwife was called; and first with
great troub^e she was delivered of a rude lump, which I conceive was a
superfatati^n, after a lawful Con^ep^ion; there were fastened unto it on both
^ides two Handles like two A^ms, for the length and the fashion of them.; it
pan^ed and seemed to be alive as Sea Fishes, called V^tica; and by the Dutch
Els^howe, which float in the Sea in Summer, in infin^t^ numbers; and being
taken out they run abro^d, and when you handle them, mel^^ wi^h a burning and
prickling, left behind them; whence they had their Name, after this a Monster
came forth of her Womb, with a crooked Back, long round Neck, and fiery Eyes,
and a pointed Tail, being very nimble footed; for as soon as it came forth it
gave the affrighted Midwife the slip, and run up and down the Room to seek a
hiding place, till at last, one Woman more courageous than the rest, fell upon
it with a Cusheon, and smothered it: This Monster had sucked the Blood from the
Child, which came forth after it, being a Male, and so eaten the Flesh, that it
scarcely lived to be Christened; nor could the Woman be in a long time restored
to her strength: And farther adds, that upon his inquiry, she told him, that it
had proceeded (as she thought) from unseasonable, and extraordinary, and
insatiable Venery: Hereupon (says he) I proscribed her a wholesome course of
Life, and Medicines to restore her Forces; for she was become wonderful Lean.

These, and many such like things, should teach all Men and Women to use
decency, and orderly proceedings, in their mutuaul Embracings, lest Nature
wronged thereby, monstrous Births ensue, in which respect some Lascivious
People are much to be condemned, who suppose they may do what they list, and
will by no means have their Pleasure bounded; and above all, Pocky and Gouty
People are most Lascivious, the one thro` the Heat contracted in the Blood, and
the other through the polite windiness passes through the Veins, and afflicts
the Nerves; others again observe not, whether their Stomach be full or empty,
or the Meat be raw or digested, whether it be by Day or Night, nay, never
r^gard the season nor opportunity of time, but as their Lusts and Desires
prompts them; but such insatiable Lechers seem to be, or at least are wilfully
ignorant, to what end they were Created Male and Female, which was to beget
Children, and propagate their kind, not for obscene purposes, and beastly
pleasure; but at last they pay for their unruly Lust, when the Disorders of
Body, as Aches, Gout, and many Diseases contracted thereby, Rack and Torment
them.

The last thing in this Chapter to be considered is, whether monstrous Births
have reasonable Souls, and whether such shall appear at the day of
Resurrection; in discussing of which I shall cite the opinions of such Learned
Divines and Physicians, as have made curious search, and diligently weighed
these great Mysteries. And first, it is their opinion, not jointly, but
severally, that all those that are like Men, according to the order of
Generation, deduced from our primitive Parents, proceeded by natural means from
either Sex, though they are ^eformed, and of monstrous shape, having
notwithstanding a reasonable Soul, shall, when they have run the date of
Mortality, be capable of Resurrection to Immortality: but those that proceed
not from Man, but by the Woman's unnaturally mixing with other Creatures, shall
not participate of Immortality, but perish as brute Beasts, because such a
monstrous Birth is not capacitated to receive a divine part or Soul, which
should entail him to the Resurrection.

There are indeed amongst the number of Men and Women, that read the
Terrestrial Globe, diverse that are monstruously Deformed, and of horrid Aspect,
with distorted Jaws, and Gogle Eyes, and many other marks of Deformity; but
these, though by their p^rents rashness in incedent or unseasonable Copulation,
or the defect of Nature being thus disordered, yet are they referred to the
number of Men and Women, because they speak, understand, and act, which
demonstrate them to have reasonable Souls; and therefore shall they stand upon
the Earth at the last day, and at the Resurrection all Deformity shall be done
away, and they shall appear in perfect shape, and the Organical parts render
the Soul, that shall then return a ^ree scope to act and operate; but imperfect
and abortive Birth, or Mischances, where the Limbs are not fashioned or very
imperfect, want a reasonable Soul, it not being as yet infused by the Almighty,
shall have no part in the Resurrection.

Many Physicians there are, and indeed most o^ them make difference between a
Mischance and Abortion: The former of which, say they, is when there is a
Conception, but through the slipperiness or weakness of the Womb, it drops out
e're any shape is contracted, being only a Rude unframed Mass, properly called
the Rudiments of a Child, that shhuld have been, and a shadow of what was
begun; but Abortion often times shows the parts of the Infant perfectly composed,
which if it be ca^t ^orth by fright or untimely force, and has not accomplished
the days to receive the Soul, then it shall not participate of Immortality; but
if it be quick and cast out, though it live not an hour after, it is first
enlivened, then it has received an Immortal Soul; for although many things are
wanting in it, and it come not to its full Magnitude, yet in the Resurrection,
all shall be made up, that time would have produced. And as Children have many
things, in possibility, that with times progress show themselves as Teeth,
Nails, Hair, and full stature of Body, which increases by degrees, and come to
perfection; so in the Resurrection, all things that are defective shall be made
perfect. Whosoever therefore is both of the Seed of Man, and not of some foul
Matter, or vicious Humor concurring, though his shape be monstrous, yet, as I
said, he shall rise again from Death to Life^ all defects being repaired by the
Divine Power, that then will manifest it self no l^ss than in Creation; nay
more, for St. Austine is of the Opinion, it is easier to Crea^e Men, than to
raise them when they are Dead, etc. Though the Earthly Matter, where ever
scattered, is not perished in the sight of God, who can with his Word, recall
it from the Four Winds of Heaven, and restore it to its pristine Vigor, nay,
though vanished into Air, and other Elements, or what Leanness or Hunger, have
consumed, or Diseases have wasted, or what is burnt to Ashes, or is passed in
the first Principles, or in the substance of some other Body, for the Flesh
shall be restored to whom it was taken, as his due that was borrowed from him,
by the mighty working of him, who is able to subdue all things to himself:
Those that are Men, shall find this to be true, and those monstrous Shapes that
proceed from them, endued with rational Souls, and participating the same
Nature with them, shall participate the same Benefit of the Resurrection,

CHAP. VI. A more peculiar and exact Treatise of the bappy Estate of Matrimony,
as it is appointed by God; and the true Felicity that redounds thereby to either
Sex, and to what end it was Ordained.
CErtainly, the joining of Hearts in a Matrimonial State, is of all conditions
the happiest; for then a Man has, whom to unravel his Thoughts to, as well as a
sweet Companion in his Labor, he has an Internus Sensus, another self, one in
whose Breast, as in a safe Cabinet, is reporsed his inmost Secrets, especially
where Reciprocal Love, and inviolate Faith is centered; for there no cares,
fears, jealousies, Mistrust or Hatred, can never interpose; for what Man, as
it is observed in Holy Writ, ever hated his own Flesh, and indeed a Wife is no
less, if rightly considered; for as our grand ^arent well observed, she is or
ought to be so esteemed of every honest Man, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his
Flesh, etc. Nor was it the least care of the Almighty, to ordain so near a
Union, and especially for two causes, the first for increase of Posterity, the
second to bridle and bound Man's wandering Desires and Affection; nay, that
they might be yet happier, when God had joined them together he blessed them,
as `tis in the 2 d. of Genesis. Colamela, no mean Author, considering and
contemplating on this happy State, tells us out of the Occonomy of Xenophon,
that Matrimonial Conjunction appointed by Nature, is not only the most
pleasant, but profitable cour^e of Life, that may be enterred on, for the
preservation and increase of Posterity; wherefore, since the harbor of
Marriage is most safe, and a sure and delightful station of Mankind, who is
exceeding prone, by the dictates of Nature, to propagate his-like, he does in
no wise provide amiss for his own Tranquillity who enters it, especially when he
comes to maturity of years, ^or there are many abuses and errors in Marriage,
contrary to what is ordained; the which, in the ensuing Chapter I shall expose
to view; but to proceed.

Seeing our blessed Savior and his Apostles, detested obscene and unlawful
Lusts, an^ pronounced those to be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, that polluted
themselves with Adultery and Whoring, I cannot conceive any objection can be
made thereto, or what face such lude Persons can have to color their
impieties; who hating Matrimony, make it their study how they may live freely
and licentiously without Marriage; but certainly, in so doing, they rather seek
to themselves torment, anxiety and disquietude, then certain pleasure, besides
the hazard of their Immortal Souls; for certain it is, that mercenary Love, or
as the wise Man calls them, Harlots smiles, cannot be true and sincere, and
therefore not pleasant, but rather a Net laid, to betray such as trust them,
into all mischief, as Solomon observes by the Young man, who turned aside to
the Harlots, House going, said, As a Bird to the Sn^re of the Fowler, or as an
Ox to the Slaughter, till a Dart be struck through the Liver. Nor in this case
can they have Children, those sweet and indearing Pledges of Conjugal Love, or
if they have, they will rather redound to their shame than comfort; Harlots
likewise are like Swallows, singing and chattering to their morning walk, and
Summer Season of Prosperity, but the black stormy Winter of Adversity coming,
they take Wing, and pass into other Regions, to expand themselves before a
warmer Sun; but a virtuous chaste Wife, fixing entire Love upon her Husband,
and submitting to him as her Head, and him, by whose direction she ought to
steer in all lawful courses, will, like a faithful Companion, share patiently
with him in both adversities, run with cheerfulness through all Difficulties
and Dangers, though never so hazardous, to preserve or assist him in Poverty,
Sickness, or whatever else is incident to Humane Frailty, acting according to
her Duty in all things; when a proud imperious Harlot will do no more than she
list, even in the prosperous day, and is like a Horseleach, ever craving, and
never satisfied, still seeming displeased, if she have not every thing she
desires, not regarding the Ruin and Misery of him, she with flattering and
feigned Charms, pretends to admire, and dote upon him, using to confirm her
Hypocrisy, with Crocodile's Tears, Vows, and Swoonings, when her Gallant is to
depart for a while, or seems to deny her immoderate Desires; but this lasts no
longer than she can gratify her Appetite, and prey upon his Fortunes. Conradus
Gnessn^r tells us a story, That a young Man traveling from Athens to Thebes,
met by the way a Beautiful Lady, as to his Appearance she seemed, adorned with
all perfections of Beauty; glittering with Gold and precious Stones, who
Saluted him, and invited him to her House in an adjacent Village, pretending to
be exceedingly inamoured of him, and declared she had a long time watched the
opportunity to find him alone, that so she might declare the extreme Passion
she conceived for him. When he came to her House, he found it, to appearance,
very sumptuously built, and gloriously furnished with whatever could seem
costly and gay^ which so far wrought upon his covetous Inclination, that he
resolved to put off his intended Journey, and comply with her Desire; but
whilst she was leading him to see the pleasant Places, came by a Holy Pilgrim;
who perceiving in what danger the Youth was, resolved to see him in his right
Senses, and show him what he imagined real, was quite otherwise; so that by
powerful Prayer, the mist was taken from before the Youth's Eyes, when as he
beheld his Lady Ugly, Deformed, and monsterous, and that whatever had appeared
glorious and beautiful, was only trash. Then he made her confess what she was,
and her design upon the young Man, which she did, saying, She was a Lamiae, or
Fairy, and that she had thus enchanted him, on purpose, to get him into her
power, that she might devour him. This passage may be fitly alluded to a
Harlot, who draw those that follow their misguiding Lights, into places of
danger and difficulty, even till they have shipwracked their Fortunes, and then
leave them to struggle with the tempestuous Waves of Adversity. But on the
contrary, a loving, chaste, and even tempered Wife, seeks what she may to
prevent such danger, striving on the one hand to pr^serve it, as much as the
other does to destroy it: And in a word, as there is no content in the embraces
of a Harlot, so there is no joy greater than in reciprocal Love, and the
indearing Embraces of a loving, obedient, and chaste Wife; nor is that the
principal end for which Matrimony was Ordained, but further, that Man might
lawfully procreate his like, and increase in his Generation, to replenish the
Earth^ To conclude, a virtuous Wife is a Crown and Ornament to her Husband, and
her price is above Rubies, but the ways of an Harlort are deceitful.

CHAP. VII. Of Error in Marriage, and what they too frequently are, and the
prejudice that arise thereby^
IF any be desirous to enter into the Holy State of Matrimony, let them observe
their Ability and Constitution of Body, and not run themselves rashly upon ill
conveniences; for those who marry too young, may rightly be termed to marry
unseasonably, not considering their inability, nor examining the force of
nature; for diverse there are, before they are ripe for the consummation of so
weighty a matter, who either rashly of their own accords, by the instigation of
Bawds, Procurers, or Marriage-brokers, or forced thereto by their Parents, who
covet a large Dowry, take upon them this Yoke, to their great Prejudice:
Lavinus Lemnius, says, that he has known some of them, who before the
expiration of a year, have been thereby so infeebled and weakened, that all
their vital Moisture was exhausted, so that he was, upon their applying
themselves to him, obliged with Medicaments to restore their strength that was
fallen, and sunk down, wherefore his advice is, that it is no way convenient to
suffer Children, or such a^ are not of Age, to marry, or get Children^ But
whosoever proposes to marry, must chiefly observe this, that he choose one to
his Companion and Partner in his Felicity^ that is of an honest Stock, and
proceeding from temperate Parents, though her Dowry be not so large as he could
wish, that he observe the Conversation, and find therein that she is chaste,
well bred, and of goed manners. For a Woman, as the Comedian says, if she has
good conditions, she has Portion enough. That of Alcamena in Plaut^^ is a witty
saying, which all Maids, and others of the Female Sex, should retain fresh in
remembrance: I do not think (says she) that to be my Dowry, which is called
so^ but Chastity, Modesty, and a settled desire to fear God, to love my
Parents, and agree with my Kindred, to obey my Husband, to be bountiful, and to
do good to such as are virtuous and honest. Now if she proved as good as she
promised, such a Wife was to be valued above the Price of Rubies.

It Is a Duty incumbent upon Parents, to ^e careful in bringing up their
Children in the ways of Virtue; and have ever a regard that they ^ully not
their Honor and Reputation, especially the Females, and most of all Virgins,
when they grow up to be marrigable, for if through the unnatural severity of
rigid Parents they be crossed and frustrated in their love, many of them, out
of a mad humor, if temptations lies in their way, throw themselves into the
unchaste Arms of a subtle charming Tempter, being through the softness of good
Nature, and strong Desire, to pursue their Appetites, easily induced to believe
Men's Flatteries, and feigned Vows of promised Marriage, to cover the shame;
and then too late the Parents find the effects of their ra^h Severity, which
brought a lasting stain upon their Family. Now, as it is an Error in marrying to
young, so is unequality of Marriage between Age and Youth, as a young Man, who
to make his Fortune, marries to a Woman, that for Age might be his Grand
mother, between whom, for the most part, Jealousies and Discontents happen; nor
is it possible such Women should have Children, be the Man never so sprightly
and young. The like may be said, though with a little more excuse, when an old
doting Fellow marries a young Virgin, in the Summer Season of her Youth and
Vigor, who whilst he strives, and vain^ly strains to please her, is the sooner
wedded to the Grave. For as in Childhood or Green Youth, it is unfit and
unseasonable to think of Marriage, so in old Age to marry unequal, is
altogether the same; for they that enter upon it too soon, are soo^ exhausted,
and fall into Consumption, and diverse other diseases; and those that
procrastinate and marry unseemly, fall into the like ill conveniences on the
other side having only the Honor to be dubbed ^ Knight of the Forked Order,
and have their Names enrolled in the Colony o^ Cuckoldom, especially if their
Wives have not been trained up in the Paths of Virtue and lie too much open to
importunity an^ temptation of lewd and debauched Men^ And thus much for Errors
or Oversights^ in rash, unseasonable, or preposterou^ Marriages.

CHAP. VIII. ^he Opinions of the Learned concerning Children conceived and born
within the space of seven Months, with lively Arguments upon the Subject, to
prevent suspicions of incontinency, and the bitter Contests that thereon too
often arise between Man and Wife. To which is added, Rules for knowing the
disposition of Man's Body by the Genetal parts.
CErtain it is, that many bitter Quarrels have arisen through
mis-understand^ng, when solid reason would have recti^ied the Judgment, and
have prevented the Conception of such an Evil; and from whence does this arise,
but through Su^picion and Jealousy, when indeed it is many times founded upon
a slender Foundation, as the new married Woman's being brought to Bed before
the Expiration of Nine Months, which is vulgarly taken from the time of
Conception to the Birth: To remove which Groundless Suspicion, I shall
endeavor, not that it is common, dare I avouch, but that it is possible, and has
been frequently known, that Children have been born at Seven Months; but the
matter being wholly left by the Lawyers, who decide Controversies to the
Physicians to judge of, it is in their power to determine, by inspecting the
Child, whether it is a Child of 7, 8, 9, or 10 Months. Paul the Counselor has
this Passage in his nineteenth Book of Pleadings, viz. It is now a received
truth, that a perfect Child may be born in the seventh Month, by the Authority
of the Learned Hypocrates. And therefore we must believe, that a Child born at
the end of the seventh Month, in lawful Matrimony, may be lawfully begotten.
Gallen, in Chap. 6 of his third Book, handles this Argument, but rather
according to Men's Opinions^ than according to the truth of the business, or
from natural Reasons, who supposes there is no certain time set for bearing
Children. And from the Authority of Pliny, who makes mention of a Woman that
went 13 Months with Child: But as to what concerns the 7th Month, says
Leminus, I know many married People in Holland that had Twins, who lived to
extreme old Age, their Bodies lusty, and their Minds apt and lively; wherefore
their Opinion is foolish, and of no moment, who assert, That seven Months a
Child cannot be perfect and long lived, and that he cannot in all parts be
perfect till the 9th. Month; and thereupon this Learned Author proceeds to tell
a passage from his own knowledge, as follows: Of late, says he, there happened a
great disturbance amongst us, which ended not without Bloodshed, and was
occasioned by a Virgin, whose Chastity had been violated, descending of a Noble
Family, and ever before that time held to be of unspotted Fame. Now several
there were, who charged the Fact upon a Person of Note, viz. a Judge President
of a City in Flanders, who strongly denied the Fact, saying, that he was ready
to swear it upon the Holy Evangelist, that he never had Carnal Copulation with
her, and that he would by no means therefore be taken for the Fa^^er of the
Child that was not his; and fur^her alleged; that he verily believed that it
was a Child born in seven Months, and himself was many miles distance from the
Mothor of it when it was conceived, whereupon the Judges, before whom the
hearing was, decreed, That the Child should be viewed by able Physicians, as
also Experienced Women, and that they should make their report, who having made
diligent Inquiry, all of them with one accord, concluded the Child (without
respecting who was the Father) was a Child Born within the space of seven
Months that it was carried in the Mother's Wom^ but 27 Weeks, and some odd
days; but i^ she could have carried it to full 9 Months the Child's Part and
Limbs would have been more firm and strong, and the Structure of the Body more
compact and fast^ for the Skin was exceeding loose, and the Breast Bone that
defends the Heart, and the Sword-like Gristle that lies over the Stomach, were
higher than naturally they should be, not plain, but crooked, and sharp ridged,
or pointed like those of young Chickens, that are hatched at the beginning of
the Spring. And being a Female Infant, it wanted its Nails upon her Fingers,
and the outmost Joints of her Fingers, upon which, from the Musculous or
Cartilaginous Matter of the Skin, Nails that are very smooth do come, and by
degrees harden, she had instead of Nails a thin Skin, o^ ^^m; as for her Toes
there was not the least appearance of Nails about them, by reason that they
wanted the heat that was communicated to the Fingers from the nearness of the
Heart. These and the like weighty Matters being considered, and above all, one
Gentlewoman of Quality that assisted, affirms, that she had been the Mother
of 19 Children, and that diverse of them had been born, and lived at 7 Months,
^hey without favor to any Party made their report that the Infant was a Child
of 7 Months, and so must be accounted, though it was born within the seventh
Month, or that in such cases the revolution or circuit of the Moon ought to be
observed, which perfects it self in 4 bare Weeks, or somewhat less than 28
days, in which space of her Revolution the Blood being agitated by the Moons
force, the Courses of the Woman flow from them, which being spent, and the
Matrix cleansed from the Menstrual Blood, which happens on the 5th. Day; then
if on the 7th. Day a Man lie with his Wife, the Copulation is most natural, and
the Conception best, and a Child then gotten may be bor^ in the 7th Month, and
prove very healthful; so that upon this report, the supposed Father was
pronounced innocent, upon proof that he was 100 Miles distance all that Month,
in which the Child was begot: And as for the Mother, she strongly denied that
she knew the Father, being fo^ced in the dark; and that through fear and
surprise, was left in ignorance.

As for Coition, it ought not to be had, unless the Parties be in Health, lest
it turn to the disadvantage of the Children so begotten, creating in them,
through the abundant ill Humo^rs, diverse ling^ing and languishing Diseases;
wherefore Health is no where better to be discerned than by the Genitals of the
Man, wherefore Midwives, and other skilful Women in former day^, were wont to
see the Testicles of Children, thereby to conjecture or guess at their
temperate and state of Body, and young Men may know thereby the Signs or
Symptoms of Life and Death; for if the Cases of Testicles be loose and feeble,
and and the Cods fall down, it denotes the natural Faculties, and vital
Spirits, which are the props of Life, are fallen: But if the secret part be
wrinkled, and raised up, it is a sign all will be well: But that the Event may
exactly answer the Prediction, it is necessary to consider what part of the
Body the Disease possesses; for if it chance t^ be the upper part that is
afflicted, as the Hend or Stomach, then will it not so well appear by the
Members, which frequently are unconcerned with such Grievances; but the lower
part of the Body exactly sympathizing with them, their liveliness on the
contrary, makes it apparent; for Natures force, and the Spirit that have their
intercourse, first manifest themselves therein, which occasions Midwife^ to
feel the Genitals of Chil^^en, to know in what part the Grief is resident and
whether Life or Death be portended thereby, the Symptom being strongly
communicated by the Vessels that have their intercourse with the principal
Seats of Life.

CHAP. IX. The cause of the Green Sickness in Virgins, with its Symptoms, and
Directions for its cure: Together with the chiefest occasion of Barrenness in
Women, and by what means to remove the Cause, and render them fruitful.
THE former of these ill conveniences, is too apparent in Virgins, especially
such as are of a Phlegmatic Complexion, evidently showing it self by
discoloring the Face, in making it look green, pale, or of a dusky yellow,
which proceeds from raw undigested Humors, nor only does it appear to the Eye,
but sensibly afflicts such as it possesses, with difficulty of breathing, pains
in the Head, Palpitation of the Heart, unusual beatings, and small throbings of
the Arteries in the Temples, Neck, and Back, many times casting them into
Fevers, if the humor be very vicious, also loathing of Meat, and the
distension of the Hypocondriack part, by reason of the inordinate Efflux of
Menstrual Blood to the greater Vessels, and by reason of the abundance of
humor, the whole Body is often trouble with Swelling, or if not, at least the
Thighs, Legs and Ankles all above the Heels. And also there is a weariness of
the whole Body, without any reason at all for it.

The Galenists say, that this Distemper proceeds chiefly from the obstruction
of those Vessels that are about the Womb, occasioned by the abundance of gross,
viscid and crude Humors, arising from the several inward causes; but there are
also outward causes, which have a share in the production of it, as taking cold
on the Feet, drinking of Water, Intemperance in Diet, and also the eating of
things which are wholly contrary to Nature, viz. raw or burnt Flesh, Ashes,
Coals, old Shoes, Chalk, Wax, Nut-shells, Mortar, Lime, Oat meal,
Tobacco-Pipes, which occasion not only a Suppression of the Menses, but
likewise obstructions through the whole Body. Therefore the first thing necessary
to eradicate the Cause, is Matrimonial Conjunction, and such Copulation that
may prove to the satisfaction of her that is afflicted; for by that means the
Menses will begin to flow according to their natural and due course, and the
Humourt being diffused and dispersed, will soon waste themselves, and then no
more matter being administered to increase them, they will vanish, and a good
temperament of Body will return; but in case such a Conjunction cannot be had
so soon as necessity requires, then let the Damsel Blood in the Ankle, and if
she be about 16, you may do it likewise in the Arm, though suffer her not to
bleed overmuch, especially if the Blood be good. If the Diseases be of any
continuance, then it is to be eradicated by purgation, preparation of the
humor being first considered, which may be done by the Virgins drinking,
Decoction of Guaicum, with Dittany of Creet: but the best Purge in this case
ought to be made of Aloes, Agrick, Senna, Rhubard: And then for strengthening
the Bowels and open obstructions, Chalybeet Medicines are chiefly to be used.
The Diet must be moderate and sharp things; as Vinegar, etc. be by all means
avoided. And for the unobstructing of the Humor, take prepa^ed Steel,
Bezoar-sto^e, the Root of Scorzonera, and Oil of Crystal in small Wine, and
let the Diet be moderate, but in no wise let Vinegar be used therewith, nor
upon any other occasion: And in so o^serving, the Humors will be dilated,
dissipated, and transfused, by which means the Complexion will return, and the
Body be lively and full of Vigor. And now, since Barrenness daily occasions
discontent, and that Discontent creates Difference between Man and Wife, or by
immoderate Grief frequently casts the Woman into one or other violent
Distemper; I shall somewhat largely treat thereof.

Sterility proceeds from diverse Causes, but most commonly from some defect in
the Organs of Generation. Upon the Woman's part it most commonly happens, from
the strict closure of the Mouth of the Womb which will not admit the Seed, and
sometimes from the straitness of the Share-Bone, which denies entrance to the
Penis: Sometimes also from Ulcers or Excrescencies in the Neck of the Womb. To
these may be added too much Fatness, which s^raitens the passage of the Matrix.

Most of the Ancients are of opinion, that ^^nception is hindered commonly by
the Humidity and moisture of the Womb, when by reason thereof it cannot retain
the Seed, or by bad Humors heaped up there and ^urrupting it, or strange
defect of the Menstr^o^s Blood. But certain it is, that it preceeds either from
some Tumor, Ulcer, Exc^escence, or by some fault or other of the Womb, Ovaria,
or Ovi-Ducts. For if the Eggs are not impregnated with the Aura Virilis, or
Seminal Spirit, there can be no Conception, (the Testicles of Women having no
such Office as those of Men, but containing Eggs analogous to those of Fowls
and other Creatures.)

Now if the Or^fice of the Womb be closed that the Seed cannot enter, or rather
the two Wings or Nymphae, so ^ar that ^he Penis cannot pass the Neck of the
Womb, it must be opened by an Instrument, and subject to this defect in Nat^re
are many Women, especially in hot Countries, but most of all in Egypt, where the
Surgeons are forced with Silver Instruments, to make way for the Instrument
of Generation, a thiug not altogether unpracticable in England.

In case the Neck of the Womb be so strait that the Yard cannot enter, then is
the case to be inquired into, whether it be naturally so, or proceed from some
swelling, or Schirrus either within or without; and if such things appears, it
is for the most part incurable; but if it be a natural straitness, then s^pple
it with a Tent dipped in Oil of Roses, and the white of Eggs, and drink
Camomile Posset, sweetened with Sugar Candy, Morning and Evening; and by the
proportion thereof, the Womb will in all parts distend; or if it so happen in a
young Woman, Nature will increase the passage, and time produce things fitting
to their mutual Satisfaction; but let no Man by violence endeavor to force the
Passage, lest he break the Vessels; nay, endanger the Bladder it self, which
has been broke with such violent Intrusion, and so coft the Woman her Life.

If the Neck of the Womb be ulcerated, or any Excresenses happen there, which
equally hinder Copulation, then may they be known by the pain and shooting upon
the least compressure, and the issuing forth of putrid Humor, and sometimes
Blood of the Ulcer be great, and the Menses flow, the Water hot, pains ari^ing
in the fore part of the Head, and oftentimes they occasion gentle Fevers.

And these obstructions of Generation happen diverse ways, sometimes from
external Causes, viz. Rash Physic, hard Labors, or excessive Copulation; and
sometimes from internal, as the Corruption of the Secun-line, the courses too
long retained, or obstructed heat, and overflowing of the urinal Vessels,
Virulent Gonorrhaeas, Pox, Inflammation turned into Apostume, Humors flowing
from diverse parts of the Body, and settling there; all which must be duly
considered.

Now some are in the outward part, and may be the easier come at at, and
external Applications as are most convenient applied thereto; but those that
cannot be come at, must be cured if possible by injection: the best injection
in this case is as follows: viz.

Break four Eggs, and take the Whites only, the which beat with an unequal
quanty of Rose Water, mingled with Plantain-water, Litherage of Gold, Camphire,
Bole-Armonick, Ceruse, of each a Dram, half a Dram of Green Copperas, all which
well beaten, dissolved, and mixed together, strained through a fine Cloth, and
with a Syrringe inject it Morning and Evening till the grief cease; and if it
smart that it cannot be well endured, you may sometimes inject warm Milk to
cleanse the pu^rified Matter.

Others there are that are not so violent, and therefore admit of any easy
Cure, not being so deep, known by a putrid Greenish Matter that flows from
them. To cure this, take Water wherein Barley has been boiled, Honey of Roses,
new Milk and Sugar, with the Decoction of Lentils, and after them gentle
Astringents must be applied. Some again are sordid, having much Contagious
Humor flowing from them; to cure which, stronger Medicaments must be applied.
Others there are that eat into the Flesh, having a green Contagion flowing from
them, to cleanse which, Aloes and Wormwood concocted in White Wind are most
requisite.

Another sort of Ulcers there are which appear long, eating away the Skin from
off the Neck of the Womb, and are discerned by the Blood and pain they occasion
immediately upon the Concression, appearing in the Neck of the Womb, much like
Chilblains, occasioned by ill lying, extraordinary Venery, by violent
inflammations or flux of sharp Humors: The best cure after a gentle Purge is
an Astringent Clyster, and after that to anoint them with the Grease that fries
out of a Ladle often used in a Ki^chen, when it is held to the Fire, mixed with
Unguentum album, or Pomatum. If the defect be in the Seed through tenderness of
age in the Woman, than the best Remedy is convenient Diet, moderate Exercise,
and temperate Air, together with patience in the Man, till Nature in process of
time operates so effectually that all things appear and conspire to mutual
satisfaction.

If the Woman be stricken in years, and the time of breeding Children be past,
which in some happens sooner, and others later, according to their several
Constitutions, but generally between 44 and 45, unless strong Preparatives,
viz. an Extraordinary Diet, easy Lodging, and moderate Exercise restore them,
those Women must despair of fur^her Generation: For as the Learned in this Art
frequently observe, where is neither Buds nor Blossoms, there can be no Fruit.

If Sterility be occasioned by Obstructions in the Vessels, which it often
does, then the cause must be enquired into, and this often happens, the which
is known by the small desire to Venery, and the little or no satisfaction
received thereby, a settling in the Courses, and a slimy Phlegmatic Matter
mixed therewith as also by their inordinate flowing occasioned by the plenty of
Humors collected in the Womb, which by reason of the abundance of windy
Vapors contracted therein, causes Obstructions. To which may be added a cold,
Phlegmatic Constitution, and from hence it is, that sudden paleness arises in
the Face, etc. To remedy this, the Party must alter her Diet, not eating any
Cold, Raw, Phlegmatic substance, but rather such things as are apt to stir up
Choleric, hot Humors in the Body, as Anniseeds, or Carraway-seeds in her
Bread, store of Penniroyal in her Broth; let her likewise each Morning for a
Week together, make a Posset, in which she must boil the Roots of Birthwort,
Angelico, Sage, Rosemary, Cinnamon, and Burrage: The taking the Male Herb
Mercury, Dittany, Centaury, Marygolds, Cubebs, Saffron, Mugwort, and
Clove-Gilliflowers, of each a handful, boil them in White Wind, and eject the
Concoction by little and little, at sundry times, as the cold or obstruction
can be perceived, Anointing the Belly, and Reins of the Back, one day with Oil
of Cinnamon, next with the Oil of Nutmeg or Mace, and the third with the Oil of
Myrrh, and so continuing to do for a Month together. When the Woman lies down,
Nature will be wonderfully restored, and recover such force as to remove the
Obstructions.

Many there are that conceive Barrenness is frequently caused by Inchantation,
but those Opinions are altogether frivolous and vain.

If the Womb be defective in its Retentive Faculty, Men frequently labor in
vain, in such a case the Woman must avoid Sorrow, Anger, or much Sleep, Eating
new Cheese, Milk, and raw Food, especially Lettice, Edive, Spinach, Beets,
Nuts, Cherries, Purslain, Onions, Garlic, and the like, they all being hurtful
to Generation: Nor must she drink nor use Vinegar, nor eat the Fat of Meat too
frequently, but the Womb must be cleansed from the over abundant moisture, with
the Decoction of Hearts-Tongue (an Herb so called) Cummin, Fennel, and
Anniseed, and strengthened with the Syrup of Wormwood, and for a gentle
operative Purge in this case, take half an Ounce of Laudanum, Beeswax, Sheeps
Suet, and Agarick, of each a like quantity, melt and bruise them, after which
make them up into little Pills, and take three in a Morning, and next to them
take of this Conception to the bigness of an Nutmeg, viz. The shavings of
Ivory, Ash-keys, yellow and wild Rape-Seed, Siler, Montanus, with red and white
Behen, of each one Dram, Cinnamon, Galinga, Long^Pepper, Cloves and Mace,
Balsamwood, Rosemary Flowers, Blatiae, Bezaria, Gentle Marjorum and
Pennyroyal, of each 4 Scruples, Balm, Bogloss, Cittern, Reils, of each 2
Scruples, Pearl, dissolved or beaten to Powder one Scruple, Musk two Grains,
White-Sugar one Pound and an half, briuse them and sees them over a gentle
Fire, in as much Malmsey, as will make them into a Confection. This Confection
is indeed a most singular and approved one in all cases of Barrenness, where
cold or obstructions of the Vessels do accasion weakness in the Womb.

Other causes of Barrenness there are, when the Woman grows fat, (as we have
said before) so that the Caul swelling, and bearing beyond its bounds with its
fatness, obstructs the Passage into the Womb; to prevent which, the Woman must
not sleep overmuch, especially in the day time, nor feed riotously, but
exercise her self in Walking, or moderate Exercises, and often use Purgation
and strong Glysters, made of such He^bs and Druggs that are hot and dry, which
will in a short time remove such Ostructions.

But a more dangerous cause of Barrenness than yet I have named, are the Whites
which are contracted by an inordinate Eurudition of the Excrementious Homour^
collected through the Vitiousness of the Blood, incident to Young and Old, at
such times as they are capable of Generation^ and therefore the Cure must be
hastened, by reason that in short time it derides Art, and renders Women
inevitably barren, occasioning Leanness, Consumption, Melancholy, Dropsy,
falling of the Womb, swooning, Convulsions, which renders it difficult and
dangerous in long continuance, though in the beginning it may be ea^ily removed^
In the Cure of this, let Phlebotomy, or Blood-letting, be avoided; for as much
as the bad Humor must be by no means recalled to defile the Blood, the Disease
it self being a sufficient weakening of the Body and Vital Spirits. First, then
to discuss the Humor, in order to its Expurgation, Take two Ounces of Guaicum,
the like quantity of China, and Lentilckwood, boil them in Water and Honey,
drinking a pint, fresh made each Morning: Then to dry up to Contraction of the
Vessels, or Humor that lodged there, take the Root of Filipendula, beat it to
Powder, and drink it in White Wind Morning and Evening: As also for
Astringents, use Bones, burnt and beat to Powder; likewise the Ashes of Capons
dung, ejected after a long time steeping in fair Water: The Patient must
likewise avoid sleeping upon her B^ck, lest the Humor descend and contract in
the Vessels of the Womb, but let her be rubbed often to disperse them, that
they settle not in any one place.

Sometimes this occasion of Barrenness happens through the violent attraction
of the Womb, and then appears signs of afflictions of the Womb, the Flux not
being so great, to cure which, Suffumations are the most proper, and those may
be made of Frankincense, Laudanum, Santalum, or Mastick: The Woman upon such
occasion, having great regard to her self that she take not Cold, or proceed to
intemperate Diet.

Many Women there are, whose violent Lusts contracts a heat, that either
destroys the Eggs, or hinders them from being impregnated. In this case, it is
requisite to avoid hot Air, soft lying, hot Meats and Spice, and requisite to
bleed in the Basilick Vein, purge moderately with Decoctum Epitaymi, and Juice
of Roses, each two Drams and a half, Whey half a pint, mix them together, and
drinking them fasting in the Morning, and so continue 4 hours after, or for
want of the former you may take Triphera Serasenica and Rhuburb, of each half a
Dram, pulverized and mixed with 2 Ounces of Syrup of Roses, Violets or Endive;
but the most excellent Restorative to cool and moderate the Temper in this
case; is Diet-drink, made as follows, viz. Take Pistachia-Nuts, and
Eringo-Roots, of each half an Ounce, of Saffron a dram, Lignum Alloes,
Gallinga, Caryophillata, Mace, red and white Behen and Baulm Flowers, of each 4
Scruples, Shavings of Ivory, Rind of Cassia, each 2 Scruples, Syrup of
confected Ginger 12 Ounces, white Sugar 6 Ounces, add to these 12 Ounces of
Baulm Water, and set them over a gentle Fire, permitting them to sees, then
take it off, suffer it to cool, and put more Water to it, stirring the
Ingredient; lastly, increasing them with a Scruple and a half of Musk and
Amber, then strain out the Luquid part, and boil it up again into a Conserve,
of which let the Woman eat three times a day, but not exceeding the bigness of
a Walnut at a time. The times most convenient are Mornings, Noons and Night,
and this let her continue till she finds her Body in temper.

Another occasion of Barrenness proceeds from the obstruction of those Vessels,
through which the Monthly Purgations flow, in which case open the Basilick
Vein, and take from hence a moderate quantity of Blood, after which take Hiera
composita, and Oppopanax, of each half a Dram, and a Dram of Syrup of
Giliflowers, make them into 7 Pills, take them in the Morning, and sleep upon
them a considerable time, then drink off half a pint of Sugared water, and 3
hours after, a portion of Syrup, of Vinegar compounded: For want of this, take
Syrup of Eupatory, 3 quarters of an ounce, Female Mugwort, and Elecampane Root,
of each an ounce, with Syrup of Vinegar, a proportionable quantity, mix them
together, and take them, when made into an Electuary, Morning and Evening, to
the quaatity of an HazelNut at a time; and if the Courses flow not within a
short time after, let a Pessary of Musk, Amber, Wood of Alloes; and Ash-Keys,
of each ^ Grains, Saffron half a Scruple, Hares Renet an ounce, be put into the
Womb Tent-wise, and continue there for the ^pace of a day, and it will remove
the obstruction, cause the Cources to flow, and in short time render the Woman
capable of Generation. And thus, Reader, have I, with much caution, performed
my promise in these particulars; and the next thing I shall proceed to, amongst
other matters relating to the Mystery of Generation, are the signs of
Virginity, etc.

CHAP. X. Virginity what it is, in what it consists, and how violated, together
with the Opinions of the Learned in the point of mutation of Sexes in the Womb,
during the Operation of Nature in framing the Body.
SEeing many ignorant People have boasted their Knowledge as to the first
particular, und some Virgins have undergone hard Censures through the ignorant
Determinations of such as have taken upon them to discuss the matter, I thought
it altogether necessary to clear the Point, that so for the future the
Conceited might not be indulged in their vain Opinion, nor by traducing others,
prejudice the Female Sex, whose Virtues are frequently such, as do not require
our admiration, but imitation. Then since the mysterious Word Virginity has
puzzled many to define it, I mean the cause from whence it arises, for the word
barely in it self signifies the prime, chief, or best of any thing: But as to
the point in hand, the main matter bears the following Construction. It is
observed by the curious searchers into Natures Secrets, that in young Maids or
Females, in the Sinus Pudoris, or in that place that is by some called the Neck
of the Womb, is that pendulous production, vulgarly called the Hymen, but more
rightly the Claustrum Virginale, and in French it is termed the Button de Rose,
or Roses-Bud, for that it much resembles the Bud of a Rose, expended, or a
Clove-Gilliflower, from when it derived the Word Defloro, to Deflower, the
Deflowering of Virgins, because most are of opinion, that the Virginity is
altogether annihilated, when this Duplication is fractured and dissipated by
violence, and that when it is found perfect and entire, no penetration has been
made. Also some Learned Physicians are of opinion, that there is not neither
Hymen or Skin expanded containing Blood in it, which diverse imagine in the
first Copulation, flows from the fractured expanse.

Now this Claustrum Virginale, or Flower, is as it were composed, or consisting
of four Caruncles, or little Buds like Myrtle-berries; which in Virgins are
full and plump, but in Women flag, and hang loose; and these are placed in the
four Angles of the Sinus Pudorus, joined or held together by little Membrains,
and Ligatures like Fibers, each of them situate in the Intresticles or Spaces
between each Caruncle, with which in a manner they are proportionably
distended, which Membranes being once delacerated, denote Devirgination, and
many curious Coxcombs prying into this Secret the first Night of their
Marriage, and finding their Wives defective in this point, have ever after held
them in evil esteem, concluding it happened through the effect of Copulation with
some other, who had been entertained in the Chambers of Venus. Nay, one I knew
that upon this vain fancy took such conceit, that he would never go to Bed with
his Wife; when to undeceive such Idots, it is affirmed by the Learned, tha^
such fracture may happen diverse ways by accidents, as well as Copulation with
Man, viz. By extrordinary straining, violent coughing, immoderate sneezing,
stopping of Urine, and violent motion of the Vessels, inforcibly sending down
the humors, which pressing for passage break the Ligatures or Membrane, so
that the intireness or fracture of this thing, commonly taken for the Virginity
or Maidenhead, is no absolute sign of dishonesty; though certain it is, that
in Copulation it is more frequently broken than otherwise.

Once at an Assize, held for the County of Rutland, a young Man was put upon
Trial of Life and Death, which Trial was founded upon an Indictment, for
forcing a Virgin, when after diverse questions asked, and the Maid swearing
positively to the matter naming the time, place, and manner o^ the Action; it
was upon mature delibera^tion resolving, that she should be searche^ by a
skilful Chyrurgeon, and two Mid^wives, who were to make their Report up on
their oaths, which after due Examination they accordingly did affirm, that the
Mem^branes were entire and not disacerated, an^ that it was their Opinion for
that Reason that her Body had not been penetrated which so far wrought upon the
Jury, tha^ the Prisoner was acquitted, and the Mai^ afterward confessed she
swore against hi^ out of revenge, because he had promise^ to marry her, and
then declined it. An^ thus much concerning Virginity. And no^ I shall proceed
to the second particular^ which is, Reader, to show you the Opinion of diverse
learned Men, in relation to Nature operation, in changing Sexes in the Womb

This point is of much necessity, by reason of the different Opinions of Men
relating to it. Therefore before any thing positive can be asserted, it will be
altogethe^ convenient, to recite what has been delivered, as well in the
negative as the affirmative. And first, of the first; Severus Plineus^ who
^rgues for the negatives, writes thus^ The Genital parts (says he) of both
Sexes ^re so unlike other, in Sub^tance, Compo^^tion, Situation, Figure,
Action, and U^^, that nothing is more unequal, and by how ^uch more all other
parts of the Body, ^he Breasts excepted, which in Women well more, because of
the secundary use) ^ave an exact resemblance, so much the ^ore, in resemblance
are the Genital parts ^f one Sex, compared with the other una^ke; and if their
Figure be thus different, ^uch more is their use. The Veneral ^ppetite also
proceeds from different cau^es; for in Men it proceeds from a desire ^f
Emission, and in Women from a desire ^f Completion, in Women also, the chief^st
of those parts are concave, and apt to ^eceive, but in Men they are only
porous, and in a Woman Solid.

These things considered, I cannot but ^onder (added he, how any one can
ima^ine that the Genital Member of Female ^ir^hs should be changed into those
that be^ong to Males) since by those parts only ^he difference and distinction
of Sexes is ^ade, nor can I well impute the reason of his vulgar Error to any
thing but the mi^take of unexpert Midwi^es, who have ^een deceived by the evil
confirmation of ^he parts; which in some Male Births may ^ave happened to have
had some small p^otrusion, not to have been di^cerned, ^ ^^peared by the
Example of a Child, chr^^stened at Paris, by the Name of Joan, ^ if it had been
a Girl, when as afterwar^ it proved a Boy, and on the contrary the over-far
extension of the Clytoris in Femal^ B^^ths, may have occasioned the like
mi^stakes. Thus far Pliny proceeds in the n^^gative, yet notwithstanding his
negatio^ there are not wanting diverse learned Phy^sicians that have asserted
the affirmative, o^ which number Galen is one, A Man (sait^ he) is different
from a Woman in nothing els^ but having his Genital Members without h^^ Body:
And this certain, that if Natu^^ having formed a Man, would conver^^ him into a
Woman, she has no other Task to perform, but to turn his Genit^^ Member
inward, and a Woman into a Man by doing the contrary. But ^his is to b^
understood of the Child, when it is in the Womb, and not perfectly formed, for
di^vers times Nature has made a Femal^ Chi^d, and it has so remained in the
Bell^ of the Mother for a Month or two, and af^terward plenty of heat
increasing in the Genital Members, upon some occasion they have issued forth,
and the Child ha^ become a Male, yet retaining some cer^tain Gestures,
unbe^iting the Masculin^ ^ex, as Female Actions, a shrill Voice, and ^ore
feeble than ordinary. Contrariwise, Nature often having made a Male, and ^old
Humors flowing to it, the Genitals ^ave been inverted, yet still retaining a
Man-like fashion both in Voice and Gesture.

Now these Opinions considered, I am rather inclinable to believe the latter as
a thing altogether probable, for there is not that vast difference between the
Members of the two Sexes, as Pliny would have us believe there is, for the
Woman has in a manner the same Members with the Man, ^ho' they appear not
outwardly, but are inverted with the convenience of Generation, the main
difference being, that one is more solid than the other, and that the chief
reason of changing Sexes is, and must be attributed to heat or cold suddenly,
or slowly contracted, which operates according to its greater or lesser force.
And thus much for these two P^rticulars, leaving which, I shall proceed to lay
down seasonable and necessa^y instructions or directions for Midw^fes etc.
opening in that Discourse a Cabinet of many rare Secrets, not vulgarly known,
and indeed only fitting to be known to such as may obse^ve and put them in
practice for the public good, and in no wise convert them to obscenity.

CHAP. IX. A Midwife, how she ought to be qualified.
THose that undertake this great Task, ought by no means to enter upon it
rashly or unadvisedly, but with all imaginable caution, well weighing and
pre^considering that she is accountable for all the mischief that befalls
through her wilful ignorance or neglect; therefore let not unskilful Women take
upon them this Office, barely upon pretense of their maturity of years and
Child bearing; for in such, for the most part, there are diverse things wanting
that ought to be observed, which is the occasion so many Women and Children are
lost: Now, as for a Midwife, in relation (...) her Person, these things ought
to be obs^rved, viz. She must not be too old nor too young; neither
extraordinary fat, nor weakened by leanness, but in a good habit or Body, not
subject to Diseases, Fear, nor sudden Frights; her Body well shaped, and neat
in her Attire, her Hand smooth and small, her Nails ever pared sho^t, not
suffering any Rings to be upon her Fingers, during the time she is doing her
Office, nor any thing upon her Wrists that may obstruct; and to these ought to
be added, Activity and a convenient Strength, with much caution and diligence;
nor subject ^o Drowsiness nor Impatience.

As for her Manners, she ought to be courteous, affable, sober, chaste, and not
subject to passion, bountiful and compassionate to the Poor, and not cove^^us
when she attends upon the Rich.

Her Temper cheerful and pleasant, that she may the better comfort her Patients
in their Afflictions; nor must she at any time make over much haste, though her
business be urgent in another place, left by indangering the Mother or Child,
she disgrace her self, and forfeit Heavens Blessing upon her Endeavors for the
future.

Of Spirit she ought to be prudent, wary and cunning; but above all, to have
the fear of God before her Eyes, and to employ the Talent he has lent her to
his Glory.

CHAP. XII. Things worthy to be observed by Midwives, tending to their
Advancement, and what they ought to avoid, etc.
LET her that undertakes this Office, attended with many Circumstances of
Danger and Disgrace, take good heed to what I shall relate. In the first place,
let her be diligent to leave nothing unsearched which may be advantageous to
her Practice, never imagining her self so perfectly, but she may add to her
knowledge, by Study and Experience; yet never let her apply any remedies in
that case, unless she has tried them, or known them tried with success, or
least is conscious of their force, that they will do no harm, doing nothing in
that nature, to practice upon poor or rich, but speaking freely of what she
knows, and giving reason for the farther confirmation thereof, by no means
daring to give directions for such Medicines a^ will cause Abortion, to
pleasure those that have unlawfully, conceived, which to do, is a high degree
of wickedness, and may be ranked with Murde^; but if any come to her with
specious pretenses, let her send them to able Physicians^ and neither for fair
words nor lucre, be won to hearken to them. If she be sent for, let her know to
whom she goes, and be careful therein, le^t by laying any one that has an
infectious Disease, as the Pox, etc. she get it, and so spoil other Women, as a
Midwife once did, who laying a Strumpet^ that had an inveterate Pox, which
occasioning a Bubo upon her right Hand, and she not leaving off her Calling,
spoiled diverse Women, not the Women only, but the Men also, to whom it was
communicated by their Wives, which made them think hard of each other, and for
a long time could not imagine how it happened; but at last it was discovered by
an able Physician, and the Midwife for ever after debarred her Practice; and
not so only, but followed with Curses even to her grave. She must likewise
observe, that she entertains no great Bellied Women at B^d, and Board in her
House, le^t thereby she bring a Scandal upon her self, and so lose her
Practice. If the Birth at any time be hard and difficult, she must not be
dismayed, but cheer up the Woman, and try her utmost Skill to make the Labor
easy, D^rections for which shall hereafter be inserted; nor shall she ever
think of any thing but doing well, and using her utmost skill, causing all
necessary things that are proper for the Work, Consolation of the Woman, and
reception of the Child to be in a readiness; and above all let her use her
diligence^ either by persuasion or otherwise, to keep the Woman from being
unruly in her Pangs, lest thereby she destroy both her self and her Child, and
not in any wis^ to proceed too hasty in her business, but w^^t God's leisure in
all things, and by no mea^^ let her suffer her wits to scatte^, but dismay or
doubt, if things go not well, for fear it disorders the Senses, and a Person
that keeps her Wits together, is capable of giving assistance in Weighty
affairs, for when we are most at a plunge, then there is most need of prudence
to set things right. And seeing she can never be an expert Midwife that has no
further knowledge than of the ex^ernal parts, I shall not think it amiss,
briefly with modesty, to proceed in describing the generative part of the
Woman, as they have been Anatomized, by the Learned of the present and past
Ages, and show the use of such Vessels, etc, as are contributing to Generation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Genital of Women, External and Internal to the Vessels of
the Womb.
WAS it not sor the benefit of Practitioners and Pro^essors of the Art of
Midwifry, I should above all things spare to Treat of these Particulars,
because they may be turned by some Lascivious and ^^wd Persons into ridicule;
but they being absolutely necessary to be known. I will hope the best, and
proceed in order.

The parts that offer themselves in view, without any deduction, at the bottom
of the Belly, are the Fissura Magna, or the Great Chink, with its Labia or
Lips, the Mons Ven^ris^ and the Hair. These parts are called by the general
Name of ^ud^nda, because when they are bared they bring Pudor or Shame upon a
Woman. The Fissura magna reaches from the lower part of Os Pubis too within an
Inch of the Anus. It is less and closer in Maids, than in those that have born
Children, and has two Lips, which toward the Pubes, grow thicker, and more
full or peturberant, and meeting upon the middle of the Os P^bis, make that
rising that is called M^ns Vener^s, or the Hill of Venus.

The next thing that offers are the Nymphae and Clytoris, the former of which
is of a Membrany and Filmy substance, spongy, soft, and partly fleshy, being of
a bloody color in the shape of Wings, two in number, though from their rise
they are joined in an acute Angle, producing there a fleshy Substance, which
clothes the Clytoris, and many times they spread so far, that incision is
required to make way for the Mnn's Instrument of Generation.

The Clytoris is a substance in the upper part of the Division, where the two
Wings concur, and is the Seat of Veneral Pleasure, being like a Yard in
Situation, Substance, Composition and Erection, growing sometimes out of the
Body two Inches, but that rarely happens, unless through extreme lus^ of
extraordinary accident. But to proceed, this Clytoris consists of two spongy
and skinny Bodies, containing a distinct Original from the Pubis Bone, the Head
of it being covered with a tender skin, having a hole or passage like the
Penis, or Yard of a Man, though not quite through, in which, and the bigness, it
only differs from it.

The next thing in course, are the fleshy Knobs, and the great Neck of the
Womb. And these Knobs are behind the Wings, being four in number, much
resembling Mir^le Berries, being placed in quadrangle one against the other,
and in this place is incerted to the Orifice of the Bladder, which opens it
self in the Fissure, to evacuate the Urine, for securing of which from cold, or
the like inconveniency, one of these Knobs are placed before it, and shuts up
the passage.

The Lips of the Womb, that next appear, being separated, disclose the Neck
thereof, in which, two things are to be observed, viz. The Neck it self, and
the Hymen, but more properly the Claustrum Virganale, of which I have before
discoursed. But the Neck of the Womb is to be understood, the Channel that is
between the a^oresaid Knobs, and the inner Bone of the Womb which receives the
Penis like a Sheath; and that it may the better be dilated for the pleasure of
Procreation, the Substance of it is Sinewy, and a little Spongy, and in this
Concavity are diverse Folds or O^bicular Plights, made by Tunicles, wrinkled
like an expanded Rose; in Virgins they plainly appear, but Women that have been
used often in Copulation, they are extinguished; so that the inner side of the
Wombs Neck appears smooth, and in old Women it becomes more hard and grisly:
And now note, that although this channel be sometimes writhed and crooked
sinking down, yet in the time of Copulation, Labor, or the Monthly Purgations,
it is erected and extended, which over Extention occasioneth the great pain in
Childbirth.

The Hymen or Claustrum Virginale, is that which closes the Neck of the Womb,
being, as I have before cited in the Chapter relating to Virginity, broken in
the first Copulation, its use being rather to stay the untimely Courses in
Virgins, than to any other end; and commonly when it is broke in Copulation, or
by any other accident, a final quantity of Blood flows, with some small pain
passing. Hence it is observed, that between the duplicity of the two Tunicles
which constitute the Neck of the Womb, there are many Veins and Arteries
running along, and arising from the Vessels, descending on both sides the
Thighs, and passing into the Neck of the Womb, being extremely large, and the
reason of their largements is, for that the Neck of the Bladder requires to be
filled with abundance of Spirits, thereby to be extended and dilated for its
better taking hold of the Penis, great heat being required in some notions,
which becoming more intense by the act of frication, does consume a
considerable quantity of moisture, in supplying which large Vessels, are
altogether necessary.

Another cause of the longness of these Vessels there is, viz. By reason of the
Menses have their way through them, which often occasion Women with Child to
continue their Purgations; for although the Womb is shut up, yet the passage in
the Neck of the Womb, through which these Vessels pass are open: In this cause
there is further to be observed, that as soon as you penetrate the Pudendum,
there appears two little Pi^s or Holes, wherein is contained an Humor, which
by being expunged in time of Copulation, greatly delights the Woman.

CHAP. XIV. A Description of the Woman's Fabric, the preparing Vessels, and
Testicles in Women, as also of the Deferent, or Ejaculatory Vessels.
IN the lower part of the Hypogastrion, where the Hips are widest and broadest
(they being greater and broader thereabouts ^han those of Men, which is the
reason they have likewise broader Buttocks then Men^) is the Womb joined to its
Neck, and is placed between the Bladder an^ strait Gut, which keeps it from
swaying or rolling, yet give it liberty to stretch and dilate it self, and
again to contract as Nature in that cause disposes it: Its figure is in a
manner round, and not unlike a Gourd, lessening a little, and growing more
acute toward one end, being knit together by its proper Ligaments, its Neck
likewise is joined by its own substance^ and certain Membranes that fallen it
to Os Sacrum, and ^he Share-bone. As to its largeness, that much differs in
Women, especially the difference is great between such as have born Children,
and those that have born none: In substance it is so thick, that it exceeds a
Thumbs breadth, which after Conception it is so far from decreasing, that it
augments to a greater propotion, and the more to strengthen and con^irm it, it
is interwoven with Fibers overthwart, strait, and winding, and its proper
Vessels are Veins, A^teries and Nerves, and amongst these are two little Veins,
which pass from the Spermatick Vessels to the bottom of the Womb, and two
larger from the Hypogastricks, which visits both the bottom and the Neck, the
Mouth of these Veins piercing as 'far as the inward concavity.

The Womb has also two Arteries on both sides, the Spermatick Vessels, and the
Hypogasticks, which still attend or accompany the Veins, and besides these
there are diverse little Nerves knit and intwined in the form of a Net, which
extend throughout, even from the bottom to the Pudenda themselves, being
chiefly placed for sense and pleasure, moving in Sympathy between the Head and
Womb.

Now it is to be farther noted, that by reason of two Ligaments that hang on
either side the Womb, from the Share-bone, and piercing through the
Peritonaeum, and are joined to the Bone it self, that the Womb is movable upon
sundry occasions, often falling low, or rising high; as for the Neck of the
Womb, it is of an exquisite feeling, so that if it be at any time ou^ of order
by being troubled with a schirous brawn, over-fatness, moisture, or relaxation,
the Womb is subjected thereby to Barrenness^ In those that are with Child,
there frequently stays a most glutinous matter in the entrance to facilitate
the Birth; for at the time of Delivery the Mouth of the Womb is opened in a
strange manner, to such a widenes, as is conformable to the bigness of the
Child, suffering an equal dilation from the bottom to the top.

As for the Preparatory or Spermatick Vessels in Women, they consist of 2 Veins
and 2 Arteries, not differing from those in a Man, but only in their largeness
a manner of insertion; for, as to their number, there are so many Veins, and
the like proportion of Arteries, as in Men, the right Vein issuing from the
trunk of the hollow Vein descending, and the lift from the Emulgent Vein, and
on the side of them two Arteries, which grows from the A^rta:

As to the Longitude and Latitude of these Vessels, they are narrow, and
shorter in Women than in Men; only observe where they are wrinkled or crumpled,
they are more wreathed and contorted than in Men, as shrinking together, by
reason of their shortness, they may by their looseness be the better stretched
out, when occasion requires it. And these Vitals in Women are carried with an
oblique course through the lesser Guts, to the Testicles or Stones, but are in
the midway divided into two Branches, the greater going to the Stones,
constituting the various or windy Body, and wonderful Inoculation; the lesser
Branch ending in the Womb, in the side of which it disperseth it self, and
chiefly at the higher part of the bottom of the Womb, for the nourishment
thereof, and that part of the Courses, may purge through these Vessels; and
seeing the Testicles in Women are seated near the Womb, for that cause the
Vessels fall not from the Peritonaeum, neither make they such Passages as in
Men, nor extend themselves to the share-bone.

The Stones in Women, commonly called the Testicles, perform not the same
Actions as Men's; they are also different in their situation, magnitude,
temperament, substance, form and covering. As ^or the seat, it is in the
hollowness of the Abd^men, neither are they external pendulous, but rest upon
the Muscles of the Loins, that so they may be contracting the greater heat by
more fruitful, their Office being to contain the Ova, or Eggs, which being
impregnated by the Man's Seed, engender Man; yet they differ from those of Men
in figure, by reason of their lesness and flatness, at either end, not being so
round or oval. The External Superficies being likewise more unequal, appearing
like the composition of a great many knots and kernels, mixed together, there
is also another difference in their substance, they being much more soft and
pliable, loose, and not so well compacted.

Their magnitude and temperament being also different, for they are much colder
and lesser than those in Men, as for their covering or enclosure, it likewise
differs extremely, for as Men's are wrapped or covered in diverse Tunicles, by
reason they are externally Pendulous, and subject to diverse injuries, unless so
senced by Nature, ^o Women's Stones being internal, and less subject to
casualty, are covered with one Tunicle or Membrane, the which, though it
closely adhere to them, yet are they likewise half covered with the Peritonaeum.

The Deferent or Ejaculatory Vessels, are two obscure Passages, one on either
side, nothing differing from the Spermatick Veins in sustance; rise they do, on
one part from the bottom of the Womb, not reaching from their other extremity,
either to the Stones, or any other part, but shut up and unpassable, adhering
to the Womb as the Colon does to the blind Gut, and winding half way about; the
Testicles are every way remote to them, yet though they touch them not, they are
tied to them by certain Membranes, resembling the Wings of a Batt, or
Flutter-Mouse, through which certain Veins and Arteries, passing from the end
of the Testicles in these beginning, or may be termed here to have their
passages, proceeding from the corners of the Womb to the Testicles, and are
accounted the proper Ligaments by which the Testicles and Womb are united, and
strongly knit together, and these Ligaments in Women are the Cremesters in Men;
of which I shall speak more largely, when I come to describe the Masculine
parts conducing to Generation.

CHAP. XV. A Discourse of the use and Action of the several Parts in Women,
appropriated to Generation, etc.
THE Externals, commonly called the Pudenda, are designed to cover to great
Orifice, and that to receive the Penis, or Yard in act of Coition, and give
passage to the Birth and Urine, The use of the Wings and Knobs like
Mirtle-berries, are for the security of the Internal parts, ^hutting the
Orifice, and Neck of the Bladder, and by their swelling up, cause Titulation in
those parts, and also to obstruct the unvoluntary passage of the Urine.

The Action of the Clytoris in Women, is like that of the Penis in Men, viz.
Erection. And its outer end is like the Glans of Penis, and has the same
Nature; and as the Glans in Man is the Seat of the greatest pleasure in
Copulation, so is this in Women, whence it is called Amoris dulcedo^ and
AEstreum Veneris.

The action and use of the Neck of the Womb, is also equal with that of the
Penis, viz. Erection, occasioned diverse ways. First, in case of Copulation, it
is erected and made strait for the passage of the Penis to the Womb: Secondly,
whilst the passage is repleated with Spirit and vital Blood, it becomes more
strait for embracing the Penis, as for the convenience of Erection it is
twofold. First, for as much as if the Neck of the Womb was not erected, the
Yard could have no convenient passage to the Womb. Secondly, it hinders any
hurt or damage that might ensue through the violent Concussion of the Yard,
during the time of Copulation.

As for the Vessels that pass through the Neck of the Womb, there Office is to
repleat it with Blood and Spirit, that still as the moisture consumes by the
heat contracted there in Copulation, it may by those Vessels be renewed. But
their principal business is, to convey Nutriment to the Womb.

The Womb it self has many Properties attributed to it; as first, Retention of
the secundated Egg, which is properly called Conception.

Secondly, To cherish and nourish it, till by the help of Nature, it has framed
the Child, and brought it to perfection. And then it strongly operates in
sending forth the Birth when the time of its remaining there is expired,
dilating and spreading it self in a wonderful manner: And indeed is the Field
of Man's Generation, being designed for no other purpose, and so aptly removed
from the Senses, that nothing of Injury can proceed from thence, retaining in
it self a power and strength to operate and cast forth the Birth, unless by
accident or the like it be rendered deficient. When to strengthen and enable
it, besides the helps of Nature, sundry Remedies are to be applied by skilful
hands Direction. For which shall be hereafter mentioned.

The use of the preparation Vessel is this: The Arteries convey the Blood to
the Testicles, where part of it is spent in the nourishment of them, and the
Production of those little Bladders (which do in all things resemble Eggs)
through which the Vasa Preparentia run, and are obliterated in them. And as for
the Veins, their Office is only to bring back what Blood remains from the uses
afo^esaid.

The Vessels in this kind are much shorter in Women than in Men, by reason of
their nearness to the Stone which defect is yet lengthned and made good, by the
many Intricates or Windings, to which those Vessels are subject; for in the
middle way they drive themselves into two branches, though different in
magnitude, for one being greater than the other, passes to the Stones.

The Stones in Women are very useful, for they are very defective, Generation
is at an end; for although those little Bladders, which are on their outward
Superficies, contain nothing of Seed, as the followers of Galen and Hipocrates
did erroneously imagine, yet they contain several Eggs, (commonly to the number
of twenty in each Testicle) one of which being impregnated by the most
spiritous part of the Man's Seed, in the Act of Coition, descends through the
Ovi-ducts, into the Womb, and from thence, in process of time, becomes a living
Child.

Their Figure is not exactly round, but flat and depressed on the sides; in
their lower part Oval, but in their upper, where the Blood Vessels enter them
more plain, and have but one Membrane to encompass them, probably that the heat
may have the easier Access.

CHAP. XVI. Of Conception, and the infallible Signs thereof; as also whether it
be a Male or Female, that is conceived, or both at once, commonly called Twins.
THE next thing convenient to be observed in this Treatise, and as it falls in
course, is Conception, and its Symptoms, very material, and worthy of note, not
only of Midwives, but all young Women. Now the signs of Conception, three or
four days after convenient and satisfactory, are,

Pains in the Head, Virtigo and Dimness of the Eyes, the Apples of the Eyes
decrease, the Eyes themselves swell, and become of a dull or dark color, their
Veins waxing red, and shut with Blood; again, if the Eyes sink, the Eyebrows
grow loose, various colors appear in the Eyes, and little red Pimples suddenly
arise in the Face, and almost as suddenly disappear. Thirdly, if the Veins
between the Eyes and Nose are extended with Blood, the Veins under the Tongue
look greenish, the Neck flusheth with heat, the Back bone cold, the Veins and
Arteries swell, and the Pulses are observed more easily. Fourthly, if the Veins
in the Breast appear blackish, and afterward turn yellow, the Teats look
fiery, and upon drinking cold Drink, the Woman feels it as it were in her
Breasts. Fifthly, If she on a sudden fall to loathing her Meat and Drink,
coveting things unreasonable, and not fit for Sustenance: be troubled with
P^kings, weakness of Stomach, sore declining, and there be little Worms found
about her Navel. Sixthly, If the lower part of the Belly swell, and weakness be
contracted in her Loins with inward Gripings and retention of the Courses 7
days after Copulation. After which act, there is a cold and trembling seizes on
the Members External. Seventhly, it is a certain sign of Conception, if the Mid
wife putting up her finger, find the interior Neck of the Womb exactly closed.
If the Womb wax round and swell, the Courses stay, the Thighs swell with some
pain, the whole Body grows weak, the Face at times becomes Pale, the Urine
white, with a little Cloud after some standing at the top of it, if many Attoms
appear in it. Eighthly, if Urine be put in a Glass three days, and the Woman
have conceived, certain live things will appear to stir in it: If a bright
Needle be put in a whole Night, and she have conceived, diverse little red
Specks will be thereon, but if not, it will be blackish or rusty. Nor are these
Imaginations, but the proved assertions of the Learned in Physic, and skilful
in Midwifry, who have made it their study to search into the depths of Natures
Secrets: And next comes a nicer point to be treated of, not without the
Pat^onage of such^ whose Wisdom and infatigable Labour^ have rendered them
famous to Posterity The which take as follows,

After Conception, and the Child becom^ to some perfection, so that the Sex may
b^ distinguished, if it happen to be a Mal^ Child, then the right Eye of the
Woman will, to appearance, move swifter, an^ sparkle more than the left: The
right Pa^^ will rise, swell, and be more hard than the left, and the Tea^s
color will chang^ more suddenly, and the incre^se of the Milk will be speedy;
and if it be milke^ out, and set in the Sun, it will look like Pearl,
contracting it self in a more solid matter than ordinary; or if upon Milking it
out, you cast it upon the Woman's Urine, it will sink to the bottom. Her right
Cheek will often glow, and be more ruddy than the le^t, and indeed the whole
color of the Face more lively than at other times, she feels less Sadness than
if she Conceived a Female. And when first the Child stirs, it is more brisk and
strong in its motion than the other, having commonly its first motion on the
right side on the 60th. day, if her Courses flow the 40th day after Conception,
if her Belly be more acute toward the Navel, and as she goes she puts her
right Leg foremost, and rising observe to ease her self on the right side, more
than of the left.

Now in case a Female be conceived, the tokens are averse to those for the most
part, the first motion rarely happening before the 19th day after Conception,
and then it is made on the left side. Females are carried with more pains than
Males, through defect of heat in the Womb, to attract the substance, also the
Thighs and Genital Members of the Woman swell more than ordinary, her Color
departs, and her Longings are Extreme, and her Courses flow the Thirtieth day
after Conception.

If Twins are conceived, which many times happens through the impregnating of
two Eggs at the same time, the sign thereof will not appear, till the third or
fourth Month after Conception, and then the first appearance will be by the
motion of the Infants both ways, that is, on either side of the Womb at once;
for they receive their Souls at one and the same time; also if her two Flanks
swell higher than the middle of the Belly; if there does appear a Line, or as
it were a Division from the Navel to the Groin, making a kind of a Channel, or
if a Woman with more than ordinary pain support her burden: And thus much may
suffice for these, from whence I shall proceed to give the Reader an insight
into false Conception, that frequently deceive Women, especially such as are
over desirous of Children.

CHAP. XVII. Of false Conceptions, and how to know them.
HAving already treated of true Conceptions, the next thing note worthy is,
what relates to false Conceptions, and in this case Women are sometimes
deluded, thinking themselves with Child, when their Belly only swell with the
retention of their Natural Purgations, that fall not according to their usual
times: Or else by a lump of indigested Flesh, for the most part like the Gizard
of a Fowl, greater or le^ser according to the time of its continuance there,
which is frequently four Months, and is called a Moon Calf.

At other times they are deceived by Moles, which are twofold, viz. The true
and a false, the former of which is a fleshly Body, filled with many Vessels,
streaked with white, green, or black Lines, not deficient of Membranes, but
encompassed with diverse, yet without growth, motion, Bones, Bowels, or any
Internals, receiving its nourishment through certain Vessels; notwithstanding it
lives, as we may say the life of a Plant, without any figure or order,
ingendered in the Concavity of the Matrix: It has no Burden or Navel-string
fastened to it, as a Child always has; for as much as the Mole it self adheres
to the Womb, by which means it receives Nourishment from its Vessels.

The latter of these, viz. The false Mole may be divided into four
distinctions, as following. First, the windy Mole, being a contraction or
conflux of wind. Secondly, the watery Mole being a gathering of Water.
Thirdly, the Humourous Mol^, or conflux of diverse humor; and ^ourthly, the
membranous Mole, being many Membranes in the form of a Bag, filled with Blood,
and of these in their order.

Galen holds, that the Mole is bred, when the Man's Seed is weak, barren,
imperfect, or in too little quantity; and for the most part choked through the
abundance of the menstrous Blood, which is gross and thick, unfit for the
framing of a Child; so that instead thereof is bred a lump of Flesh, that by
little and little increases, being wrapped in his own Membrane, which Nature
effects, as desirous to bring forth any thing rather than be Idle.

The windy Mole is occasioned through defect of heat in the Womb, and parts
adjacent, as the Liver and Spleen, which engender a polite or windy vapor,
which fills the Membranous parts, and puffs up the Concavity of the Matrix.

The watery Mole is engendered of diverse apt confluences of thin Matter, or watery
Efluxes, which passing through the Vessels, evacutes into the Womb, having its
Original from the Spleen, Liver, or parts adjoining; or rather it proceeds from
the weakness of the Matrix, which cannot assimilate the Blood that is brought
to nonrish it; part whereof is turned into Water, and not being avoided,
stays in the Womb.

The Humorous Mole is ingendered by moist attracted Humors, as the Whites, or
certa^n watery Purgation, which dist^^ from the Menstruous Veins, and gathering
into a gluttenous substance, stay in the concavity of the Womb.

The Membranous Mole is no other than a contraction of Blood within a Skin or
Membrane, to which is f^stned many white and transparent Vessels, filled with
Blood, the which coming forth, and being thrown into Water, the Blood goes
out, and the Membrane rumples together, shrinking on a heap like coaguluted
Seed.

Now most or all of these false Conceptions have many Signs or Symptoms,
coherent with the tr^e, as the depravity of Appetite, puking, swelling,
suppression of the Menses, swelling of the Breast and Belly, so that many are
at a plunge to distinguish them; for indeed it is most easily to be done,
though in these following Matters there is distinction, viz. In case of a false
Conception, the Breast swell and fall again, not containing any Milk, the Face
is frequently puffed up, the Arms, the Groin, and the Thighs grow meagre and
lanker, the Belly waxes hard, as i^ Dropsical, being almost of an equal
roundness, with many prickings at the bottom, scarcely admitting of
intermission, which breaks the rest of the Women so afflicted; diverse other
signs are there to know it by, especially the true or fleshly Mole; as thus, A
Male Infant begins to move at the beginning of the third Month for the most
part, and the Female at the end of the third, or beginning of the fourth: Now,
when any motion happens, the Woman ought to consider whether she has any Milk
in her Breasts; if she have, it is a sign of a true Conceptio^, but the
contrary, of a salse one; it is also the sign of a true Conception, if the
Child move freely and lively in all parts of the Womb; for although there is a
motion in a false Conception, yet it is dull, and not quick nor active in
motion, the motion not being in it self, but in the expulsive Faculty of the
Mother. And further, if the Woman observe, she may perceive it fall always to
the side she lies on, and she lying on her Back, if her Belly be stroaked down,
the burden will descend, and not have, for want of imbred force, power to
recover its Station. But what confirms it more is, that nine Months expired, no
Travel ensues, but her Belly still increases, whilst all the rest of the Body
grows lean, and out of order.

The Signs of the windy Mole are diverse, as the sudden stretching of the Belly
like a Bladder, yet ^oft and spongy, especially near the Groins, and smell
thereof, when if it be struck, it sounds like a Drum, and that the swelling is
sometimes more, and sometimes less^ so that according to its increase or
decrease, the Woman feels more heavy or more light.

The watery Mole is known by its distention of the Belly, and especially when
she lies upon her Back, the Sides thereof are more swelled than the middle or
the bottom, which grows flatter, by reason the watery humor falls to the
sides, moving up and down, as if it were a fluctuation of water, and much to
the same purpose as the Symptoms of the Humorous Mole, only with the
distinction, that the Flanks and Thighs are more stretched by the watery Mole,
than by the other, because the water being thinner than the Humor, or not
confined in Cells, flows thither, and that which in case of a watery Mole,
comes through Natures conduit is clear, when in case of a humourous Mole, the
water is red, are of a bloody color.

Further observe, in case of a false Co^ception the Cour^es dome not down, and
the Navel of the Mother advances it self little or nothing; which in true
Conception is otherwise.

Other false Conceptions there are occasioned by diverse Tumors, which the
Ignorant take for Moles, when they are only Rotundies and Swelling the Belly,
which are not discovered till the Womb be opened; and then, though the Womb be
not all out of order, there does appear at one or both corners thereof, little
Bags full of Water, in others there are to be seen a heap of Kernel^, or
superfluous Flesh like a cluster of Grapes in the Womb, causing it to swell.
Yet in such cases, the Courses are observed to proceed in due order, which
denotes the Womb to be in good order.

Another Excrescency of Flesh there is, which some call a Pendant Mole, being a
piece of fleshly substance, hanging within the Interior Neck of the Womb, being
in breadth about a finger at the place where it is fastened, increasing bigger
and b^gger toward the bottom, like a small Bell, possessing the whole Orifice,
nay, sometimes appearing outward to a great bigness.

CHAP. XVIII. Instructions for Wom^n, how to govern themselves during their
being with Child.
THese Instructions being exceeding necessary, I thought fit to lay them down
for a rule to such as are desirous of self-preservation. And indeed, for want
of due observance, diverse Diseases afflict Childbearing Women; nay, the Child
is frequently lost, or if it come to a perfect Birth, proves sickly and
disordered through the evil Homours^ that are derived to it, through the
Mothers misobservance.

In the first place, then the Woman with Child ought to choose a Temperate Air,
not infected with Fogs, arising from Marshes, Ditches, Ponds, Lakes, or Rivers,
and not to go abroad in too hot, nor too cold Weather, nor when the South wind
blew strong; for that Wind above all others, disturbs and disorders Women with
Child, oftentimes causing Abortion: And next to it the North Wind is hurtful,
causing Catarrhs, Coughs and Rheums, which opening the Body, causes the Woman
to bring forth before her time. In short, if any evil Vapor be drawn in during
Pregnancy, causes diverse Diseases.

In ca^^ of Diet, she ought to be very cautious in choosing such Meats as create
wholesome nourishment, all Meats that are moderately dry, being taken so to do;
and let her observe not to fast immoderately; for that renders the Child sickly
and weak, and often for want of nourishment, constrains it to be born before
its time; nor on the other hand, must she be too gluttinous, for that again
stuffs it, and causes ^t to swell beyond its natural bounds.

All Meats, either too hot or too cold, and moist, are to be avoided, as
Salads, Spices, Meats, and the extraordinary use of their Meats, which makes
the Children come forth, oftentimes without Nails, which is a sign of short
Life. The most wholesome Meats in this case are Pigeons, Turtles, Larks,
Partridges, Pheasants, Veal, Mutton, or any such Meat that is of good Juice,
and contributing to kindly Nourishment; as also such Fruits as are sweet and
often Digestion, as Cherries, Pears, Damsons, etc. but let her avoid such
things, as subject her Body to windiness.

Her Longings, if extravagant, she must restrain, at least as much as in her
lies, not eating any thing that is filthy or contrary to Nourishment, nor let
her sleep immediately after Me^l, and not at all in the daytime, if she can
avoid it; the Night being preferable in such cases, when she may sleep her
fill, so it exceed not nine hours.

Her Exercise ought to be moderate, for violent motion, either in walking or
otherwise, molests and disturbs the Womb, Riding in a Coach, especially upon
the Stones, or in un-even way (the last three Months are dangerous) as also
extraordinary Sounds, Noises, and above all, the Ringing of the Bells, and
discharging the Guns.

Laughing, Crying, or immoderate Anger, or any other Passion, is extremely
hurtful; nor in the first four Months after Conception, ought she to lie with
her Husband, for as much as the Act of Copulation moves and shakes the Womb,
and consequently the Fruit therein causes the courses to descend. She must
likewise in the 6th. and 8th. month abstain, but in the 7th. and 9th. it is not
forbidden, but rather to be encouraged, by reason, as Physicians affirm, it
opens the Passage, and thereby facilitates the Birth; and the better to help
it, the Woman ought to take such things as may keep her Body soluble, as Syrups
and other loosening Matters, as may help Nature in its Operation; especially
let her observe when she grows any thing big, to lay aside her Busk, and go
loose, that the Child may have free Scope, for two Reasons: First, That it may
not be hurt, and Secondly, That being unrestrained, it may come to its full
growth.

CHAP. XIX. Further Considerations how Women ought to govern themselves during
Pregnancy.
IT IS further to be observed, that after Delivery, the Breasts frequently grow
extreme large, and swell overmuch; to prevent which (and to avoid the danger
of too much Blood, which cause curdled or curdy Milk, so that from the effects
thereof diverse Diseases arise in the Breast) so soon as the Woman perceives her
self with Child, let her wear about the Neck a small Necklace of Gold or Steel,
or a small ingot of the latter, to hang between her two Breasts, fomenting her
Breasts a quarter of an hour every Morning with Water, distilled from Sage,
Perewinkle, Ground Ivy, being Blood-warm.

In her fourth Month, when the motion is great, and her Belly swells big, she
may swath it with a Swath-band, anointed with Pomatum, or the like; to make
which, I shall give Direction, and in so doing she will keep it smooth, and
free from wrinkles, as also from hanging down like a Tripe after Delivery,

Receipt.
Take of the Gall of Kid, and of a Sow, of each 3 ounces, of Capons grease, and
Goose-grease of each one ounce and a half, and having melted them, put thereto
a quarter of a pint of Water, after which strain them through a Linen Cloth
into fair Water, casting it to and fro therein till it be white; at what time
add to it the Marrow of a Red Deer, one ounce, and lay it in Red Rose Water 12
hours, after the expiration of which, you may use it in anointing the Swath as
aforesaid, as also the Belly.

If the Ingredients aforesaid cannot be gotten, then the following Lineaments
is effectual, though the former is better, viz.

Make of Mutton-Suet adjoining to the Kidneys, and of Dogs-Grease, each two
ounces, Whale-Oyl, an ounce, and of sweet Almond-Oyl the like quantity; wash
them well after they are melted together in the Water of Germander, or new
White Wind, and anoint the Belly therewith, or the Swath-band ordained to
suppo^t it. But for such as are not desirous to anoint their Bellies, they may
use the following Bathe or Concoction.

Take of all the sorts of Mallows, and of Motherwort, each two Handfuls,
Lilly-roots, the White ones, to the weight of Three Ounces, Melilot and
Camomile of both Two Handfuls, Lime-seeds, Quince-seed, and Fenn-greek seed.
Three Ounces, proportionable of each, boil them in Spring Water, and bathe
therewith.

If the Woman, during her pregnancy, feels but little motion in her Womb, let
her make a Quilt as follows, and bind it upon her Navel, and it will greatly
strengthen the Infant, viz.

Take the Powder of Roses, Red Corral and Gillyflowers, of each Three Ounces,
Mastick a Dram, and of Angelica-s^eds two Drams, Two Grains of Amber-greese,
and one of Musk, all which being well beaten, put them into a Linen Bag,
expanded and quilted, that they may be in every part of it, placing it upon the
Navel.

CHAP. XX. Rules to be observed upon a Woman lying down, and her Delivery, etc.
HAving thus far proceeded, in what as I highly conceived, is necessary to be
known by the Professors of this Art, I shall gradually proceed to what remains:
And first, to inform the Reader, what is necessary to be observed upon the
Woman's lying in order to her Delivery.

The hour, according to computation of time, and the disposition of the Body
approaching, let the Woman send for a skilful Midwife, not delaying so to do,
but rather too soon than too late; at what time let her prepare a little Bed or
Couch of a moderate height, and so situate, that it be far from the Door, near
the Fire, and convenient for the Midwife and her Assistants to pass round, and
be aiding on every side, as occasion requires, having change of Linen, and a
small Cricket, or little Log of Timber to rest her Feet against, she having
more force when they are bowed, than otherwise.

Having thus provided, when the Womau feels her pains come, if ^he weather be
not extreme cold, let her walk leisurely about the room, resting her self by
turns upon the Bed, expecting so the coming down of her Water, which is a
Humor that is contracted in one of the outward Membranes, and flows thence
when it is broke by the struggling of the Child, or some other accident, there
being no direct time affixed for its Efflux, though for the most part it flows
not above two hours before the Birth. Motion likewise will cause the Womb to
open and ^^^^te it self, when lying long in Bed will prove troublesome, yet if
she be much spent and weakened, she may take some gentle Cordial to refresh her
self, if her pains will permit.

If her Travel be tedious, to revive her Spirits, she may take any Broth of
Chickens or Mutton, and after it a Poach'd Egg, but must not take any thing to
excess. As for the Posture, Women are Delivered in, they, are diverse; some
lying in their Beds, others sitting in a Chair, supported and held by others,
or resting upon the side of the Bed or Chair; some again upon the Knees, being
supported under their Arms; but the safest and most commodious way is in the
Bed, when as the Midwife ought to observe these following Rules.

Let her see that the Woman be laid upon her Back, her Head a little elevated
by the help of a Pillow, having the like help to support her Reins and
Buttocks, and that her Rump lie high: for if she lie low, she cannot be well
delivered; then let her keep her Knees and Thighs as far asunder as she can,
her Legs bowed together, her Buttocks, the Soles of her Feet and Heels being
fixed upon a little Log of Timber, placed for that purpose, that she may have
the greater force to strain: Now in ca^e her Back be exceeding weak, a
Swath-band may be cast under it, the band being four double, and about 12
Inches broad, and this must be held by two Persons, who with steady Hands and
equal motion, must raise her up at the time the pains happen; but if they be
not exact in their motion, it is better evaded, and at the same time, let two
Women hold her Shoulders that she may the better strain out the Birth with more
advantage, and the better to facilitate it, let a Woman stroke or press the
upper part of her Belly gently, and by degrees. Nor must the Woman her self be
faint-hearted, but Courageous, and of a good Heart, forcing her self by
straining and stopping her Breath.

In case of Delivery, the Midwife must wait with patience, till the Child's
Head or other Members Burst the Membrane; for through Ignorance, or haste to be
gone to other Women, as some has done, the Midwife tear the Membranes with her
Nails, she indangers both the Woman and the Child; for it lying dry, and
wanting that slipperiness that should facilitate it, its Egress comes forth
with greater pain.

When the Head appears, the Midwife must gently hold it between her two Hands,
and draw the Child at such times as the Woman's pangs are upon her, and at no
other, slipping by degrees her four Fingers under its Armpits, not using a
rough hand in drawing it forth, lest by such means the Child through its
tenderness, receive any Deformity of Body.

As soon as the Child is taken forth which is commonly with its Face downwards,
let it be laid upon its Back, that it may more freely receive External
Respiration; then cut the Navel-string with a sharp Instrument, about three
Inches from the Body, tying that which adheres to the B^lly, with a silken
string, as near as you can, then cover the Head and Stomach of the Child well
suffering nothing to come upon the Face.

The Child being thus drawn forth, and in Health, lay it aside, and let the
Midwife regard the Patient, in drawing, or causing to come forth the Secundine:
And this may be done by wagging and stirring them up and down, and afterward
with a gentle Hand drawing them forth, or if the work be difficult, let the
Woman hold Salt in her Hands, shut them close, and breath hard into them,
whereby she shall know whether the said Membranes be broken or not: The like
may be known by causing a Strain, or Vomitting by putting one Finger down her
Throat, by straining or moving her Inferior parts, being all observed to be
done out of hand. If this fail, she may take a draught of raw Elder-water. or
the Yolk of a raw Egg, or smell to a piece of Assa-Faedita, especially if she
be troubled with the Wind-Cholick, a Remedy for which, I shall hereafter
prescribe. If she have taken Cold, it is a great obstruction to the coming down
of the Secundines; and in such cases the Midwife ought to chafe the Woman's
B^lly with a gentle Hand, which breaks not only the Wind, but obliges the
Secundine to come down. And these proving ineffectual, the Midwife must dilate
with her Hand the exterior Orifice of the Womb, and gently draw it forth.
Having discoursed of common Births, or such as for the most part are easy, I
shall proceed to give Directions in case of Extremity.

CHAP. XXI. In case of Extremity, what ought to be observed, especially to
Women, who in their Travel are accompanied with an Efflux of Blood, Convul^ion,
or Fits of the Wind.
IN case of Extremity, greater regard must be had than at other times; and
first of all, the Situation of the Womb, and her posture of lying, must be
cross the Bed, being held ^y such as have strength to prevent her slipping
down, or moving her self in the operation of the Man-Midwife, or Chyrurgeon,
her Thighs must be sundered as wide a^ may be^ and so held, whilst her Legs
invert and bend backward toward her Hips, her Head leaning upon a Bolster, and
the Reins of her Back supported with the like, her Rump and Buttocks likewise
Elevated, observing to cover her Stomach, Belly, and Thighs, with warm Linen,
to keep them from cold winds.

The Woman being in the posture afor^said, let the Operator put up his Hand, if
he finds the Neck of the Womb dilated, and remove the contracted Blood that
obstructs the passage of the Birth; and having by degrees, with much gentleness
made way, let him tenderly move the Infant, his Hand being first anointed with
sweet-Butter, or a harmless Pomatum, and if the Waters are not come down, then
without any difficulty may they be let forth, when if the Infant attempts to
break forth with the Head foremost or cross, he may gently turn it to find the
Feet, which having done, let him draw forth one, and fasten it to a Ribbon,
then put it up again, and by degrees find the other, when bringing them as
close, and even as may be, and between whiles, giving the Woman leave to
breathe, urging her to strain in helping Nature to perfect the Birth, he may
draw it forth, and the better to do it, that his hold may be surer, he must
fasten or wrap a Linen Cloth about the Child's Thighs, observing to bring it
into the World with its Face downward.

In case of a Flux of Blood, if the Neck of the Womb be open, it must then be
maturely considered, whether the Infant or the Secundines come first, which
often the latter happening to do, stop the Mouth of the Womb, and hinder the
Birth, to the endangering both the Woman and Child; in such a case, I say, the
Secundine must be removed by a swift turn, and indeed they have by their so
coming down, deceived many, who feeling their softness, supposed the Womb was
not dilated, and by their being so deceived, the^ Woman and Child or at least
the latter, has been lost, the Secundines removed, the Child must be sought
for, and drawed forth, as has been directed, and if in such a case the Woman or
Child dye, the Midwife or Chyrurgeon is blameless, because they did their true
endeavor.

If it appear upon enquiry, that the Secundine comes first, let the Woman be
delivered with all convenient expedition, because great flux of Blood will
follow, for then the Veins are opened, and upon this account, two things are to
be considered. First, the great or lesness of the Secundines advancing; if the
former, and the head of the Child appear first, it must be guided and directed
toward the Neck of the Womb, as in case of Natural Births; but if there, thro`
the weakness of the Child or Mother, appear any difficulty in the Delivery, the
best way is to search for the Feet, and thereby draw it forth; but if the
latter, the Secundines may be put back with a gentle hand, and the Child first
taken forth.

Another matter is note worthy, viz. If the Secundine, be far advanced, so that
it cannot be put back, and the Child follow it close, then are the Secundines
to be taken forth with much care, as swift as may be, and laid aside without
cutting the entail that is fastened to them, for by that you may be guided to
the Infant, the which, whether alive or dead, must be drawn forth by the Feet
with all Expedition, though it is not to be acted, unless in case of great
necessity, for in other cases the Secundine ought to come last.

As for a dead Child, in drawing it forth, let these directions be carefully
observed by the Surgeon, viz. if the Child be found dead with its Head
foremost, the danger is the greater, and more difficult will be the Delivery;
for it is an apparent sign the Woman's strength begins to fail her, and that the
Child being dead, and wanting its imbred force, can be no ways affisted to its
Delivery; wherefore the most certain and safe way is^ for the Chyrurgeon to put
up his left hand, sliding it as hollow in the Palm as he can into the Neck of
the Womb, into the lower part thereof, toward the Feet, and that between the
Head of the Infant, and the Neck of the Matrix, when having a Hook in the right
hand, couch it close, and slip it up above the left Hand, between the Head of
the Child, and the flat of his Hand, fixing in it the Bone of the Temple
toward the Ear, or else in the hollow of the Eye, or for want of conveniently
coming at these in the occipital Bone, observing still to keep the left hand in
its place, with it gently, moving and stirring the Head; and so with the right
Hand and Hook, draw the Child forward, admonishing the Woman to put forth her
utmost strength, still drawing when the Woman's pangs are upon her. The Head
being drawn forth, he must with all speed slip his hand under the Arm holes of
the Child, and take it quite forth, giving these things to the Woman, viz. a
Toste of fin^ Wheat Bread, in a quarter of a Pint o^ Ipocrass Wine.

Now the former Application and E^deavour failing, and the following Medicines
will not enable the Woman to cast forth the Birth, you may proceed to
Instrument^ after another manner. First, when the Woman is in her Bed, let her
receive the ensuing portion hot, abstaining from al^ manner of Meats, and rest
till she feel the Operation, which is this:

Take blue Figs, to the number of Seven, c^^ ^^em in pieces, adding to them
Fenegreek, Mother wort, and Seeds of Rue, of each Five Drams, Water of
Peneroyal and Motherwort, Six Ounces of each, boil them till one half he
consumed; and having constrained them again, add Trochischs of Myrrh a Dram,
and of Saffron Three Grains, sweetning the Liquor with Loaf Sugar, and spicing
it with Cinnamon.

Having rested upon this^ let her labor again as much as may be, and if she be
not yet successful, make a Suffumation of Castor, Oppoponax, Sulpuhur, and Assa
Foedita, of each half a Dram, beating them into Powder, and wetting them with
the Juice of Rue till they become stiff, then burthem upon Coals, so that the
Smoke or Fume may only come to the Matrix, and no further.

If these effect not your Desire, then this Emplaister is very fitly to be
applied, viz. Take of Galbanum an Ounce and a half, Colocynthis without Grains
Two Drams, the Juice of Motherwort and Rue, of each half an Ounce, and Two
Ounces of Virgins Beez-wax, b^uise and melt them together, spreading them as a
Cere-Cloth, to r^ach from the Navel to Os Pubis, spreading likewise to the
Flanks at the same time, making a convenient P^ssary of Wool, closing it in a
Bag of Silk, and dipping it in a C^ncoction of round Birth-worth, Savin,
Colocynthis with Grains, Staves-Acur, Black Elebore, of each a Dram, and of Rue
a little sprig or two.

These things failing, and the Woman in danger, let the Chyrurgeon use his
Instruments to dilate and widen the Womb, to which purpose the Woman must be
set in a Chair, so that she may t^rn her Crupper as much from its Back as is
conveni^nt, drawing up her Legs as close as she can, but spreading her Thighs
as wide as may be, or if through her weakness it appear more convenient, that
she be laid upon the Bed, with heread downwards, her Buttocks raised, and her
Legs drawn up as much as can be, at what time the Chyrurgeon with his Speculum
Matricis, or his Apertory, may dilate or widen the Womb, and draw out the Child
and Secundines together, if it be possible, after which the Womb must be well
washed and anointed, and the Woman laid in her Bed, comforted there with Spice,
pleasant Meats and Cordials: This course must be takon in the Delivery of all
dead Children, likewise with Moles, Secundines, or otherwise false Births, that
will not of themselves come forth in due season, or if the Instruments
aforesaid, will not sufficiently widen the Womb, then other Instruments, as the
Drakes Bill, and long Pincers ought to be used.

If it so happen that any Inflammation, Swelling, or concreet Blood be
contracted in the Matrix, under the Film of those Tumors, either before or
after the Birth, where the Matter appears thinner, the Midwife with a
Penknife, or Incision Instrument may Launch it, and press out the Corruption,
healing it with a Pessary dipped in Oil of Red Roses.

If at any time through cold or some violence, the Child happen to be swelled
in any part, or have contracted a watery Tumor; yet if it remain alive, such
means ^ught to be used as are least injurious to the Child or mother, but if it
be dead that Tumor must be let out by incision, to faciliate the Birth.

It often happens that Children come with their Feet foremost, and the Hands
dilating themselves from the Hips, in such a case the Midwife must be well
provided of necessary Ointmens to stroke and anoint the Infant with, thereby to
help its coming forth, lest it return again into the Womb, before it can be
drawn forth, holding at the same time, both the Arms of the Infant close to the
Hips, that so the Child may issue forth after its own manner, but if then it
prove too big: then the Womb must be well anointed. The Woman may likewise take
sneezing Powder, to cause her the more to strain, and at the same time those
that attend, may gently stroke down her Belly, to make the Birth descend, and
keep the Child, when advanced, from retiring back.

Sometimes it falls out, that the Child, comi^g with its Feet foremost, has its
Arms extended above its Head, the which so happening, the Midwife must not
receive it in that posture, but put it back into the Womb, unless the Passage
be extraordinary wide, and then she must anoint both the Child and the Womb,
nor is it safe to draw it forth before it is put into due form, which must be
done after this manner, the Woman lying upon her Back, with her Head depressed,
and her Buttocks elevated, the Midwife, with a gentle hand, must compress the
Belly of the Woman, toward the Midrif, by that means to put back the Infant,
observing to turn the Face of the Child toward the Back of the Mother, raising
up its Thighs and Buttocks toward her Navel, thereby to bring it to a more
regular and natural Production.

Is a Child happen to come forth with one Foot, the Arm being extended along
^he side, and the other Foot turned backward, then must the Woman be instantly
brought to her Bed, and laid in the posture aforesaid, at what time the Midwife
must carefully put away the Foot so appearing, and the Woman rock her self from
one side to the other, till she find the Child is turned; but she must not
alter her posture, nor turn upon her Face, after which she may expect her
Pains, and must have great assistance, Cordials, especially, not being wanting,
to revive and support her Spirits.

At other times it so comes to pass, that the Child lies cross in the Womb, and
falls upon its side; if it so happen, the Woman must not be urged in her
Labor, neither can any expect the Birth in that manner: Therefore the Midwife,
when she so perceives it, must use great diligence to reduce it to its right
form. or such a form in the Womb, as it is possible to deliver it; especially by
moving the Buttocks, and guiding the Head to the Passage: but if she be
suc^cessful herein, let her again try by rocking her self to and fro, and wait
with patience till it changes its manner of lying.

Sometimes it falls out that the Child hastens to the Birth, with it Legs and
Arms distorted or expanded, in which, as in the former, the Woman must rock her
self, but not with any violence, till she find the Legs and Arms fall to their
proper stations; or it may be done by a gentle compression of the Womb: but if
neither of them prevail, the Midwife with her Hand must clos^ the Legs of the
Infant, and if possible she can reach them, do the like to the Arms, and so
draw it forth, though if it could be reduced of it self to the composure or
posture of a natural Birth, it is better.

If the Infant come forward with both Knees foremost, the Hand hanging down upon
the Thighs, then must the Midwife put both Knees upward, till the Feet appear,
taking hold of which with her Left Hand, let her keep her Right Hand on the
^ide of the Child, and in that posture endeavor to bring it forth; but if she
cannot, then must the Woman rock her self till the Child is in a more
convenient posture for Delivery.

When it happens that the Child presses forward, wi^h one Arm extended upon the
Thighs, and the other elevated over his Head, the Feet likewise stretched out
at length in the Womb, the Midwise in such a posture must not attempt to
receive the Child, but must lay the Woman upon the Bed, in the manner often
before recited, making a soft and gentle compression upon her Belly, to oblige
the Infant to retire: and if on its own accord it retire not, then must the
Midwife thru^t it back by the Shoulders, and bring the Arm that was stretched
above the Head to its right place, for certain it is, the most dangerous in
these Extremities; in this therefore the Midwife ought to take more care herein
than ordinary. And first, she must observe well, to anoint her Hands, then the
Womb of the Woman, either with some sweet Butter, or some convenient Pomatum^
thrusting up her Hand as near as she can, to the Arm of the Infant, and reduce
it to the side, but if she cannot recall it, then must the Woman be laid on her
Bed, there to repose for a while, and then again conducted to a Seat prepared
for the most convenience in that affair, by which time perhaps the Child may be
reduced to a better posture; the which, when the Midwife finds, she must draw
the Arms close to the Hips, and so receive it.

If an Infant come with its Buttocks foremost, being in a manner double, then
the Midwife anointing her Hand, must thrust it up, and by degrees, by heaving
the Buttocks, and after them the Back, strive to turn the Head to the passage,
but be not overhasty in so doing, lest the Infant retiring should shape it
self worse, therefore if it cannot be turned with the hand, the Woman must to
bed, and rock her self, taking such comfortable things as may support her
Spirits, till she perceive the Child turn.

If a Child come forward with its Shoulders, the Neck being bowed, as it often
happens, as also the Hands and Feet stretched upwards: In such a case the
Midwife must with much diligence move the Shoulders, that she may direct the
Head to the passage; and the better to perfect it^ the Woman must rock her
self, etc. These and such like methods are to be observed in all single births:
And the same may be observed in case of Twins, or Trebble Births, for as the
single Birth has but one Natural way, and many unnatural Forms even so it
happens with the Birth of many Children^ wherefore the Midwife must observe (if
Twins be in the Womb and p^ess forwa^d, according to the Natural form that she
receive that first which is nearest the Passage, not letting the other go, lest
by retiring, it should change the form; nor must she, when one is born, delay
to bring forth ^he other; and this Birth in the natural form is more easy,
because the Children are most commonly less than the single Births, and
consequently require a lesser passage: but if this Birth happen in an unnatural
form, it is more difficult and dangerous^ In the Birth of Twins, let the
Midwife be exceeding careful that the Secundines be naturally brought forth,
lest in such a case, the Womb being delivered of its burden, fall, and by its
so doing the Secundine continues there longer than is requisite, to the
indangering of the Woman.

If it so happen, that the Woman is pregnant with Twins, and one come naturally
and the other naturally, as the one with the Head, the other with the Feet
foremost, then must the Midwife consider to deliver the natural Birth first:
and then i^ she cannot tu^n the other, draw it out in the posture it presses
forward; but if that with the Feet downward, be much before the other, that she
may deliver that first, turning the Head of the other aside.

In this case the Midwife must be diligent to search, that instead of Twins, it
be not a monstrous Birth; as a Body with two Heads, or two Bodies joined
together, which she may observe, if both the Hands come foremost, by putti^g up
her Head between them, as high as she can, and if she find they are Twins, she
must gently put one of them aside, to make way for the other, taking at first
that is most advanced, having regard to the other, that she change not its
situation.

Now to prevent the first Child`s being in danger of its Life, the Midwife,
as soon as it is come forth, must tie the Navel string, as has been before
directed, and also bind it again with a long and large Fillet, that part of the
Navel, that is fastened to the Secundines, the more readily to find them. The
second Infant born, let her diligently inquire whether there be no^ two
Secundines, for by the shortness of the Ligament, it often happens that it
retires back, to the damage of the Woman: wherefore, le^t in such a case the
Womb should close, it is most expedient to hasten them forth with all
convenient speed.

If two Infants are joined together by the Body, as sometimes monstrou^ly falls
out, then although the Heads comes foremost, yet it is convenient, if possible,
to turn them, and draw them forth by the Feet, observing when they come to the
Hips, to draw them forth as swift as may be: and in this case great care ought
to be observed, in anointing and widening the passage. And thus much for
Extremity or Unnatural Births^ and the next thing I shall proceed to, is how to
order the Woman after Natural or Unnatural Births, or Delivery.

CHAP. XXII. What ought to be observed after Delivery, etc.
PResently after Delivery, in case of a Natural Birth, especially if the Woman
has had hard labor, it is convenient to wrap her in the Skin of a Sheep, taken
off before it is cold, putting the fleshy side to her Reins and Belly, or for
want for this, the Skin of a Hare or Coney, being ^layed off as soon as killed,
may be applied to her Belly; and in so doing, the dilation made in the Birth
will be closed up, and the ill melancholy Blood, expelled from those parts:
And these may be continued in Summer the space of an hour, and in Winter two,
after which let the Woman be swathed with a fine linen Cloth, about a quarter
of a Yard in breadth, chafing her Belly before with Oil of St. Iohnsw^rt, after
that raise up the Matrix with a linen Cloth many times folded, then with a
little Pillow or Quilt cover her Flanks, then use the Swath somewhat above the
Hanches, winding it pretty stiff, applying at the same time a warm Cloth to her
Nipples, not presently applying Remedies to drive back the Milk, by reason the
body at such a time is disordered, and as it were out of frame, for there is
neither Vein nor Artery which does not strongly beat, where such remedies to
drive back the Milk being all of a dissolving Nature, it is improper to apply
them to the Breast, during such confusion and disorder, lest by so doing evil
Humors be stayed or contracted into the Breast; wherefore 12 hours ought to be
the least space allowed for the Circulation and settlement of the Blood, and
what was cast upon the Lungs by the vehement Agitation during the Labor, to
retire to its proper Receptacles.

A while after Delivery you may make a restrictive of the Yolks of two Eggs, a
quarter of a pint of White Wine, an Ounce of Oil of Saint John's Wort, as much
of the Oil of Roses, Plaintain, and Rose water, of each One Ounce, bray them
together, fold a Linen Cloth, and dip it therein, warm it before a gentle
Fire, and apply it to the Breast, and ohe pains of those parts will be greatly
eased.

Present sleep is not convenient, but above four hours after Delive^y she may
take Broth, ^audle, or what other liquid matter is nourishing; and afterward,
if she be disposed to sleep, it may be safely permitted^ And this is as much,
in case of a Natural Birth, as ought immediately to be done.

In case of ^xtremity, or an unnatural Birth, these Rules ought to be observed:
In the first place, let the Woman keep a temperate Diet, by no means
overcharging her self, after such an excessive Evacuation, and to say true, her
Diet must be equal to that of wounded Persons, not being ruled, or giving
Credit to unskilful Nurses, who admonish them to feed lusty, the better to
repair the loss of Blood, for that Blood is not, for the most part, pure, but
such as has been detained in the Vessels or Membranes better avoided for the
Health of the Woman then kept, unless there happens an extraordinary Flux of
Blood; for if her nourishmen^ be over great, it will endanger her falling into
a Fever, nay more, it will Increase the Milk to superfluity, which Curdling
often times turns to Aposthumes, wherefore it is requisite, for the first five
days especially, that she take moderately Ponado Broth, Poach'd Eggs, Gelly of
Chickens, or Calves feet, French Barley-Broath, each day somewhat increasing
her allowance, if she intend to be Nurse to her Child, she may take a little
more than ordinary to increase the Milk by degrees, which must be of no
continuance, but draw off, either by the Child or otherwise. In this case
likewise, let her have Coriander or Fennel-seed, boiled in her Barley-Broath;
but by any means, for the time specified, let her abstain from Meat. If no
Fever trouble her, she may drink now and then a small quantity of White Wine or
Claret, as also Syrup of Maidenhair, or other Syrup that is Astringent, taking
it in a little water well boiled: And after the Suspicion of a Fever, or fear
of Contraction of Humors in the Breast, she may be nourished more plentifully
with the Broth of Pullets, Capons, Pigeons, Mutton, Veal, etc. which must not
be till after eight days, from the day of Delivery is over, at what time the
Womb, unless some accident hinder, has purged it self; it will then likewise be
expedient to give her cold Meats sparingly, that so she may be enabled to
gather strength, she during the time resting quiet and free from disturbance,
not sleeping in the day time if she can avoid it. If there happen any
obstruction in the evacuation of the Excrement, a Glyster may be administered to
help the defect, made after the manner following.

Receipt.
Take of both the Mallows and Pelletory of the Wall, a handful of each,
Cammomile and Mellylot Flowers, of each a handful, Anniseeds and Fennel-seeds,
of each two Ounces, boil them in the decoction of a Sheeps-head, and take of
this three quarters, dissolving in them of common Honey and course Sugar, two
Ounces of each, and of new fresh Butter two Ounces strained well, and
administer it Glisterwise, but if it operate not to your mind, then may you
take an Ounce of Catholicon.

CHAP. XXIII. What ought to be done to the Child when newly born, with diverse
other matters relating thereto.
THE Navel of the Child having been before recited, the Midwife must cleanse
the Infant, not only in the Face, but likewise the whole Body, anointing the
Groin, Hips. Buttocks, with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Oil of Roses, to make the
Skin supple, and close the Pores, thereby to exclude the penetration of the
Air, and strengthen the Members; nor would it be amiss if she should take the
decoction of Roses, or Rose-cakes, and Red-Sage decocted in White Wind, and
bathe the Child therewith, the decoction being blood-warm.

The Infant being thus well anointed, or suppled, and well d^ied, wrap it up
warm, and give it a spoonful of Sugar and Mallago, or a scruple of Mithridate,
or Venice-Treacle, dissolved in half a spoonful of Canary, and after it a
little Cardus water, observing to bathe or anoint it each Morning as aforesaid.
If the Child have extreme throws, immediately after it comes into the World, it
must be rubbed with Juice of Pellitory, or the Decoction, into which fresh
Butter is melted, or for wanting of that Spinage-Juice, with Hogs Grease
applied to the Navel, with new-layed Eggs, mixed^ or cemented with Nut Oil,
laying them likewise to the Navel; or you may administer a Glister made of
Milk, the Yolk of an Egg, and a small quantity of Sugar, which will undoubtedly
ease the pain.

Now some Children are born of evil constituted Parents, or are defective through
the evil nourishment the Woman has unadvisedly taken during her Pregnancy,
which occasions the Child to be much afflicted with phlegmatic Humors, to
expel which, you may lay the Child on one side, and then turn him to the other,
for laid upon the Back, it is subject to Suffocation or Strangling, by the
ascent of the humor, the Belly must, above all things, be kept soluble,
causing thereby the Infant to aviod the Blood kept in the Intrails, from the
time of its being in the Womb, by giving it a small quantity of Suppository of
black Soap, mixed with fresh Butter, to take away the Acrimony of it, after
which immediately let the Infant take a spoonful of Syrup of Violets, which
will oblige the Phlegm to pass down; but if heat be defective, add to the Syrup
half the quantity of Oil of sweet Almonds, bathing the Belly and Stomach of it,
as often as it is undressed.

If it happens that the Child's Cods be of Wind, the Child must be gently moved
to and fro, and the Cods anointed with Oil of Mirrh, giving it the liquid of
Anniseeds boiled in small Drink, if they be swelled or extended with Water, rub
and chafe the Skin with fresh Butter, and the Water will sweat out. But what is
more to be regarded than any other thing, is the choosing a good Nurse; for upon
that choice depends the thriving or not thriving of the Child, and in such
cases these things ought to be regarded, viz. Observe that she be not
dull-sighted, sqnint-eyed, or have down-casts looks; that she be not
consumptive, or subject to Fits, that her Breath is pure. that so no noisome
Vapor be conveyed to the Lungs of the Child, that she be not affected with
Bloaches, Boils, Blains, or that she or her Husband were never afflicted with
the French Disease; that she be not given to excessive Drinking or Gluttony,
nor in the least subject to Epilepsie, or falling Evil. For the Nurse being in
a manner the second Mother to the Child, it drawing from her good or evil
humors, especially care must therefore be taken that the Nurse be good
conditioned, moderate in Meat and Drink, wakeful and vigilant, not fretful nor
subject to passion, that her Milk be clean and sweet, flowing sufficiently, her
Breasts well fixed and large, nor over fleshy, nor she over fat; and above all,
that she be not too desirous of carnal Copulation, by which means the Milk will
be rendered unwholesome. Having thus far proceeded in these affairs. I shall,
through God's blessing, lay down diverse necessary matters for the preservation
of Childing Women and Infants, thereby to prevent the hazard and loss, which
too often happens in such cases.

CHAP. XXIV. To know the exact time of Delivery, by signs that precedes it, and
how to cause the Woman to retain the Birth.
IN the bu^iness of Generation, nothing is more to be regarded by the Woman,
than the time of her Conception and Quickening, that thereby she may be enabled
to be exact in the time of her Delivery, every natural Delivery being at the
end of 9 Months, especially if at the time or near it, the Woman is wont to
have her natural Purgations, or at that time fall out with the full or new
Moon: Nay, though a day or two, before or after, for these things so falling out,
not only hasten, but faciliate Delivery, and the knowledge of this must extend
to the Woman for many reasons. First, that she may prepare and dispose her self
for so great a task. Secondly, for that at such a time diverse Maladies are
incident to her, nor can their cause be penetrated into, unless those things be
well known, etc. Now one thing necessary, the better to enable the Woman to
understand it, is the time of her natural Courses, for in case she have forgot,
or by not rightly understanding their natural Efflux, or is puzzled therein, by
reason of some unnatural retention or extraordina^y evacuation, she may
rectify her Judgment by these directions, viz. From the Age of 14 to 21, Women
have their Courses^ according to the most natural Courses in the New Moon; from
21 to 30 in the first Quarter; from 30 to 37, or 38 in the full Moon; and from
that time to the time they cease, in the last Quarter.

Beside what is beforementioned, she will be made sensible of the approaching
time by pain in her Groin, Thighs, the small of her Belly, the lower part of
her Navel, together with swelling, and hardness in the said places, shivering
and quaking through. out the body, as if possessed with an Ague, and suddenly
after with flushing heat, feebleness and lassitude, small Sweats on the Face,
and flushings of the blood there, and her body will be in a manner restless,
she shall perceive the Child move downward with more force than ordinary, and a
bloody Water will distill from the inferior parts, in case of these
Forerunners, she may be assured her time is at hand, when as she must not
delay sending for her Midwife, whose Office it is to order her to the best
advantage, directions for which I have already given, for wonderful it is that
Nature has so well ordered her works, that the Matrix opens not unless upon
some Extraordinary Casualty before the time prefixed, and not till then do
these signs appear. But appearing they ought to be much regarded, if the Woman
desire her own safety, and the preservation of the Child.

In case the Woman be subject to Miscarriage, or to come before her time, let
her take Mint, Roses, Marjorum^ of each a small handful, Sa^fron and Musk, of
each three Grains, bruise them togeth^r, put them in a Bag flat, and hang it
about the Woman`s Neck, so that it may reach the pit of her Stomach, and i^
will draw the Womb upward, or keep it in its place that it shall not fall down,
or give the Child occasion to seek for un^imely passage.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Washing of Women after Delivery, with Dir^ctions how to make
them.
FOR the first Wash take a good handful o^ young ^h^rvil, boil it in two pints
of Water, which having done, add to it a spoonful of Honey of Roses, and let
the Midwife use it at her discretion, and it will draw down the Pu^gations,
heal and cleanse the aff^icted part. There are some that use Milk instead of
Water, affi^ming that it greatly mitigates the pain^ b^t by those whom
Experience has taugh^ better, it is rejected: this having be^n used eight days,
the second wash may be made.

Take Province Roses moist if you can, but if not, the dry Cakes, put them in a
little Linn^n Bag, and boil them sufficiently in half a pint of Water, and half
a pint of white Wine, and use it as the former, f^r the other eight Days, viz.
The liquid part being well strained.

The third and last Wash must be made of the decoction of Province Roses, in a
pint of white Wine, and a quarter of a pint of Mirrh Water, and used only four
days.

CHAP. XXVI. An Astringent for Women when occasion requires, as also Directions
for a Cere-Cloth and how to cleanse her before she rose.
TO make an Astringent, Take Pomegranates, Roach-Allum and Galls, of each Two
Ounces, Knot-Grass a handful, of Province Roses four Ounces, the Rinds of
Cassia and Pomegranates, each thre^ Ounces, of Scarlet berries, and Spermaceti,
of each one ounce. The waters of Roses, Myrrh and Burnet, of each one ounce and
a half, White Wind, and Water of the Smiths Forg, of each a quarter of a Pint;
then take two little Bags, about a quarter of a yard long, and half a quarter
broad, boil them in the Waters with the drugs of Simples in them, and in a new
glazed Pipkin, and use them successively as occasion requires.

To make an exceeding convenient Sear-cloth to ease the pain, and reduce the
Body into a good temperament.

Take Virgins Wax 8 ounces, Spermaceti and Venice Turpentine, well washed in
Rose and Plantine Water, of each an ounce and a half, adding to them whilst
they are melting an ounce of white Lead of Venice pulverized, and having by the
operation of the Fire well mixed them together, spread them Plaisterwise upon a
Cloth, fit to cover the Belly as far as it is convenient; some of this you may
lay upon the Nipples, having first anointed them with the Oil of Acorns or
Spermaceti, and it will allay the Inflammation, and much strengthen them.

To cleanse a Woman before she rises: Take a considerable quantity of bitter
Almonds, pell them, bruise them well, and make them into a Paste, with the Yolk
of an Egg, and Powder of Grise, put the Past unto a bag of Shamy, and dip it in
black Wine, tempering it well, and use it upon ^he place where the Sear-cloths
have been said, one after that wash the said places with black Wine, wherein
Orange flowers have been steeped, and it will cleanse these parts to admiration.

CHAP. XXVII. How to expel the Cholick from Women in Childbirth, and the
violent Gripings that attend the first Delivery.
THese pains frequently afflict the Woman, no less than the pangs of her
Labor, and are by the Ignorant, taken many times, the one for the other,
sometimes again they join forces, and happen at the same instant, which is
occasioned by the crudy Ma^ter in the Stomach, contracted through indigestion;
and while such a pain ^asts, the Woman advances nothing toward her Travel;
to expel the Fits of the Cholick; therefore

Take two Ounces of sweet-Almond Oil, and an Ounce of Cinnamon Water, with
three or four drops of Spirit of Ginger, and let the Woman drink it off, and if
this work not your Desire, make a Glyster of Camomile, Baum Leaves, Olive Oil,
and new Milk, boiling the former ^n the latter; and having strained it very
well, administer it, as it is usual in such cases, nor are Fomentations proper
for dispel^ing mind amiss.

If the pain prove the griping or fretting of the Guts, continuing long after
Delivery; or if it happen upon the Courses, descending by reason of the
smalness of the Veins, which convey the Blood into the Matrix, which often
befalls Women, lying in of the first Child; wherefore it is altogether
convenient to use such a Remedy at such a time, as may eradicate the cause for
the future; and above all, I recommend this most approved one, used with
success by many noble Women.

Receipt.
Take the Root of great Camfry a Dram, Nutmegs and Peach Kernels, of each two
Scrupl^s, yellow Amber, and Amber-Grease of the former a Dram, and the latter a
Scruple, bruise them togethe, and give them the Woman as soon as she is laid
down, in two or three Spoonfuls of White Wind, but if it so happen that she be
Fev^rish, then let it be in as much warm Broth.

CHAP. XXVIII. The approved Receipts for hindering the Monthly Flux in Women
with Child; also to cause Women that are fearful, and subject to Abortion, to
contain the Birth. Together with preparatory Ointments, to be used before the
time of Delivery, and Directions for staying or preventing Vomiting, much
incident to Women with Child.
TO hinder the Superfluity or Efflux, dangerous to Women far gone with Child:
Take the Oil of Roses, Virgins-wax, Juice of Male Knot grass, of each 3 Ounces,
Bole-Armonick, Crocus Martis, of each six Drams, melt them, and bruise them
till they become pliant and capable of being spread Plaster wise; and when the
Flux descends, lay it to her Loins whilst she lies in Bed. Or to the same
effect, you may make Crocus Martis a Dram, Knot-grass Juice 4 Ounces, Rose
water and Vinegar, of each an Ounce, adding to them the White of an Egg, and
apply them cold upon a Linen Cloth to her Loins. If the Woman be fearful of
containing the Birth, and be subject to Abortion.

Take the Roots of Tormentile and Snamwood, of each an Ounce and an half,
Iobertus's Astringent Powder, Myrtle berries, Pomegranate Flower of each six
drams, Dragons Blood, and Spong Bedeguar, of each half an Ounce, Frankincense
and Mastick, of each 3 Dram, Nutmeg and Cloves, of each half a Dram, ^ommon
Pitch six Ounces^ Cinnamon a Dram, Venice- Turpentine washed in the Juice of
Shepherds purse 2 Ounces, of Ship-Pitch 3 Ounces, Virgins-wax 2 Ounces, melt
and well imbody them till they become pliable to be spread Plaister-wise, and
apply the Plaster upon the Leather to the Reins.

To make an Ointment exceeding useful before Delivery. Take the Oils of white
Lilly Roots, and Camomile, each 4 Ounces, new Hogs-Seam strained, and fresh
Butter, of each an Ounce and a half, Muoilage of the Seed of Fen^reek extracted
in Mugwort water 2 Ounces, the Powder of round Birthw^rt-Roots and Saffron, of
each two Drams, Wax an Ounce and a half, melt them over a gentle Fire; and
having strained it forth, anoint and supple the Woman's Thighs, Hips, and Marix
therewith.

In case of Vomiting or Nauseating, which too frequently befalls young Childing
Women.

Take a Sear Cloth, sprinkle it with Galbanum, Powder of Cloves and Mastick,
then covering it with Linntn or Silk in the form of A Stomacher, applying it to
the S^omack ye^^w^ing it as the Scent decays.

CHAP. XXIX. A Pematum for Midwifes to anoin^ the Hands with when the^ are
about their Of^^^^^ as also the Womb of the Woman ^o ^e del^ver'd^ Excellent
A^plications to s^raigh^en and strength^n ^he Womb aft^r D^livery.
AMong the many excellent Pom^t^m^ or Ointment for Midwive^ (...), and
anointing the Womb or Ch^^d to ^ender the Birth easy, I recommend this as
chief, viz Take of Hemp Seed Oil an Ounce and a half, half an Ounce of Caster
Oyl^ Galmoschate half a Scruple, of Laud^num a Scru^ple, with a gen^le fire
make ^h^m into an Ointment, to be used as before m^ntioned.

To contract the Womb after Delivery, Take the Leaves of S^raw^rt and Myrtle,
of each 3 Ounces, Gr^^n-Medla^s, P^^^ns, and wild Pears, of each 8 or 9 Ounces,
the S^^machs of 3 C^cks, fr^sh killed, and newly taken out; all which distill,
and dipping Cor^^n into the Water issuing from them, make it into the form of a
Pessary, and put it into the Womb, where let it c^ntinue a considerable space.

To strengthen the Womb, Take of Borage and Violet Flowers, each a handful,
Ditany of Creet, an Ounce, Wood Sorrel a handful, Honey of Roses, half an
ounce, Maidenhair an ounce; boil them in White Wind, and inject the liquid
part into the Womb, the Woman taking soon after it this Potion, viz. of Fennel,
Succory, and Bugloss Roots, take two ounces of each, boil them in 24 ounces of
Wh^te-wine, to the Consumption of two parts, adding afterward Fennel-water, and
Succory-water, of each three ounces, boiling them again till the fifth part of
what remains be consumed, and of this let her drink an ounce at a time,
continuing so to do Morning and Evening for ten days.

CHAP. XXX. To keep the Milk from Curdling in the Breast, or to dry it up, a
most approved Receipt; as also to increase Milk.
IF the Milk be subject to Curd in the Breast, past doubt, it will contract
pains or disorder there, as well as in the Child that draws it forth; wherefore
to prevent it so doing, Take the Root of Althaea half a pound, boil them in
White Wind Vinegar, strain them through a fine Seive, adding to the Liquid part
Bean flower one ounce, Powder of Rue and dried Mint, of each a dram, Oil of
Mastick 2 ounces, boil them again till they come to the thickness or
plyableness of an Ointment.

To dry up the Milk, Take Honey, newly taken from the Bees, dissolve it in
Water, and often wash the Breasts therewith, or take the Juice of Spear mint,
and Shephards Purse, of each half an ounce, mix them and sweeten them with a
little of the aforesaid Hon^y, and drink them in the Morning with the Broth of
a Hen or Chicken. Or she may take the Oil of Violets 2 ounces, the Juice of
Mint and Parsley a like quantity, an ounce of White Wind Vinegar, Rose Water two
Ounces; boil them over a gentle Fire to the Consumption of the Juice, adding a
little Wax to make them into an Ointment, and anoint the Breast therewith; or
for want of these, take Elder-tops, Sage and Mint, of all of them a handful,
boil them in Spring Water soft, and lay to her Breast.

If the Woman be scarce of Milk, and for the benefit of the Child would
increase it, Let her take the Decoction of Fennel, and ba^he her Breast
therewith mixing the Juice of Oak Apple, and the same time take inwardly this
following Powder, viz. Of Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, and Cummin seeds, of each 2
drams, beaten Ginger half an ounce, of both sorts of Pepper 2 drams, of Coral a
dram, of Crystal and Cinnamou each a dram, the Seed of Daucus a dram, Sil^r
Montanus one ounce and a half^ Cardamoms and long Pepper of each a dram and a
half, of Seseleus half an ounce, the Seeds of Sasanum an ounce, of white Poppy
one Ounce, mingle and dry them till they are all capable of being beaten into
Powder; one Dram of which the Woman must take at a time, Morning and Evening,
in Broth made of Red Coleworts, anointing her Breast the mean time with an
Ointment made of Venice- Turpentine, Vinegar of Roses and Be^s-wax, of each an
equal proportion^

CHAP. XXXI. For a Pain in the Bre^st immediately upon Delivery, or Fissure.
TAke the new B^^s wax 2 Ounc^s, Nut-Oyl h^lf an Ounce, Rape-seed O^l the like
quantity as the latter, when melting the Wax add the Oil, and temper them well
together to the thickness of a stiff Ointment or Salve, and spread them upon a
Cloth fit to cover the Breast, and apply it with extraordinary success.

In case a Fissure happen i^ the Breast, Take of the P^wder of Gum A^abick an
Ounce, R^se-water and Aqu^vitae, of each an Ounce, pr^pare them, by beating
them together till they are of an apt thickness, th^n sees them over the Fire,
and when cool, apply them Plaster wise to the Fissure; or for want of these,
take Unguentum Rosarum, and anoint the place grieved, applying upon it a Pultis
of Ground Ivy.

CHAP. XXXII. The cause of the Bellies swelling after Delivery, and how to
prevent it, and cure it if it happens.
CE^tain it is, and experience teaches often, that many Women have their
Be^lies swelled after Delivery, as much almost as before, and this happens
through too much neglect and carelessness in not having regard to foment them,
as also to apply things convenient for the Privities, by which means, windiness
and vapour^ en^er and contract in the hollow co^c^vities, Veins and A^^eries,
the latter of which they enter by insensible ways: Now to prevent it, take
Origanum, Night^shade and Mastick, of each a Scruple, Sagav^n^m a dram, mix
them together, and make them into 7 Pill^; take them all at once, and after
them drink the quantity of a quarter of a pint of the water of w^^^^ Lill^^s,
viz. of the Flowers.

In case it be come al^e^dy, let her take ^alf a pound of Spanish Figs, the
Me^l o^ Bar^^y and Beans finely s^s^^^ 4 ^unces of ^ach 2 (...) ^f w^ll burnt
brick pulveriz^d, S^r^ps of N^^s an ^unce, boil them in as much w^^er of the
Smiths Forge as will suffice to bring them to a thickness, then spread them
upon a Linen cloth, and apply them to the Belly twice ^r thrice, and it will
retire to its wonted smalln^ss.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Inflammations in the Breast, and its Cure.
THE Inflammation in the Breast, is no other than the hard Swelling, accompanied
with a shooting pain, as also a beating and redness, and is mostly caused by
the abundance of Blook, drawn or flowing to the Breast, and sometimes, but
rarely, it is occasioned by the suppression of the Menses, the Hemorrhoids, or
some bruise received by a blow, or the like, and is known by a certain redness,
and burning heat, causing the whole body to be feverish, and out of order. To
cure it then, first let the Diet be comforting, moistening, and of good
nourishment, as the Broth of Pullets, Capons, Cocks, Chickens, Veal, etc.
wherein Indive, Borage, Purslain or Lettice has been boiled; and if she can get
it, let the Woman drink Juice of Pomegranets; but for want of that,
Barley-water, wherein Annis^eds have been boiled, but let her refrain drinking
of Wine and strong Liquors, as likewise hot Spices; and if she find any
Obstruction in her excremental Evacuation, let her take a softning or
mollifying Glyster, and sleep at seasonable times as much as she can. Another
way to remedy it, is by diverting the Humors, which may be done by rubbing the
Body in all adjacent places, letting Blood in the Foot, Scarification in the
Legs, or Vesicatiories applied in those places, especially if the Menses are
stupped, or ready to come down, if not, it is requisite to bleed in the Arm.

But if what has been mentioned, prevailed not to remove the Humors, make a
Cataplasm of the Leaves of Mellilot and Nightshade, each half a handful: and
when boiled in Spring Water, add to them Bean-meal two Ounces, Oil of sweet
Almonds and Oatmeal, of each an Ounce, and apply them to the Breast, observing
so to do before the Breast be ex^raordinarily inflamed.

CHAP. XXXIV. A Tumor in the Breast; its Cause and Cure.
OF Tumors there are several sorts, but first of the Flagitous Tumor, the
cause of which proceeds from a thick and unnatural Vapor, arising from the
Menstrual Blood, which is ret^ined or corrupted in the Matrix, and that again
occasioned by the suppressions of ^he Courses, or when Nature is defective in
discharging them into their proper place, and due time; as also from corruption
of humo^rs, whereby are ingendered ^vil Vapors, and their passing by
insensible ways, causes the Breast to swell or distend, as if it were a true
swelling, and is known by a shooting pain, and disorder of ^he Heart, by reason
of the Wind that oppresses it, the lest Bre^st being for the most part more
swelled than the right, communicating pains to the Arms and Shoulders, a^
likewise the Ribs on the same side, ^he Breast being white and shining,
sounding like a Drum, if touched gently, and swelled in all parts alike. To
cure ^his, as also the windy Tumour^ you must order the Woman to observe a
mod^ration in Diet, that thereby C^udities may be avoided, and all such things
as contract windy Humors in the Vei^s, suffering ^er to drink water, wherein
Cinnamon and Anniseeds have been boiled, as also the Rind of Cittron, and then
let her observe to take such things as are proper ^o provoke the Courses, in
doing which, she will find the Humors abate; then let her take Celandine,
Camomile, Ground-^ill, and Ground-Juice, stamp them and boil them in
White Wind, and in so doing you will ease the pain, and restore the Breast. As
for Disease and Accidents incident to young Children, there are but few Women
of any experience, but are skilful in cutting and ordering them, wher^fore for
brevi^^es s^ke, I shall pass them over, and pr^ceed to Anatomize the Genit^l
parts in a Man, that one thing rem^ining necessary in this Treatise, as also to
instance what Men and Women ought to marry, that their Islue may be Fair,
Healthful, and Prosperous.

CHAP. XXXV. The Anatomy o^ the Organs of Generati^n in Man.
THE Yard, which is called in Latin Penis, a Pedendo, because it hangs
without the Belly, ^s an Organical part, made of Skin, Tendons, Veins,
Arteries, Sinews, and great Lig^men^s; and i^ long, round, and on the upper
si^e flartish, seated under ^he Oss^ Pubis, and destined by Nature, partly for
making of Water, and p^rtly for co^veying the Seed into the Mat^ix. To which
end, there open ^n^o it small Pores, through which the Seed passes into it from
^he Vesiculae Seminales; and al^o the ^eck of the Vesi^a Vrinaria, which pours
out the Urine in making of W^ter. Besides the common p^rts, as the Cut^cle the
Skin, and the Membrana Carnosa; it has in these proper or internal parts, as
^he two Nervous Bodies, the Septum, the U^ethra, the Glans, four Muscles and
the Vessels. The Nervous Bodies (so called) are surrounded with a thick white,
Nervous Membrane, but their inner substance is spongy, consisting chi^fly of
Veins, Arteries, and Nervous Fibers interwoven together like a Net. And when
the Nerves are repleat with Animal Spirits, and the Ar^eries with hot and
spirituous Blood, then the Penis is distended, and becomes ^rect; but when the
Influx of the Spirits ceases, then the Blood and remaining Spirits are absorded
by the Veins, and so the Penis beco^es limber and flaggy. Below these Nervous
Bodies like the Vrethra, and whenever the Nervous Bodies swell, it swells also.
The Muscles of the Penis are ^our, two shorter arising from the Cexendix, and
s^rving its Erection, and are therefore called Erectores; and two large^,
proceeding from the Spincter of the Anus, and serve to delia^e the Vrethra from
Miction and Ejaculation of the Seed, and are therefore called Dilatantes or
Wideness. At the end of the Penis is the Glans, covered wi^h a very thin
Membrane, by means of which, and its Nervous substance, it becomes most
exquisitely insensible, and is the principal Seat o^ Pleasure in Copulation.
The outmost covering of the Glans is called P^aeputium, a Praeputando, from
being cut off, it b^ing that which the Jews cut o^f in Circumcision: And it is
tied in the lower part of it to the Glans, by the Froenum, or Bridle. The Penis
is also sto^ked with Veins, Arteri^s and N^rves. That part that is ^ext above
it, toward the Belly, is called the Pube^, and its Lateral parts are called
I^nuina, ^he Groins.

The Tes^es, or Sto^^s (so called, because they tes^ifie o^^ to be a M^^)
^laborate the Blood brought to them by the Spermatick Ar^eries, into Seed. They
have Coats of two sorts, Proper and Common. The Common are two, and invest both
the Testes. The outermost of the Common Coats, consists of the Guticula, and
true Skin, and is called the Scrotum, hanging out of the Abdomen like a Purse.
The inner Common Coat is the Membraua Carnosa. The proper Coats are also two,
the outer called Elitroides or Viginales, the inner A'buginea, into the outer
are inserted the Cremaster Muscles; to the upper part of the Testes are fixed
the Epididymedes or Pastata, from whence arise the Vasa Differentia or
Ejaculatoria; which, when they come near the Neck of the Bladder, deposite the
Seed into the Vesiculae Seminales. These Vesiculae Seminales are two, each like
a Bunch of Grapes, and emit the Seed into the Vrethra in the Act of Copulation.

Near to them are the Prostatae, about the bigness of a Wallnut, and joined to
the Neck of the Bladder. Authors cannot agree about the use of them, but most
are of Opinion, tha^ they afford any Oily, Slippery and Fat humor to besmear
the Vrethra, whereby to defend it from ^he Acrimony of the Seed and Urine. But
the Vessels which convey the Blood to the Testes, out of which the Seed is
made, are the Arteriae Spermaticae, and are also two. The Veins which carry
back the remaining Blood are two, and have the name of Venae Spermaticae.

CHAP. XXXVI. What Women ought to marry, with what Men that they might have
Children.
IN respect of Married Women that prove Childless, Hypocrates advises this
Experiment to be tried, to know whether the defect be on the Woman's part, or
on her Husbands, which is to make her Suffumigations with Incense or Storax,
which a Garment loose wrapped about her, which may hang down on the Ground, in
such sort^ that no vapor nor fume may issue out; and if within a while after
she feel the Savor of the Incense in her Mouth, she may conclude that the
Barrenness comes not through her own defect, but through her Husband's; for as
much as the Fumes found the passage open, whereby it pierced up to the Nostril:
But although this proof perform that effect which Hypocrates speaks of;
namely, the piercing up to the inner part of the Mouth, yet this is no
infallible Argument of the Husbands Barrenness, nor of the fruitfulness of the
Wife, since want of Children may arise through an unapt disposition in them
both, in respect of the Correspondency of Qualities; for it has oftentimes
happened that a Man that could not have Children by one Wife has had them by
another; the like also has befallen Women.

Hypocrates gives us his Opinion concerning the Correspondency that ought in
that respect to be betwixt Man and Wife, in these words: If the hot answer not
the cold, the moist in Measure and Quantity, that is, if there meet not in the
Womb two Seeds, the one hot, the other cold; the one dry, the other moist,
extended in equal degree, there can be no Generation. For so mavelous a work
as the Fornication of man (says he) could not be performed without a
proportionable commixture of Seed. To exemplify this assertion of his, the
ancient Physicians go on, and say, that a Woman who is wily, ill-conditioned,
shrill-voiced, lean, swarthy colored; and deformed, (which are the signs of
cold and moist in the first degree) may conceive by a Man who is ignorant,
good-natured, sweet voic'd, corpulent, having little Hair, ^ well-colored
Face, and a handsome Body, which are the signs of hot and dry in the first
degree, in regard she retains a mean in all those signs abovementioned, is
most like to be fruit^ul, because she comes nearest in proportion to Men of
each several temperature. But from ^he first of thee Unions, or conjoyning of
Man and Woman, are most likely to issue the wisest Children (say they) because
the dryness of the Mother corrects and amendeth the defect of the Father. But
this being chiefly grounded upon that old opinion, of the Commixture of the
Seed of the Man and Woman together, and of the Child's being formed from
thence, we think fi^ to reject it, and to afirm, that Youth, Strength and
Vigor, a sound Body, and a mind free from Cares, with a mutual Love and Amity
betwixt the Man and Woman, seldom fail of their desired Effects.

CHAP. XXXVII. A word of Advice to both Sexes, in the Act of Copulation.
THE Act of Copulation being ordained by Nature as the Grond of all Generation,
and without which no Birth can be produced, somewhat must be said of it; but we
shall cloth it in that modest Dress, that the chasest Ears may hear, without
being put to the trouble of a blush.

It is convenient on this occasion to cherish ^he Body with generous
Restorative, to charm the Imagination with Music, to drown all C^res in good
VVi^e; that so the Mind being elevated to a pith of Joy and Rapture, the
sensual Appeti^e may be more ^reely encouraged to gratify it self in the
Delights of Nature. For, Melancholy and Grief, and whatsoever is troublesome
to the Senses and the Fancy, are Enemies to the Pastimes of the Nuptial Bed.
Yet^ it is necessary to avoid Excess^s in Eating and Drinking; for if the Body
be overcharged with Wine or Meat, the Spirits will become dull and unactive,
and unable to perform their Office. This you may take ^or a good Rule, That a
little of what is good, and well digested, breeds good Blood, good Blood
creates good Spirits, and when a Man is invigorated with a plentiful Stock of
such, he is able to do Miracles. Also when both the Husband and Wife meet with
an equal Ardour in their Conjugal Embraces, it is very rare, if it be not
attended with Conception. But when that Act is over, all is not done; for that
it may have the better Success, the Husband must not presently separate himself
from his Wife's Embraces, lest the Air should suddenly strike in, and so
prevent the happy issue of their Labors: And when the Man departs, the Woman
ought to compose her self to all the rest and quietness imaginable, and to
avoid heavy thoughts of what may cause any disturbance; and especially she
ought to avoid both Coughing and Sneezing, both which are two great hindrances
to Conception after the Act of Copulation.

Thus ( Reader) have I finished the difficult work of Generation, and I hope,
to the satisfaction of all Modest and Ingenious Persons.

Pary says, that in 1573. he saw in Paris a Boy, Nine years old, born near
Guise; he had but two Fingers on his right Hand, his Arm was well proportioned
from the top of his Shoulders almost to his Wrist, but from thence to the
fingers ends it was very deformed, he wanted his Legs and Thighs, etc.

The Effigies of a monstro^s Child, by reason of the defect of the Matter of
Seed.




In Stecquer, a Village of Saxony; they say, a Monster was born with four Feet,
Eyes, Mouth, and Nose like a Calf, with a round and red Excrescence of Flesh on
the Forehead, and also a piece of Flesh like a Hood, hung from his Neck upon
his Back, and it was deformed, with its Thighs torn and cut.

Anno Dom. 1393. There was Generated of a Woman and a Dog, an issue, which from
the Navel upward, perfectly resembled the shape of the Mother, but there hence
downwards the Sire, that is the Dog^ This Monster was sent to the Pope that
then Reigned, as Voluterane wri^eth; also Carda^e mentions it; wherefore I have
here given you the Figure thereof.

The Effigies of a Monster, half Man, and half Dog.


In the Year of our Lord 1512^ (in which Year, upon Easter day, near Rovenna,
was fought that mortal Battle, in which the Pope's Forces were overthrown) a
Monster was Born in Ravenna, having a Horn upon the Crown of his Head, and
besides, two Wings, and one Foot alone, most like to Feet of Birds of Prey, and
in the Knee thereof an Eye, the Privities of Male and Female, the rest of the
Body like a Man, as you may see by this Figure.

The Figure of a Winged Monster.




Iovianus Pontanus, tells in the year 1529. the Ninth day of January, there was
a Man Child born in Germany, having Arms, and as many Legs.

FINIS.
The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy, and an Infant that was black by the
Imagination of their Parents.



