The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy, and an Infant that was black by the
Imagination of their Parents. Jovi^^


ARISTOTELES MASTERPIECE, Or The Secrets of Generation displayed in all the
parts thereof.

Containing, 1. The Signs of Barrenness. 2. The way of getting a Boy or Girl.
3. Of the likeness of Children to Parents. 4. Of the Infusion of the Soul into
the Infant. 5. Of Monstrous Births, and the reasons thereof. 6. Of the benefit
of Marriage to both Sexes. 7. The prejudice of unequal Matches. 8. The
discovery of Insufficiency. 9. The cause and cure of the Green Sickness. 10. A
Discourse of Maiden-heads. 11. How a Midwife ought to be qualified. 12.
Directions and Cautions to Midwifes. 13. Of the Privities. 14. The Fabric of
the Womb. 15. The Use and Action of the Genitals. 16. Signs of Conception, and
whether of a Male or Female. 17. To discover false Conceptions. 18.
Instructions for Women with Child. 19. For preventing Miscarriage. 20. For
Women in Childbed. 21. Of ordering newborn Infants, and many other very
useful Particulars. To which is added a word of Advice to both Sexes in the Act
of Copulation: And the Pictures of several Monsterous Births drawn to the Life.

Entered According to Order.

London, Printed for J. How, and are to be sold next door to the Anchor Tavern
in Swee-things-Rents in Cornhil. 1684.

The Introduction.
IT plainly appears in Holy Writ, that this glorious Universe, bespangled with
gaudy Fires, and every where adorned with wonderful Objects, proclaming the
Wisdom and Omnipotence of the great Work-Master, who in six days erected all
things for his pleasure, was at first drawn out of nothing, or at most a
formless Chaos of Confusion, a disordered and confounded heap of jarring
Elements tossed and jumbl'd together, under the dismal shades of during Night,
eldest of things; no Fruitfulness nor Pleasure, no Creature that had breath had
being in the place this lower World possesses, till God out of the abundance of
his Goodness sent forth his Holy Spirit, who dove-like, with mighty out-spread
Wings, sat brooding on the vast Abyss, and made it pregnant: then Light put
Darkness soon to flight, and all the glorious Lamps of Heaven appeared, all
Creatures soon had being, and every Plant, Tree, Herb, or Flower of fragrant
smell sprung from the Vernant Earth, raised by command above the Waters, every
thing of use having Seed in it self, that no second Creation needed not, but
still the Lordly Creature who should rule the Creatures being wanting, he was
framed more Glorious than all Creatures, as not made without mature Counsel and
Deliberation, and stamped in the divine Similitude, inspired with the infused
breath of Life, beyond what any other Creature durst to boast. The
contemplating of which, long since made the Royal Psalmist break out into this
Rapture, viz. What is Man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that
thou visitest him? Thou made him lower than the Angels: To Crown him with
Glory and Worship. Thou make him to have dominion of the Works of thy Hands:
and thou have put all things in subjection under hhis Feet. Psalm. 8. ver. 4, 5,
6.

Thus, I say, when God had created the World, and furnished it with whatsoever
seemed good in his sight, and that there was nothing wanting for necessary use,
commodity and pleasure, it seemed good to him then, to make one that might use
them to his Glory, and take delight in rejoicing in them; wherefore when
Natures Ornaments were all complete, he brought Man into the World as into his
own Possession; and that he might not be disconsolate, nor solitary, gave him a
Woman for a Helper and Companion, infusing into them a force of love and desire
toward each other. And of procreating their likeness, having prepared for that
purpose a swelling Humor or Spirit, and Organical parts, and that the one through
fear or neglect, should not be induced to decline the Society of the other, he
added Allurements, and desire of mutual embracing, that so they might in
procreation be sweetly affected, and pacified by wondrous ways, for unless
this was natural to all kind of Creatures, they would be regardless of
Posterity, and procreation would cease, whereby mankind would quickly be lost,
and the Affairs of mortals of no durance. But that this passiouate desire might
strongly opporate, as well in sensual felicity as on the imagination. God has
firmly impressed it in all Creatures subject thereto, both Male and Female, but
more especially on man, and least it should prove unruly in him and not easily
subdued: he has thought it convenient to prescribe him bounds, in granting him
the use of the Matrimonial Bed, that so they might not defile themselves with
wandridg lust, who want the Gift of Continency, wherefore so soon as Copulation
is finished, and the Woman happens to prove with Child, great is Natures
cunning in fostering, coagulating and framing the Seed of both Sex, that at the
set time when nine months are run over Man that ruler and ornament of the
sublunary World may come forth: In Relation to which my stry of Generation Holy
Job in the tenth Chapter of his Book thus expresses himself, viz. Have thou not
powered me out as Milk, and curdled me like Cheese? Thou have clothed me with
Skin and Flesh, and have fenced me with Bones and Sinews. Thou have granted me
life, and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my Spirit. But not to be
tedious in prolonging on this Subject, I shall proceed to unravel the mystrey
of Generation, and diverse other Mysteries? as I well hope to the fatisfaction
of the learned and ingenious of the Age, whose discretion, past doubt, will
wrest it to no other end than to what it was designed; viz. for the benefit and
advantage of the modesty of either Sex; I not desiring this Book should fall
into the hands of any obseene Person, whose Folly or Malice may turn that into
Ridicule that loudly proclaims the infinite Wisdom of an omnipotent Creator,
who by his mighty working is able to subdue all things to himself.

Gloria Deo in Excels^s.
CHAPTER I. Of Marriage, and at what Age Virgins and Youths are capable of
Generation, and the reason that prompts them to desire Copulation; with the
signs of Barrenness, and how long a Man or Woman are capable of getting
Children.
THat Marriage is an Honorable State ordained by God in Paradise, and since
confirmed by our blessed Savior, who wrought his first Miracle at a Wedding, I
hope none will deny; therefore it is convenient that Parents well take care of
their Daughters Chastity, and when they find them inclinable to Marriage, not
rigorously to restrain their Affections, for Nature will have its course, but
rather to provide for them, if possible, such Husbands as may be for their
advantage, and with whom they may live comfortably in that blessed State, lest
being crossed in their purposes, and delayed, they part with their Honor
dishonorable ways.

The propension and inclination of Maids to Marriage, is to be discovered by
many Symptoms; as, when Nature fringes the obscure parts, and their Terms flow
at the time appointed, which is usually in the Fourteenth or Fifteenth Year of
their Age, when as the Seed increases in some sooner, and in others later,
according to their Habits or Constitutions: And the Blood, which is no longer
taken to augment their Bodies, abounding, incites their Minds and Imaginations
to Venery. And by the Retention of the Seed, many times it falls out that they
are cruelly afflicted with fainting Fits, and strangling of the Mother: for all
learned Physicians are of Opinion, that more harm comes by the Seed corrupting,
than by their Courses being unseasonably obstructed; for the Seed derogates to
a venomous quality; and from the effects thereof arise the Swarth and weasel
Color in Maids, when they begin to be in Love, and desirous of Copulation; as
also their short Breathings, Tremblings, and Pantings of the Heart. The
Expulsive Faculties being moved to cast out the superfluous Humor. But if they
happen to be Married to their own Content, these afflictions vanish, and their
native Beauty returns more gay than before: nor is their eager gazing, and
desiring to associate themselves with Men, a lesser sign that Nature prompts
them to desire what she ordained: Their due of which, sometimes being by
obdurate Parents debarred in a lawful way, breaking the bounds of modesty,
rather than enduring such violent Agitations and Conflicts within themselves,
they satiate their desire in unlawful Love. The same may in all Particulars be
observed in young brisk Widows, whom Death, that Enemy of sweet Conjugal Love,
has separated from the Bosom of their Husbands.

At fourteen Years of Age, commonly the Terms in Virgins begins to flow, and
then they are capable of Conceiving, and so continue generally till forty four;
at what time, for the most part, the Eflux being stayed, they are no longer
capable of Generation, unless such as are exceeding healthful, strong of body,
and have used themselves to Temperance, who have appeared to be delivered of
Children till fifty five Years; but such Prodigies rarely happen, although the
Terms extend sarther in some Women than in others; but many times such Eflux
proceeds not from any natural cause, but by reason of some violent straining,
or other violence, and does often endanger the life of the Party: And therefore
young Men that marry Women surmounting the Age aforesaid, if they expect
Children, unless by Miracle, must labor against the Wind, though if an old
Man, that is not worn out by Diseases and Incontinency, marry a brisk lively
Lass, there is hopes even to threescore and ten, and some that are
extraordinary lusty, till fourscore.

Hypocrates, that Famous and Learned Physician, is of Opinion, that a Youth at
16 years, or between that and 17, having much vital strength, may be capable of
getting Children, and that force and heat of Procreating matter continually
increases till 45, 50, and 65. and at the end of the latter begins to flagg;
the Seed by little and little becoming unfruitful, the natural Spirits being
extinguished, and the humors dried up; and in general, most Physicians at this
day do observe it, but as to particulars, as I have before mentioned, it often
happens otherwise; nay, it is reported by a credible Author, that in the Reign
of Erecus, King of Sweedland, a Man was married at a Hundred years old, to a
Bride of Thirty, and had many Children by her, but looked so fresh, that such
as knew him not took him not to exceed half that Age.

In Campania, where the Air is temperate, serene, and calm, men of 80 years
usually marry young Virgins, and have Children by them, which argues, that Age
in men hinders not Procreation, unless they be exhausted in their Youth, and
their Members shriveled up. If any ask why a Women is sooner barren than a Man?
I answer, the Cause is, the natural Heat, which is more predominant in the
latter than in the former; for since a Woman is more moist than a Man, as her
Courses do most evidently demonstrate, as also the softness of her Body; it is
also apparent, that he does exceed her in Native heat; and as for that heat, it
is the chief thing that concocts the Humors, and changes them into the
substance of the Seed, which Aliment the Woman wanting, grows fat, when a Man,
by reason of that heat, melts his fat by degrees, and his Humors are
dissolved, but by the benefit thereof they are elaborated into Seed: and this
may, for the better Confirmation of what I propose be added, That the Woman is
not so strong as a Man, nor so wise and prudent, nor has so much reason, nor
is so ingenious in contriving her Affairs, whereby the Faculties are hindered
in their operation. And so I conclude my Assertion.

CHAP. II. General and particular Rules, laid down by Learned Physicians, how
to proceed in getting a Male or Female Child; and of the Embrio and perfect
Birth, and the Season sit for Copulation.
WHen a young likely Couple have entered the holy State of Wedlock, and are
desirous of mutual enjoyment for Generation sake, which is the chief end for
which Wedlock was ordained, and rather covet to be blessed with one Sex than
another, let them know first for certain, that the Success of such things
depends upon Divine Providence, though secondary causes must be actual and
instrumental therein; and those are especially two: First, the Genital Humor
which proceeds partly from the Brain, and partly from the Liver, the Fountain
of Blood; then the spirit that is conveyed by Arteries from the Heart, by force
whereof the Yard is erected, and made capable to eject the Seed; and partly it
flows from the whole Body without exception. To which may be added the Appetite
and desire to Copulation, which fires the Imagination with unusual Fancies, or
by the sight and feeling a brisk charming Beauty, whose wit and liveliness may
much incite, and more inflame the Courage; but if Nature be infeebled, then are
there fit artificial Remedies to restore it; viz. such meats as most conduce to
the affording such aliment as proves to make Seed abound, and restore the
decaies of Nature, that the Faculties may freely opporate: for as Dung and well
manuring restores Ground that is worn out and heartless; even so seasonable and
proper Diet opporates to the restoring the faint heart, weak spirit, coldness
and dryness of the Genital Parts, and reduces the weakness of the Nerves to
their Temperament, and removes Impediments, obstructing the Procreation of
Children. Then since the Diet may, and will alter the evil state of the Body to
a better, it is necessary that such as are subject to Barrenness should eat
such meat only as tend to render them fruitful; and among such things as are
inducing and stirring up thereto, are all meats of good juice, that nourish
well, and makes the body lively and full of sap: of which Faculty are all hot
moist meats: for according to Gallen, the substance of Seed is made of the pure
concocted and windy superfluity of Blood, from whence we may conclude there is
in many things a power to accumulate or heap up Seed, as also to augment it,
and other things of force to cause Erection and Ejection of Humor, as
Hen-Eggs, Pheasants, Woodcocks, Guatsappers, Thrushes, Black birds, young
Pigeons, Sparrows, Partridge, Capons, Almones, Pine-nuts, Rasons, Currants,
all strong Wines moderately taken, especially those made of the Grapes of
Italy; but the Genitals are chiefly erected and provoked by Satyrium, Eringoes,
Cresses, Eressimum. Parsnips, Artichokes, Turnips, Rapes, Asparagus, Candid
Ginger, Gallinga, Acorns bruised to powder and drunk in Muscadel, Scallions,
Sea-shell Fish, etc. And these, though excellent Restoratives, will not have
present Operation, but you must use your self to them sometime before you
handle your Arms, or your Wife will grudg the charge; for when Husbands will
win their Wives favor, then they shall account nothing too good nor too dear
for them: then must they be well prepared to enter this Conflict; and when they
find themselves so to be, they must take the opportunity of doing their
business well, and that is when the monthly Terms are over, lest the Seed be
hindered from coagulating and fermenting, and the Womb be rendered unfit for
Conception. When therefore the Terms are finished, and the Womb well cleansed,
they must proceed decently, and not over rashly, though courage and activity must
not be wanting, nor the force of Imagination: and having performed what is
necessary, the Woman must gently repose on her right side, with her head lying
low, and her body sinking down, that by sleeping in that Posture the cells on
the right side of the Matrix may prove the receptacles of the Seed, in which
are the greatest force of Generative heat, which is the chief inducement to the
procreation of Male Children, and rarely misses to answer the expectation of
such as experience it, especially if they keep themselves warm, and without
much motion, leaning for the most part to the right and drinking a little
Spirit of Saffron and Juice of Hysop in a Glass of Malligo or Aligant when they
lie down and rise, for the space of a Week. Now the fittest time for the
Procreation of Male Children, is when the Sun is in Leo, and the Moons Sign is
Virgo, Scorpio, or Sagitarius.

This Order may be observed for a Female Child, by lying as aforesaid, on the
left-side, and strongly sancying a Female in the time of Procreation,
especially if the Woman drink the decoction of Female Mercury, four days from
the first day of Purgation; the Male Mercury (both Herbs so called,) having the
like Operation in case of a Male Child, for the juice or concoction of these
Simples are of force, the one to purge the right, and the other the left side
of the Womb, and thereby open the Receptacles, making a way for the Semenary of
Generation: and the best time to copulate for this Sex, is, when the Moon is in
the Wain and the Sign in Libra, or Aquarius; for then they will be of a most
gentle, affable temper, very fair and perfect in all their Members. Avicenna,
an Author of good repute, describes the time of Procreation thus: When, says
he, the Terms are spent and the Womb is cleansed, which is commonly in five
days, or seven at most, if a Man lie with his Wife from the first day she is
purged to the fifth, she will conceive a Male, but from the fifth to the eighth
day a Female, and from the eighth to the twelfth a Male again; but after that
number of days peradventure neither distinctly, but both in an Hermophrodite.
And thus this Opinion of his by the Learned is explained; viz. for as much as
the first day the Wom^ ^eing cleansed, and the sordid humor perfectly purged
forth, the Matrix has more heat, whereby the Seed of either Sex are better
contracted, and take surer place on the right-side of the Womb, by the
attracting force of the Liver and right Kidney, from which also in those days
het Blood is derived for the Nutriment of the Child that shall be for the left
part, as being cold, numbed and void of Blood cannot contribute any thing so
soon as the Terms are purged, but Blood is drawn later, and more sparingly from
the Veins on the left side, which are called emulgent Veins, that creep about
the Milt and left Kidney; so that at length, after the first day until the
eighth day, some Blood comes forth of them, whereby the Child is to be
nourished so that when these Parts perform their Office, and the rightside
ceases by reason of the Situation and cold Nutriment, a Female is generated:
after the eighth day the parts on the right side opporate again, and Blood
comes from them to nourish the Male after these circuit of days, because the
menstrual Blood flows without distinction from all parts, and the Matrix is
made too moist with cold Humors flowing into it; and the Seed adheres to
neither side, but floats in the middle of the Womb, the Seed of either Sex
confounded or confused, and out of due Place and Order, fixed at last in the
Cell at the bottom of the Womb, generates an Hermophrodite, though sometimes such
unusual and unuatural Conceptions are occasioned by the indecency of
Copulation, when preposterously the Woman in the Act lies uppermost, and the
Man under her, or by the force of strange Imaginations: but many are of Opinion
such Births happen through the powerful influence of Mercury and Venus in
conjunction. In a word, they that would be commended for their Wedlock Actions,
and be happy in the fruit of their labor, must observe to copulate at distance
of time, not too often nor yet too seldom, for both these hurt Fruitfulness
alike; for to eject immoderately weakens a Man and wastes his Spirits, and too
often causes the Seed, by long continuance, to be ineffectual, and not manly
enough. And thus much for the first general and particular; from whence I shall
proceed to the second; which is, to give the Reader to understand how the Child
is formed in the Womb, and what Accidents it is incident to, how nourished, and
when brought forth.

Certain it is, there are various Opinions concerning this matter; therefore I
shall, for the satisfaction of the curious, lay down the Opinions of the
learned, as thus. Man consists of the Seed of both united in the Matrix by
Copulation, and for the first seven days the Mothers Blood running to it it
grows in shape like an Egg; but there is a forming faculty and virtue in the
Seed from a divine and heavenly gift, it being abundantly endued with Vital and
Etherial Spirit, which gives shape and form to the Child; so that all the parts
and bulk of the Body, which is made up in the space of many months, and is by
degrees framed and formed into a decent and comely Figure of a Man, do consist
in that, and are adumbrated thereby: on which Holy David contemplating, fell
into his divine Rapture and Admiration expressed in Psalm. 138. I will praise
thee, O Lord, because I am wonderfully made: thy Works are wonderful. Mr Soul
searches and knows it right. Well thou know all my Bones when I was
fashinned in the secret place, and when I was wonderfully formed in my Mothers
Womb. Thy Eyes beheld me yet unmade, and in thy Book were all my Members
written, which day by day were fashioned. Thy Knowledge is wonderful unto me,
whereby I was made, I cannot understand it. etc. And Physicians that have
narrowly contemplated Man's Nature, constitute four different times wherein this
Microcosm or little World is framed and perfected in the Womb.

First, When after Copulation and mutual embracing it has the nature of Seed;
at which time it is called Conception or Geniture, because the Seeds of the Man
and Woman mixing and fermenting, become like Cream and are perfect in the first
week if no Eflux happen, which sometimes falls out through the slipperiness of
the Matrix, or the head thereof that shuts over like a Rose bud opening on a
sudden by reason of some cold distemper, or over-weariness in Travel.

The second time of forming is constituted when Nature and the force of the
Womb, by the use of her own inbred forces and virtue, makes a manifest mutation
in the Seed, so that all the substance seems congealed Flesh and Blood, rather
than Seed, which happens about the 12 or 14 day after Copulation; and though
this Concretion, or fleshy Mass, abound with hot fiery blood, yet it remains
undistinguishable without form of figure, and may be called the rough draught,
or Embrio, and well likened to Seed which is sown in the ground, which through
kindly heat and moisture grows up by degrees into a perfect form, either in
Plant or Grain; or as when a Potter fashions a Vessel out of a rude Lump of
Clay.

The third time to make up this Fabric, is set when the three principal Parts
show themselves evidently and perspicuously, viz. The Heat from whence proceeds
the Arteries, the Brain from which the Nerves proceed like many small threads
running through the whole Body, and the Liver from whence the Veins derive
their Original. These are the Seeds and Fountains of Life, that nourish and
support each part of the Body; in framing which, the Faculty of the Womb is
busied from the time of Conception to the eighteenth day of the first Month.

But lastly, which time reaches to the 28 or 30 day, the outward Parts are
seen exquisitely claborated and distinguished by Joints, and then the Child
begins to grow and pant; from which Progress of days, by reason the Limbs are
divided, and the whole frame is perfect, it is no longer held an imperfect
Child or Embrio, that is, a Concretion that springs sorth, but is held to be a
perfect and absolute Child. Males for the most part are perfect by the 30 day,
but Females seldom till the 42 or 45 day; and the reason why the one is sooner
perfected than the other, is, that the heat of the Womb is greater in producing
the Male than the Female; for heat extends the humor like soft wax, diffusing
and delating it, and hen by its force contracting, framing and fashioning it,
so heat and vigout of the Body, and Alacrity of nature in the Man makes the
Male to move in 3 months, but the Female rarely under 4, at which time also his
Hair and Nails come forth, and the Child begins to stir, kick, and tumble in
the Womb; so that the motion is plainly perceived, and the Women are troubled
with nauseating and loathing of their meat, and oftentimes covet and greedily
long for things contrary to Nutriment, as Coals, Rublish, Chalk, Lime, Starch,
Oat-meal, ^aw Flesh and Fish or the like, which desire proceeds from a former
contraction of evil humors, occasioning im pure Blood in their containing
Vessel, within, and often occasions abortion and miscarriage; some Women as it
has been noted by diverse Authors of Credit, have been so extravegant in their
longings, that they have coveted Hob-Nails, Leather, Hearse Flesh, Man's Flesh,
and the Flesh of diverse ravenous Be asts, for want of which they have cast
their Birth untimely, or the Child has contiued dead in the Womb, for many
days, to the eminent hazard of the Woman's life: But to proceed in this great
mystery, I shall unfold by what means the Infant is sustained in the Womb, and
the posture it there remains in.

The Infant being arrived to some perfection, is fastened by a long string to
the Navel, as the Apple by the stalk is fastened to the Tree; by which, through
the help of the Umbelical Vein, it is nourished by a Fountain of pure Blood,
not taking it in at the mouth, as some ignorant People have imagined; that
being of no use during the abode in the Womb, neither do any Excrements fall
from the Vessels of Evacuation; but the Umbelical Vein springing from the
Matrix, enters the Liver in two parts, and terminates in Vena Porta, from which
the most pure Blood from the Seminary Vessels are derived to the Matrix. And
hende it is that the Blood and Spirits, like Auxiliaries, are always conveyed
downwards, that so none of them be wanting, whereof are those Channels and
Rivers of Veins and Arteries that proceed from the Mothers Body are carried to
the Womb, and then fastened into the Navel, feed the Child by insensible ways,
and by the faculty of the Seed that is fostered by the heat of the Womb, and
moistened with Blood; being perfected at the times specified in all its parts
equal balanced, it is in the midst of the Womb, as in the Center lying all on
a heap, and being something long, is turned round, so that the Head a little
inclines, and it lays its Chin on its Breast, his Heels and Ancles upon his
Buttocks, its Hands on its Cheeks, and its Thumbs to its Eyes; but its Legs and
Thighs are carried upward with its Hams bending, so that they touch the bottom
of its belly: the former and that part of the body which is over against us, as
the Forehead, Nose, Face, are turned toward the Mothers Back, and the Head
inclining downwards toward the Cocyx or Rumpbone that joins to the Os Sacrum,
which Bone, together with Os Pubis, in the time of the Birth parts and is
loosened; whence it is that Male Children commonly come with their Faces
downwards, or with their Heads turned somewhat Oblique, that their Faces may be
seen; but the Female children with their Faces upward, though sometimes it
happens that Births follow not according to Natures order, but Children come
forth with their feet stradling, their Necks bowed, and their Heads lying
Oblique with their Hands stretched out, which greatly endangers themselves and
the Mother, giving the Midwife great trouble to introduce them nto the World:
but when all things proceed orderly and naturally, the Child, when Natures set
bounds are accomplished, is desirous to break its bounds, and come forth of the
Womb; and by inclining himself, he rowls downward; for he cannot longer be
obscured in those hiding places, than he can find Nutriment from the Navel, and
the heat of the Heart can subsist without external respiration; wherefore being
grown great, he is more and more desirous of Nutriment and Light; when coveting
the Etherial Air, he by struggling to obtain it breaks the membrains and
Coverings whereby he was restrained and fenced against Attrition; and for the
most part with bitter Pangs of the Mother issucth forth to view the Day,
commonly in the ninth Month; for then the Matrix divided, and Oss Pubis being
loosened, the Woman strives what she can to cast forth her burden, and the
Child doing the like to get forth by the help of its inbred strength, the Birth
comes to be perfect; but if the Child be dead, then more dangerous is the
Delivery, though Nature, as a kind Commiserator, often helps the Woman's
weakness herein; but the Child that is quick and lively labors no less than
the Woman.

Now there are Bitths at 7 or 8 months, and some Women go to the 10th month;
but of these, and the Reasons for them, I shall speak more largely in another
place, and at present proceed to unrayel other mysteries of Nature.

CHAP. III. The Reason why Children are often like their Parents, and what the
Mathers Imagination contributes thereto: How the Mother contributes Seed, and
is a Companion in the whole Generation; and whence grows the Kind, viz. Whether
the Man or the Woman is the cause of the Male or Female Child, etc.
IT is the opinion of learned Physicians, grounded upon reason, That if a Woman
in the Act of Copulation afford most Seed, her likeness will have the greater
impression upon the Child; but if on the contrary, then will follow the
contrary effects; or if a proportionable quantity proceed from either, then
will the Similitude depend upon either.

Lactantius is of opinion, That when a Man's seed falls on the left side of the
womb a Male Child may be gotten: but by reason it is the proper place for a
Female, there will be something in it greatly resembling a Woman, viz. It will
be fairer, whiter, and smoother, not very subject to have hair on the Body or
Clain, long lank hair on the Head, the Voice small and sharp, and the Courage
feeble; and arguing yet further, he says, that a Female may perchance be
procreated if the Seed fall on the right side; but then through extraordinary
heat, she will be very large boned, full of Courage, endued with a big Voice,
and have her Chin and bosom hairy not being so clear as others of the Sex;
subject to quarrel with her Husband when married, for the superiority, etc. yet
in case of the similitude, nothing is more powerful than the imagination of the
Mother; for if she conceive in her mind, or do by chance fasten her eyes upon
any Object, and imprint it in her Memory, the Child in its out ward parts
frequently has some representation thereof; so whilst a Man and Woman are in
the Act of Copulation, if the Woman earnestly behold his Countenance and fix
her mind thereon, without all peradventure, the Child will resemble the Father;
nay so powerful is its Operation, that though a Woman be in unlawful
Copulation, yet if fear or any thing else causes her to fix her mind upon her
Husband, the Child will resemble him, though he never got it. The same effect,
according to the opinion of the Learned, proceeds from Imagination in cause of
Warts, Moldspots, Stains, Dashes, and the figures of strange things, though
indeed they sometimes happen through frights or extravagant longings. Many Women
there are, that seeing a Hare cross them when great with Child, will, through
the strength of imagination, bring forth a Child with a hairy-lip. Some
Children again are born with flat Noses, wry Mouths, great bluber Lips, and ill
shaped Bodies, and most ascribe the reason to the strange conceit of the
Mother, who has busied her Eyes and Mind upon some ill shaped or distorted
Creature; therefore it greatly behooves all Women with Child to avoid any
monstrous sight, or at least to have a steadfast mind, not easily fixed upon any
one thing more than another. And this opinion Pliny confirms in his 7th Book of
natural things, and the 12th Chapter. The Famour Sir Thomas More likewise
confirms it, and discants merrily on a Passage of his times, wherein a Person
having diverse Children, would own none but one that was like him, when in the
end it proved, by the asseveration of the Mother, that all, except that, were
of his own begetting; but whilst another man was mounted in his Saddle, she
fearing that he would come and detect her in the Act, had her imagination so
fixed on him, that as she conceived, the similitude could proceed from no other
cause, wherefore it is apparent that likeness can confiirm no Child to be a
lawful Fathers own: yet in manners, wit, and the propension of the mind, daily
examples reach us that Children which have all force and Spirits from the
faculty of the Seed, are commonly of the same condition with their progenitors,
and of the same nature, but there is much in this, whether venery be used with
great or weak desire, for many are less venerous and not so hot, and
consequeutly not so desirous of copulation, but rather decline it, unless the
obstreporusness of their Wives cause them to compliance therein, and then they
proceed faintly and drowsily, whence it happens that the Children fall short of
the Parents nature, wit and manners; and hence it is that wise men frequently
beget stupid sloathful Children of feeble minds, because they are not much
given to these delights, but as I said on the contrary, when the Progenitors
are hot in venerious Actions, and do liberally and abundantly employ themselves
therein: it oftentimes happens that the Children are of the same desires,
manners and actions of the mind with their Parents. And thus much for the first
point, now I shall proceed to the Second, which is to prove that the mother's
equally contributing to the making the Child, etc.

Though it is apparent that the Seed of man is the chief efficient and
beginning of action, motion, and Generation, yet that the Woman does afford
seed, and effectually contributes in that particular to the procreation of the
Child, is evinced by strong reasons; in the first place, Seminary Vessels had
been given them in vain, and genital Testicles inverted, if the Woman wanted
Seminal excessence; for being Nature does nothing in vain, therefore it must be
granted that they were made for the use of seed and procreation and fixed in
their proper places, both the Testacles and Receptacles of Seed, whose nature
and force is to operate, and afford fruitful virtue to the Seed: and to prove
this, there needs no stronger Argument than that if a Woman do not use
Copulation to eject her Seed, she oftentimes falls into strange Diseases, as
appears by young Widows and Virgins. A second reason may be urged, that
although the society of a lawful Bed consist not altogether in these things,
yet it is apparent, that the Female Sex is not better won, and appear more
blithe and jocund, than when they are often satisfied this way; which is an
inducement to believe that they have greater pleasure, and reccive more content
than a man: for since by Nature much delight accompanies the ejection of the
Seed, by breaking forth of the swelling Spirit, and the stiffness of the
Nerves, in which case the operation of the Woman's part is double, she suffering
both ways, even by ejection and reception, whereby she is more recreated and
delighted in the Venereal Act.

Hence it is that the Child more frequently resembles the Mother than the
Father, because the Mother confers the most toward its Generation: and further
it may be instanced from the great love they bear them, for besides their
contributing Seminal matter, they, during the time they are in the Womb, feed
and nourish the Child with the purest Fountain of Blood: which Opinion Galen
confirms, by allowing the Child to participate more of the Mother than the
Father, and refers the difference of the Sex to the influence of menstrual
Blood; but the reason of the likeness he attributes to the force of the Seed;
for as Plants receive more from fruitful ground than from the industry of the
Husbandman, so the Infant in more abundance receives from the Mother than the
Father; for first the Seed of both is heaped and fostered in the Womb, and
there grows to perfection, being nourished with blood. And hence it is that
Children for the most part affect their Mothers best, for it proceeds from the
nearness of nature by a natural instinct, because the Mothers forces were most
employed about 'em? for nine months, and sometimes ten, she nourishes the
Child with her purest Blood, then her love toward it newly born, and the
likelyness do clearly demonstrate, that the Woman affords Seed, and that
Women do contribute more toward making the Child than Men. And thus much for
the clearing of this point also: and now to the third thing proposed, viz.
Whence grows the kind, and whether the Man or the Woman is the cause of the
Male or Female Insant.

The primal cause, as is justly due in this and all other causes, we must
ascribe to God the Ruler and Disposer of all things; yet many things, by his
high sufferance, proceed in regular order by the Rules of Nature, and are
carried by their inbred motion, according to their usual and natural Course
without variation, though indeed by favor from on high. Sarah conceived Isaac;
Hanna, Samuel; and Elizabeth, John the Baptist; but these were to fulfill the
Almighties Decree: nor since those times have the Prayers of the righteous been
unsuccessful, in obtaining Children: but passing over such Supernatural and
Extraordinary causes that have their peculiar effects: I shall proceed to speak
of things natural and common, and how Nature works by her inbred Forces; for
she prepares a Body fit for the reception of the Soul (of whose Nature I shall
hereaster discourse) and gives every thing its temper; but siuce there are two
Principals out of which the Body of Man is made, and which render the Child
like the Progenitors, and to be of one or the other Sex, viz. Seed common to
both Sex, as I have before demonstrated, and menstrual Blood proper to the
Woman only. The Similitude consists in the force of the Male or Female Seed, so
that it proves like to the one or the other, as more or less plenty is afforded
by either; but the difference of Sex is not referred to the Seed, but to the
menstrual Blood, which is proper to the Woman; for were that force altogether
retained in the Seed, the man's Seed being of a hotter quality than the Woman's,
Male Children would be superabundant, and none of the other Sex (or very
rarely) would be propagated, whereof the kind of the Creature is attributed to
the temperament of the active qualities, which consist in heat and cold, and to
the substance or nature of the matter under them, that is to the flowing of the
menstrual Blood: now the Seed affords both force to procreate and form the
Child, and matter for its Generation, also in the menstrual Blood there is both
matter and force; for as the Seed must helps the material Principles, so
likewise the menstrual Blood, the potential Seed, is, says famous Galen, Blood
well concocted by the Vessels that contain it, so that Blood is not only the
matter of generating the Child, but also Seed, in possibility that menstrual
Blood has both principles, as matter, and faculty of effecting. Many do allow
that the Seed is the strongest efficient, the matter of it being very little in
quantity, but the potential of efficient faculty of it is very feeble:
wherefore, if the material part and principal of Generation, according to which
the Sex is made, were only in the menstrual Blood, then would the Children be
all or mostly Females, as if the efficient force was in the Seed, they would be
all Males: but since both have operation in menstrual Blood, Matter
predominates in quantity, and in the Seed force and verue. Deservedly, says
samous Galen, the Child receives its Sex rather from the Mother than from the
Father, although his Seed does contribute something to the material Principles,
though more weakly. But as for similitude, although Imagination be of
extraordinary force, it is referred rather to the Father than the Mother, as to
the quality of the Seed, at or for a short time after Copulation, but continues
not long so to do, for the Woman's Seed receiving faculty from the menstrual
Blood for the space of nine months, overpowers the Man's as to that particular,
because the menstrual Blood flowing into the Vessels, rather cherishes and
augments the one than the other; from which it may be more easily conjectured,
that the Woman not only affords matter to make the Child, but force and virtue
to perfect the Conception, though the Woman's Seed be fit Nutriment for the
Man's, by reason of the moisture and thinness of it, being more fit to frame and
make up Conception thereby: for as of soft Wax and moist clay the Workman can
frame what he intends, so the Man's Seed mixing with the Woman's, as also with
the menstrual Blood, helps effectually to make the form and perfect part of
Man; or to give you a better comparison, viz. as the Earth is to Plants, so is
the Womb for Conception; for as the seed of every Plant requires the Earth to
nourish and increase them, so the Seed of Man requires the Womb, which is
affected with a desire of offspring, for by its moisture and the help of the
effluent Blood, it does grow and incorease. Hence you may plainly conjecture
what curious Art Nature uses in conceiving and framing a Child, which by an
innate force grows up by degrees, and secretly inereasing comes to maturity.

CHAP. IV. A serious discourse of the Soul of Man: How it comes not from the
Parents Seed, but is infused by God, and can neither dye nor corrupt: and what
day of Childbearing it is infused: of the Immortality thereof, and Certainty
of the Resurrection.
THE Soul of Man is of so divine a nature and excellency, that man himself can
in no wise comprehend it, it being the insused breath of the Almighty immortal
and incomprehensible, but by him that gave it, it being, as it well may be
termed, a part of himself; for Moses, by Holy Inspiration, relating the
Original of Man, tells us, That God breathed into his Nostrils the breath of
Life, and he became a living Soul. Now as for all other Creatures, at his Word
they were made, and had life, but the Creature that God has appointed to let
over his works, was favored with the more immediate hand of the Almighty,
forming him out of the dust of the Earth, and secondly condescending to breath
into his Nostrils the breath of Life; which implies that there was more care,
and (if we may so term it) labor used about man, than about all other Creatures
or created things, he only partaking and participating with the divine Nature,
being made in his likeness, bearing the Image of God, that is in innocence and
purity, whilst he stood firm; but in his Fall that lively Image was defaced;
yet such was the insinite love of God toward him, that alto' he rebelled
against him, he would not altogether cast him off, but found a way to restore
him. Nay, so much in esteem was he thought, not deserving the least favor,
that the Son of God, the second Person in the glorious Trinity, when the
fullness of Time was come, laying aside his Crown of Stars, left the right hand
of Glory, Majesty, and the bright effulgence that adorned him, and descending,
took upon him our nature. O infinite and unspeakable love. Nay more, endured
shame reproach, scourging, buffetting, spitting on, and the death of the Cross,
that he might bruise the head of the Serpent, and deliver beloved man from the
jaws and brink of inter ruin; and the better to confirm his love toward us,
is ascended on high, leading Captivity captive, where he is so far from
forgetting us, that he is become our Mediator, and makes daily Intercession for
us to the Father, whose offended Justice he has satisfied as to the Original
Sin: but to come nearer to my purpose.

If a man would understand the excellency of the Soul, as far as it is capable
of comprehending it self, let him after serious Recollection descend into
himself, and search diligently his own mind, and there he shall find so many
admirable Gifts and excellent Ornaments, that it must needs strike him with
Wonder and Amazement, as Reason, Understanding, true Choice, agility of Wit,
Memory, and diverse other Faculties, that absolutely approve the Soul to be more
admirable than that any should imagine it to be finite or subject to
Annihilation; yet by reason of its many Offices and Operations, whilst in the
Body it is specified under sundry denominations. For at St. Augustine says,
when it enlivens the Body it is called the Soul; when it gives it knowledge the
judgment, the mind, when it recalls things past, the memory, whilst it
discourserh and discerns, Reason, whilist it contemplates she Spirit, whilst
it is in the sensitive parts of the senses: and these are the principal
Offices, whereby the Soul declares its. Power and performs its Actions; for
placed in the highest part of the Body, and nearest Heaven, it diffuseth or
disperseth effectually its force into every Member, not proceeding from the
Parents seed, nor mixed with gross matter, but the infused breath of the
Almighty immediately proceeding from him, never passing from one to another, as
fond and absurdly the Pithagorians have insinuated in their Opinions about the
Transmigration of the soul; and so vain were they, that they did not only
imagine the souls of deceased men passed into new born Infants, but into Beasts
also; and from thence it was they forbid the eating of Flesh, and abstained
themselves from so doing, lest, as they fondly fancied, they might as
Tertullian records it, Eat their Grandfather in a Calf: but such frivolous and
superstitious Notions are to be rejected by Christians, and those true ones
observed which are both reasonable and agreeable to humane Capacities; fot
Orthodox Divin^^ conclude in general, that the Soul is given to every Infant by
Infant by Infusion, when he or she is perfected in the Womb, which happen^^
about the 45 day after Conception; especial all for Males that in likelihood
will be born at the end of nine Months, but that Females (who are of a weaker
Constitution, and not so soon formed and perfected through the defect of heat)
have not their Souls till the fiftieth day.

And although this day in all cases cannot be perfectly set down, yet Hypocrates
has undertaken to give his absolute opinion, when the Child has its perfect
form, when it begins to move, and when born if in due season; for in his Book
of the nature of Infants he affirms, That if it be a Male, and he be perfect
on the thirtieth day, move at the ^^tieth, he will come forth at the seventh
Month: but if he be perfectly formed on he 35 day, he will move on the 70th,
and be born in the 8th Month: again, if he be perfectly formed on the 45th day,
he will move on the 90th day, and be born in the ninth Month. Now from these
passings of ^ays and months, it plainly appears, that the day of Forming being
doubled, makes up he day of moving; and that day 3 times ^^ckoned makes up the
day of Birth.

As for Example, where 35 perfect the ^orm, if you double it, it makes 70; the
^ay of motion and three times 70, amounts ^^ 206 days or 7 months, allowing 30
days ^^ one month, and so you must consider the rest: But as for a Female, it
is longer perfecting in the Womb, and the Mother ever goes longer with a Boy
than a Girl, so that there is difference in the Account; for a Female formed in
30 days, moves not till the 70 day, and is born in the 7 Month; when she is
formed in the 40 days, she moves on the 80 day, and is born in the 8 month: but
if she be perfectly formed on the 55 day, she moves on the 90, and is born in
the 9 month; but she that is Formed on the 50 day moves on the 100 day, then
will she be born in the 10 month. And thus have I more largely demonstrated it
to the Reader, that he may know the reasonable Soul is not in the Parents Seed,
but is infused by God when the Child has its perfect Form, and is exactly
distinguished in its Lineaments; for the Soul is not preent in the first month
the Child begins to be formed, but the faculty of the Matrix, and force of the
Seed perform the work by degrees, distinguishing the parts, and rendering the
form perfect.

Now as the life of every other Creature, as it is testified in the 17 Chapter
of Levitie is, is in the Blood, so the life of Man consists in the Soul; the
which, although subject to passion, by reason of the gross composture of the
Body, in which it has a temporary confinement, yet it is immortal and cannot in
it self corrupt or suffer change, it being a spark of the divine mind, and a
blast of Almighty Breath that distinguishes Man from other Creatures, and
renders him immortal: and that every man has a peculiar Soul, it plainly
appears by the vast difference between the Wit, Judgment, Opinion, Manners,
Affections, etc. in men. And this David observes, when he says, God has in
particular fashioned the Heart and Minds of all Men, and has given to every one
its own Being, and a Soul of its own Nature. Hence Solomon rejoiced, that God
had given him a happy Soul, and a Body agreeable and suitable to it.

It has caused many Disputes amongst the Learned, especially Philosopers, in
what part of the Body the Soul chooses to reside: and some have given their
opinion, that its resident is in the middle of the Heart, and from thence
communicates it self to every part; which Solomon, in the Fourth of his
Proverbs, seems to assert, when he says, Keep thy Heart with all thy diligence,
because Life proceeds therefrom: but many curious Physicians scarching the
Works of Nature in Man's Anatomy, etc. do give it as their Opinion, that its
chief Seat is in the Brain, from whence proceed the Senses, Faculties, and
Actions, diffusing the operations of the Soul through all parts of the Body,
whereby it is enlivened with heat and force; but it does communicate particular
force to be Heart by Arteries, Catotides, or sleepy Arteries that part upon the
Throat; the which if they happen to be broke, or cut, cause Barrenness, and if
stopped they become Apoplectick; for there must necessarily be some ways
through which the Spirits animal and vital may have intercourse, and convey
native heat from the Soul. For although the Soul is said to reside in one
place, it operates in every part, exercising every Member which are the Souls
Instruments, by which she manifests her power: but if it so happen that any
of the Organical parts are out of Tune, the Work is confuied, as it may appear
in the case of Idiots, Madmen, etc. Though in some of them, the Soul by
forcibly working recovers her supernatural vigor, and they become right after a
long dispondency of mind and in some it is lost in this life. For as fire under
ashes, nor the Sun obscured from our sight by thick Clouds, afford not their
full luster, so the soul overwhelmed in moist or faulty matter, is darkened, and
Reason thereby overclouded; and although reason shines less in Children than in
those that are arrived to maturity; yet no man must imagine that the Soul is an
Infant, and grows up with the Child, for then would it again decay; but it
suits it self to the weakness of Nature, and the imbecility of Body wherein it
is placed, that it may the better operate. And as the Body is more and more
capable of receiving its influence, so it shows it self in its prper luster,
having its force and indowments at the time it enters the formed Child in the
Womb, for the Substance of it can receive nothing less: And thus much to prove
that the Soul comes not from the Parents Seed, but is infused by God: and the
next thing now to be handled is its Immortality; and thereby I shall
demonstrate the certainty of the Resurrection.

That the Soul of Man is a divine Ray infused by God, I have already made
apparent, and now come to show you that whatever immediately proceeds from him
must participate of his Nature, and from thence consequently be as Immortal as
it is Original; for although all other Creatures are endued with life and
motion, yet wnat they a reasonable Soul: and from thence it is concluded, their
life is in their Blood, and that being corruptible, they perish, and after
their expiring are no more. But Man being endued with a reasonable Soul, and
stamped with the divine Image, is of a different nature, and though his Body be
corruptible, yet his Soul cannot perish, but must, when it is expunged its
earthly Tabernacle, return to God that gave it, either to receive reward or
punishment: now that the body can sin of it self is impossible, because wanting
the Soul, it cannot act nor proceed to any thing either good or evil; for could
it do so, additional sins might be accumulated even in the Grave; but it is
plain, that after death there is a cessation; for as Death leaves us, so
judgment finds us. And St. John, in the fifth Chapter of his Gospel, tells us,
That the hour shall come, that all that are in their Graves shall hear his
Voice, and they that have done well shall come forth to the Resurrection of
Life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation. And
Holy Job, in the fourteenth and nineteenth Chapter speaking to the same
purposes, says, For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the Earth: And though after my Skin Worms destroy my body,
yet in my Flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be consumed within me. By this
it is plainly proved, that the Soul is made of immortal Essence, incapable of
death, having a place assigned it after its separation from the Body, till the
day of the general Resurrection, not in the Grave, but in a Mansion prepared by
the Almighty for its Reception; and that through the mighty working of him that
is able to subdue all things to himself, it shall again enter the same Body
that was laid down, though the dust thereof be scattered to the four Winds of
Heaven; nay, such force and vigor shall it have, that it shall as it were take
up the Body; for Job positively says, I shall rise out of the Earth at the last
day, etc. Which being applicable to the future Tense, may be meant two ways, I
shall, or will rise; for plainly foreseeing the Resurrection, he claimed it as
the promise of his Creator. Nay, so far were the Heathens, by the light of
Nature, from doubting the immortality of the Soul, that Plato in his Phaedro
thus reasons; viz. What consists not of Elements (says he) is immortal and can
neve dye. The Soul is not made of Elements nor of created matter, but came from
God, and therefore it cannot dye, etc. Then may it be without difficulty
granted, that the body which has been a long Companion of the Souls, will once
again enjoy it never more to be separated; for the Body at the Resurrection
shall be incorruptible, and so as far from a capacity of perishing any more as
the Soul; made so by him that at first created it. For St. Paul speaking of the
Resurrection, says, He shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his
glorious body. The consideration of which, makes him in another place cry out,
O the depth of the Riches, of the Wisdom, and Knowledge of God! How
unscarchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out. For who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Councellor? For by him, and
through him, and to him are all things. Nay, the Resurrection of man's Body may
be proved by the renewing of many inconsiderable Creatures, and their returning
to life after they seem dead, nay, some of them thereby also changed; as who
has not observed that when a Grasshopper is grown old, and has cast his skin,
a lively new shrill insect will come forth of it. From a dying and sluggish
Caterpiller comes out a lively painted Butterfly. From Ants a winged Fly. The
Silkworm having spent her Bowels in weaving out her Web, after many days
seeming dead and motionless, becomes a Butterfly, providing for increase by
laying a number of Eggs, and then expires. But above all, the Phoenix, that the
Learned Lactantius writes of, may put us in mind, if not confirmed to us the
Resurrection, for after she has lived in the Arabian Fields (as some affirm)
about 600 years, and finding her self wasted with Age and infirmity, she
gathers the sprigs of Cassei, Myrrh, Frankincense and other Aromatic
combustion, when laboring with her wings, she firing them by the heat of the
Sun, which in those Countries is excessive, she expires upon the Funeral-Pile,
when out of her Ashes springs a Worm, and from that Worm another Phoenix, to
supply her place, Nay, further do we not behold Grain thrown into the ground,
continue there for a season as if lost and dead, but when warmth and moisture
gives it force, it springs up, and bears a hundred fold: Yea, Herbs and Plants
whilst Winter with his Icy Arms grasps the Earth, seem dead retiring as it were
into the Grave, and wait the Resurrection of the Spring. But to conclude as to
this point the infinite love toward Man, may convince him that he was not made
to be annihilated, since the second person of the Trinity condescended to take
his nature upon him. Even he who is the Wisdom of the Father, and of whom the
wise Man Testifies in the 3 of his Proverbs, viz. I was with God in the
beginning before any thing was made: I was with him from Eternity, when he made
the Heavens: I was there when he compassed in the depth by a Law: I was preent
when he sustained the Heavens above, and the Earth beneath: I was with him,
ordering all things, and was continually delighting before him, recreating my
self in the Earth, and my delight was with the Sons of Men.

CHAP. V. Of Monsters and monstrous Births, and the reason thereof, according
to the Opinions of sundry learned Men, with serious considerations, whether
Monsters are endued with reasonable Souls.
THat many monstrous Births have happened contrary to the course of Nature, is
evident, not only in this but in former Ages; wherefore I shall take some
pains, for the satisfaction of the Reader, to inquire into the cause of such
preposterous forms.

Now a monstrous habit or shape of Body is contracted diverse ways, as from
Fear, sudden Frights, extraordinary Passion, the influence of the Stars, too
much or too little Seed, the Mothers strange Imaginations and diverse phantasms
which the mind conceive deform the body, and render the Children of an improper
shape, and many times not perfect in either Sex: sometimes the whole course of
Nature is changed, either when the Seeds are vitated, or the Instruments of
Generation unfit, sot hat the natural Faculties, to propagate and form the
Child, cannot perform their Office exactly: for as the most ingenious Artist
can bring nothing to perfection if his Materials be bad or out of order, so
Nature wanting the force of her Faculties, or not having fit matter, must of
necessity proceed preposterously in forming the Child. As in the Art of melting
of Metals it may be observed, if the matter be impure and not well cleansed,
the Vessels or Receiver Oblique, and full of windings, not well joynted, the
Corners set awry, and full of Chinks or Plates; if loosed or holds ill
together, it is apparent men cast ill shaped Figures. So if the Womb or the
Matter be unfit or ill tempered, it is impossible, without an extraordinary
overruling Providence; but above all, unseasonable Copulation, or intemperate
Venery, is the cave of so many monsterous shapes.

So the Low Country Women, especially those living near the Seaside, being
restless and troubled in Copulation, bring forth misshapen Embrio's, or rude and
deformed burdens, not only without motion, but some that pant and are alive,
and these most commonly happen in case of Sailors or Mariners, who coming home
rashly marry, or run upon their Wives without any due regard to their menstrual
courses, or the Wombs cleansing it self to the Season of the year, or the Moon
or Suns progress through the Celestial Signs, nor are the Women without regard
to the health or shape of their posterity, less desirous to receive them after
a long separation, which is not only exceeding hurtful to themselves, for
thence proceed not monsterous or untimely Births only, but dangerous diseases
often to those who so rashly proceed. The first is because the Seed mixing with
menstrual Blood contracts an unnatural mass of corrupt matter, which either
turns to miscarriage, abortion, or a Monstrous and deformed Birth, for by that
means the faculty of the Womb as I said loses its force to Generation and
Success of breeding the Child, or if it try to come to any thing it is at most
some monsterous Form, not shaped like a Man, unless in some parts, which after
a long continuance in the Womb, will come forth with great pain and labor, not
unlike to this, there is an Eflux that greatly troubles such as by their
inconsiderate rashness are subject to it.

Our Women, because conception begins in the fourth Moon, when the terms flow
down by force, and that Planet in conjunction call it a Moon Birth, or many
kinds. And some are of opinion that this conception may be made without the
help of a Man, by force of Imagination, in those that are extremely Lascivious;
for that by often secing and touching their Husbands, at the same time strongly
fancying themselves in the Act, their Seed flows to the Blood, and is by the
heat of the Womb formed into a foul mass, but arrives at no perfection. And to
the same purpose it is when Men strive against the Stream: entering into
copulation in the fourth and silent Moon, and in the fourth day of its
conjunction; for then not observing Natures Rules, he either loses his Labor,
or Generates a monsterous Birth, ot if it change, which is almost next to a
miracle to be perfect, it is by the Latins called a Birth of the fourth Moon,
because the product is commonly unhappy in all the Series of its lise, having
had its entrance by Generation, contrary to Natures order; which Moses
considering, or being so commanded by God, strictly commanded the Hebrew men
not to touch a Woman that was unclean of her Blood: and these that have been so
rashly profligate of either Sex, have many times by sad experience found their
wilful folly too late, but especially the Female Sex; for by the violent
concussion and motion used in copulation, and evil mixture, the contagion by
degrees will seize upon the whole habit of the Body, causing the Pox and
Leprosy: the like Effects it has upon Men, if the Woman be infected,
especially if he deal with Whores at such times, who commonly are infected, and
may be accounted so many walking Contagions, or Emissaries of the Prince of
Darkness, for the destruction of Mankind, and at this day the greatest pest and
grievance of the Nation.

These things rightly considered, no man need wonder at so many misshapen
Births and monsterous People with scald Heads, bowed and distorted Legs, Arms,
and Backs, wry Necks, crumpled Feet, incident to swellings and inherent
Diseases, especially swellings in the Groin, Buboes, and Emerods, as also that
their minds are dull, stupid, forgetful, foolish, mad, and unreasonable, which
are indeed the effects of unseasonable and unreasonable Venery, which every
Creature but Man observes in the Season Nature has allotted; and when their
Females have conceived, they desire no longer, but rest satisfied.

Therefore let Man, who is endued with a rational Soul, and ought above all
other Creatures to have dominion over his appetite and affections, codsider how
eruel he is to his posterity that brings such mischiefs upon them, and chiefly
they are here to be understood that are conceived in the fourth Moon, when the
Woman's Courses are upon her, therefore all men ought to refrain, neither should
the Woman dare to copulate with Men, as better knowing the Season of their
Courses than some rash inconsiderate and unexperienced Novices of the Masculine
Gender do; for the Children then conceived want all or most of those gifts and
properties that Children begotten at seasonable times are endowed withal, being
capable of nothing that is good nor great; and if it so happen they do any
thing well, they have ill Success in their Undertakings, by reason their
natural Faculties are short, not by their own but their Parents fault, who
undecently in Procreation violate Natures Law; whence it is that many things
are wanting in them, or else given them sparingly, and with some ill qualities
that (...)

CHAP. VIII. The Opinions of the Learned concerning Children conceived and born
within the space of seven Months, with lively Arguments upon the Subject, to
prevent suspicions of incontinency, and the bitter Contests that thereon too
often arise between Man and Wife. To which is added, Rules for knowing the
disposition of Man's Body by the Genital parts.
CErtain it is, that many bitter Quarrels have arisen through misunderstanding,
when solid reason would have rectified the Judgment, and have prevented the
conception of such an evil; and from whence does this arise, but through
Suspicion and Jealousy, when indeed it is many times founded upon a slender
Foundation, as the new married Woman's being brought to Bed before the
expiration of nine months, which is vulgarly taken from the time of Conception
to the Birth: to remove which groundless Suspicion, I shall endeavor, not that
it is common dare I avouch, but that it is possible, and has been frequently
known, that Children have been born at 7 months; but the matter being wholly
left by the Lawyers, who decide Controversies to the Physicians to judge of, it
is in their power to determine, by inspecting the Child, whether it is a Child
of 7, 8, 9, or 10 months. Paul the Counselor has this Passage in his
nineteenth Book of Pleadings, viz. It is now a received truth, that a perfect
Child may be born in the 7 month, by the Authority of the learned Hypocrates.
And therefore we must believe, that a Child born at the end of the 7th month,
in lawful Matrimony, may be lawfully begotten. Gallen, in the 6th Chapter of
his third Book, handles this Argument, but rather according to Men's Opinions
than according to the truth of the business, or from natural Reasons, who
supposes there is no certain time set for bearing Children. And from the
Authority of Pliny, who makes mention of a Woman that went 13 months with
Child: but as to what concerns the 7th month says Lemnius, I know many married
People in Holland that had Twins, who lived to extreme Old Age, their Bodies
lusty, and their Minds apt and lively; wherefore their Opinion is foolish, and
or no moment, who assert that at 7 months a Child cannot be perfect and long
lived, and that he cannot in all parts be perfect till the 9th Month: and
thereupon this Learned Author proceeds to tell a passage from his own knowledge,
as follows: Of late says he, there happened a great disturbance amongst us,
which ended not without Blood shed; and was occasioned by a Virgin, whose
Chastity had been violated, descending of a noble Family, and ever before that
time held to be of unspotted fame. Now several there were who charged the Fact
upon a Person of Note, viz. a Judge President of a City in Flanders, who
strongly denied the Fact, saying that he was ready to swear it upon the holy
Evangelist, that he never so much as penetrated her Body, or broke the Membrane
of her Virginity, and that he would by no means therefore be taken for the
Father of the Child that was not his: and further alleged that he verily
believed that it was a Child born in seven Months, and that himself was many
miles distance from the Mother of it when it was conceived, whereupon the
Judges before whom the hearing was, decreed That the Child should be viewed by
Able Physicians, as also Experienced Women, and that they should make their
report, who having made diligent inquiry, all of them with one accord,
concluded the Child (without respecting who was the Father) was a Child Born
within the space of Seven Months, that it was carried in the Mothers Womb but
27 Weeks, and some odd Days, but if she could have carried it to full 9 Months,
the Child's Parts and Limbs would have been more firm and strong, and the
Sructure of the Body more compact and fast, for the Skin was exceeding loose,
and the Brestbone that defends the Heart, and the Sword-like Gristie that lies
over the Stomach were higher than naturally then should be, not plain but
crocked, and sharp Ridged, or pointed like those of young Chickens that are
hatched at the beginning of the Spring. And being a Female Infant, it wanted
its Nails upon her Fingers, and the outmost Joints of her Fingers upon which
from the Musculous or Cartilaginous matter of the Skin, Nails that are very
smooth do come, and by degrees harden, she had instead of Nails a thin Skin or
Film: as for her Toes there was not the least appearance of Nails about them,
by reason they wanted the heat that was communicated to the Fingers from the
nearness of the Heart. These and the like weighty matters being considered, and
above all, one Gentlewoman of quality that assisted, affirming that she had
been the Mother of 19 Children, and that diverse of them had been born, and
lived a 7 Months, they without favor to any party made their report that the
infant was a Child of 7 Months, and so must be accounted though it was born
within the seventh Month, for that in such cases the revolution or circute of
the Moon ought to be observed, which perfects it self in 4 bare weeks or
somewhat less then 28 days, in which space of her revolution the Blood being
agitated by the Moons force, the Courses of the Woman flow from them, which
being spent and the Matrix cleansed from the Menstrual Blood, which happens on
the 5th day, then if on the 7th day a Man lie with his Wife, the copulation is
most natural, and the conception best, and a Child then gotten may be born in
the 7th Month, and prove very healthful, so that upon this report the supposed
Father was pronounced innocent, upon proof that he was a hundred miles distance
all that month in which the Child was begot: own as for the Mother she strongly
denied that she knew the Father, being forced in the dark and that through fear
and surprise was left in ignorance: though Physicians are of opinion, that if a
Woman prove with Child, it cannot be accounted a Rape, for unless she cast
forth her Seed to commix with the Man (which imploys a willingness in her to be
a Copartner in the Act,) the Child cannot be formed: but my opinion is, that
poor silly Girls, struggling to defend themselves in case of such violence, and
not in such fear and perplexity regarding the nicety of containing their
Humor, the Seminary Vessels by an natural proneness will open, and the Seed in
such cases, whether they desire it or not, will flow, to commix with the Man's
in the Matrix, and by coagulating with the Blood that descends to nourish, it
will form the Child: and thus much for these particulars.

For for Copulation, it ought not to be had unless the Parties be in health,
lest it turn to the disadvantage of the Childen so begotten, creating in them,
through the abundant ill humor, diverse lingering and languishing Diseases;
wherefore Health is no where better to be discerned than by the Genitals of the
Man, wherefore Midwives and other skilful Women, in former days were wont to
see the Testicles of Children, thereby to conjecture or guess at their temper
and state of Body, and young men may know thereby the Signs or Symptoms of life
and death, for if the cases of the Testicles be loose and feeble, and the Cods
fall down, it denotes the natural faculties and vital Spirits, whichare the
props of Life, are fallen: but if the Secret parts be wrinkled and raised up,
the Yard, at any occasion so requiring, standing stif, it is a Sign all will be
well: but that the Event may exactly answer the Prediction, it is necessary to
consider what part of the Body the disease possesses: for if it chance to be
the upper part that is afflicted, as he Head or Stomach, then will it not so
well appear by the Members, which frequently are unconcerned with such
grievances; but the lower part of the body exactly sympathizing with them,
their liveliness, on the contrary, makes it apparent; for Natures force and the
Spirits that have their intercourse, first manifest themselves therein, which
occasions Midwives often to feel the Genitals of Children to know in what part
the grief is resident, and whether life or death be portended thereby, the
Symptom being strongly communicated by the Vessels that have their intercourse
with the principal Seats of Life.

CHAP. IX. The cause of the Green sickness in Virgins, with its Symptoms and
Directions for its cure; Together with the chiefest occasion of Barrenness in
Women, and by what means to remove the Cause, and render them fruitful.
THE sormer of these ill conveniences is too apparent in Virgins, especially
such as are of a Phlegmatic Complexion, evidently showing it self by
discoloring the Face, in making it look green, pale, or of a dusky yellow,
which proceeds from raw undigested humors, nor only does it appear to the Eye,
but sensibly afflicts such as it possesses, with difficulty of breathing, pains
in the Head, Palpitation of the Heart, unusual beating and small throbings of
the Arteries in the Temples, Neck and Back, many times casting them into
Fevers, if the humor be very vicious, also loathing of meat, and distension of
the Hypocondrick part, by reason of the inordinate reflux of menstruous Blood
to the greater Vessels, and by reason of the abundance of humor, the whole
body is often troubled with swelling, or if not at least the Thighs, Legs, and
Ankles all above the Heels.

Now this affliction proceeds from crude, raw, and undigested Humors arising
from the suppression of the monthly Courses, by reason of the natural
narrowness of the Vessels, or their accidental Contraction by violent motion,
but oftener through eating Chalk, Oat-meal, Tobacco-pipes, Loame, Starch,
Nutmegs, and drinking of Vinegar, for thereby an ill Concoction in the Bowels
is occasioned, and the Humors moreover contracted into the habit of the body,
become habitual, and concordant with it: many of these Afflictions happen
through the long Retention of the Seed, when Virgins are ripe for the Act of
Generation; which vitiating, the Vessels spread it into evil Humors: Therefore
the first thing necessary to eradicate the Cause, is matrimonial Conjunction,
and such Copulation as may prove to the satisfaction of her that is afflicted;
for by that means the Humors being diffused and dispressed, they will soon
wast themselves, and then no more matter being administered to increase them,
they will vanish, and a good temperament of Body will return: but in case such
a Conjunction cannot be had so soon as necessity requires, then let the Damsel
blood in the Heel, and if she be about 16, you may do it likewise in the Arm,
though sufer her not to bleed overmuch, especially if any pure blood come
forth, for then the vitiated Humor clinging to the Veins will stay behind, and
that bloods loss render her less capable to oppose them. If the diseases be of
any continuance, then is itto be eradicated by purgation, preparation of the
Humor being first considered, which may be done by the Virgins drinking
decoction of Guaicum, with Dittany of Creet: but the best Purge in this case
ought to be made of Aloes, Agrick, Juice of Lavin, Succorrina; and for the
unobstructing of the Humor, take prepared Steel, Bazoar-stone, the Root of
Scorzonera, and Oil of Crystal in small Wine, and let the Diet be moderate,
but in no wise let Vinegar be used therewith, nor upon any other occasion. And
in so observing, the Humors will be dilated, dissipated, and transfused, by
which means the Complexion will return, and the Body be lively and full of
vigor. And now since Barrenness daily occasions discontent, and that
discontent creates difference between Man and Wife, or by immoderate grief
frequently easts the Woman into one or other violent Distemper; I shall
somewhat largely treat thereof.

This defect comes diverse ways, but most commonly through the defect of the
Genitals, Vessels, Blood or Menstrum: and of these I shall discourse in their
order, and then proceed to mention other matters Relating to the same subject.
The defect then in the Genitals frequently happens in Women through the strict
closure of the mouth of the Womb, which by that means denies the Seed entrance,
or through the narrowness of the parts or share-bone, that will not admit the
Yard entrance, or many times by reason of some Ulcers of excrecencies in the
neck of the Womb, to which may be added the defect of the Seed, by reason of
some Distemper in the Generative Vessels, which the Woman may perceive by the
little, or no satisfaction she receives in the act of copulation; sometimes
again Children are wanting, when the Woman being too young, her Courses are not
come down, or that she is so old they cease to flow: For it is the opinion of the
Learned, that when the Courses are wanting, the Man labors in vain, and
further it may be attributed to the want of Seed, when there is not a due
proportion of either Party, or when by reason of some cold moist Humors
flowing into the Womb, it loses it is attractive force, and cannot draw the
Seed to its proper place or station.

Now if the Orifice of the Womb be closed, that the Seed cannot enter, it must
be opened by incision, or rather the two wings or Nymphae, which many times
extend themselves over the Clytoris, so far that the Yard cannot pass the neck
of the Womb: and subject to this defect in Nature are many Women, especially in
hot Countries, but most of all in Egypt, where the Chyrurgeons are forced with
Silver Instruments, to make way for the Instrument of Generation, a thing not
altogether unpracticable in England.

In case the neck of the Womb be so strait that the Yard cannot enter, then is
the case to be inquired into, whether it be naturally so, or proceed from some
swelling, or Schirrhus either within or without, and if any such thing appears,
it is for the most part incureable, but if it be a natural straitness, then
supple it with a Tent dipped in Oil of Roses and the white of Eggs, and drink
Chamomile Posser sweetened with Sugar-Candia, morning and evening: and by the
operation thereof, the Womb which is of a reaching quality, will in all parts
distend and give way to the Instrument of Generation, or if it so happen in a
young Woman, Nature will increase the passage, and time produce things fitting
to their mutual Satisfaction; but let no man by violence endeavor in
attempting Copulation to force the Passage, lest he break the Vessels, nay
endanger the Bladder it self, which has been broke with such violent Intrusion,
and so cost the Woman her life.

If the neck of the Womb be ulcerated, or any Excresenses happen there, which
equally hinder Copulation, then may they be known by the pain and shooting upon
the least compressure, and the issuing forth of putrid Humors, and sometimes
Blood if the Ulcers be great, and the Terms flow, the Water hot, pains arising
in the fore part of the Head, and oftentimes they occasion gentle Fevers.

And these Obstructions of Generation happen diverse ways, as from external
causes, viz. Rash Physic, hard Labor, or excessive Copulation; from internal
causes, as the Corruption of the Secundine, the Courses too long retained, or
obstructed heat, and overflowing of the Urinal Vessels, Virulent Gonorrhaeas,
Pox, Inflammation turned into Apostume, Humors flowing from diverse parts of
the Body, and settling there; all which must be duly considered.

Now some are in the outward part, and may be the easier come at, and external
plications as are most convenient applied thereto; but those that cannot be
come at, must be cured if possible by injection: the best injection in this
case is as follows; viz.

Break four Eggs, and take the Whites only, the which beat with an equal
quantity of Rose Water, mingled with Plantain-water, Litherage of Gold,
Camphire, Bole-Armonick, Ceruse, of each a dram, half a dram of Green Copperas,
all which well beaten, dissolved, and mixed together, strained through a fine
Cloth, and with a Syrringe inject it Morning and Evening till the grief cease;
and if it smart that it cannot be well endured, you may sometimes inject warm
Milk to cleanse the puttified matter.

Others there are that are not so violent, and therefore admit of any easy
Cure, not being so deep, known by a putrid Greenish matter that flows from
them. To cure this, take Water wherein Barley has been boiled, Honey of Roses,
new Milk and Sugar, with the decoction of Lentils, and after them gentle
Astringents must be applied. Some again are sordid, having much contagious
Humor flowing from them; to cure which, stronger Medicaments must be applied:
others there are that eat into the Flesh, having a green Contagion flowing from
them, to cleanse which Aloes and Wormwood concocted in white Wine are most
requisite.

Another sort of Ulcers there are which appear long cating away the skin from
off the Neck of the Wood, and are discerned by the Blood and pain the occasion,
immediately upon the concression appearing in the Neck of the Womb, much like
Chilblains, occasioned by ill lying, extraordinary Venery, by violent
inflammation or flux of sharp humors: The best cureafter a gentle purge, is an
astringent Glyster, and after that to anoint them with the Grease that fryes
out of a Ladle often used in a Kitchen, when it is held to the fire, mixed with
an ointment called Pomarum, if the defect be in the Seed through tenderness of
age in the Woman, so that her menstrual Blood not coming down, flow not to it,
then the best remedy is, convenient diet, moderate exercise and temperate Air,
together with patience in the main, till nature in process of time operates so
effectually that all things appear and conspire to mutual satisfaction.

If the Woman be stricten in years, and it cease to be with her after the
Custom of Women, that is her Courses are stayed, which in some happens sooner,
and in some later, and between 44 and 55 with all them unless strong
preparatives, viz. an Extraordinary diet, easy longing, and moderate exercise
restore them, those Woman must despair of further Generation: for as the
learned in this Art frequently observe, where there is neither Buds nor
Blossoms there can to no Fruit.

If any obstruction happen in the Vessels of Generation, that the Seed has no
free passage, then the cause must be enquired into, and this often happens, the
which is known by the small desire to Venery, and the little or no pleasure or
satisfaction received thereby, a settling in the Courses, and a slimy
F^^gmatick matter mixed therewith, as also by their inordinate flowing
occasioned by the plenty of humors collected in the Womb, which by reason of
the abundant of windy Vapors contracted therein causes obstruction, to which
may be added the cruditie and wateryness of the Seed, which debars the pleasure
in ejection, and from hence it is that sudden paleness arises in the face, etc.
To remedy this, the party must alter her Diet, not eating any cold, raw,
Phlegmatic substance, but rather such things as are apt to stir up Choleric,
hot humors in the Body, as Anniseeds, or Carrawayseeds in her Bread, Store of
Peniroyal in her Broth, let her likewise each morning for a week together make
a Posset, in which she must boil the Roots of Birthwort, Angelico, Sage,
Rosemary, Cinnamon and Burrage: The taking the Male Herb Mercury, Dittany,
Centaury, Marygolds, Cubeds, Safron, Mugwort and Clovegilly-flowers, of each a
handful, boil them in white Wine, and eject the Concoction by little and little
at sundry times, as the cold or obstruction can be perceived, Anointing the
Belly and Reins of the back, one day with Oil of Cinnamon, the next with Oil of
Nutmeg or Mace, and the 3d. with Oil of Myrrh, and so continuing to do for a
month together. When the Woman lies down, Nature will be wonderfully restored
and recover such force as to remove to Obstructions.

Barrenness is likewise caused through want of due proportion of Seed in either
party, to remedy which, let their Diet be such as I have prescribed in the
former part of this Book, Chap. II. Many there are that conceive Barrenness is
frequently caused by inchantation, but those opinion s are altogether frivolous
and vain.

If the Womb be defective in attracting the Seed ejected, Men frequently labor
in vain: in such a case the Woman must avoid Sorrow, Anger, or much Sleep,
Eating new Cheese, Milk, and raw food, especially Lettis, Endive, Spinach,
Beets, Nuts, Cherries, Purstain, Oynions Garlic, and the like, They all being
hurtful to Generation: nor must she drink nor use Vinegar, nor eat the Fat of
Meat too frequently, but the Womb must be cleansed from the over abundant
moisture, with the decoction of Hearts Tongue (a Herb so called) Cummin, Fenel,
and Anniseed, and strengthened with the Sirup of Wormwood, and for a gentle
opperative Purge in this case, take half an ounce of Laudanun, Beeswax, Sheeps
Suet, and Agarick, of each a like quantity, melt and bruise them, after which
make them up into little Pills and take 3 in a morning, and next to them take
of this conception to the bigness of an Nutmeg, viz. The shavings of Ivory, Ash
Keys, Yellow and wild Rape-seed, Siler, Montanus, with red and white Behen, of
each one Dram, Cinaman, Galinga, Long-pepper, Cloves and Mace Balsamwood,
Rosemary Flowers, Blatiae, Bezaria, Gentle Marjorum and Pennyroyal, of each 4
Scruples, Balm, Bogluss, Cittern, Reils, of each two Scruples, Pearl disolved
or beaten to power one Scruple, Musk two Grains, White-Sugar one pound and a
half, bruise them and sees them over a gentle fise, in as much Malmsey as will
make them into a Confection. This Confection is indeed a most singular and
approved one in all cases of Barrenness, where cold or obstructions of the
Vessels do occasion weakness in the Womb.

Other causes of Barrenness there are when the Woman grows far, so that the
Caul swelling and bearing beyond its Bounds with its fatness, obstructs the
Passage into the Womb; to prevent which, the Woman must not sleep over much,
especially in the day time, nor feed riotously, but exercise her self in
walking, or moderate Exercises, and often use Purgation and strong Glysters
made of such Herbs and Drugs that are hot and dry, which will in a short time
remove such Obstructions.

But a more dangerous cause of Barrenness than yet I have named, are the Whites
which are contracted by an inordinate Eurudition of an excrementitious Humor,
collected through the Vitiousness of the Blood, incident to Yonng and Old, at
such times as they are capable of Generation; and therefore the Cure must be
hastened by reason that in short time it derides Art, and renders Women
inevitably barren, occasioning Leanness, Consumption, Melancholy, Dropsy,
falling of the Womb, swooning, Convulsions, which renders it difficult and
dangerous in long continuance, though in the beginning it may be easily
removed. In the Cure of this, let Phlebotomy, or Blood letting, be avoided, for
as much as the bad Humor must be by no means recalled to defile the Blood, the
Disease it self being a sufficient weakening of the Body and vital Spirits.
First, then to discuss the Humor, in order to its Expurgation, take two ounces
of Guaicum, the like quantity of China, and Lentick-wood, decoct them in Water
and Honey, drinking a pint fresh made each morning: then to dry ^p the
Contraction of the Vessels, or Humor that lodged there, take the Root of
^ilipendula, beat it to powder, and drink it in White Wind Morning and Evening:
as also for Astringents, use Bones burnt and beat to powder, likewise the ashes
of Capons Dung ejected after a long time steeping in fair water: the Patient
must likewise avoid sleeping upon her Back, lest the Humor descend and
contract in the Vessels of the Womb, but let her be rubbed often to disperse
them, that they settle not in any one place.

Sometimes this occasion of Barrenness happens through the violent attraction
of the Womb, and then appears signs of afflictions of the Womb, the Fiux not
being so great, to cure which Suffumarions are the most proper, and those may
be made of Frankincense, Laudanum, Santalum, or Mastick: the Woman upon such
occasion, having great regard to her self that she take not cold, or proceed to
intemperate Diet.

Many women there are whose violent lust contracts a heat that destroys the
Seed, and renders it incapable of coagulating, and mixing with the Blood, which
very sparingly on such occasions flow from the several parts to the womb: In
this case it is requisite to avoid hot Air, soft lying, hot Meats and Spices,
and requisite to bleed in the Basilick Vein, and Purge moderately with
Electuary him de Epithijmo, and juice of Roses, each two drams and a half, Whey
half a pint, mix them together and drink them fasting in the morning, and so
continue 4 hours after, or for want of the former, you may take Triphera
Sarasenicia and Rhuberb, of each half a dram, pulverized and mixed with 2
ounces of Syrup of Roses, Violets, or Endive; but the most excellent
restorative to cool and moderate the Temper in this case, is a Diet drink made
as follows, viz. Take Pistacho, Pingles, and Eringoes, of each half an ounce,
of Saffron a Dram, Lignum, Alloes, Gallinga, Caryophillata, Mace, red and white
Behen, and Baulm flowers, of each 4 Scruples, shavings of Ivory, Rind of
Cassia, each two Scruples, Syrup of Confected Giner twelve ounces. White Sugar
six ounces, add to these 12 ounces of Baulem water, and set them over a gentle
Fire, permitting them to sees, then take it off, suffer it to cool, and put
more water to it, stiring the ingredient, lastly increasing them with a Scruple
and a half of Musk and Amber, then strain out the Liquid prt and boil it up
again into a Conserve, of which let the Woman eat 3 times a day, but not
exceeding the bigness of a Walnut at a time. The times most convenient are
Mornings, Noons, and Nights, and this let her continue till she finds her body
in good temper.

Another occasion of Barrenness proceeds from the obstruction of the Courses,
in which case open the Basilick Vein, and take from thence a moderate quantity
of Blood, after which take Hiera composita, and Oppopanax, of each half a dram,
and a dram of Syrup of Gilliflowers, make them into ^ Pills, take them in the
Morning and sleep upon them a considerable time, then drink off half a pint of
Sugered water, and 3 hours after, a portion of Syrup of Vinegat compounded: for
want of this take Syrup of Eupatory 3 quarters of an ounce, Female-Mugwort, and
Elecampaine Root, of each an ounce, with Syrup of Vinegar a proportionable
quantity, mix them together, and take them, when made into an Electuary,
Morning and Evening, to the quantity of an Hazel Nut at a time; and if the
Courses flow not within a short time after, let a pessary of Musk, Amber, Wood
of Aloes, and Ash-Keys, of each 2 Grains, Saffron half a Scruple, Hares Renet
an ounce, be put into the Womb Tent-wise, and continue there for the space of a
day, and it will remove the Obstruction, cause the Courses to flow, and in
short time render the Woman capable of Generation. And thus, Reader, have I,
with much caution, performed my promise in these particulars; and the next
thing I shall proceed to, amongst other matters relating to the Mystery of
Generation, are the signs of Virginity, etc.

CHAP. X. Virginity what it is, in what it consists, and how violated; together
with the Opinions of the Learned in the point of mutation of Sexes in the Womb,
during the Operation of Nature in framing the Body.
SEeing many ignorant people have boasted their Knowledge as to the first
Particular, and some Virgins have undergone hard Censures through the ignorant
Determinations of such as have taken upon them to discuss the matter; I thought
it altogether necessary to clear the Point, that so for the future the
Conceited might not be indulged in their vain opinion, nor by traducing others
prejudice the Female Sex, whose virtues are frequently such as do not only
require our admiration, but imitation. Then since the mysterious word Virginity
has puzzled many to define it, I mean the cause from whence it arises, for the
Word barely in it self signifies the prime chief, or best of any thing: but as
to the point in hand, the main matter bears the following Construction. It is
observed by the curious Searchers into Natures Secrets, that in young Maids or
Females, that in the Secret place about the S^mus Pudoris, or rather by some
vulgarly called the Neck of the Womb, is that pendulous production by some
called the Hymen, but more rightly the Claustrum Virginale, and in French it is
termed the Button de Rose, or Roses Bud, for that it much resembles the Bud of
a Rose, expended, or a Clove Gilliflower, from whence it derived the Word
D^floro, to deflower, or the deflowring of Virgins, because most are of opinion
that the Virginity is altogether annihilated when this Duplication is fractured
and dissipated by violence, and that when it is found perfect and entire no
penetratio has been made. Also some learned Physicians are of opinion, that
there is no other Hymen or Skin expanded containing Blood in it, which diverse
imagine, in the first Copulation, flows from the fractured expanse.

Now this Claustrum Virginale, or Flower, is as it were composed or consisting
of 4 Caruncles, or little Buds like Mirtle-berries, which in Virgins are full
and plump, but in Women flag and hang loose; and these are placed in the four
Angles of the Sinus Pudoris, joined or held together by little Membranes and
Ligatures like Fibers, each of them situate in the Intresticles or Spaces
between each Caruncle, with which in a manner they are proportionably
distended, which Membranes being once delacerated, denote devirgination, and
many curious Coxcombs prying into this Secret the first night of their
Marriage, and finding their Wives defective in this point, have ^ver after held
them in evil esteem, concluding it happened through the effect of Copulation with
some other, who had been entertained in the Chambers of Venus. Nay, one I knew
that upon this vain ^ancy took such conceit, that he would never copulate with
his Wife: when to undeceive such Idiots, it is affirmed by the Learned, that
such fracture may happen diverse ways by accident as well as Copulation with
man, viz. by extraordinary straining, violent coughing, immoderate sneezing,
stopping of Urine, and violent motion of the Vessels, inforcibly sending down
the humors, which pressing for passage, break the Ligatures or Membrane, so
that the intireness or fracture of this thing, commonly taken for the Virginity
or Maidenhead, is ^o absolute Sign of dishonesty: though certain it is, that in
Copulation it is more frequently broke than otherwise.

Once at an Assize held for the County of Rutland, a young Man was put upon
Trial of life and death, which Trial was founded upon an indictment, for
forcing a Virgin, when after diverse questions asked, and the Maid swearing
positively to the matter, naming the time, place, and manner of the Action, it
was upon mature Deliberation resolved, that she should be searched by a skilful
Surgeon and two Midwives, who were to make their report upon their Oaths,
which after due Examination they accordingly did affirm, that the Membranes
were entire and unfractured, and that it was their Opinion, for that reason,
that her Body had not been penetrated, which so far wrought with the Jury, that
the Prisoner was acquitted, and the Maid afterward confessed she swore against
him out of revenge, because he had promised to marly her, and then declined it.
And thus much concerning Virginity: and now I shall proceed to the second
particular, which is, Reader, to show you the Opinions of diverse learned men to
relation to Natures operation in changing Sexes in the Womb.

This Point is of much necessity, by reason of the different Opinions of Men
relating to it. Therefore before any thing positive can be asserted, it will be
altogether convenient to recite what has been delivered, as well in the
negative as the affirmative. And first of the first Severius Plinaeus, who
argues for the negatives writes thus. The Genital parts (says he) of both Sex,
are so unlike each other, in Substance, Composition, Situation, Figure, Action
and Use, that nothing is more unequal, and by how much more all other parts of
the body, (the Breasts excepted, which in Women swell more, because of their
secondary use) have an exact resemblance so much the more, in resemblance are
the Genital parts of one Sex, compared with the other unalike, and if their
Figure he thus different, much more is their use, for Women contribute the
matter, but Men the form in case of Generation. The Venerial Appetite also
proceeds from different causes, for in Men it proceeds from a desire of
Emission, and in Women from a desire of Completion, in Women also the chiefest
of those parts are concave and apt to receive, but in Men they are only porous,
and in a Woman Solid.

These things considered, I cannot but wonder (added he how any one can imagine
that the Genital Member of Female Births should be changed into those that
belong to Males) since by those parts only the difference and distinction of
Sexes is made, nor can I well impute the reason of this vulgar Error to any
thing but the mistake of unexpert Midwives, who have been deceived by the evil
conformation of the parts which in some Male Births may have happened to have
had some small protrusion, not to have been discerned as appeared by the
example of a Child Christened at Paris, by the Name of Joan, as if it had been a
Girl, when as afterward it proved a Boy, and on the contrary the over-far
extension of the Clytoris in Female Births, may have occasioned the like
mistakes. Thus far Plinaeus proceeds in the negative, yet notwithstanding his
negation there are not wanting diverse learned Physicians that have asserted the
affirmative, of which number Galen is one, a Man (says he) is different from a
Woman in nothing else but having his Genital members without his body: and this
is certain, that if Nature having formed a Man, would convert him into a Woman;
she has no other task to perform, but to turn his Genital member inward, and a
Woman into a Man by doing the contrary. But this is to be understood of the
Child when it is in the Womb, and not perfectly formed, for diverse times Nature
has made a Female Child, and it has so remained in the Belly of the Mother for
a month or two, and afterward plenty of heat increasing in the Genital Members,
upon some occasion they have issued forth, and the Child has become a Male, yet
retaining some certain Gestures, unbefitting the Masculine Sex, as Female
Actions, a shrill Voice, and more feeble than ordinary, contrariwise, Nature
often having made a Male, and cold Humors flowing to it, the Genitals have
been inverted, yet still retaining a Man like fashion, both in Voice and
Gesture.

Now these opinions considered, I am rather inclinable to believe the latter as
a thing altogether probable, for there is not that vast difference between the
Members of the two Sexes, as Plinaeus would have us believe there is, for the
Woman has in a manner the same Members with the Man, though they appear not
outwardly, but are inverted for the convenience of Generation, the main
difference being that one is more solid than the other, and that the chief
reason of changing Sexes is, and must be attributed to heat or cold suddenly
or stowly contracted, which operates according to its greater or lesser force.
And thus much for these two particulars, leaving which I shall proceed to lay
down seasonable and necessary instructions or directions for Midwives, etc.
opening in that discourse a Cabinet of many rare Secrets not vulgarly known,
and indeed only fiting to be known to such as may observe and put them in
practice for the public good, and in no wise convert them to obscenity.

CHAP. XI. A Midwife, how she ought to be qualified.
THose that undertake this great task, ought by no means to enter upon it
rashly or unadvisedly, but with all imaginable caution, well eighing and
preconsidering that she is accountable for all the mischief that befalls through
her wilful ignorance or neglect; therefore let not unskilful Women take upon
them this Office, barely upon pretense of their Maturity of Years and
Childbearing, for in such for the most part there are diverse things wanting
that ought to be observed, which is the occasion so many Women and Children are
lost: now as for a Midwife, in relation to her Person these things ought to be
observed, viz. She must not be too old nor too young; neither extraordinary
fat, nor weakened by leanness, but in a good habit of Body, not subject to
Diseases, Fear, nor sudden Frights; her Body well shaped, and neat in her
attire, her Hand smooth and small, her Nails ever paired short, not suffering
any Rings to be upon her Fingers during the time she is doing her Office, nor
any thing upon her Wrists that may obstruct: and to these ought to be added
Activity and a convenient Strength, with much cution and diligence: not subject
to Drowziness nor Impatience.

As for her Manners, she ought to be courteous, affable, sober, chaste, and not
subject to Passion; bountiful and compassionate to the Poor, and not covetous
when she attends upon the Rich.

Her Temper cheerful and pleasant, that she may the better comfort her Patients
in their Afflictions: nor must she at any time make overmuch have, though her
business be urgeht in another place, lest by indangering the Mother or the
Child she disgrace her Self, and forfeit Heavens Blessing upon her Endeavors
for the future.

Of Spirit she ought to be prudent, wary and cunning, but above all, to have
the fear of God before her Eyes, and to employ the Talent he has lent her to
his Glory.

CHAP. XII. Things worthy to be observed by Midwives, tending to their
Advancement, and what they ought to avoid, etc.
LET her that undertakes this Office, attended with many circumstances of
danger and disgrace, take good heed to what I shall relate. In the first place,
let her be diligent to leave nothing unsearched which may be advantageous to
her practice, never imagining her self so perfect but she may add to her
Knowledge by study and experience; yet never let her apply any remedies in that
case, unless she has tried them, or known them tried with Success, or at least
is conscious of their force, that they will do no harm, doing nothing in that
nature, to practice upon poor or rich, but speaking freely of what she knows,
and giving reason for the farther Confirmation thereof, by no means daring to
give directions for such Medicines as will cause Abortion, to pleasure those
that have unlawfully conceived, which to do, is a high degree of Wickedness,
and may be ranked with Murder: but if any come to her with specious pretenses,
let her send them to able Physicians, and neither for fair words nor lucre be
won to hearken to them. If she be sent for, let her know to whom she goes, and
be careful therein, lest by laying any one that has an infectious Disease, as
the Pox, etc. she get it, and so spoil other Women, as a Midwife once did, who
laying a Strumpet, that had an inveterate Pox, which occasioning a Bubo upon
her right hand, and she not leaving off her Calling, spoiled diverse Women, nor
the Women only, but the Men also, to whom it was communicated by their Wives,
which made them think hard of each other, and for a long time could not imagine
how it happened; but at last it was discovered by an able Physician, and the
Midwife for ever after barred her Practice, and not so only, but followed with
Curses even to her Grave. She must likewise observe, that she entertains no
great bellied Women at Bed and Board in her House, lest thereby she bring a
Scandal upon her Self, and so lose her Practice. If the Birth at any time be
hard and difficult, she must not be dismayed, but cheer up the Woman, and try
her utmost Skill to make the Labor easy, Directions for which shall hereafter
be incerted; nor must she ever think of any thing but doing well, and using her
utmost skill, causing all necessary things that are proper for the work,
consolation of the Woman, and reception of the Child to be in a readyness; and
above all let her use her diligence, either by persuasion or otherwise, to keep
the Woman from being unruly in her pangs, least thereby she destroy both her
self and her Child, and not in any wise to proceed too hasty in her business,
but wait Gods leisure in all things, and by no means let her suffer her wits to
scatter, by dismay or doubt, if things go not well, for fear it disorders the
senses, and a Person that keeps her wits together, is capable of giveing
assistance in weighty affairs, for when we are most at a plunge, then there is
most need of prudence to set things right. And seeing she can never be an
expert Midwife that has no further knowledge than of the external parts, I
shall not think it amiss briefly with modesty, to proceed in describing the
generative part of Woman; as they have been Anatomized, by the learned of the
present and past ages, and show the use of such Vessels, etc. as are
contributing to Generation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Genitals of Women, External and Internal to the Vessels of
the Womb.
WAs it not for the benefit of Practitioners and Professors of the Art of
Midwifry, I should above all things spare to Treat of these particulars because
they may be turned by some Lascivious and lude Person into ridicule, but they
being absolutely necessary to be known. I will hope the best, and proceed in
order.

At the Bellies Inferior parts is the Pubis where when Virgins come to
maturitie; Nature has ordained a covering of Hair to hide as it were the Secret
parts, and shroud 'em from any ill convenience, when descending downward there
appears two closures of Flesh as it were Lips, which are the Portals of the
Palace of Generation, giving entrance into the more Secret and Abstruse
parts, and between these being the Exterior Orifice, it is properly called the
privy Member composed of protuberances, and are accounted two soft oblong
bodies, composed of Skin and a spongy kind of Flesh.

The next things that offer are the Nimphae and Clytoris; the former of which
are of a Membrany and flimy Substance, spongy, soft, and partly Fleshy, being
of a bloody color, in the shape of Wings, two in number, though from their
rise they are joined in an acute Angle, producing there a fleshly Substance
which clothes the Clytoris, and many times they spread so far, that incision is
required to make way for the Man's Instrument of Generation.

The Clytoris is a substance in the upper part of the Division, where the two
Wings concur and is the Seat of venerial Pleasure, being like a Yard in
Situation, Substance, Composition and Erection, growing sometimes out of the
Body two Inches, but that rarely happens, unless through extreme lust or
extraordinary accident. But to proceed, this Clytoris consists of two spongy
and skinny Bodies, containing a distinct Original from the Pubis Bone, the Head
of it being covered with a tender skin, having a hole or passage like the Yard
of a Man though not quite through, in which, and the bigness, it only differs
from it.

The next things in course are the Fleshy Knobs, and the great Neck of the
Womb. And these Knobs are behind the Wings, being four in number, much
resembling Myrtle berries, being placed in quadrangle one against the other,
and in this place is incerted the Orifice of the Bladder, which opens it self
into the Sissure to evacuate the Urin, for securing of which from Cold, or the
like inconveniency, one of these Knobs are placed before it, and shuts up the
Passage.

The Lips of the Womb that next appear, being separated, disclose the Neck
thereof, in which two things are to be observed, viz. The Neck it self, and the
Hymen, but more properly the Claustrum Virginule, of which I have before
discoursed. By the Neck of the Womb is to be understood, the Channel that is
between the aforesaid Knobs, and the inner Bone of the Womb which receives the
Yard like a Sheath; and that it may the better be delated for the pleasure of
Procreation, the Substance of it is smewy and a little spongy, and in this
Concavity are diverse folds or Orbicular Plights made by Tunicles, wrinkled like
an expanded Rose; in Virgins they plainly appear, but Women that have been used
often in Copulation they are extinguished; so that the inner side of the Wombs
Neck appears smooth, and in old Women it becomes more hard and grifley: And now
note, that although this channel be sometimes writhed and crooked sinking down,
yet in the time of copulation, labor, or the monthly Courses, it is erected
and extended, which over Extension occasioned the great pain in Childbirth.

The Hymen or Claustrum Virginale, is that which closes the Neck of the Womb,
being as I have before cited in the Chapter relating to Virginity, broken in
the first copulation, its use being rather to stay the untimely Courses in
Virgins than to any other end, and commonly when it is broke in copulation or
by any other accident, a small quantity of Blood flows, with some small pain
passing. Hence it is observed that between the duplicitiy of the two Tunicles
which constitute the Neck of the Womb, there are many veins and arteries
running along, and arising from the Vessels, descending on both sides the
Thighs, and passing into the Neck of the Womb, being extremely large, and the
reason of their largements is for that the Neck of the Bladder requires to be
filled with abundance of Spirit, thereby to be extended and dilated for its
better taking hold of the Yard, great heat being requied in such motions, which
becoming more intense by the act of frication, does comsume a considerable
quantity of moisture in supplying, which large Vessels are altogether necessary.

Another cause of the longness of these Vessels there is, viz. By reason the
monthly Courses have their way through them which often occasions Women with
Child to continue their purgations, for although the Womb is shut up, yet the
passage in the Neck of the womb through which these Vessels pass, are open: In
this cause there is further to be observed, that as soon as you penetrate the
Female Siffure or pudendum, there appear two little pits or holes, wherein is
contained a contract humor, which by being expugned in time of Copulation,
greatly delights the Woman.

CHAP. XIV. A description of the Wombs Fabric, the preparing Vessels, and
Tisticles in Women, as also of the different, or Ejaculatory Vessels.
IN the lower part of the Hypogastrion, where the Lips are widest and broadest
(they being greater and broader thereabouts, then those of Men, which is the
reason they have likewise broader Buttocks then men,) is the womb joined to its
Neck, and is placed between the Bladder and the straight Gut, which keep it
from swaying or rolling, yet give it liberty to stretch and delate it self, and
again to contract as nature in that cause disposes it: Its figure is in a
manner round, and not unlike a Gourd, lessening a little, and growing more
acute toward one end the bottom, being knit together by its proper Ligaments,
its Neck likewise is joined by its own substance, and certain membranes that
fasten it to Os Sacrum, and the Share-bone. As to its largeness that much
differs in women, especially the difference is great between such as have born
Children, and those that have born none: In substance it is so thick that it
exceeds a Thumbs breadth, which after Conception is so far from decreasing that
it augments to a greater proportion, and the more to strengthen and confirm it,
it is interwoven with Fibers overthwart strait, and winding, and its proper
Vessels are Veins, Arteries and Nerves, and amongst these are two little Veins,
which pass from the Spermatick Vessels to the bettom of the Womb, and two
larger from the Hypogastricks, which visit both the bottom and the Neck, the
mouth of these veins piercing as far as the inward concavity, in which place
the extremities of them are called Acetabula, which when the Courses flow, open
themselves, and evacuate the eflux of Blood, and therefore they are the more
conspicuous in Women with Child, that part called the Liver of the Womb, being
joined to them the better to extract Blood for the Child's nourishment, at which
time their veins do so swell especially near their time of delivery, that they
equal in bigness the Emulgent veins, or appear half as thick as the hollow
Veins.

The Womb has also two Arteries on ^oth sides, the spermatick Vessels and the
Hypogasticks, which still attend or accompany the Veins, and besides these
there are diverse little Nerves knit and intwined in the form of a Net, which
extend throughout, even from the bottom to the Privities themselves, being
chiefly placed for sense and pleasure, moving in Sympathy between the Head and
the Womb.

Now it is to be further noted, that by reason of two Ligaments that hang on
either side the Womb, from the share-bone and piercing through the Peritonaeum,
and are joined to the bone it self, that the Womb is movable upon sundry
occasions, often salling low or rising high; as for the Neck of the Womb it is
of an exquisit feeling, so that if it be any time out of order, by being
troubled with a schirous brawn, over-fatness, moisture, or relaxation, the Womb
is subjected thereby to Barrenness: In those that are with Child there
frequently stays a most glutenous matter in the entrance to facilitate the
Birth; for at the time of delivery the mouth of the Womb is opened in a strange
manner, to such a wideness as is conformable to the bigness of the Child,
suffering an equal dilatation from the bottom to the top.

As for the preparatory of Spermatick Vessels in Women, they consist of 2
veins, and 2 arteries, not differing from those in a Man, but only in their
largeness and manner of insertion; for, as for their number, there are so many
Veins and the like proportion of Arteries as in men, the right vein issuing
from the trunk of the hollow vein descending, and the left from the Emulgent
vein, and on the side of them are two Arteries which grows from the Aorta, and
bring vital Blood for the accomplishment of the work of Generation.

As to the Longitude and Latitude of these Vessels, they are narrow, and
shorter in women than in men; only observe where they are wrinkled or crumpled,
they are more wreathed and contorted than in men, as shrinking together by
reason of their shortness, they may by their looseness be the better stretched
out, when occasion requires it, and that by their drawing up as it were, the
Blood might stay there in greater quantity for the preparation of the Seed. And
these Vessels in Women are carried with an oblique Course through the lesser.
Guts to the Testicles or Stones, but are in the midway divided into two
Branches, the greater going to the Stones, constituting the various or winding
Body, and wonderful Inoculation; the lesser Branch ending in the Womb, in the
side of which it disperseth it self, and chiefly at the higher part of the
bottom of the Womb, for the nourishment thereof, as also of the Child, and that
part of the Courses may purge through these Vessels: and feeing the Stones in
Women are seated near the Womb, for that cause these Vessels fall not from the
Peritonaeum, neither make they such Passages as in Men, nor extend themselves
to the Share-bone.

The Stones in Women, commonly called the Testicles, although they perform the
same Action as men's, if rightly considered, yet are they different in their
situation, magnitude, temperament, substance, form and covering. As for their
seat it is in the hollowness of the Abdomen, neither are they Externally
pendulous, but rest upon the Muscles of the Loins, that so they may by
contracting the greater heat be more Fruitful, their Office being to contract
and elaborate that matter, which in conjunction with Man's Seed ingenders Man,
yet they differ from those of Men in figure, by reason of their lessness and
flatness, at either end not being so round nor Oval. The external Superficies
being likewise more unequal, appearing like the composition of a great many
knots and kernels mixed together, there is also another difference in their
substance, they being much more soft and pliable, loose, and not so well
compacted.

Their magnitude and temperament being also different, for they are much colder
and lesser than those in Men, by reason of which a thinner and feebler Seed is
contracted by one Sex then by the other; as for their covering or enclosure, it
likewise differs extremely, for as Men's are wraped or covered in diverse
Tunicles, by reason they are externally Pendulous, and subject to diverse
injuries, unless so fenced by nature, so Women's Stones being internal and less
subject to casualty, are covered with one Tunicle or Membrane, the which though
it closely adhere to them, yet are they likewise half covered with the
Peritonaeum.

The different or Ejaculatory Vessels, are two obscure passages one on either
side, nothing differing from the Spermatick veins in substance; rise they do on
one part from the bottom of the Womb, not reaching from their other extremity,
either to the Stones, or any other part, but shut up and unpassable, adhearing
to the Womb, as the Colon does to the blind Gut, and winding half way about;
the Stones are every way remote to them, yet though they touch them not, they
are tied to them by certain Membranes, resembling the Wings of a Batt or
Flutter-mouse, through which certain Veins and Arteries passing from the Stones
end, in these beginning, or may be termed here to have their passages,
proceeding from the corners of the Womb to the Stones, and are accounted the
proper Ligaments by which the Stones and the Womb are united, and strongly knit
together, and these Ligaments in Women, are the Cremesters in Men: Of which I
shall speak more largely, when I come to describe the Masculine parts conducing
to Generation.

CHAP. XV. A Discourse of the Use and Action of the several Parts in Woman,
appropriated to Generation, etc.
THE Externals, commonly called the Privy Member, re designed to cover the
great Orifice, and that to receive the Yard, and give passage to the Birth and
Urin. The use of the Wings and Knobs like Mirtle-berries, are for the security
of the internal parts, shutting the Orifice and Neck of the Bladder, and by
their sweliing up cause Titulation and Defire in those parts, and also to
obstruct the unvoluntary passage of the Urine.

The Action of the Clytoris is like that of the Yard, viz. Erection, where
Erection is for motion and attraction of the Seed.

The action and the use of the Neck of the Womb is equal with that of the Yard,
viz. Erection, occasioned diverse ways. First, in case of Copulation it is
erected and made strait for the passage of the Yard to the Womb. Secondly,
whilst the Passage is repleated with Spirit and vital Blood, it becomes more
strait for embracing the Yard: as for the convenience of Erection it is
twofold. First, for as much as if the neck of the Womb was not erected, the
Yard could have no convenient Passage to the Womb. Secondly, the Affrication
which occasions the Seed to issue forth, could be no other ways: nay, to this
we may add, that it hinders any hurt or damage that might ensue through the
violent Concussion of the Yard during the time of Copulation.

As for the Vessels that pass through the neck of the Womb, their Office is to
repleat it with Blood and Spirit, that still as the moisture consumes by the
heat contracted there in Copulation, it may by those Vessels be renewed, and
the menstruous Blood at unseasonable times, for its Efflux be kept back: nor
are these all their Offices, for they contribute Nutriment toward the Child
when in the Womb.

The Womb it self has many properties attributed to it, as, First Attraction of
the Seed by Familiar Sympathy.

Secondly, It retains it, which is properly called Conception.

Thirdly, It cherishes and changes the Seed, continuing so to do till it by the
help of Nature frames the Child, and brings it to perfection, and then it
strongly operates in sending forth the Birth when the time of its remaining
there is expired, dilating and spreading it self in a wonderful manner; and
indeed is the Field of Man's Generation, being designed for no other purpose,
and so aptly removed from the Senses, that nothing of Injury can proceed from
thence retaining in it self a power and strength to operate and cast forth the
Birth, unless by accident or the like it be rendered deficient. When to
strengthen and enable it, besides the helps of Nature, sundry Remendies are to
be applied by skilful hands Direction. For which shall be hereafter mentioned.

The Utility of the preparing Vessels are taken from their Original, and from
the incertion of the right vein, proceeding from the hallow, and the left from
the emulgent vein as in men, that hot and pure Blood may more abundantly flow:
from the right vein for the Procreation of Males, and that serous and watery
Blood may proceed from the emulgent vein for the procreation of Females.

The Vessels in this kind are much shorter in Women than in Men, by reason of
their nearness to the Stones, which defect is yet lengthened and made good, by
the many Intricacies or Windings, to which those Vessels are subject, for in
the middle way they derive themselves into two branches, though different in
magnitude, for one being greater than the other passes to the Stones conveying
matter for composition of Seed, and the lesser to the Womb, scattering there
such Nutriment as it extracts from other parts of the Body; as for the
Arteries, they afford the Blood which is more full of Spirit to perfect the
Seed.

The Stones in Women are greatly useful, for where they are defective
Generation is at an end, by reason they operate in preparing the Seed, as those
in Men, and by reason the Woman is colder than the Man, therefore are they
seated within, that they should have the more heat to cherish them; and for
that cause are they covered only with one Tunicle, that the heat may have the
easier access, though by reason of their softness they cannot perfect so
substantial a Seed as those of Men, as being cherished with less heat, that the
remainder might supply the inferior parts.

Their figure is not exactly round but depressed, that the small meanders of
the veins dispersed, through the Members, from the Stones to the different
Vessels, might have more room to be inserted for the attraction of the Seed, by
the Substance of the Stones, the inequality contributing to the longer stay of
the Seed in those meandring Vessels, nor is rugedness or unevenness of them
less conducing thereto.

CHAP. XVI. Of Conception, and the infallible Signs thereof; as also whether it
be a Male or Female, that is conceived, or both at once, commonly called Twins.
THE next thing convenient to be observed in this Treatise, and as it falls in
course, is Conception and its Symptoms, very material and worthy of note, not
only by Midwives, but all young Women. Now the signs of Conception 3 or 4 days
after convenient and satisfactory Copulation, are

Pains in the Head, Virtigo and dimness of the Eyes, the Aples of the Eyes
decrease, the Eyes themselves swell, and become of a dull or dark color, their
veins waxing red and shut with Blood: Again, if the Eyes sink, the Eybrows grow
loose, various colors appear in the Eyes, and little red Pimples suddenly
arise in the Face, and almost as suddenly disappear. Thirdly. if the Veins
between the Eyes and Nose are exteuded with Blood, the Veins under the Tongue
look greenish, the Neck flusheth with heat, the Back bone cold, the Veins and
Arteries swell, and the Pulses are observed more easily. Fourthly, If the Veins
in the Breasts appear blackish, and afterward turn yellow, the Teats look
firey, and upon drinking cold drink, the Woman feels it as it were in her
Breasts. Fifthly, if she on a sudden fall to loathing her Meat and Drink,
coveting things, unreasonable and not fit for Sustenance: be troubled with
Pukeins, weakness of Stomach, sore declining, and there be little Worms found
about her Navel. Sixthly, If the lower part of the Belly swell, and weakness be
contracted in her Loins with inward Gripings and retention of the course 7 days
after copulation: After which act, there is a Cold and Trembling seizes on the
Members External, by reason the force of the Womb violently attracts the heat,
and dries up the moisture. Seventhly, It is a certain sign of Conception, if
the Midwife putting up her finger, find the interior neck of the Womb exactly
closed. If the Womb wax round and swell, the Courses stay, the Thighs swell
with some pain, the whole Body grows weak, the Face at times becomes Pale, the
Urine white with a little cloud after some standing at the top of it, if many
Attoms appear in it. Eighthly, if Urine be put up in a Glass three days, and
the Woman have conceived, certain live things will appear to stir in it: if a
bright Needle be put in a whole night, and she have conceived, diverse little
red Specks will be thereon, but if not it will be blackish or rusty: nor are
these Imaginations, but the approved Assertions of the Learned in Physic, and
Skilful in Midwifry, who have made it their study to search into the depth of
Natures Secrets: And next comes a nicer Point to be treated of, not without the
Patronage of such, whose Wisdom and indefatigable Labors have rendered them
famous to Posterity. The which take as follows.

After Conception, and the Child be come to some perfection, so that the Sex
may be distinguished, if it happen to be a Male Child, then the right Eye of
the Woman will, to appearance, move swifter, and sparkle more than the left:
the right Pap will rise, swell, and be more hard than the left, and the Teats
color will change more suddenly, and the increase of the Milk will be speedy,
and if it be milked out and set in the Sun, it will look like Pearl,
contracting it self into a more solid matter than ordinary; or if upon the
milking it out, you cast it upon the Woman's Urin, it will sink to the bottom.
Her right Cheek will often glow, and be more ruddy than the left, and indeed
the whole color of her Face more lively than at other times, she feels less
Sadness than if she conceived a Female. And when first the Child stirs, it is
more brisk and strong in its motion than the other, having commonly its first
motion on the right side on the sixtieth day if her Courses flow the fortieth
day after Conception, if her Belly be more accute toward the Navel, and as she
goes she puts her right Leg foremost, and rising observe to ease her self on
the right side more than on the left.

Now in case a Female be conceived, the tokens are averse to these for the most
part, the first motion rarely happening before the 19th day after Conception,
and then it is made on the left side. Females are carried with more pains than
Males, through defect of heat in the Womb to attract the substance, also the
Thighs and Genital Members of the Woman swell more than ordinary, her Color
departs, and her Longings are Extreme, and her Courses flow the Thirtieth day
after Conception.

If Twins are conceived, which many times happens through the strange
disposition of the Womb, and exceeding quantity of Seed, the sign thereof will
not appear till the third or fourth month after conception, and then the first
appearance will be by the motion of the Infants both ways, that is, on either
side of the Womb at once, for they receive their Souls at one and the same
time; also if her two Flanks swell higher than the middle of the Belly; if
there does appear a line, or as it were a division from the Navel to the Groyn,
making a kind of a Channel, or if the Woman with more than ordinary pain
support her burden. And thus much may suffice for these, from whence I shall
proceed to give the Reader an insight into false Conceptions, that frequently
deceive Women, especially such as are over desirous of Children.

CHAP. XVII. Of false Conceptions, and how to know them.
HAving already treated of true Conceptions, the next thing note worthy is,
what relates to false Conceptions, and in this case Women are sometimes
deluded, thinking themselves with Child, when their Belly only swell with the
retention of their usual Courses that fall not according to their usual times,
or else by a lump of indigested Flesh, for the most part like the Gizard of a
Fowl, greater or lesser, according to the time of its continuance there, which
is frequently four months, and is called a Moon Calf.

At other times they are deceived by Moles, which are twofold, viz. The true
and a false, the former of which is a fleshly body, filled with many Vessels,
streaked with white, green, or black Lines, not deficent of Membranes, but
encompassed with diverse, yet without growth, motion, Bones, Bowels, or any
Internals, receiving its nourishment through certain veins, notwithstanding it
lives, as we may say the life of a Plant, without any figure or order
ingendered Original in the concavity of the Matrix adhearing to its side, but
not participating of its substance.

The latter of these, viz. the false Mole may be divided into four
distinctions, as following. First the windy Mole, being a contraction or
conflux of wind. Secondly, the watery Mole being a gathering of Water. Thirdly,
the Humourous Mole, or conflux of diverse humors; and Fourthly the Membranous
Mole, being many Membranes in the form of a Bag filled with Blood, and of these
in their order.

The Mole is contracted in the Womb, when a Woman has copulation, during her
monthly Purgations, or otherways unseasonably, or else when she lies with great
desire and lust with her Husband, when she has already conceived, or by
retaining her Courses beyond the time Nature allows for their expurgation.

The windy Mole is occasioned through defect of heat in the Womb and parts
adjacent, as the Liver and Spleen, which engender a polite or windy vapor,
which fills the membranous parts, and puffs up the concavity of the Matrix.

The watery Mole is engendered of diverse apt confluences of thin matter or watery
Efluxes, which passing through the Vessels, evacuates into the Womb, having its
Original from the Spleen, Liver, or parts adjoining, and above all from the
Liver, when it is cold, weak, and not able to concoct all the Nutriment into
Blood, so that the remainder turning into watey humor falls into the Womb, and
cannot be easily voided thence.

The Humorous Mole is ingendered by moist attracted humors, as the Whites or
certain watery Purgations, which distill from the Menstruous Veins, and
gathering into a glutenous substance, stay in the concavity of the womb.

The Membranous Mole is no other then a contraction of Blood within a Skin or
Membrane, to which is fastened many white and transparent Vessels filled with
Blood, the which coming forth, and being thrown into Water, the Blood goes out,
and the Membrane rumbles together, shrinking on a heap like coagulated Seed.

Now most or all of these false conceptions have many signs or symptoms,
coherent with the true, as the depravity of Appetite, puking, swelling,
suppression of the Courses, swelling of the Breasts and Belly, so that many are
at a plunge to distinguish them; for indeed it is most easily to be done,
though in these following matters there is distinction, viz. In case of a false
Conception the Breast swell, and fall again not containing any Milk, the Face
is frequently puffed up, the Arms, the Groyn, and the Thighs, grow megat and
lanker, the Belly waxes hard, as if Dropsical, being almost of an equal
roundness, with many prickings at the bottom, scarcely admitting of
Intermission, which breaks the rest of the Women so afflicted; diverse other
signs are there to know it by, especially the true or fleshy Mole; as thus, A
Male Infant begins to move at the beginning of the third month for the most
part, and the Female at the end of the third or beginning of the fourth: now
when any motion happens, the Women ought to consider whether she have any Milk
in her breasts; if she have, it is a sign of a true Coneption, but the
contrary, of a false one: it is also the sign of a true Conception, if the
Child move freely and lively in all parts of the Womb, for although there is a
motion in a false Conception, yet it is dull, and not quick nor active in
motion, the motion not being in it self but in the expulsive Faculty of the
Mother: and further, if the Woman observe, she may perceive it fall always to
the side she lies on, and she lying on her back, if her belly be stroked down,
the burden will descend, and not have for want of inbred force a power to
recover its Station. But what confirms it more is, that 9 Months expired no
Travel ensues, but her Belly still increases, whilst all the rest of the body
grows lean, and out of order.

The Signs of the windy Mole are diverse, as the sudden stretching of the Belly
like a bladder, yet soft and spungy, especially near the Groins, and small
thereof, when if it be struck it sounds like a drum, and that the Swelling is
sometimes more, and sometimes less, so that according to its increase or
decrease, the Woman feels more heavy or more light.

The watery Mole is known by its distention of the Belly, and especially when
she lies upon her back, the sides thereof are more swelled than the middle or
the bottom, which grows flatter by reason the watery Humor falls to the sides,
moving up and down, as if it were a fluctuation of Water, and much to the same
purpose as the Symptoms of the humorous Mole, only with this distinction, that
the Flanks and Thighs are more stretched by the Watery Mole than by the other,
because the Water being thinner than the Humor, or not confined in Cells,
flows thither, and that which in case of a watery Mole comes through Natures
conduite is clear, when in case of a humourous Mole, the water is red or of a
bloody color.

Further observe, in case of a false conception the Courses come not down, and
the Navel of the Mother advances it self little or nothing; which in true
Conception is otherwise.

Other false Conceptions there are occasioned by diverse Tumors, which the
Ignorant take for Moles, when they are only Rotundies and swelling the Belly,
which are not discovered till the Womb be opened; and then though the Womb be
not all out of order, there does appear at one or both corners thereof little
bags full of water, in others there are to be seen a heap of Kernels, or
superfluous flesh, like a cluster of Grapes in the Womb, causing it to swell.
Yet in such cases, the Courses are observed to proceed in due order, which
denotes the Womb to be in good order.

Another Excrescency of Flesh there is which some call a Pendent Mole, being a
piece of fleshy substance, hanging within the Interior Neck of the Womb, being
in breadth about a finger at the place where it is fastened, increasing bigger
and bigger toward the bottom like a small Bell, possessing the whole Orifice
of the privy Member, sometimes appearing outward to a great bigness.

CHAP. XVIII. Instructions for Women how to govern themselves, during their
being with Child.
THese Instructions being exceeding necessary, I thought fit to lay them down
for a Rule to such as are desirous of self-preservation. And indeed for want of
due observance, diverse Diseases afflict Childbearing Women; nay the Child is
frequently lost, or if it come to a perfect Birth, proves sickly and disordered
through the evil Humors that are derived to it, through the Mothers
misobservance.

In the first place, then the Woman with Child ought to choose a Temperate Air,
not infected with Fogs arising from Marshes, Ditches, Ponds, Lakes, or Rivers,
and not to go abroad in too hot, nor too cold weather, nor when the South wind
blows strong; for that wind above all others, disturbs and disorders Women with
Child, oftentimes causing Abortion: And next to it the North Wind is hurtful,
causing Catarrhs, Coughs, and Rhumes, which opening the body, causes the Woman
to bring forth before her time. In short, if any evil Vapor be drawn in during
pregnancy, causes diverse Diseases.

In case of Diet, she ought to be very cautious in choosing such Meats as create
wholesome Nourishment, all Meats that are moderately dry being taken so to do;
and let her observe not to fast immoderately, for that renders the Child sickly
and weak, and often for want of Nourishment constrains it to be born before its
time; nor on the other hand, must she be too gluttonous, for that again stuffs
it, and causes it to swell beyond its natural bounds.

All Meats either too hot or too cold, and moist, are to be avoided, as Salads,
Spices, Meats, and the extraordinary use of her Meats, which makes the Children
come forth oftentimes without Nails, which is a sign of short life. The most
wholesome Meats in this case are Pigeons, Turtles, Larks, Partridges,
Pheasants, Veal, Mutton, or any such Meats that is of good Juice, and
contributing to kindly Nourishment, as also such Fruits as are sweet and often
digestion, as Cherries, Pears, Damsons, etc. but let her avoid such things as
subject her Body to windiness

Her Longings, if Extravagant, she must restrain, at least as much as in her
lies, not eating any thing that is filthy or contrary to nourishment, nor let
her sleep immediately after Meals, and not at all in the daytime if she can
avoid it; the Night being preferable in such cases, when she may sleep her
fill, so it exceed not 9 hours.

Her Exercise ought to be moderate: for violent motion, either in walking or
otherwise, loosens the Cylendons through which the Child receives its
Nourishment, riding in a Coach, especially upon the Stones, or in uneven way
(the last three Months is dangerous) as also extraordinary Sounds, Noises, and
above all the Ringing of the Bells, and discharging the Guns.

Laughing, Crying, or immoderate Anger, or any other Passion, is extremely
hurtful; nor in the first four Months after Conception ought she to lie with
her Husband, for as much as the Act of Copulation moves and shakes the Womb,
and consequently the Fruit therein causes the courses to descend. She must
likewise in the 6th and 8th Month abstain; but in the 7th and 9th it is not
forbidden, but rather to be encouraged, by reason as Physicians affirm, it
opens the passage, and thereby facilitates the Birth: and the better to help
it, the Woman ought to take such things as may keep her Body soluble, as Syrups
and other loosening matters, as may help Nature in its operation; especially
let her observe when she grows any thing big, to lay aside her busk, and go
loose, that the Child may have free Scope, for two Reasons. First, that it may
not be hurt: and secondly, that being unrestrained, it may come to its full
growth.

CHAP. XIX. Further Considerations how Women ought to govern themselves during
Pregnancy.
IT IS further to be observed, that after delivery the Breasts frequently grow
extreme large, and swell over much, to prevent which (and to avoid the danger
of too much Blood, which cause curdled or curdy Milk, so that from the effects
thereof diverse Diseases arise in the Breast) so soon as the Woman perceives her
self with Child, let her wear about the Neck a small Necklace of Gold or Steel,
or a small ingot of the latter, to hang between her two Breasts, somenting her
Breasts a quarter of an hour every morning with Water distilled from Sage,
Perewinkle, art Ground Ivy, being blood-warm.

In her fourth month, when the motion is great, and her belly seells big, she
may swath it with a Swath-band, anointed with Pomatum, or the like, to make
which I shall give direction, and in so doing she will keep it smooth, and free
from wrinkles, as also from hanging down like a Trip after delivery.

Receipt.

Of the Gall of Kid, and of a Sow, of each 3 ounces, of Capons grease, and
Goose grease, of each one ounce and a half, and having melted them, put thereto
a quarter of a pint of water, after which strain them through a Linen Cloth
into fair water, casting it to and fro therein till it be white, at what time
add to it the marrow of a red Deet, one ounce, and lay it in red Rosewater 12
hours, after the expiration of which you may use it in anointing the Swath as
aforesaid, as also the Belly.

If the Ingredients aforesaid cannot be gotten, then the following Linnament is
effectual, though the former is better, viz.

Make of Mutton Suet adjoying to the Kidneys, and of Dogs Grease, each two
ouces, Whale Oil, an ounce, and of sweet Almon Oil, the like quantity, wash
them well after they are melted together in the water of Germander, or new
Whitewine, and anoit the Belly therewith, or the Swath band ordained to support
it. But for such as are not desirous to anoint their Bellies, they may use the
following Bath or Concoction.

Take of all the sorts of Mallows, and of Motherwort, each two handfuls,
Lilly-roots, the white ones, to the weight of 3 ounces, Melilot and Chammomile,
of both two handfuls, Lime-seed, Quince-seed and Feen-greek seed, 3 ounces
proportionable of each, concoct them in Spring Water, and bath therewith.

If the Woman during her pregnancy feels but little motion in her Womb, let her
make a quilt as follows, and bind it upon her Navel, and it will greatly
strengthen the Infant, viz.

Take the powder of Roses, red Corral and Gillyflowers, of each 3 ounces,
Mastick a dram, and of Augelica seeds two drams, two grains of Ambergrease, and
one of Musk, all which being well beaten, put them into a Linen bag, expanded
and quilted that they may be in every part of it, placing it upon the Navel.

CHAP. XX. Rules to he observed upon a Woman lying down, and her delivery, etc.
HAving thus far proceed, in what as I highly conceived is necessary to be
known by the Professors of this Art. I shall Gradually proceed to what remains:
And first to inform the Reader what is necessary to be observed upon a Woman's
lying in order to her delivery.

The hour, according to computation of time, and the disposition of the Body
approaching, let the Woman send for a skillful Midwife not delaying so to do,
but rather too soon than too late; at what time let her prepare a little Bed or
Couch of a moderate height, and so situate that it be far from the Door, near
the Fire, and convenieut for the Midwife and her assistants to pass round, and
be aiding on every side as occasion requires, having change of Linen, and a
small Cricket, or little Log of Timber to rest her feet against, she having
more force when they are bowed, than otherwise.

Having thus provided, when the Woman find her Pains come on, if the weather he
not extreme cold, let her walk leisurely about the Room, resting her self by
turns upon the Bed, expecting so the coming down of her Water, which is a
Humor that is contracted in one of the outward Membranes, and flows thence
when it is broke by the struggling of the Child, or some other accident, there
being no direct time affixed for its Efflux, though for the most part it flows
not above two hours before the Birth. Motion likewise will cause the Womb to
open and dilate it self, when lying long in Bed will prove troublesome, yet if
she be much spent and weakened, she may take some gentle Cordial to refresh her
self, if her pains will permit it.

If her Travel be tedious, to revive her Spirits she may take any broth of
Chikens or Mutton, and after it a poached Egg, but must not take any thing to
excess. As for the Postures Women are delivered in, they are diverse, some
laying in their beds, others siting in a Chair, supported and held by others,
or resting upon the side of the Bed or Chair; some again upon the Knees, being
supported under their Arms; but the safest and most commodious way is in the
Bed, when as the Midwife ought to observe these following Rules.

Let her see that the Woman be laid upon her Back, her head a little elevated
by the help of a Pillow, having the like help to support her Reins and
Buttocks, and that her Rump lie high; for if she lie low, she cannot be well
delivered, then let her keep her Knees and Thighs as far asunder as she can,
her Legs bowed together, her Buttocks, the Soles of her Feet and Heels being
fixed upon a Little Log of Timber placed for that purpose, that she may have
the greater force to strain: now in case her Back be exceeding weak, a
Swath-band may be cast under it, the band being four double, and about 12
inches broad, and this must be held by two persons, who with steady hands and
equal motion must raise her up at the time the Pains happen; but if they be not
exact in their motion it is better evaded: and at the same time let 2 Women hold
her Shoulders, that she may the better strain out the Birth with more
advantage, and the better to facilitate it, let a Woman stroke or press the
upper part of her Belly gently, and by degrees, nor must the Woman her self be
faint hearted, but Courageous, and of a good Heart, forcing her self by
straining and stopping her Breath.

In case of Delivery, the Midwife must wait with patience, till the Child's Head
or othre Members burst the Membrane; for if through Ignorance, or have to be
gone to other Woman, a ssome have done; the Midwife tear the Membranes with her
Nails, she indangers both the woman and the Child, for it lying dry, and
wanting that slipperyness that should facilitate it, its ligress comes forth
with greater Pain.

When the Head appears, the Midwife must gently hold it between her two hands,
and draw the Child at such times as the Woman's pangs are upon her, and at no
other, slipping by degrees her four fingers under its Armpits, not using a
rough hand in drawing it forth, least by such means the Child through its
tenderness, receive any deformity of Body.

As soon as the Child is taken forth, which is commonly with its Face
downwards, let it be laid upon its Back, that it may more freely receive
external Respiration then cut the Navel-string with a a sharp Instrument about
three inches from the Body, tying that which adheres to the Belly with a Silken
string as near as you can, then cover the Head and Stomach of the Child well,
suffering nothing to come upon the Face.

The Child being thus drawn forth, and in Health, lay it aside, and let the
Midwife regard the Patient, in drawing or causing to come forth the Secundine,
which are the contracted Membranes: And this may be done by wagging and
stirring them up and down, and afterward with a gentle hand drawing them forth,
or if the work be difficult, let the Woman hold Salt in her hands, shut them
close, and breath hard into them, whereby she shall know whether the said
Membranes are broken or not: The like may be known by causing a strain, or
Vomiting, by putting one Finger down her Throat, by straining or moving her
Inferior parts, being all observed to be done out of hand. If this fail, she
may take a draught of raw Elder water, or the Yolk of a raw Egg, or smell to a
piece of Fssa-Faetida, especially if she be troubled with the Wind chollick; a
Remedy for which I shall hereafter prescribe. If she have taken Cold, it is a
great obstruction to the coming down of the Secundines; and in such cases the
MIdwife ought to chase the Woman's Belly with a gentle hand, which breaks not
only the wind, but obliges the Secondine to come down: And these proving
Ineffectual, the Midwife must dilate with her hand the exterior Orifice of the
Womb, and gently draw it forth. Having discoursed of common Births, or such as
for the most part are easy, I shall proceed to give directions in case of
Extremity.

CHAP. XXI. In case of Extremity, what ought to be Observed, especially to
Women who in their Travel, are accompanied with an Eflux of Blood, Convulsions
or Fits of the Wind.
IN case of Extremity, greater regard must be had then at other times, and
first of all the situation of the Womb, and her posture of lying must be cross
the Bed, being held by such as have strength to prevent her sliping down, or
moving her self in the operation of the Man Midwife, or Surgeon, her Thighs
must be sundered as wide as may be, and so held whilst her Legs invert or bend
backward toward her Hips, her Head leaning upon a Bolster, and the Reins of
her Back supported with the like, nor Rump and Buttocks likewise Elevated,
observing to cover her Stomach, Belly, and Thighs with warm Linen, to keep
them from cold winds.

The woman being in the posture aforesaid, let the Operator put up his hand, if
he finds the neck of the Womb dilated, and remove the contracted Blood that
obstructs the passage of the Birth, and having by degrees with much gentleness
made way, let him tenderly move the Infant, his hand being first anointed with
sweet Butter, or a harmless Pomatum; and if the waters are not come down, then
without any difficulty may they be let forth, when if the Infant attempts to
break forth with the Head foremost or cross, he may gently turn it to find the
Feet, which having done, let him draw forth one, and fasten to it a Ribbon,
then put it up again, and by degree find the other, when bringing them as close
and even as may be, and between whiles giving the Woman leave to breath, urging
her to strain in helping Nature to perfect the Birth, he may draw it forth, and
the better to do it, that his hold may be the surer, he must fasten or wrap a
Linen Cloth about the Child's Thighs observing to bring it into the World with
its Face downward.

In case of a flux of Blood, if the Neck of the Womb be open, it must then be
maturely considered, whether the Infant or the Secundines come first, which
often the latter happening to do, stop the mouth of the Womb and hinder the
Birth, to the endangering both the Woman and the Child; in such a case, I say,
the Secundine must be removed by a swift turn, and indeed they have by their so
coming down deceived many, who feeling their softness, supposed the Womb was
not delated, and by their being so decived, the Woman and Child or at least the
latter, has been lost, the Secundines removed, the Child must be sought for,
and drawed forth as has been directed, and if in such a case the Woman or Child
dye, the Midwife or Surgeon is blameless because they did their true
endeavor.

If it appear upon enquiry that the Secundine comes first, let the Woman be
delivered with all convenient expedition, because great flux of Blood will
follow, for then the Veins are opened, and upon this account two things are to
be considered. First the great or lessness of the Secundines advancing, if the
former and the head of the Child appear first, it must be guided and directed
toward the Neck of the Womb, as in case of natural Births, but if there, through
the weakness of the Child or Mother, appear any difficulty in the delivery, the
best way is to search for the feet, and thereby draw it forth; but if the
latter, the Secundines may be put back with a gentle hand, and the Child first
taken forth.

Another matter is note worthy, viz. If the Secundines be far advanced, so that
it cannot be put back, and the Child follow it close, then are the Secundines
to be taken forth with much care, as swift as may be, and laid aside without
cutting the entrail that is fastened to them, for by that you may be guided to
the Infant, the which whether alive or dead must be drawn forth by the Feet
with all expedition; though it is not to be acted unless in case of great
necessity, for in other cases the Secundine ought to come last.

As for a dead Child, in drawing it forth let these Directions be carefully
observed by the Surgeon, viz. If the Child be found dead with its head
foremost, the danger is the greater, and more difficult will be the Delivery;
for it is an apparent sign the Woman's strength begins to fail her, and that the
Child being dead and wanting its inbred forced, can be no ways assisted to its
delivery; wherefore the most certain and safe way is, for the Surgeon to put
up his left hand, sliding it as hollow in the Palm as he can into the neck of
the Womb into the lower part thereof, toward the Feet, and that between the
Head of the Infant, and the Neck of the Matrix, when having a Hook in the
right hand couch it close, and slit it up above the left hand, between the Head
of the Child, and the flat of his hand, fixing in it the bone of the Temple
toward the Ear, or else in the hollow of the Eye, or for want of conveniently
coming at these in the occipital Bone, observing still to keep the left hand in
its place, with it gently moving and stirring the Head, and so with the
righthand and Hook draw the Child forward, admonishing the Woman to put forth
her utmost strength, still drawing when the Woman's pangs are upon her. The Head
being drawn forth, he must with all speed slip his hand under the Arm-holes of
the Child, and take it quite forth, giving these things to the Woman, viz. A
toste of fine Wheat bread, in a quarter of a pint of Ipocrass Wine.

Now the former Application and Endeavor failing, and the following Medicines
will not enable the, Woman to cast forth the Birth, you may proceed to
Instruments after another manner. First, when the Woman is in her bed, let her
receive the ensuing potion hot, abstaining from all manner of Meats, and rest
till she feel the Operation; which is this.

Take blue Figs to the number of 7, cut them in pieces, adding to them
Fenegreek, Mother-wort, and Seeds of Rue, of each 2 Drams, water of Peneroyal
and Motherwort 6 ounces of each, boil them till one half be consumed, and
having strained them again, and Trochischs of Mirrh a dra, and of Saffron 3
Grains, sweetning the Liquor with Loaf-sugar, and spicing it with Cinnamon.

Having rested upon this, let her labor again as much as may be; and if she be
not yet successful, make a Suffumation of Castor, Oppoponax, Sulpher, and Assa
Faetida, of each half a Dram, beating them into Powder, and wetting them with
the juice of Rue till they become stiff, then burn them upon Coals, so that the
Smoke or Fume may only come to the Matrix, and no further.

If these effect not your desire, then this Emplaister is very fitly to be
applied, viz. Take of Galbanum one ounce and a half, Colocynthis without Grains
2 drams, the juice of Motherwort and Rue, of each half an ounce, and 2 ounces
of Virgin Beeswax, bruise and melt them together, spreading them as a Scere
cloth, to reach from the Navel to Os Pubis, spreading likewise to the flanks
at the same time, making a convenient pessary of Wool, closing it in a bag of
Silk, and dipping it in the concoction round Birthworth, Savin, Colocynthis
with Grains, Staves Acar, black Elebore, of each a dram, and of Rue a little
sprig or two.

These things failing, and the Woman's life in danger, let the Surgeon use
his Instruments to dilate and widen the Womb, to which purpose the Woman must
be set in a Chair, so that she may turn her Crupper as much from its back as is
convenient, drawing up her Legs as close as she can, but spreading her Thighs
as wide as may be, or if through her weakness it appear more convenient that
she be laid upon the Bed, with her Head downwards, her Buttocks raised, and her
Legs drawn up as much as can be, a what time the Surgeon with his Speculum
Matricis, or his Apertory, may dilate or widen the Womb, and draw out the Child
and the Secundines together if it be possible, after which the Womb must be
well washed and anointed, and the Woman laid in her Bed, comforted there with
Spices, pleasant Meats and Cordials: This course must be taken in the delivery
of all dead Children, likewise with Moles, Secundines; or otherwise false
Births, that will not of themselves come forth in due season, or if the
Instruments aforesaid will not sufficient widen the Womb, then other
Instruments, as the Drakes Bill, and long Pincers ought to be used.

If it so happen that any Inflammation, Swelling, or concreet Blood be
contracted in the perputium of the Matrix, under the Film of those Tumors,
either before or after the Birth, where the matter appears thinner, the Midwife
with a Penknife, or incision Instrument may Lance it, and press out the
corruption, healing it with a Pessary dipped in Oil of Red Roses.

If at any time through cold or some violence, the Child happens to be swelled
in any part, or have contracted a watery Tumor; yet if it remain alive, such
means ought to be used as are least injurious to the Child, or Mother, but if
it be dead, that Tumor must be let out by incision to facilitate the Birth.

It often happens that Children come with their Feet foremost, and the Hands
dilating themselves forth the Hips, in such a case the Midwife must be well
provided of necessary Ointments to stroke and anoint the Infant with, thereby
to help its coming forth, lest it return again into the Womb before it can be
drawn forth, holding at the same time both the Arms of the Infant close to the
Hips, that so the Child may issue forth after its own manner, but if then it
prove too big, then the Womb must be well anointed. The Woman may likewise take
sneezing powder, to cause her the more to strain, and at the same time, those
that attend may gently stroke down her Belly, to make the Birth descend, and
keep the Child when advanced, from retiring back.

Sometimes it falls out that the Child coming with its Feet foremost, has its
ARms exended above its Head, the which so happening the Midwife must not
receive it in that posture, but put it back into the Womb, unless the passage
be Extraordinary wide, and then she must anoint both the Child and the womb,
nor is it safe to draw it forth before it is put into due form, which must be
done after this manner. The Woman lying upon her Back, with her Head depressed,
and her Buttocks elevated, the Midwife with a gentle hand, must compress the
Belly of the Woman toward the Midrif, by that means to put back the Infant,
observing to turn the Face of the Child toward the back of the Mother, raising
up its Thighs and Buttocks toward her Navel, thereby to bring it to a more
regular and natural production.

If a Child happen to come forth with one Foot, the Arm beign extended along
the side, and the other Foot turned backward, then must the Woman be instantly
brought to her bed, and laid in the posture aforesaid, at what time the Midwife
must carefully put back the Foot so appearing, and the Woman rock her self from
one side to the other, till she find the Child is turned, but she must not
alter her posture, nor turn upon her Face, after which she may expect lier
pains, and must have great assistance, Cordials especially not being wanting to
revive and support her Spirits.

At other times it so comes to pass, that the Child lies cross in the Womb and
falls upon its side; if so it happen, the Woman must not be urged in her
Labor, neither can any expect the Birth in that manner: Therefore the Midwife
when she so perceives it, m ust use great diligence to reduce it to its right
form, or such a form in the Womb, as it is possible to deliver it; especially by
moving the Buttocks and guiding the Head to the passage; but if she be
successful herein, let her again try by rocking her self too and fro, and wait
with patience till it changes its manner of lying.

Sometimes it falls out that the Child hastens to the Birth with the Legs and
Arms distorted or expanded, in which, as in the former, the Woman must rock her
self, but not with any violence, till she find the Legs and Arms fall to their
proper stations; or it may be done by a gentle compression of the Womb: but if
neither of them prevail, the Midwife with her hand must close the Legs of the
Infant, and if possible she can reach them, do the like to the Arms, and so
draw it forth, though if it could be reduced of it self to the composure or
posture of a natural Birth, it is better.

If the Infant come forward with both Knees foremost, the Hands hanging down
upon the Thighs, then must the Midwife put both Knees upward till the Feet
appear, taking hold of which with her left hand, let her keep her right hand on
the side of the Child, and in that posture endeavor to bring it forth; but if
she cannot, then must the Woman rock her self till the Child is in a more
convenient posture for Delivery.

When it happens that the Child presses forward with one Arm extended upon the
Thighs, and the other elevated over his Head, the Feet likewise stretched out
at length in the Womb, the Midwife in such a posture must not attempt to
receive the Child, but must lay the Woman upon the bed in the manner often
before recited, making a soft and gentle compression upon her Belly to oblige
the Infant to retire: and if of its own accord it retire not, then must the
Midwife thrust it back by the Shoulders, and bring the Arm that was stretched
above the Head to its right place, (...) certain it is the most dangerous in
these Lxtremities: in this therefore the Midwife ought to take more care herein
than ordinary; and first, she must observe well to anoint her Hands, then the
Womb of the Woman, either with some sweet Butter, or some convenient Pomotum,
thrusting up her hand as near as she can to the Arm of the Infant, and reduce
it to the side: but if she cannot recall it, then must the Woman be laid on her
bed, there to repose for a while, and then again conducted to a Seat prepared
for the most convenience in that affair, by which time perhaps the Child may be
reduced to a better posture; the which when the Midwife finds, she m ust draw
the Arms close to the Hips, and so receive it.

If an Infant came with its Buttocks foremost, being in manner double, then the
Midwife anointing her Hand, must thrust it up, and by degrees by heaving the
Buttocks, and after them the Back, strive to turn the Head to the passage, but
be not overhasty in so doing, lest the Infant retiring should shape it self
worse, therefore if it cannot be turned with the hand, the Woman must to Bed,
and rock her self, taking such comfortable things as may support her Spirits
till she perceive the Child turn.

If a Child come foreward with its Shoulders, the Neck being bowed as it often
happens, as also the Hands and Feet stretched upwards: In such a case the
Midwife must with much diligence move the Shoulders, that she may direct the
Head to the passage; and the better to perfect it, the Woman must rock her
self, etc. These and such like methods are to be observed in all single Births:
And the same may be observed in case of Twins, or Trebble Births, for as the
single Birth has but one Natural way and many unnatural forms, even so it
happens with the Birth of many Children, wherefore the Midwife must observe (if
Twins be in the Womb and press forward, according to the Natural form) that she
receive that first which is nearest the passage, not letting the other go, lest
by retiring it should change the form, nor must she when one is born delay to
bring forth the other; and this Birth in the natural form is more easy,
because the Children are most commonly less than the single births, and
consequently require a lesser passage; but if this Birth happen in an unnatural
form, it is more difficult and dangerous. In the birth of Twins let the Midwise
be exceeding careful that the Secundine be naturally brought forth, lest in
such a case the Womb being delivered of its burden fall, and by its so doing
the Secundine continues there longer than is requisite, to the indangering of
the Woman.

If so it happen that the Womb is pregnant with Twins, and one come naturally,
and the other unnaturally, as the one with the Head, the other with the Feet
foremost, then must the Midwise consider to deliver the natural birth first,
and then if she cannot turn the other, draw it out in the posture it presses
forward, but if that with the Feet downward be much before the other, then may
she deliver that first, turning the Head of the other aside.

In this case the Midwise must be diligent to search, that instead of Twins, it
be not a monsterous Birth; as a Body with two Heads, or two bodies joined
together, which she may observe if both the heads come foremost, by putting up
her hands between them as high as she can: and if she find they are Twins, she
must gently put one of them aside to make way for the other, taking that first
that is most advanced, having regard to the other, that she change not its
situation.

Now to prevent the first Child's being in danger of its Life, the Midwife,
as soon as it is come forth, must tie the Navel-string, as has been before
directed, and also bind it again with a large and long Fillet, that part of the
Navel that is fastened to the Secundines, the more readily to find them. The
Second Infant born, let her diligently it quire whether there be not two
Secundines, for by the shortness of the Ligament it often happens that it
retires back, to the damage of the Woman: wherefore, lest in such a case the
Womb should close, it is most expedient to hasten them forth with all
convenient speed.

If two Infants are joined together by the body. as sometimes monstrously falls
out, then although the Heads comes foremost, yet is it convenient if possible
to turn them, and draw them forth by the feet, observing when they come to the
Hips to draw them forth as swift as may be: and in this case great care ought
to be observed in anointing and widening the passage. And thus much for
Extremity or Unnatural-births, and the next thing I shall proceed to, is how to
order the Woman after Natural or Unnatural Births, or Delivery.

CHAP. XXII. What ought to be observed after Delivery, etc.
PResently after Delivery, in case of a Natural Birth, especially if the Woman
has had hard labor, it is convenient to wrap her in the Skin of a Sheep taken
off before it is cold, putting the fleshy side to her Reins and Belly, or for
want of this, the Skin of a Hare or Coney, being flayed off as soon as killed,
may be applied to her Belly: and in so doing, the dilatation made in the Birth
will be closed up, and the ill melancholy Blood expelled from those parts: And
these may be continued in Summer the space of an hour, and in VVinter two;
after which let the Woman be swathed with a fine linen Cloth about a quarter
of a Yard in length, chafing her Belly before with Oil of St. Jahuswort, after
that raise up the Matrix with a linen Cloth many times solded, then with a
little Pillow or Quilt cover her Flanks, then use the Swath somewhat above the
Hanches, winding it pretty stiff, applying at the same time a warm cloth to her
Nipples, not presently applying remedies to drive back the Milk, by reason the
body at such a time is disordered, and as it were out of frame, for there is
neither Vein nor Artery which does not strongly impulse, where such remedies as
drive back the Milk being all of a dissolving Nature, it is improper to apply
them to the Breast during such confusion and disorder, lest by so doing evil
Humors be stayed or contracted into the Breast; wherefore 12 hours ought to be
the least space allowed for the Circulation and Settlement of the Blood, and
what was cast upon the Lungs by the vehement Agitation during the Labor, to
retire to its proper Recepticles.

A while after Delivery you make a restrictive of the Yolk of two Eggs, a
quarter of a pint of White Wind, an ounce of Oil of St. John's Wort, as much of
the Oil of Roses, Plantain and Rose Water, of each one ounce, bray them
together, fold a linen cloth and dip it therein, warm it before a gentle
Fire, and apply it to the Breast, and the pains of those parts will be greatly
eased.

Present sleep is not convenient, but above four hours after Delivery she may
take Broth, Caudle, or what other liquid matter is nourishing, and afterward if
she be disposed to sleep, it may be safely permitted. And this is as much, in
case of a Natural Birth, as ought immediately to be done.

In case of Extremity, or an unnatural Birth, these Rules ought to be observed:
In the first place, let the Woman keep a temperate Diet, by no means
overcharging her self after so demonstrate an Evacuation; and to say true, her
Diet must be equal to that of wounded persons, not being ruled, or giving
Credit to unskilful Nurses, who admonish them to feed lusty, the better to
repair the loss of Blood, for that Blood is not for the most part pure, but
such as has been detained in the Vessels or Membranes, better avoided for the
health of the Woman than kept, unless there happen an extraordinary Flux of
Blood; for if her nourishment be over great, it will endanger her falling into
a Fever, nay more, it will increase the Milk to superfluity, which Curdling
often times turns to Apostumes, wherefore it is requisite for the first five
days especially, that she take moderately Ponado broth, Poach'd Eggs, Gelly of
Chickens or Calves feet, French Barley-broath, each day somewhat increasing her
allowance. If she intend to be Nurse to her Child, she may take a little more
than ordinary to increase the Milk by degrees, which must be of no continuance,
but drawn off either by the Child or other wise. In this case likewise let her
have Coriander or Fennel-Seed boiled in her Barley-broth: but by any means for
the time specified let her abstain from Meat. If no Fever trouble her, she may
drink now and then a small quantity of Whitewine or Claret, as also Syrup of
Maidenhair or other Syrup that is astringent, taking it in a little Water
well boiled: And after the suspicion of a Fever, or fear of contraction of
Humors in the breast, she may be nourished more plentifully with the broth of
Pullets, Capons, Pigeons, Muton, Veal, etc. Which must not be till after eight
days from the day of delivery is over, at what time the Womb, unless some
accident hinder, has purged if self; it will then likewise be expedient to give
her cold Meats sparingly, that so she may be enabled to gather strength, she
during the time resting quiet and free from disturbance, not sleeping in the
day time if she can avoid it. If there happen any obstruction in the evacuation
of Excrement, a Glyster may be administered to help the defect made after the
manner following.

Receipt.

Of both the Mallows and Pelletory of the Wall a handful of each, Cammomile and
Mellilot Flowers, of each a handful, Anni-seeds and Fennel-seeds, of each two
ounces, boyd them in the decoction of a Sheeps head, and take of this 3
quarters dissolving in them of common Honey and course Sugar, two ounces of
each, and of new fresh Butter 3 ounces strained well, and administer it
Glysterwise, but if it operate not to your mind, then may you an ounce of
Catholicon.

CHAP. XXIII. What ought to be done to the Child when newly born, with diverse
other matters relating thereto.
THE Navel of the Child having been before recited, the Midwise must cleanse
the Infant, not only in the Face, but likewise the whole Body, anointing the
Groyn, Hips, Buttocks, with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Oil of Roses, to make the
Skin supple, and close the Pores, thereby to exclude the penetration of the
Air, and strengthen the Members; nor would it be amiss if she should take the
decoction of Roses or Rose-Cakes, and red Sage, decected in White Wine, and
bath the Child therewith, the decoction being blood-warm.

The Infant being thus well anointed or suppled, and well dried, wrap it up
warm and give it a spoonful of Sugar and Mallago, or a Sctuple of Mithridate or
Venice Treacle, dissolved in half a spoonful of Canary, and after it a little
Cardus-water, observing to bath or anoint it each morning as aforesaid. If the
Child have extreme throws immediately afcer it comes into the World, it must be
rubed with the juice of Peletory or the Deeoction, into which fresh Butter is
melted, or for wanting of that Spiriage Juice, with Hogs Grease applied to the
Navel, with new laid Eggs, mixed or cemented with Nut-Oyl, laying them
likewise to the Navel, or you may administer a Clyster made of Milk, the Yolk
of an Egg, and a small quantity of Sugar, which will undoubtedly ease the pain.

Now some Children are born of evil constituted Parents, or are defective through
the evil nourishment the Woman has unadvisedly taken during her pregnancy,
which occasions the Child to be much afflicted with phlegmatic Humors, to
expel which you must lay the Child on one side, and then turn him to the other,
for laid upon the back, it is subject to Suffocation or Strangling by the
ascent of the humor, the belly must above all things be kept soluble, causing
thereby the Infant to void the blood kept in the intrails from the time of its
being in the Womb, by giving it a small quantity of Suppository of black Soap,
mixed with fresh Butter to take away the Acrimony of it, after which
immediately let the Infant take a spoonful of Syrup of Violets, which will
oblige the Phlegm to pass down; but if hear be defective, add to the Syrup, half
the quantity of Oil of sweet Almonds, bathng the Belly and Stomach of it, as
often as it is undressed.

If it happen that the Child's Cods be full of wind, the Child must be gently
moved to and fro, and the Cods anointed with Oil of Mirth, giving it the liquid
of Anniseeds decocted in small drink, if they be swelled or extended with
water, rub and chafe the Skin with fresh Butter, and the water will sweat out.
But what is more to be regarded than any other thing, is the choosing of a good
Nurse, for upon that choice depends the thriving or not thriving of the Child,
and in such cases these things ought to be regarded, viz. Observe that she be
not dull sighted, squint-Eyed, or have down cast looks; that she be not
consumptive or subject to Fits, that her breath is pure, that so no noisome
vapor be conveyed to the Lungs of the Child, that she be not infected with
bloaches, boils, blaines, or that she, or her Husband never were afflicted with
the French disease, that she be not given to excessive drinking or Gluttony,
nor in the least subject to Epilesie or falling Evil. For the Nurse being in a
manner the second Mother to the Child, it drawing from her good or evil
humors, especially care must therefore be taken that the Nurse be good
conditiored, moderate in meat and drink, wakeful and vipilant, not fretful nor
subject to Passion; that her Milk be clean and sweet, flowing sufficiently, her
Breasts well fixed and large, not over fleshy, nor she over fat, and above all
that she be not too desirous of carnal copulation, by which means the Milk will
be rendered unwholesome. Having thus far proceeded in these offairs, I shall
through God's blesing lay down diverse necessary matters for the preservation of
Childing Women and Infants, thereby to prevent the hazard and loss, which two
often happens in such cases.

CHAP. XXIV. To know the exact time of Delivery, by signs that precedes it, and
how to cause a Woman to retain the Birth.
IN the business of Generation nothing is more to be regarded by the Woman,
than the time of her Conception and quickening, that thereby she may be enabled
to be exact in the day of her delivery, every natural delivery be^^g at the end
of 9 months, especially if at the tune or near it, the Woman is wont to have
her natural Purgations, or that the time fall out with the full or new Moon:
Nay though a day or two before or after, for these things to falling out, not
only hasten but facilitate delivery; and the knowledge of this must extend to
the Woman for many reasons. First that she may prepare and dispose her self for
so great a task. Secondly, For that at such a time diverse Maladies are incident
to her, nor can their cause be penetrated into, unless those things be well
known, etc. Now one thing neceessary the better to enable the Woman to
understand it, is the time of her natural Courses, for in case she have forgot,
or by not rightly understanding their natural ^fflux or is puzzled therein, by
reason of some unnatural retention or extraordinary evacution, she may rectify
her judgment by these directions, viz. From the age of 14 to 21 Women have
their Courses, according to the most natural courses in the n^w Moon; from 21
to 30 in the first Quarter; from 30 to 37 or 38 in the fud Moon; and from that
time to the time they cease in the last Quarter.

Beside what is before mentioned, she will be made sensible of the approaching
timeby pain in her Groyn, Thighs, the small of her Belly, the lower part of her
Navel, together with swelling, and hardness in the said places, shivering and
quaking throughout the Body as if possessed with an Ague, and suddenly after
with flushing heat; Feeble, ness and Lassitude, small Sweats on the Face, and
flushings of the blood there, as her body will be in a manner restless, she
shall perceive the Child, more down ward with more force than ordinary, and a
bloody water will distill from the inferior parts, in case of these Prodromos,
as many term them, she may be assured her time is at hand, whenas shemust not
delay sending for her Midwife, whose office it is to order her to the best
advantage, directions for which I have already given; for wonderful it is that
Nature has so well ordered her works, that the Matrix opens not unless upon
some Extraordinary Casualty before the time prefixed, and not till then do
these signs appear: But appearing they ought to be much regarded, if the Woman
desire her own safety, and the preservation of the Child.

In case the Woman be subject to miscarriage or to come before her time, let
her take Mint, Roses, Marjorum, of each a small handful, Saffron and Musk, of
each 3 grains, bruise them to gether, put them in a bag flat and hang it about
the Woman's Neck, so that it may reach the pit of her Stomach, and it will draw
the Womb upward, or keep it in its place that it shall not fall down, or give
the Child occasion to seek for untimely passage.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Washing of Woman after Delivery, with Directions how to make
them.
FOR the first Wash take a good handful of young Charvil, boil it in 2 pints of
water, which having done, add to it a spoonful of Honey of Roses, and let the
Midwife use it at her discretion, and it will draw down the Purgations, heal
and cleanse the afflicted part. There are some that use Milk instead of Water,
affirming that it greatly mittigates the pain: but by those whom Experience has
taught better it is rejected: this having been used eight days the second wash
may be made.

Take Province Roses moist if you can, but if not, the dry Cakes, put them in a
little linen Bag, and boil them sufficiently in half a pint of Water, and half
a pint of White Wine, and use it as the former for other eight days, viz. The
liquid part being well strain.

The third and last wash must be made of the decoction of Province Roses,
decocted in a pint of White Wine, and a quarter of a Pint of Mirth-water, and
used only four days.

CHAP. XXVI. An Astringent for Women when occasion requires, as also Directions
for a Cere-Chath, and how to cleanse her before she rise.
TO make an Astringent, take Pomgranets, Roach Alum and Galls of each 2
ounces, Knot Grass a handful, of Province Roses four ounces, the Rinds of Cassa
and Pomgranets, each 3 ounces, of Scarlet-berries, of Spermaceti, one ounce.
The waters of Roses, M^^^n, and Burnet, of each one ounceand a half, white
Wine, and water of the Smiths Forge of each a quarter of a Pint, then take two
little baggs about a quarter of a yard long, and half a quarter broad, boil
them in the Waters with the Drugs or Simples in them, and in a new glazed
Pipkin, and use them successively as occasion requires.

To make an exceeding convenient Searcloath, to ease the pain and reduce the
Body into good temperament.

Take Virgins wax 8 ounces, Spermaceti and Venice Turpentine, well washed in
Rose and Plantane water, of each an ounce and a half, adding to them whilst
they are melting an ounce of white Lead of Venice pulverized, and having by the
operation of the Fire well mixed them together, spread them Plaisterwise upon a
Cloth, fit to cover the Belly as far as it is convenient, some of this you may
lay upon the Nipples, having first anointed them with Oil of Acrons of
Spermaceti, and it will allay the inflammation and much strengthen them.

To cleanse a Woman before she rises. Take a considerable quantity of bitter
Almonds, peel them, bruise them well, and make them into a Past, with the Yolk
of an Egg, and Powder of Grise, put the Past into a bag of Shamy, and dip it in
black Wine, tempering it well, and use it upon the place where the Sear-cloaths
have been laid, and after that wash the said places with black Wine, wherein
Orange flowers have been steeped, and it will cleanse these parts to admiration.

CHAP. XXVII. How to expel the Chollick from Women in Childbirth, and the
violent Griping that attend the first Delivery.
THese Pains frequently afflict the Woman no less than the pangs of her Labor,
and are by the ignorant taken many times the one for the other, sometimes again
they join Forces, and happen at the same instant, which is occasioned by the
crudy matter in the Stomach contracted through indigestion, and whilst such a
Pain lasts, the Woman advances nothing toward her Travel, to expel the fits
of the Chollick; therefore,

Take two ounces of sweet Almond Oil, and an ounce of Cinnamon Water, with 3 or
4 drops of Spirit of Ginger, and let the Woman drink it off, and if this work
not your desire, make a Glyster of Cammomile Baum leaves, Olive-Oyl, and new
Milk, concocting the former in the latter, and having strained it very well
administer it as it is usual in such cases; nor are Fomentations proper for
dispelling wind amiss.

If the pain prove, the griping or fretting of the Guts continuing long after
Delivery, or if it happen upon the Courses descending by reason of the
smallness of the Veins, which convey the Blood into the Matrix, which often
befalls Women lying in of their first Child: wherefore it is altogether
convenient to use such a Remedy at such a time as may eradicate the cause for
the future: and above all I recommend this most approved one, used with success
by many Noble Women.

Recepe.

Of the Root of great Camfory a dram, Nutmegs and Peach-Kernels of each two
scruples, yellow Amber and Amber grease of the former a dram, and the latter a
scruple, bruise them together, and give them the Woman as soon as she is laid
down, in two or three Spoonfuls of White Wind, but if it so happen that she be
feverish, then let it be in as much warm Broth.

CHAP. XXVIII. The approved Receipts for hindering the Monthly Flux in Women
with Child; also to cause Women that are fearful and subject to Abortion to
contain the Birth: Together with preparatory Ointments, to be used before the
time of Delivery, and Directions for staying or preventing Vomiting, much
incident to Women with Child.
TO hinder the Superfluity or Eflux, dangerous to Women far gone with Child,

Take the Oil of Roses, Virgins-wax, juice of Male Knot-grass, of each 3
ounces, Bolearmonick, Crocus Martis, of each six drams, melt them and bruise
them till they become plyant, and capable of being spread Plaster wise, and
when the Flux descends lay it to her Loins whilst she lies in the bed. Or to
the same effect, you may take Crocus Martis a dram, Knot-grass juice, 4 ounces,
Rose Water and Vinegar, of each one ounce, adding to them the white of an Egg,
and apply them cold upon a Linen Cloth to her Loins. IOf the Woman be
fearful of containing the Birth, and reject to Abortion.

Take the Roots of Tormentile and Snake-weed, of each an ounce and a half,
Joubertus, Astringent Powder, Mirtleberries, Psida, Pomgraner Flowers, of each
six drams, Dragons-blood, and Spong-Bedeguar of each half an ounce,
Frankincense and Mastick, of each 3 drams, Nutmeg and Cloves of each half a
dram, common Pich six ounces, Cinnamon a dram, Venice Turpentine washed in the
juice of Shepherds purse 2 ounces, of Ship Pitch 3 ounces, Virgin-wax two
ounces, melt and well imbody them till they become pliable to be spread
Plaister-wise, and apply the Plaster upon Leather to the Reins.

To make an Ointment exceeding useful before Delivery. Take the Oils of white
Lilly Roots and Cammomile, each 4 ounces new Hogs-Seam strained and fresh
Butter of each an ounce and a half, Muscilage of the Seed of Fenegreck
extracted in Mugwort-water 2 ounces, the Powder of round Billwort Roots and
Saffron, of each two drams, Wax an ounce and a half, melt them over a gentle
Fire, and having strained forth the suplist part, anoint and supple the Woman's
Thighs, Hips, and Matrix therewith.

In case of Vomiting or Nauseating, which too frequently befalls young Childing
Women.

Take a Cere-cloath, sprinkle it with Galbanum, Powder of Cloves and Ma^^ick,
them covering it with linen or silk in the form of a Stomacher, apply it to
the Stomach, renewing it as the scent decays.

CHAP. XXIX. A Pomatum for Midwives to anoint their hands with when they are
about their Office, as also the Womb of the Woman to be Delivered: Excellent
Applications to straighten and strengthen the Womb after Delivery.
AMongst the many Excellent Pomatums or Ointments for Midwives Hands, and
anointing the Womb or Child to render the Birth easy, I recommend this as
chief, viz. Take of Hemp seed Oil an ounce and a half, half an ounce of Castor
Oil, Galmoschate half a scruple, of Laudanum a scruple, with a gentle fire make
them into an Ointment, and attribute it to the use beforementioned.

To contract the Womb after Delivery. Take the Leaves of Startwort and Myrtle,
of each 3 ounces, Green Medlars, Pruans, and wild Pears, of each 8 or 9 ounces,
the Stomachs of 3 Cocks fresh killed and newly taken out; all which distill,
and dipping Cotton into the water issuing from them, make it into the form of a
Pessary and put it into the Womb, where let it continue a considerable space.

To strengthen the Womb, take of Borrage and Violet flowers, each a handful,
Dittany of Creet an ounce, Wood Sorrel a handful, Honey of Roses half an ounce,
Maidenhair an ounce, boil them in White Wind, and Inject the Liquid part into
the Womb, the woman taking soon after it, this potion, viz. Of Fennel and
Bugloss Roots, with Cicora ana take two ounces, boy them in 24 ounces of
Whitewine to the consumption of two parts, adding afterward Fennel water, and
Cicory water, of each 3 ounces, boiling them again till a 5th part of what
remains be consumed, and of this let her drink an ounce at a time, continuing
so to do Morning and Evening for 10 days.

CHAP. XXX. To keep the Milk from Curdling in the Breast, or to dry it up, most
approved Receipt; as also to increase Milk.
IF the Milk be subject to Curd in the Breast, past doubt in will contract
pains or disorder there, as well as in the Child that draws it forth; wherefore
to prevent it so doing.

Take the Roots of Althea half a pound, boil them in White Wind Vinegar, strain
them through a fine Seive, adding to the liquid part Bean flower one ounce,
powder of Rue and dried Mint, of each a dram, Oil of Mastick two ounces, boil
them again till they come to the thickness or plyableness of an Ointment.

To dry up the Milk take Honey newly taken from the Bees, dissolve it in water,
and often wash the Breasts therewith, or take the Juice of Speremint and
Shepherds Purse, of each half an ounce, mix them and sweeten them with a little
of the aforesaid Honey, and drink them in the morning with the Broth of a Hen
or Chicken.

Or she may take of the Oil of Violets 3 ounces, the juice of Mint and Paisley
a like quantity, an ounce of white wind Vinegar, Rose water two ounces, boil
them over a gentle fire to the consumption of the juice, adding a little wax to
make them into an Ointment, and anoint the Breast therewith; or for want of
these, take Elder tops, Sage and Mint, of all of them a handful, boil them in
Spring water loft, and lay them to the Breast.

If the Woman be scarce of Milk, and for the benefit of the Child, she would
increase it; Let her take the Decoction of Fennel and bath her Breast
therewith, mixing the juice of Oak-Apples, and at the same time take inwardly
this following powder, viz. Of Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, and Cummin seeds, of
each 2 drams, beaten Ginger half an ounce, of both sorts of Pepper two drams,
of Coral a dram, of Crystal and Cinnamon each a dram, the Seed of Daucia a
dram, Silver Mo^tanus one ounce and a half, Cardamons and long Pepper of each a
dram and a half, of Seselcos half an ounce; the Seeds of Sesamum one ounce, of
White-poppy one ounce, mingle and dry them till they are all capable of being
beaten into a powder: one dram of which the Woman must take at a time, Morning
and Evening, in a broth made of Red Colwar^s, anointing her Breast the mean
time with an Ointment made of Venice Turpentine, Vinegar of Roses and Bees wax,
of each an equal proportion.

CHAP. XXXI. For a Pain in the Breast immediately upon Delivery, or the Fissure.
TAke new Beeswax, two ounces, Nut Oil half an ounce, Rape seed Oil, the like
quantity as the latter, when melting the Wax, add the Oils, and temper them
well together to the thickness of a stiff Ointment or Salve, and spread them
upon a cloth fit to cover the Breast, and apply it with extraordinary success.

In case a Fissure happen in the Breast, take of the Powder of Gun-Arabick one
ounce, Rose Water and Aqua vitae, of each an ounce, prepare them by beating
them together till they are of an apt thickness, then sees them over the Fire,
and when cool, apply them Plaister-wise to the Fissure or for want of these,
take Unguentum Rosarum, and anoint the place grieved, applying upon it a
Poltiss of Ground Juice.

CHAP. XXXII. The Cause of the Bellies swelling after Delivery, and how to
prevent it, or Cure it if it happens.
Certain it is, and Experience teachet^ often, that many Women have their
bellies swelled after Delivery as much almo^^ as before, and this happens
through too much neglected and carelessness, in not having regard to foment
them, as also to apply things convenient to the privities, by which means
polite windiness and Vapors enter and contract in the hollow Concavities,
Veins and Arteries, the latter of which they enter by insensible ways: Now to
prevent it, take Origanum, Night shade and Mastick, of each a scruple,
Sagapenum a dram, mix them together and make them into 7 Pills, take them all
at once, and after them drink to the quantity of a quarter of a pint of the
water of white Lillies, viz. of the Flowers.

In c^se it be already come, let her take half a pound of Spanish Figgs, the
Meal of Barley and Beans fine sifted, four ounces of each, two ounces, of well
burnt Brick, pulverized, Cyprus Nuts one ounce, boil them in as much water of
the Smiths Forge as will suffice to bring them to a thickness, then spread them
upon a Linen Cloth, and apply them to the Belly twice or thrice, and it will
retire to its wonted smallness.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Inflammations in the Breast, and its Cures.
THE Inflammation of the Breast, is no other than the hard swelling,
ac^^ompa^^ed with a shooting pain, as also a b^ating and redness, and is mostly
caused by the abundance of Blood, drawn or s^^wing to the Breast, and sometimes
but ^a^ely it is occasioned by the suppression of the courses the Hemorrhoids
or some bruise received by blow or the like and is known by a certain redness
and burning heat, causing the whole body to be feverish and out of order. To
cure it then, first let the Diet be comforting, moistening, and of good
nourishment, as the broth of Pullets, Capons, Cocks, Chickens, Veal, etc.
Wherein Indive, Borrage, Pu^slain or Lettice has been boiled, and if she can
get it, let the Woman drink the juice of Pomgranets, but for want of that
Barley-water, wherein Anniseeds have been boiled, but let her refrain drinking
of Wine, and strong Liquors, as likewise hot Spices, and if she find any
obstruction in her excremental Evacuation, let her take a softning or
mollifying Glyster, and sleep at seasonable times as much as shecan. Another
way to remedy it is by diverting the Humors, which may be done by rubbing the
body in all the adjacent places, letting Blood in the Foot, Scarification in
the Legs, or Visicatores applied in those places, especially if the Courses,
are stopped, or ready to come down, if not, it is requisite to bleed in the Arm.

But if what has been mentioned, prevailed not to remove the Humors, make a
Cataplasm of the Leaves of Mellilot, and Nightshade, each half a handful, and
when boiled in Spring Water add to them Bean Meal 2 ounces, Oil of sweet
Almonds and Oatmeal of each an ounce, and apply them to the Breast, observing
so to do before the Breast be extraordinarily inflamed.

CHAP. XXXIV. A Tumor in the Breast, its Cause and Cure.
OF Tumors there are several sorts, but first of the Flagitious Tumor, the
cause of which proceeds from a thick and unnatural Vapor arising from the
Menstrual blood, which is retained or corrupted in the Matrix, and that again
is occasioned by the suppressions of the Courses, or when Nature is defective
in discharging them into their proper place, and due time, as also from
corruption of humors, whereby are ingendered evil Vapors, and there passing
by insensible ways, causes the Breast to swel or distend as if it were a true
swelling, and is known by a shooting pain, and disorder of the Heart, by reason
of the wind that oppresses it; the left Breast being for the most part more
swelled than the right, Communicating pains to the Arms and Shoulders, as
likewise the Ribs on the same side, the Breast being white and shining,
sounding like a Drum if touched gently, and swelled in all parts alike. To cure
this, as also the Valery Tumor, you must order the Woman to observe a
moderation in diet, that thereby Crudities may be avoided, and all such things
as contract windy or valery humors in the Veins, suffering her to drink water
wherein Cinnamon and Anniseeds have been boiled, as also the Rind of Cittron,
and then let her observe to take such things as are proper to provoke the
courses, in doing which, she will find the humors abate: then let her take
Celondine, Cammomile, Groundsil and Ground-juice, stamp them and boil them in
White Wind, and in so doing you will ease the pain, and restore the Breast. As
for Diseases and Accidents incident to young Children, there are but fe Women
of any experience but are skilful in curing and ordering them; wherefore, for
brevities sake, I shall pass them over, and proceed to Anatomise the Instrument
of Man's Generation, that one thing remaining necessary in this Treatise; as
also to instance what Men and Women ought to marry, that their Issue may be
Fair, Healthful, and Prosperous.

CHAP. XXXV. The Anatomy of the Instrument of Man's Generation.
THE Yard of Man is an official Member, and the Tiller of Man's Generation,
compound, and made of Skin, Brawns, Tendones, Veins, Art^ries, Sinews, and
great Lygaments: And it has in it two passages, or principal issues, one for
the Sperm, and another for the Urine. And as the Philosophers say, the quantity
of a common Yard, is Eight or Nine Inches, with measurable bigness,
proportioned to the quantity of the Matrix.

This Member has (as Avicen says) three holes, through one passes insensible
politions and wind, that causes the Yard to rise: the other two holes is
declared before. Also the Yard has a Skin, and about the head thereof it is
double, and that Men call Praeputium, and this Skin is moveable, for through
his consecration the Spermatick matter is the better and sooner gathered
together, and sooner cast forth from the Testicles: For by him is had the most
delectation in the doing. And the foremost part of the head of the Yard before,
is made of a brawny flesh, the which if it be once lost, it can never be
restored again, but it may be well skinned, etc.

The Cods is a compounded Member, and an official, and though it be counted
amongst the Generative Members, yet it is called a principal Member, because of
Generation. This Purse was ordained for the custody and comfort of the
Testicles and other Spermatick Vessels: And it is also made of two parts, of
the inner and of the outer.

The outer is compound and made of Skin, and Lazartus, Longitudinal and
Transversal, in like manner as the Myrac. The inner part of the Cods is of the
substance of the Syfac, and are in similitude as two Pockets drawn together by
themselves, and they differ not from the Syfac: And there be two, because if
there fall any hurt to the one, the other should serve. The Testicles or Stones
be two made of Glandulous flesh, or Curnelly flesh. And furthermore, throug the
Didimus comes the Testicles from the Brain, Sinews, and from the Heart,
Arteries, and from the Liver Veins, bringing unto them both feeling and
stirring, Life and Spirit, and Nutrimental Blood, and the most purest blood of
all other Members of the Body, whereof is made the Sperme by the labor of the
Testicles, the which is put forth in due time.

The Groyns be known: They be the empty Junctures, or purging place unto the
Liver, and they have Curnelly flesh in the plying or bowing of the Thighs. The
Hips have great brawny flesh on them, and from thence descend downwards,
Brawns, Cords, and Ligaments, moving and binding together the Thighs, with the
Haunches themselves.

CHAP. XXXVI. What Women ought to Marry, with what Men, that they may have
Children.
IN respect of Married Women that prove Childless, Hyppocrates advises this
Experiment to be tried, to know whether the defect be on the Woman's part, or on
her Husbands, which is to make her suffumigations with Incense or Storax, with
a Garment close wrapped about her, which may hang down on the ground, in such
sort that no Vapor or Fume may issue out; and if within a while after she feel
the Savor of the Incense in her Mouth, she may conclude that the Barrenness
comes not through her own defect, but through her Husbands, forasmuch as the
Fumes found the Passages open, whereby it pierced up to the Nostrils: But
although this proof perform that effect which Hippocrates speaks of, namely,
the piercing up to the inner part of the Mouth, yet this is no infallible
Argument of the Husbands Barrenness, nor of the Fruitfulness of the Wife; since
want of Children may arise through an unapt disposition in them both, in
respect of the Correspondency of Qualities; for it has oftentimes happened
that a Man who could not have Children by one Wife has had them by another:
the like also has befallen Woman. What the Correspondency should be which the
Man and Wife ought to bear each to other, is expressed by Hipprcrates in these
Words, If the hot answer not the cold, and the dry the moist, with measure and
quantity, that is, if there meet not in the Womb two Seeds, the one hot, the
other cold, the one dry, the other moist, extended in equal degree, there can
be no Generation; for so mavelous a work as the Formation of Man could not be
peform'd without a proportionable commixture of Seed, and the Woman's were both
of the same temperature. To exemplify what I have said, it is to be concluded,
that a Woman who is wily, ill conditioned, shrill-voiced, lean, swarthy
colored, and deformed, (which are the signs of cold and moist in the first
degree) may conceive by a Man who is ignorant, good natured, sweet voyc'd,
corpulent having little Hair, a well colored Face, and a handsome Body, which
are the signs of hot and dry in the first degree, in regard she retains a
mean in all those signs abovementioned, is most like to be Fruitful, because
she comes nearest in proportion to Men of each several temperature. But from
the first of these Unions, or conjoyning of Man and Woman, are most likely to
issue the wisest Childen, because the dryness of the Mother corrects and
amendeth the defect of the Father. Moreover, it is requisite that Woman be
dried by a mature Age, and not marry over young; for from thence it comes to
pass, most commonly, that Children prove shallow and endued with little wit.

CHAP. XXXVII. A Word of Advice to both Sexes in the time of Copulation.
WHen the Husband comes into hi Wives Chamber, he must entertain her with all
kind of dalliance, wanton behavior, and allurements to Venery but if he
perceive her to be slow and more cold, he must cherish, embrace, and tickle
her, and shall not abruptly, the Nerves being suddenly distended, break into
the Field of Nature, but rather shall creep in by little and little,
intermixing more wanton Kisses with wanton Words and Speeches, handling her
Secret Parts and Dugs, that she may take fire and be inflamed to Venery, for so
at length the Womb will strive and wax fervent with a desire of casting forth
its own Seed, and receiving the Man's Seed to be mixed together therewith. But
if all these things will not suffice to inflame the Woman, for Women for the
most part are more slow and slack unto the expulsion or yielding forth of their
Seed, it shall be necessary first to foment her Secret Parts with the Decoction
of hot Herbs made with Muscadine, or boiled in any other good Wine, and to put
a little Musk or Civet into the Neck or Mouth of the Womb, and when she shall
perceive the Flu of her Seed to approach, by reason of the tickling pleasure,
she must advertise her Husband thereof, that at the very instant, time, or
moment, he may also yield forth his Seed, that by the concourse or meeting of
the Seeds, Conception may be made, and so at length a Child formed and born.
And that it may have better Success, the Husband must not presently separate
himself from his Wifes Embraces, lest the Air strike into the open Womb, and so
corrupt the Seeds before they are perfectly mixed together: when the Man
departs, let the Woman lie still in quiet, laying her Legs or her Thighs
across one upon another, and raising them up a little lest that by motion or
downward situation the Seed should be shed or spilt; which is the cause why she
ought at that time not to talk, especially chiding, nor to Cough or Sneese, but
to give her self to rest and quietness, if it be possible.

Thus, Reader, have I finished the difficult Mystery of Generation, as I hope,
to the Satisfaction of all Modest and Ingenious Persons.

FINIS.


In Stecquer a Village of Saxony, they say, a Monster was born, with four Feet,
Eyes, Mouth, and Nose like a Calf, with a round and red Excrescence of Flesh on
the Forchead, and also a piece of Flesh like a Hood hung from his Neck upon his
back, and it was deformed with its Thighs, torn and cut.

Parrey says, that Anno Dom. 1573. he saw at St. Andrews Church in Paris, a
Boy Nine Years old, born in the Village Parpavilla, six miles from Guise; his
Fathers Name was Peter Renard, and his Mother Marquete: He ahd but two Fingers
on his right Hand, his Arm was well proportioned from the top of his Shoulder
almost to his Wrest, but from thence to his two Fingers ends it was very
deformed, he wanted his Legs and Thighs, although from the right Buttock a
certain unperfect Figure, having only four Toes, seemed to put it self forth;
from the midst of the left buttock two Toes sprung out, the one of which was
not much unlike a Man's Yard, as you may see by the Figure.

The Effigies of a monstrous Child, by reason of the defect of the matter of
Seed.


Anno Dom. 1493. there was generated of a Woman and a Dog, an issue, which
from the Navel upwards perfectly resembled the shape of the Mother, but
therehence downwards the Sire, that is, the Dog. This Monster was sent to the
Pope that then Reigned, as Volaterane writes: Also Cardane mentions it;
wherefore I have here given you the Figure thereof.

The Effigies of a Monster half Man and half Dog.


About the time that Pope Julius the Second raised up all Italy, and the
greatest part of Christendom against Lewis the Twelfth, the King of France, in
the Year of our Lord 1512. (in which Year, upon Easter Day, near Ravenna was
Fought that Mortal Battle, in which the Popes Forces were overthrown) a Monster
was Born in Ravenna, having a Horn upon the Crown of his Head, and besides, two
Wings, and one Foot alone, most like to Feet of Birds of Prey, and in the Knee
thereof an Eye, the Privities of Male and Female, the rest of the body like a
Man, as you may see by this Figure.

The Figure of a Winged Monster.


We have read in Heliodorus, that Persna, Queen of Aethiopia, by her Husband
Hidustes, being also an Aethiope, had a Daughter of a white Complexion, because
in the Embraces of her Husband, by which she proved with Child, she earnestly
fixed her eye and mind upon the Picture of the fair Andromeda standing opposite
to her.

Damascene reports, that he saw a Maid hairy like a Bear, which had that
Deformity by no other cause or occasion than that her Mother earnestly beheld,
in the very instant of receiving and conceiving the Seed, the Image of St. John
covered with a Camels skin, hanging upon the post of the bed.

They say Hippocrates, by this Explication of the Causes, freed a certain Noble
Woman from suspicion of Adultery, who being white her self, and her Husband
also white, brought forth a Child as black as an Ethiopian, because in
Copulation she strongly and continually had in her mind he Picture of the
Aethiope.

The Effigies of a Maid all Hairy, and an Infant that was black by the
Imagination of their Parents.




Jovianus Pontanus tells in the Year 1529. the ninth day of January, there was
a Man-Child born in Germany, having four Arms and as many Legs.

FINIS.

