THE PRACTICAL RULE OF Christian Piety: CONTAINING The Sum of the whole Duty
of a true Disciple of Christ.

Written Originally in Latin By Benedictus Aria Montanus, AND Translated into
English By A. LOVEL, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill, 1685.

THE Author's Preface TO THE Christian READER.
THEY who from the Study of the Holy Scriptures, and of the nature of worldly
things, learn and do confess that God takes care of sublunary affairs; do
clearly perceive that the rough Tempest wherein most Christian People are at
present tossed, is not the effect of the uncertain influences of the Stars, nor
that it is raised by hidden and obscure causes. None of them doubt, but that
the public Calamities of Kingdoms, People and Cities, are sent by the Judgment
and Providence of God the avenger of wickedness; and that before they happen,
they are Prophesied and foretold by Pious and Chosen Men, for the glory of
divine Justice, and the amendment of the lives of sinful Men; as it is written:
Amos 3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Will a Lion roar in the
Forest when he has no Prey? will a young Lion cry out of his Den, if he have
taken nothing? Can a Bird fall in a snare upon the Earth, where no Gin is for
him? Shall one take up a Snare from the Earth, and have taken nothing at all?
Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be afraid? Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his servants the Prophets. Now for
what causes such Commotions are raised both in public and private affairs, the
same Prophet does declare: pubish in the Palaces at Ashdod, and in the Palaces
in the Land of Egypt, and say, assemble your selves upon the Mountains of
Samaria: and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, for they know not
to do right, says the Lord, who store up Violence and Robbery in their
Palaces. Therefore thus says the Lord, an adversary there shall be even round
about the Land; and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy Palaces
shall be spoiled.

To me, truly, the visible cause of the divine Judgment against us appears to
be our public and common sins; whilst I see the greatest part of Christians
rent into several Sects, not only seduced and led away by many errors, but also
proud and puffed up in them; and others who live in the Communion of the
Church, and profess the true Doctrine, neglecting the duties of the same, and
almost wholly perverting it: and so, whilst I reflect upon the depraved minds
of some, and the corrupt and dissolute lives of others, and the Dissentions,
Jars, Oppositions, Enmities and perverse courses of both, I often think with my
self upon this. The Lord looked down from Heaven, upon the Children of Men; to
see if there were any that did understand and seek God. They are all gone
aside, they are altogether become filthy: there is none that does good, no not
one.

Tho I neither be a Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet, yet I dare be bold to
foretell greater Storms hanging over our heads, unless they be prevented: It is
enough to me, to make me affirm this; that I see those crimes in the Earth,
which God Almighty by infallible Oracles has threatened not to let go
unpunished. For if the Lion roar, who will not be afraid? if the Lord has
spoken, who shall not prophecy? Therefore he may very lawfully predict future
evils, who sees the manifest causes, from which, God Almighty, calling Heaven
and Earth to witness, has foretold that difficult and sad times will arise.
Isa. 1. Now the causes which I observe, I think are obvious to all Men, to wit,
Deuteronomy. 32. our contumacy and insolence, our hardened obstinacy in wicked courses;
and a kind of contending with God that punishes us; which the Prophet Isaiah
takes notice of in the Jews. Isai. 1. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye
will revolt more and more: The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.
From the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it; but
wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores: they have not been closed, neither
bound up, neither mollified with Ointment.

And, would to God! that in this tossing and agitation of the World there were
no other loss but of the wealth, dignities, splendor and honors of the age,
which tho they be highly valued, yet it might justly be born with, nay and
perhaps to be wished, seeing such heavy loads and burdens are many times
hinderance to the prosperity of our course: but, which is most sad and
grievous, when the danger of the loss of one poor soul ought, in right, to be
prevented by the throwing overboard of all the goods and Cargo of the Ship;
yet in such doleful Ship-wrecks, innumerable numbers of souls are observed to
perish, and be swallowed up in the deep; which is the greatest of all humane
miseries. Now seeing it is the duty and office of the Masters and Pilots, to
bestir themselves for the safety of the beaten Vessel; and that I observe many
of those who are concerned, diligently laboring for that purpose; tho I want
both authority and skill to act amongst those who rule the Ship; yet as being
of the number of those, who in common danger, ought not to be idle spectators
but busy in lending a hand, or at least assistant with fervent prayers, I
thought it my duty, according to the mean and low station that I stand in, in
the Church of God, with all humility and modesty to propose what I have judged
proper for remedying of the evils, whereof the causes are so obvious to be
known; especially since we bend our care to the admonishing and helping of
those, who when they are unable to understand higher and greater matters, are
not, perhaps, frequently taught those things which are more useful, and
necessary to be known of all Men in general; and which if they be ignorant of,
they can never attain to salvation, nor to the knowledge of those Points which
are reckoned more noble and sublime truths. Nor do we fear that these our
endeavors will seem unseasonable or superfluous to those great Men, who are
more learned and skilful in the art of instructing and teaching the way of
living; we are rather confident that the considerate will approve of our
design, hoping that if we have given any hints that may serve for forewarding
their duty, they will take it kindly and in good part. For in great Storms, the
chief Masters and Pilots, receive sometimes good advice from the Passengers,
when they are pleased to hear them. In how much then, we have learned from the
Doctrine and Word of God, for the obtaining of God the salvation of our souls
in the next World, and public Peace and Tranquillity in this, we conceive two
things are to be done, the one is, that we persevere in the pure and holy Faith
of the Catholic Church; and the other that we endeavor the amendment of our
lives and manners, according to the Rules and Precepts of our Lord and Master,
constantly praying against sin that endangers our souls, and for eternal life,
which is their happiness and bliss. If these things be purely, religiously and
holily set about, they will procure us the grace and mercy of God through Jesus
Christ; as the Holy Ghost by the mouth of his Prophet does assure us: Psalm.
107. Oh that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the Children of Men. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do
business in great waters: These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in
the deep. For he commands and raises the stormy Wind, which lifts up the
waves thereof. They mount up to the Heaven, they go down again to the depths,
their soul is melted because of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like
a drunken Man, and are at their wits end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses. He makes the Storm a
Calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they be
quiet; so he brings them unto their desired haven. Oh that Men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Chilren of Men.
Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the People, and praise him in
the Assembly of the Elders.

Whose is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

THE Practical Rule OF Christian PIETY.
The First Part.
THE scope and design of all Philosophers, who have treated of the Nature and
Actions of Man, and have given precepts and rules for the conduct of humane
life, seems to have been to find out and demonstrate a supreme Perfection, to
which when Man had once attained, he had no further desires to disturb him, but
rested content in an entire and peaceable enjoyment of the chief and most
Humane Felicity.
desirable good: And this they called a state of Happiness or Bliss. Constant
and daily experience made it manifest, that The common condition of life.
the way of living, which most part of Mankind followed, being obnoxious to
care and anxiety, labor and pain, trouble and perturbation of thoughts, came
far short of that perfection of humane Nature, that rest and tranquillity of
mind that Mankind aspired to: And that the various states and conditions of
Men, made no difference in the case; seeing Kings, Princes, Magistrates, and
common People, the Rich and the Poor, the Whole and the Sick, all were
dissatisfied and uneasy in their own condition. Wherefore many have made it
their business to search out and discover several means, how they might attain
to that chief good, which might produce a solid and universal repose in the
minds of all Men. But the different biass of passions and inclination so
divided and distracted the thoughts of the undertakers, that they were wide of
the Mark, and erred in the way of finding true happiness: for some placed chief
good, in the delights and pleasures of the Body; others in the affluence of
Riches; others again in indolence or exemption from grief and pain; and some in
a freedom from all Passions and Affections: Every one in their several Studies
and Actions, pursued the end they had proposed to themselves, and laid down
Maxims and Rules for others to do the like, whom by large promises and
exhortations, they invited to the same course of life.

However the Opinion of those who placed the chief end and happiness of Man in
bodily delights, pleasures and sensual lusts, in the judgment of the wiser,
has been totally exploded; As not only in the act and enjoyments of delights
and pleasure; but also in the manner of attaining to them, rendering the nature
of Man inferior and more unhappy than that of Beasts.

But the opinion of those who made the perfection of life chiefly to consist in
the soundness of the mind, and in virtue; tho in general it was approved; yet
the determination of the things that did constitute, and the method prescribed
for arriving at that felicity, were found liable to so many errors and
difficulties, that being measured by, and compared with the standard of true
happiness, they were at length condemned and rejected as ineffectual. For some
being ignorant of the true Original of the Souls of Men, and not acknowledging
God for the author of them; they fancied to themselves a certain perfection of
Virtue, which they were so far from attaining to, that neither they, nor their
Disciples could ever reach within the view thereof. Some again, tho they knew
God to be the Supreme and true. Author of Humane Nature, yet they owned him not
to be the chief end and happiness of Man; and tho, indeed, they might
acknowledge that, yet without the revealed will of God himself, they could not
rightly understand how they ought to seek, and by what means come to the
enjoyment of him; nay and that also being known, they could not without the
assistance of divine Grace, set about the performance of the duties required
therein. God was, therefore, in the first place, to be known and applied to by
Faith, and that supreme Master to be consulted, who might show and declare
himself and his Doctrine unto them, by those secret and divine ways whereby he
can, and is wont to do it: for without Faith it is impossible to please God.
But the quite contrary course was taken by those, who attributed so much to the
industry and sharpness of humane understanding that they thought that there was
nothing to be sought from God, judging it unseeming a quaint and accurate
Philosopher, to have recourse to the will of God, as being the act rather of a
slothful Soul, than of a prying and inquisitive Mind, that searched into the
nature of things. That Man might and ought of himself find out the excellent
nature of Virtue, carefully and industriously pursue after, and labor to
obtain it, and having obtained it, preserve and improve the same: which tho
they promised to themselves, and endeavored to accomplish; yet seeing they
were neither rooted in Faith, nor had begged and desired the aid of divine
Grace; their search was in vain, so that no where finding what they looked for;
they fatally misled themselves and those that followed them: And losing all
hopes of attaining to the happiness they proposed, they at length degenerated
into the basest and most corrupt kind of life. This the Holy Ghost takes notice
of, and thus condemns, Ephesians. 4. This I say therefore and testify in the Lord,
that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind,
having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart, who
being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness to work all
Uncleanness with greediness. They again who were not without a sense and
knowledge of God, but would not conform to a steady and sure rule of Conduct,
studying rather to follow their own humor, than to comply with the simplicity
of truth, have broached most idle Notions of the excellence of the divine
Nature, and erroneous and most dangerous Persuasions of the way of imitating
the same; leading most part of Mankind first into error and a snare, and then
into utter destruction; as it is written: Romans 1. The wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness, because that which may be known of God, is manifest
in them; for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from
the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even the Eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse.
Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools: and changed the
glory of the uncorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible Man, and
to Birds and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God also gave
them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor
their own bodies between themselves: who changed the truth of God into a lie,
and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed
for evermore. The Doctrine therefore of Men that had no conformity to the Faith
of God, or that fell off from the knowledge of God, unto Vanity, false and
foolish imaginations, could neither rightly define, nor exhibit and declare the
true happiness of Mankind. That only Doctrine which the revealed Will of God
does teach, is capable through the power and goodness of its author, to perform
what it has promised to those who truly and sincerely become its Disciples.
For the Scripture says, Psalm. 119. The Proud have dug Pits for me, which
are not after thy Law. All thy Commandments are Righteousness.

There are many instances which manifestly prove, that the Doctine of the word
of God has fulfilled and made good what it promised and foretold to the true
Disciples and followers thereof; and that it can and daily does perform the
same, to those who are guided thereby. Now this Doctrine has promised
Salvation, eternal happiness and the inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, in
and through the Son of God, who was to be sent into the World, and the descent
of the Holy Ghost into the minds of Believers, which as a sure pledge and
earnest of the celestial inheritance, might by his inspirations teach them the
true and saving use of the Heavenly gifts and Graces; of this the Disciples of
our Lord had experience, as the holy Ghost himself bears witness. 2 Pet. 1.
Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ to them that have
obtained the like precious Faith with us, through the righteousness of God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ: Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, according as his divine Power has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue: whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that by these you might be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
World through lust. The Apostle St. Paul treating of the vanity of the Doctrine
of the Gentiles, and of the truth and benefits of the Christian Discipline,
says to the same purpose, Ephesians. 4. But ye have not so learned Christ; if so be
that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:
That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceiful lusts: And be renewed in the spirit of your
mind; and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness. Acts 3. Ye are the Children of the Prophets,
and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and
in thy Seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto you first God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities.

Now that state and condition to which the true Disciples and Followers of the
Christian Doctrine are by the grace and goodness of God advanced, does in
honor, dignity, and amplitude of glory and bliss far exceed all that the
natural Man, the Wit of Philosophers, and the pains and study of mortal Man can
conceive, define or comprehend, without the special favor and assistance of
divine grace: Isa. 64. For, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. 1 Cor. 2. But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the
Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. For what Man knows
the things of a Man, save the spirit of Man that is in him? even so the things
of God knows no Man, but the spirit of God. This state and condition may in
some measure, indeed, be delineated and described, which by the help of God, in
time and place convenient we shall attempt: but that will be but a faint emblem
and adumbration, rather than a true and lively representation of the same; for
the fullness of this solid and excellent happiness, is not to be expressed in
the common way of speech, nor conceived by the thoughts of men, unless of those
who by the influence and operation of the Holy Ghost, are rendered capable of so
great mysteries. Ephesians. 3. For this cause, says the Apostle, I bow my knees to
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and
Earth is named, that he would grant you according to the riches of his glory,
to be strengthened with might, by his spirit in the inner man; that Christ may
dwell in your hearts by Faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may
be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge,
that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

Now, although a Disciple of this Christian Doctrine may not at first,
comprehend the greatness and excellence of the state to which he is called,
until by divine favor he has attained to it; nevertheless the dignity and
extent of the happiness is not therefore less, nor will it by any
disappointment be diminished; for the mos^ faithful Author of this Doctrine
will abundantly and to the ful^ perform what he has promised tho in the
beginning it be unknown to believers, seeing h^ who freely and graciously has
promised, stands not in need o^ the goodness of others, nor i^ made poorer by
conferring hi^ own; but by how much the more he is liberal and bountiful, by s^
much the riches of his goodnes^ and inexhaustible mercy does increase: Romans 10.
For the sam^ Lord over all, is rich unto all tha^ call upon him. Whether, then*
the reward of the Discipline of Christ, be fully known to his followers, or but
darkly shadowed out to them; yet it shall not be denied to those who with a
pure and holy heart seek after it, nor shall it want any thing of that
amplitude and fullness, which the divine nature of the thing it self, and the
Majesty, Authority and Bounty of him that promises it, does require. Esa. 55.
For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your
ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the rain comes down, and the
snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and makes
it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater: so shall my word be that goes forth of my mouth: it shall not return
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper
in the thing whereto I sent it, for ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth
with peace: the Mountains and the Hills shall break forth before you into
singing and all the trees of the field she clap their hands. Instead of t^
Thorn shall come up the Fig-tre^ and instead of the Bryar shall com^ up the
Myrtle tree: and it she be to the Lord for a name, for a^ everlasting sign that
shall not b^ cut off. A clear proof of the appears in Abraham, whom God
heretofore, having selected and separated him from the Doctrine and Manners of
the Gentiles, proposed as an excellent pattern to be imitated by those who
would embrace and submit to this Discipline; how he having received and by firm
Faith believed the promise of an earthly inheritance did not instantly know
what extent of Land was assured to him referring that to the Almighty who had
made the Promise: but thought it was enough for him to rely on the promises of
the God of the whole Earth, who having freely spoken the word, was best able;
and most willing to perform it. And no sooner was the Promise made, but he
trusting it, obeyed the command and submitted to the conditions enjoined him:
Genesis 12. For the Lord said unto Abraham, get thee out of thy Country, and from
thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a Land that I will show thee, and
I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy Name
great; and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee; and
curse him that curses thee: and in thee shall all families of the Earth be
blessed. So Abraham departed, as the Lord had commanded him, knowing neither
whither he went, nor how large the possession was, that he was to have: which
the Apostle observing, says: By Faith Abraham when he was called to go out
into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he
went out not knowing whither he went: wholly trusting to the word of him who
could and would perform more than he was able either to ask or think* and
looking upon it as his duty to obey the Master whose Disciple he was, that had
promised him large inheritance, to be revealed and discovered unto him in due
time, as the event made appear* For Abraham having made a competent progress in
the discipline he had embraced, being called by God to whose institution he had
resigned himself, was fully instructed by him, not only in the ex^ent of the
Earthly inheritance, but of the Heavenly Blessings also, which were shadowed
and typified thereby; as it is written: Genesis 13. And the Lord said unto
Abraham, after that Lot was separated from him, lift up now thine eyes, and
look from the Place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward,
and Westward. For all the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and
to thy Seed for ever. And I will make thy Seed as the dust of the Earth: so
that if a Man can number the dust of the Earth, then shall thy Seed also be
numbered. Arise, walk through the Land, in the length of it, and in the breadth
of it: for I will give it unto thee. Wherefore seeing no Man can doubt but that
what things God has promised, will more fully be accomplished, than he who is
to receive them can wish for, o^ think; it will be the duty of a true Believer
and Disciple of Christ, to set diligently about the performance of the
condition imposed upon him, and to leave the blessings and favors which he
does expect to the arbitrament of him, to whose conduct and doctrine he has
resigned himself even to God Almighty the powerful and rich Father of all
Mercies, who makes it to rain upon the Just and the Unjust, and who by the
mouth of his own Son, in whom he has spoken and made the greatest of promises
to us, has promised to give his good spirit to those that seek him. For if he
most graciously fulfilled what at sundry times and in diverse manners he spoke
and promised unto the Fathers by the Prophets; and if the word spoken by Angels
was steadfast, how can we be denied or disappointed of any thing that has been
promised to us by the Son of his Love; the faithful interpreter of his Will,
and bountiful dispencer of his Grace and Mercies. This made a most approved
Apostle, who by his own and the experience of others was convinced of that
truth, break out in thankfulness to God: Romans 8. What shall we then say to
these things? If God be for us who can be against us? He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him freely
give us all things? So that on the part of him that promises no doubt can be
made nor any impediment interpose, why those things which have been promised,
should not superabundantly be fulfilled: Luke 6. good measure, pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. And the
truth of this Christian Doctrine for ever stands firm and unshaken, Tit. 1.
According to the Faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledging of the truth, which
is after godliness: In hope of eternal life, which God who cannot lie, promised
before the World began; but has in due times manifested his word. Heb. 6. For
when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he
swear by himself, saying, surely, blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying,
I will multiply thee. And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the
Promise. For Men verily swear by the greater: and an Oath for confirmation is
to them an end of all strife. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto
the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath:
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us: which hope we have as an anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the Vail, whither the forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedec.

It remains then, which is the design of this little Book, that we handle the
Parts and Offices that are incumbent on Believers and the Scholars of Christ,
but especially those which indifferently concern all ranks, ages, and
conditions of Men, and without which their learning will be* in vain, and the
Doctine insignificant. Let every one then, whether King or Priest, Prince or
Statesman, private or public, rich or poor, Bond or Free, Father or Son,
Husband or Wife, Young or Old, Merchant or Artificer, Soldier or Peasant,
Learned or Unlearned, provided he profess himself to be a Disciple and Follower
of Christ and Christian Doctrine, provided he be Baptized into the Faith of the
Catholic Church, without which there is no Salvation; let every one, I say,
learn in what Station soever he be, how he ought to keep his Post, behave and
carry himself in this World, and that from the Precepts and Institutions of the
Holy Ghost himself, who ought to be his Guide, and not from us, who do but, as
Students in the same School, deliver to our fellow Scholars the Precepts and
Doctrine of our great Master who has called us from Darkness to his mavelous
Light, and let him take it in good part, if perchance we inculcate some things
which way seem hard and uneasy to the Manners, Customs and Opinions of this
present Age, not interpreting what we say as a reproof to any person in
particular; but judging it the duty of a faithful Minister and Servant, to
declare and manifest to his fellow servants the Will of the Lord in his own
words; whereby if any Man out of Conscience, Ignorance or Fear shall think
himself censured, he must not be offended with the Doctrine and Precepts which
are Just and Holy, nor with his fellow Servant who delivers them, but with
himself, his faults and vices, who having professed this Doctrine, has not
submitted himself to the Laws and Conditions thereof, which are Constant,
Universal and Immutable, and not made and published, that according to the
desire, humor, lust and counsels of every private man, they may be altered and
changed; but which command Obedience by changing all those Desires, Passions,
Lusts, and Counsels that may be a hindrance to the punctual observation of the
same, our Lord himself having said, Mat. 5. Think not that I am come to destroy
the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. That is, to
make those who believe in me, pure, holy, and faithful in observing and
fulfilling the same. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one
jot or tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Now if the entry into the Kingdom of Heaven
be denied to those, whose righteousness and obedience to the Laws of God, does
not exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, not of the wicked and hypocrites,
but of the good Scribes and Pharisees, who seemed most to excel in the study
of observing the Law: what will become of him, who through hatred, or favor of
Man, shall pervert, change, conceal, dissemble, or any other ways make void the
rules of righteousness that he is to deliver to his fellow Christians, and
teach so? He shall, indeed, be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
deemed unworthy to be admitted into that Heavenly Communion and Society, into
which all that are received, are called Kings and great. Now, to be a King, and
to be the least are inconsistent; hence it follows that in the Kingdom of
Heaven, it is the same thing to be the least, and to be none; for no man that
breaks the Commandments of God and teaches others so to do* shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; but they only shall enter, whose righteousness exceeds
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and who being not only hearers,
but doers of the Law, shall be justified before God.

Wherefore if in the Precepts, Rules, and Instructions of the Doctrine that
has been delivered unto us, any thing may seem to any Man stricter than his
own Will, Opinion, or predominant Affections can comply with, or submit unto,
let him, if he intends to enter into life, be persuaded, that neither the way
which God has once fenced in, is to be changed or enlarged, nor that strait
and narrow Gate made wider, for the sake of any particular Person; and that he
must become Humble, Lowly, and poor in Spirit, striving to walk in the narrow
way, and to enter at the strait Gate, which will not be difficult to those who
truly love this Doctrine, and earnestly implore the assistance of Divine Grace,
that will be denied to none who dutifully and carefully submit to the rules and
dictates of this Discipline. For, Psalm. 145. The Lord is nigh unto all them
that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them.
And so he shall underderstand that the ways of the Lord are broad and pleasant
to those who as Pilgrims and Strangers abstaining from, and renouncing the
carnal desires that war against the Soul, and becoming poor in Spirit,
undertake that holy Journey and enter into the right way; as the Royal Psalmist
says. Psalm. 119. And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy Precepts. I will
speak of thy Testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed. And I will
delight my self in thy* Commandments which I have loved. My hands also will I
lift up unto thy Commandments which I have loved: and I will meditate in thy
Statutes.

I know that good and holy Men will willingly listen to their fellow Christian,
and not so much mind the language and learning of him that writes, as the
sayings which proceed out of the mouth of the living God, whose sacred and
infallible Authority reaching all men, whether public or private, the
Universal Church has always owned and asserted, and that they will take in
good part, whatsoever may be said by us which perhaps may tax the corrupt
manners of our present times; being persuaded that Christian Simplicity, Virtue
and Probity are always in force, and beyond exception and reproach, not only
upon their own account, but because of our purpose and design also, who
heartily love all holy and good Men tho unknown, neither hate any who may have
fallen from the truth, or degenerated from the Virtues of the Gospel, but wish
that all may repent and be saved through Jesus Christ our Lord, whom therefore
we would have rightly admonished of their Duty. As for the wiser, who stand not
in need of our Admonition, we trust, they will put a favorable construction on
our care and endeavors for the common salvation of Mankind; who tho we be
simple, and unable to contribute any thing to the information of the wise, yet
to those who are weaker in knowledge ought to perform what service and good
offices lie in our power. Now the sum of all our Admonition shall consist of
plain Sentences from the Oracles both of the Old and New Testament, the weight
of which is such, that neither humane wisdom can resist, nor the craft and
subtilty of our adversary evacuate the force of them; and by this means we may
be helpful both to those who admit of nothing in dispute, but what is taken
from holy Scripture, and to those also who rightly think, that truth wherever
it be found, ought to be embraced: for to both these it is our design to do
good, not alleging all that might be said, but only such things as we shall
have reason to think may be profitable to all, and hurtful to no body.

The whole Christian Discipline then may be comprehended under two general
Heads, which every true Disciple and follower of Christ, ought to know and
dutifully practice. The first is, to believe the Word and Promises of God, the
Authority whereof has been confirmed by Signs, Miracles and manifest
Testimonies. Now Signs and Miracles are neither at present necessary, nor are
they, nor indeed ought to be required; as being of old seen and approved,
reiterated likewise, and confirmed, and received and believed by the Universal
Church of God: for concerning these, it is written, Deuteronomy. 32. Remember the days
of old, consider the years of many Generations: ask thy Father and he will show
thee, thy Elders, and they will tell thee. Wherefore it is not now to be
doubted, what it is, or how we ought to believe; for that is reduced into
certain Points, which are called Articles, and proposed by the Church to be
learned, under the name of the Apostles Creed, briefly and plainly
comprehending all the Points of our Faith, which have been largely commented
upon and explained, in the many writings of holy and learned Men. Neither is
our discourse directed to those that do not believe, but to such as believe, or
at least, profess they believe the Word and Promises of God to their own
Salvation, and confess that there is no necessity of Miracles* nor any doubt of
the Salvation sent into the World, and wrought by Jesus Christ; Heb. 2. Which
at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by those
that heard him; God also hearing them witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and
with diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will.

The second Head and Branch of Doctrine is, the knowledge and practice of Piety,
of which at present we are to treat. Now, for illustration sake, we call Piety,
all that which every faithful Disciple and Follower of Christ and the Christian
Doctrine, believing the Promises, ought to know, hold fast, and practice, no
Man being excepted who having the right use of his Reason, can know and perform
the same, seeing the assistance of the divine Grace that is necessary to that
knowledge and practice, will not be wanting nor denied to those who, as we said
before, diligently and seasonably beg the same, but will rather be plentifully
supplied by the Father of Light, 1 Timothy 2. who will have all men to be saved,
and to come unto the knowledge of the Truth; even those who are strangers to the
knowledge of the Truth, and much more such as embrace the known Truth, and study
to hold fast and improve it. Now we say, that it behooves a Disciple of Christ,
to know the chief Precepts and Institutions of the Doctrine of Piety which he
professes: for tho to know the least Points be neither the duty, nor is it
required of all; yet those things which belong to all in general, and every
Disciple in particular, are not to be unknown. For how dare he profess and call
himself a Disciple, who knows not the Heads of that Discipline which he does
and ought to follow? And by what right can he expect to be acknowledged a
Scholar by the Master, who knows not the Precepts and Institutions of his
Teacher? And to that purpose is this, which by a Disciple is written to his
fellow Scholars: 1 Cor. 14. If any Man think himself to be a Prophet, or
Spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the
Commandments of the Lord. But if any Man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. If
any Man know not the Commands of God, he shall not be known by our Lord and
Master, who will say, Mat. 25. I know you not. And again, to every one that
has shall be given: but from him that has not shall be taken away, even that
which he has. In another place making a difference betwixt those who believe
and know the Will of God, and those who do not, the Lord says, Luke 12. And
that Servant which knew his Lords Will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his Will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not,
and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.
Wherefore leaving those who know not the Will of the Lord, such as are they to
whom the knowledge of the Gospel has not as yet reached; our discourse is to
those, who have known, or at least have professed to know the Will of the Lord,
who ought to prepare themselves and do according to his Will; to whom the
Apostle says, 1 These. 4. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord
Jesus. For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, to which Men
ought to prepare themselves. Now, no Man can be so prepared, if he be ignorant
by what means and actions that Preparation is to be set about and accomplished:
for tho one may set about it with all imaginable care and study, yet unless he
square the same according to the rules and and directions of the Divine Will,
he will at length find it to be unprofitable. And this God Almighty himself
plainly declares to those, who moved with a pious study and zeal, yet proposed
to themselves other courses, than were enjoined them by his Counsel and
Precepts. Isa. 48. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, I
am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the
way that thou should go. Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandments: then
had thy Peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea.
From which holy Sentences, it follows, that every Disciple ought at least to
know the chief Heads of the Discipline that is profitable unto him; those, I
mean, which may be known, retained and practise^ by all, and require neither
much Labor, great Study, a deep Wi^^ length of Time, nor far Trav^^ for
attaining to the knowledge them; as it is written, Deuteronomy. 3^ For this
Commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidd^^ from thee, neither is
it far off. (...) is not in Heaven that thou should say, who shall go up for us
to He^ven, and bring it unto us, that (...) may hear it, and do it? Neither it
beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for (...) and
bring it unto us, that we (...) hear it and do it? But the Word^ very nigh unto
thee, in thy mout^ and in thy heart, that thou man do it.

This Piety then, that is to (...) known and practiced by us, is d^vided into
three parts: to wit, Fear, Repentance, and Charity, with the observation of the
Laws of God; which whosoever being rightly taught, shall keep and observe, they
will through the most bountiful Promise and Covenant of God, confirm and
increase to him the Grace and Mercy of the Lord, to his own Salvation, and at
length bring him to the possession and enjoyment of the Kingdom of Heaven. For
such is the efficacy that the Will and bounteous Liberality of God has granted
to these three Parts, or Virtues, if you had rather call them so, that he whose
mind is filled and endowed with them, may thereby avoid the wrath and dreadful
Judgment of God, and find Grace and Mercy in the Eyes of the Almighty.

In the first place then, they who would practice the Duties of Christian
Piety, must have their minds filled with a divine* Fear: that is, with an awe,
reverence, and watchful observation of those things, which are known to be
either acceptable or displeasing to God, that they may wholly detest, fly and
abhor the last, and with all care and diligence pursue and seek after the
first. For that disposition, whereby the mind so reverences God, that it wills
nothing which may offend that immence goodness, and rejects nothing which it
knows to be conform to the Will of God; that disposition of mind, I say, is
called the fear of the Lord, and is said to be the beginning of all true
Wisdom, which by another name also the Latins have called Religion.
Philosophers have divided this into a servile and filial fear, and the
Christian School have admitted the same distinction, condemning the servile
fear so far, as it was a forerunner to, and made way for the filial. But we,
whose design it is not so much to dispute nicely about these matters, as to
accommodate them to vulgar capacities, and to square our discourse according to
the rule of sacred Oracles, following the definition given by the Holy Ghost,
call this fear of the Lord, Religion or Reverence, whereby the mind of an holy
Man being affected, observes and follows what he knows to be acceptable to God:
and on the contrary rejects and shuns what is displeasing to him. Wherefore
this pious disposition of mind is by Wisdom so defined: The fear of the Lord is
the beginning (or principal part) of Wisdom, that is to say* a Religious
observation of those things which by Knowledge or Wisdom, we know to be desired
or shunned. Now by Wisdom in this place, is to be understood the knowledge and
notices o^ the divine Will, whether attained by word, writing, or tradition or
by revealed rules and rational intimations.

Now this divine Fear puts him in whose heart it is, upon the exercise of true
repentance, incline him to the Study and observation of the Laws of God, and
sti^ him up to a search and diligent enquiry into the nature o^ both. For when
once a Man has resolved with himself t^ reverence and practice all tha^ he
knows to be acceptable to God, and to fly and shun those things which do
displease him; he makes it his chief care to learn what it is that God approves
of, and what he condemns; and being so taught, he implores the assistance of
the divine Grace, repents of the former sins of his misspent life, and proposes
to himself the way of Gods Commandments, wherein persisting in a steady and
uninterrupted course, he is made partaker of the Heavenly Promises stipulated
by the Covenant of Grace, and enjoys the fellowship and communion of that
blessing, which the Father of Love has promised, can, and will make good to
them who believe in him, and which, in effect, he has fulfilled to those who
have obeyed his most Just and Holy Will.

Wherefore the Wisdom of God knowing what extraordinary fruits spring from this
root of divine fear; that it might dehort Men from the violation of the Laws of
God, and deter them form the danger of everlasting Wrath and indignation; by
the mouth of the Son of Sirach; call^^ Ecclus. 1. The fear of the Lord, a Crown
of Wisdom, Honor, and Glory, and Gladness, and a Crown of Rejoicing. And to
explain and commend it more effectually and plainly, says, that the fear of
the Lord is a Fountain of Life. The fear of God is therefore called the
beginning and fountain of Life, because reclaiming Man from the violation of
the Laws of God, and inducing him to true repentance, it sets him upon the
keeping and performance of the Commandments, that he may obtain Grace and Mercy
in the sight of the Almighty, whereby he becomes the son of God and heir of
eternal Life, through the most gracious Promise and Covenant of that God, who
freely and of his own accord takes upon himself the care, conduct, instruction
and sanctification of all those who cleave unto him by Faith and true
Obedience; and therefore the Royal Psalmist sings: Psalm. 145. He will fulfill
the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save
them: and in another place, Psalm. 103. For as the Heaven is high above the
Earth: so great is his Mercy toward them that fear him. As far as the East is
from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us, Like as a
Father pitieth his Children: so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. And again.
The Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him. By all which, we are taught that the never failing Mercy of God is
infinite and eternal to those who filled and animated with divine Fear, follow
the ways of Godliness: which Fear, as we have said, is the beginning, or
principal part of Knowledge, that is, it is a reverent care to avoid sin, obey
the Will, and worship the Majesty of God. And therefore the holy Mother of our
Lord affirms: Luke 1. That his Mercy is on them that fear him, from Generation
to Generation; thereby intimating, that that divine and inexhaustible Mercy was
in no Age ever wanting to those who Fear and religiously Serve the Lord. And,
indeed, divine Wisdom has by many and frequent Testimonies and Oracles out of
the mouths of all the Prophets and Holy Men, asserted the Dignity and
Excellence of the Fear of God; and amongst others by that of the Son of Sirach:
Ecclus. 25. Oh how great is he that finds Wisdom! yet there is none above him
that fears the Lord. For Knowledge and Wisdom do, indeed, illuminate and
instruct the Mind; but that holy Fear of the Lord turns the heart effectually
unto God, and inclines it to the Obedience and Observation of the Precepts of
the divine Law. As the same Son of Sirach does expressly teach, Ecclus. 2.
saying, My Son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for
Temptation. Set thy Heart aright, and constantly endure, and make not have in
time of trouble. Cleave unto him, and depart not away, that thou may be
increased at thy last end. Whatsoever is brought unto thee take cheerfully, and
be patient when thou art changed to a low estate. For Gold is tried in the
Fire, and acceptable Men in the Furnace of Adversity. Believe in him, and he
will help thee; order thy way aright and trust in him. Ye that fear the Lord,
wait for his Mercy, and go not aside, lest ye fall. Ye that fear the Lord,
believe him, and your reward shall not fail. Ye that fear the Lord, hope for
good, and for everlasting Joy and Mercy. Look at the Generations of old, and
see: did ever any trust in the Lord, and was confounded? Or did any abide in
his fear, and was forsaken?, Or, whom did he ever despise, that called upon
him? For the Lord is full of Compassion and Mercy, Long-Suffering, and very
Pitiful, and forgiveth Sins, and saves in time of Affliction. Woe be to fearful
hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner that goes two ways. Woe unto him that
is faint-hearted, for he believes not, therefore shall he not be defended. Woe
unto you that have lost Patience: and what will ye do when the Lord shall visit
you? They that fear the Lord, will not disobey his Word, and they that love
him, will keep his ways. They that fear the Lord, will seek that is well
pleasing unto him, and they that love him shall be filled with the Law. They
that fear the Lord will prepare their heart, and humble their Souls in his
sight, saying, we will fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands
of men: for as his Majesty is so is his Mercy. Nor do the holy Scriptures
affirm only that the Fear of God is an useful, proper and effectual means for
working out our own Salvation; but also that it is absolutely necessary, and
without which no Man can be saved; seeing he who is not endowed with this
Religious and Godly Fear, can neither rightly set about, nor with a steady and
constant purpose of mind, go through with the work of Repentance; nor yet
faithfully keep the Laws of God, as they ought to do, who endeavor to approve
themselves to God, and procure the blessing of Justification and Christian
Sanctification. And therefore it was the Decree and Purpose of Heaven that a
messenger of the Salvation which was coming into the World, should as a
forerunner be sent before, to Preach the Repentance and observation of the
Divine Laws to Men, and by that means prepare the way for Christian
Righteousness. Mat. 3. For John the Baptist came preaching in the Wilderness of
Judea, and saying, Repent ye: For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. For this is
he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying. The voice of one crying in
the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. For
the same purpose the Apostles were sent out by Jesus Christ the Author and
High Priest of our Salvation, to Publish and Preach this necessary Duty of
Repentance: for, as the Evangelist says, Mark 6. They went out and Preached
that Men should Repent. The Apostles excepted none that heard them, and desired
to be partakers of the Salvation which they Preached, from the Duty and Care of
Repentance. The Apostle Paul affirms before King Agrippa, that he was enjoined
and had performed the same duty, both toward the Jews and Gentiles, without
any distinction: Preaching throughout all the wastes of Judea, and then to the
Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn of God, and do works meet for
repentance. When the Jews and others at Jerusalem asked the question, what was
to be done by those who desired to be saved, St. Peter answered: Acts 2. Repent
and be Baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the
Promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call. It might be proved by above six hundred
Testimonies from the Holy Scripture, that without the fear of the Lord and
Repentance, which is the second Head of Doctrine we now treat of, and without
the keeping and observation of the Laws of God, no Man that is come to Age, and
that knows God and the nature of good and evil, can obtain remission of sins,
and the inheritance and enjoyment of the Kingdom of Heaven. This, our Savior
himself, the best Interpreter of his Fathers will asserts, saying, Luke 13.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Mat. 5. and except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Now seeing the word
Repentance is often to be mentioned in this little Book, that it may clearly
appear what we mean, we are to take notice that Repentance comprehends two
things; a detestation and forsaking of our sins and ill life past, and an
earnest and sincere practice and performance of those Virtues, Acts, and Deeds
which are known to be acceptable to God. As to the first part, that is, the
detestation and forsaking of sin and a sinful life; that Repentance chiefly
relates to it, which is enjoined and taught by the Christian Church; of which
the particulars are, the sorrow and contrition of heart, the confession of the
mouth, and satisfaction in deed; to use the common phrase and expression of the
learned: for knowing the nature whereof, we shall refer you to the Books of the
Learned who have fully handled and discussed that Point; being resolved here
only to treat of the Virtue and Grace of Repentance, which is the end and
complement of that other part: for it is not enough to lament and bewail what
is past, as is commonly said, to confess our sins, and not commit the same
again; unless they who can, do bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance. And
therefore this part, which consists in the amendment of life, and in the
exercise and practice of Righteousness, otherwise called the Virtue and Grace
of Repentance, is the subject whereof we shall treat at present.

Now the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures makes this Repentance the Grace of
Heavenly Wisdom, to consist chiefly in this; That Man should war against his
own Lusts, subdue and overcome his natural affections, abstain from worldly and
carnal works, and with all care and industry endeavor to perform what is
commanded and approved of by God. For this Law was laid upon the first Parent
of Mankind, by that Mysterious and Divine Oracle, delivered under the Name and
Figure of the Earth, Genesis 3. Cursed is the Earth for thy sake; in Sorrow shall
thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and Thistles shall it
bring forth to thee: and thou shall eat the herb of the field. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat bread. God declared to Man that that humane Earth
called Adam, from whence he himself had the name of Adam, was for his sake,
that is, for his transgression of the Command of God, cursed and made
disobedient, foretelling him, that in sorrow and labor he should eat of the
fruits of that earth, which was not, through the curse become altogether so
barren, that it would bring forth no good fruit, but that the good and
profitable fruit which it did bring forth, must be the effect of much labor
and pain. For as that Earth was of it self, to bring forth nothing but Thorns
and Thistles, that is, various difficulties springing from Lust and Pride,
which must be rooted out by him who desires to feed on good and generous fruit;
so there is need of indefatigable pains and labor, even to the sweat of the
brow, that is, to the mastering and disciplining the Will and Affections, that
by so doing he may obtain that heavenly bread which God has promised, fully to
bestow upon those, who in that manner work out their own Salvation. Many
Oracles of divine Scripture confirm the truth of this; as, Rev. 2. and 3. To
him that overcomes and keeps my works to the end, will I give to eat of the
Tree of Life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, and a Crown of Life.
And I also will give him to eat of the hidden Manna; and will give him a white
stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no Man knows, saving he
that receives it. And I will give him the Morning Star, and he shall be
clothed in white Robes, and I will not blot out his name out of the Book of
Life; but will make him a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the
City of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, and my new name. Rev. 21. He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part
in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second death.

The gracious goodness of God to admonish us of these things, and of what
concerns our Salvation, gives to all and every sinner this seasonable warning
Rev. 3* I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be
rich and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; be zealous therefore and repent. Behold I stand at the
door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Most graciously and freely then,
does the Lord invite to the joys of his Supper, all who being decently clothed
and prepared as they ought, pray and long for the gladness of that most
excellent Feast, which being liberally offered by him that invites them, they
shall at length fully enjoy, and rejoice with him who has made them partakers
of the greatest Promises. But we have a clear Instance, that he who durst come
to the Wedding-Feast, not clothed with the Wedding Garment, which is,
Repentance and the observation of the Precepts of Christ, was rebuked by the
angry King, and had this dreadful check and sentence: Mat. 22. Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having the Wedding Garment? Then said the King to
his Servants, bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into
outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The Doctrine,
therefore, of the Gospel requires not only Faith, but Obedience also, in him
who desires to be an Heir of the promised Salvation: and this Obedience begins
by a true and unfeigned Repentance, and shows it self in the serious exercise
thereof; heavy Judgments being denounced by God upon those who obey no^ the Law
of the Gospel. No^ by the Gospel Law, in this place we mean, the conditions
requ^red of them, who really and i^ effect desire to be made partaker^ of these
glad tidings; for otherwise without Repentance and the observation of the
Precepts of God, Men are so far from obtaining the divine Promises, th^^ they
must certainly expect the wrath and anger of God; 2 They 1. In flaming Fire,
taking Veng^ance of them that know not God and that obey not the Gospel of o^^
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be p^nished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; wh^ he shall come to be
glorified in b^ Saints, and to be admired of all them that believe.

Now this Wedding Garment, which every one that is called to the Marriage, and
desires to be admitted into that holy Feast, must and ought to be clothed
with, is made up of Repentance, and the observation of the divine Precepts; and
that it is so, we have the word of the King himself, the Lord and Master of the
Feast for it, who commanded his Servants whom he sent to call the Guests,
Saying: Mat. 22. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I command you: That is to say, Repentance, and
the study and observation of the Precepts and Commands of God; For so the Lord
himself expounds it, who, when he went about performing the office of an
Evangelist, taught publicly, Mark 1. saying: The time is fulfilled, and the
Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye and believe the Gospel.

A clear instance of this is to be seen in Abraham, whom God proposed as a
pattern of his free and most gracious Election, exhibiting unto us under the
type and figure of earthly and sensual things the whole and sum of this great
mystery: for such was the counsel of God, that what things really and truly
happened unto him, the same should shadow out and represent the spiritual
blessings which belonged to us. As it is written; 1 Cor. 10. All these things
happened unto them for ensamples, ( or types) and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. Abraham being first
called, believed in God who had called him, and promised to make him a Father
of many Nations; In God I say, who calls those things which be not as tho
they were: and trusted to the divine election, knowing that to be the most
acceptable obedience to God, when one willingly and diligently complies with
his call, and without doubting* undergoes that saving discipline, as proceeding
from him; who being the Fountain of all Goodness, freely bestows himself, His
Graces and Blessings, upon those who believe and obey him: so that when he was
commanded by him, from whom he had received the Promise, to leave his Country,
his Kindred, and his Fathers House; he obeyed, and went out, leaving those
advantages, which those who live after the manner of this world, reap from
their Country, Kindred, and Fathers House; for the native Country affords
acquaintance and confidence, the Fathers House, Wealth and Riches, and Kindred,
Means and Substance to those who lead their lives according to the dictates of
Lust and Ambition. Abraham, therefore, departed, as the Lord had commanded him,
leaving his Country, Kindred, and Fathers House, and chose to be a Stranger and
Sojourner in a strange Land, following the Command of God that called him. Now
we know, that Strangers and Sojourners have no mind, means, nor confidence, to
spend their time in delights, and pleasures, so long as they think of their
condition, and behave themselves like Strangers and Sojourand propose to
themselves, that that is not their Country or place of rest, but an Inn or
place of refreshment, which they must shortly leave, and go forward unto a
place of more commodious habitation. So Abraham being called and commanded to
go out of his Country, into a Land that was to be shown to him, not only
believed, but obeyed and put it in execution: for he really and indeed forsook
his Country, Kindred and Fathers House, and not in word and inclination alone.
He said not, I will do it, or I desire to do it, and did it not; but actually
performed what he was commanded: and in that manner Abraham believed in God,
and it was accounted to him for Righteousness; not that he believed only, but
that believing he obeyed, and went out unto a place which he was to receive for
an inheritance, not knowing whither he went. Heb. 11. And that by Faith he
Sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, dwelling in
Tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same Promise.
According to this precedent, whoever is called to the gifts and blessings of
the Heavenly Promises, believes in, and would please him that has promised,
desiring to have them made good unto him, must not only by Faith, Will, and
Inclination, but also in Deed and in good Earnest, renounce the Pomp, Vanity,
Corruption, Delights, Pleasures, Ambition and other Vices of this World, and
perform what he obliged himself to and promised, before the blessed Trinity,
(in which he professed his belief,) in presence of his Godfathers, Godmothers
and Witnesses in his Baptism, through the grace and assistance of him that
called him, to whose service he resigned himself, and in whose name he was
Baptized, that is, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which grace
and assistance will never be wanting to those, who from a pure and holy heart
implore and beg the same, as we have already demonstrated: Luke 12. I am come
to send fire on the Earth, and what will I if it be already kindled? Now he
promised to renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked World: and what are the works of the Devil, and Vanities of the
World, but Ambition, Lust, Avarice, and the delights and pleasures of the
Flesh? that is to say, the corrupt manners and customs of this World, which,
according to the Doctrine of the Apostles, breed, cherish and increase sin and
wickedness, as it is written: 1 John 2. Love not the World, neither the things
that are in the World. If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not
in him. For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World. And
again, the Apostle S. James says, James 4. Ye Actulterers and Adulteresses,
know ye not that the friendship of this World is enmity with God? Whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the World, is the enemy of God. Do ye think that
the Scripture says in vain, The Spirit that dwells in us, lusts to envy?
Wherefore we must not only by Faith and in words, but in our endeavors, acts,
and deeds renounce all worldly Pleasures, Lusts and Ambition; for Virtue
consists not in words, but in deeds. And therefore St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. If
a Man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work. And
St. Peter alluding to Abraham thus admonishes: 1 Pet. 2. Dearly beloved, I
beseech you, as Strangers, and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war
against the Soul, having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that
whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which
they shall behold, glorify God in the day of Visitation. Wherefore that Faith
which is commended and praised in Abraham, was not an idle and dead, but a
living Faith, quickened by Charity, and showing it self in the practice and
exercise of Obedience, and so it was imputed to him for Righteousness, because
he really left his Country, Kindred, and his Fathers house, and obediently went
unto the place appointed him; thereby setting before us a lively instance of
true Obedience. Which Moses imitating, Heh. 11. when he was come to years,
refused to be called the Child of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in
Egypt: for he had a respect unto the recompense of Reward. By Faith he forsook
Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for he endured as seeing him who is
invisible. In deeds then and not in words alone, or an empty and idle boasting
of Faith, must every one show himself obedient to God, and bring forth the
fruits of serious Repentance; as in his holy Baptism he promised. But how is
that performed by those, who never depart from iniquity? or if they do, it is
but for a time, upon occasion of Confessing, or taking the Sacrament, that they
may again fall into the same or more heinous crimes, when notwithstanding the
conditions required of a Penitent that would worthily receive the Sacrament,
are satisfaction and amendment of life; which, if sometime they set about it,
they soon forsake, and relapse into the accursed manners of a stubborn and
inflexible nature, but not he that begins, Mat. 24 but he that shall endure
unto the end, the same shall be saved. Isa. 1. Wash ye, make you clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to
do well, seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, Judge the fatherless, plead for
the widow. Come now and let us reason together says the Lord: though your sins
be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, tho they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as Wool. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, says God, who
comparing the noble beginnings of Christian simplicity and Piety, with the
subsequent corruption of manners, and defect of Repentance and Obedience in his
ancient People, thus laments over them: How is the faithful City become an
Harlot? It was full of Judgment: Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers.
Thy Silver is become dross, thy Wine mixed with Water. Thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of Thieves are every one that loves Gifts, and
follows after Rewards: they judge not the Fatherless, neither does the cause
of the Widow come unto them. That Faith then which is accompanied with
Repentance and Obedience, is the Faith whereby Men obtain the gracious promises
of God: not, I say, an idle and dead Faith, but that which works by Charity,
and believes and obeys the word of God, does what is commanded, and is deterred
by no difficulties, but rather with heroic resolution and assurance performs
whatever is enjoined it: as it is written. Heb. 11. By Faith they passed
through the Red Sea, as by dry Land: which the Egyptians essaying to do were
drowned. By Faith the Walls of Jerico fell down, after they were compassed
about seven days. By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that
believed not: when she had received the Spies with Peace. And what shall I now
say? For the time would fail me to tell of Gideon and of Baruch, and of
Sampson, and of Jeptha, of David and also Samuel, and of the Prophets: who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the Fire: escaped the edg
of the Sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in Fight, turned
to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Women received their dead, raised to life
again. So that the Faith of all those showed it self in great Works, it being
their care and study to approve themselves to God not barely by the profession
of an idle Faith, but by the obedience and practice of a lively and active
Faith, and to omit nothing that for Godliness sake they were commanded to do,
and on the contrary, to act nothing, which Religion and Obedience taught them
to shun and avoid, and rather to suffer all inconveniences and losses, even to
death and reproach, than to violate those Precepts, which the will and word of
God delivered to be observed by them. And therefore they also, have left to
Posterity patterns and examples of true Repentance, and Obedience, as it
follows in the same place: And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance,
that they might obtain a better resurrection. Others had trials of cruel
mockings and scourgings; yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonment. They were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were slain with the Sword, they wandered about
in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: of whom
the World was not worthy: they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in
Dens and Caves of the Earth. And these all having obtained a good report
through Faith, received not the Promise: God having provided some better thing
for us: that they without us should not be made perfect. The Apostle calls the
works of those holy Men, and their practice of Obedience, the Testimony of
Faith, as well in undergoing and acting what they were commanded to act and
undergo, as in declining and shunning those things that were prohibited to be
done; and yet they obtained not the Promise, that is, not the full enjoyment of
the Kingdom of Heaven, which before the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ
was not as yet opened; that they might not be made perfect without us, who came
at the eleventh hour, tho they were severally at several hours before us, bore
the heat and burden of the day, and wrought diligently in the Vineyard.
However, must the reward appointed to be paid first to those, who were called
at the eleventh hour, be given to the idle and negligent? By no means: for
these workmen were not called that they might be idle, but rather, they were
rebuked, that they spent almost the whole day in Sloth and Idleness. Why, says
the good Man of the House, stand ye here all day Idle? Now they are called
idle, who have no work, no business to do; as the Greek word (...) employed by
the Evangelist does clearly import.

Therefore they who were called and sent into the Vineyard at the Eleventh
hour, were not called to an idle lazy Faith only, but to the exercise of a
lively Faith in obedience to the Will and Commands of him that called them, and
to labor in the Vineyard no less than they who were called before them, whose
Faith has been proved and tried in diverse works, much labor and pain. This
appears evidently by the Testimony of those who came first, delivered in that
excellent Parable; who affirmed that the last wrought but one hour, They said
not, that they who were called at that hour, were idle in the Vineyard, but
that they wrought: it was favor and bounty enough shown them by the good Man
of the House, that having wrought less, and being excused from the heat and
burden of the day, they first of all were rewarded by the gracious bounty of
the Lord, who is willing to give to the last, as to the first.

From what has been said then, it is manifest and clear, that an imputative
Faith, only laying hold of the Promises, and otherwise lazy and unactive, is
not that Faith which God does require of those, whom he calls to the Communion
of Saints, and Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven; but a lively Faith, and
such as exercises Believers in the Obedience and Observation of those things
that are commanded by him that calls them. For as it is not enough to lay
hold on the Promises barely by Faith, unless we actually enjoy and possess the
same; so it is not enough neither, to answer the Call by Faith alone, unless we
also pay Obedience to him that has called us. What Man is he that will say
that it is enough for him, to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven by Faith, that
is, by believing, tho he never attain to the actual fruition and enjoyment of
the Kingdom of God? Did God do so with the Israelites and the Seed of Abraham,
that the Promises which they laid hold on by Faith were never made good unto
them? No: for the blessing of God whom they believed and obeyed, they obtained
the enjoyment and possession of the earthly Promises. Of Abraham a great Nation
was really made, and from one Isaac, in whom God would have his Seed to be
called, there sprang so great a People, that Moses confessed: Deuteronomy. 1. I am not
able to bear you my self alone: The Lord your God has multiplied you, and
behold you are this day as the Stars of Heaven for multitude. The Lord God of
your Fathers make you a thousand times se many as you are, and bless you, as he
has promised you. The People that were brought out of Egypt, who continued in
Faith and Holy Obedience, did actually obtain and possess the promised Land of
Canaan; as it is written: Josh. 1. Arise, go over this Jordan, thou and all
this People, unto the Land which I do give to them, even to the Children of
Israel. Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I
given unto you, as I said unto Moses. From the Wilderness and this Lebanon,
even unto the great River, the River Euphrates, all the Land of the Hittites,
and unto the great Sea toward the going down of the Sun, shall be your Coast.
God not long after confirmed the truth of all this. Josh. 24. I have given you
a Land for which ye did not labor, and Cities which ye built not, and ye dwell
in them: of the Vineyards and Oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat. David
also believing the promise that he should obtain the Kingdom, endured and
overcame the hardest of times and dangers, and having at length obtained the
Kingdom, thus did sing: Psalm. 116. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was
greatly afflicted. I said in my have; all Men are liars. What shall I render
unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward me? etc. So that all these Ancients
not only by Faith laid hold on the earthly Promises, but really obtained them,
through the blessing of God that promised to fulfill them to those who believed
and obeyed him: And therefore they obeyed the Lawgiver not by Faith, and in
words only, but with all care and dutifulness they also practiced true Piety,
and performed the Precepts and Commandments, nor did any of those who expected
the desired Promises, think or say it was enough for him, that his
forefathers, Predecessors, or Friends had obeyed the Commands and Precepts of
God, unless he himself did his duty, in obeying and fulfilling the Law. Abraham
himself being called went out. David being anointed King, and having obtained a
Promise of the Kingdom, believed, did, and suffered all those things which we
read with admiration. So also, that we may return to our selves, if we desire,
as we ought to do, to be truly and indeed, made partakers of the Spiritual
Promises; if we have a real love for our selves, and aspire to everlasting
bliss, we must not only believe the Promises, but likewise in all sincerity
practice Piety, and perform our several duties in obeying those things that are
enjoined and commanded us: Nor must we think it enough, that Christ has
fulfilled for us the Law and all Righteousness; unless believing in Christ, we
also submit to that part of the Law which belongs to us, to wit, the Precepts
and Commands of the Decalogue, wherein is comprehended the sum of the Will of
God, and Law of Nature, and to whatsoever may be lawfully deduced and inferred
from thence; and so obey the Law, that we may not be called Hearers only or
Readers, Interpreters or Expounders thereof, but rather Doers of the same, and
become like to those, of whom it is written, Luke 1. And they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless. Romans 2. For not the Hearers of the Law, are Just before God:
but the doers of the Law shall be justified. Wherefore whosoever being called
to the Marriage of the Son, desires to approve himself faithfully to him that
calls him; He is chiefly to mind that there is nothing hidden from him who
searches the secrets of the heart and reins, and knows the thoughts of Men
afar off. And therefore let him seriously set about the duty of true and
unfeigned Repentance, and being grieved for all the offenses of his ill-spent,
wicked past life, let him with a contrite and humble heart, sincerely confess
his sins and plead guilty in the presence of God, and his Church, that i^ of
the lawful Ministers of the Church; Piously and Religiously obey the Counsels,
Admonitions and Instructions that are given him, and having received
Ecclesiastical Absolution from the sins and wickedness, which he has promised
to God, and to his Minister as a Witness, and Judge upon Earth, to forsake; let
him turn with all his mind and might, from that wicked life and filthy
conversation, from all impure thoughts, all Guile, Malice and corrupt Manners;
and then having shaken off and overcome the Temptations of Pride, Vanity,
Covetousness, Lust, Earthly delights and Pleasures, and of whatsoever may, and
is wont to turn Men from God; let him constantly persist in the right way, and
by diligent and frequent Prayer call upon God, and beg his favorable and
gracious assistance, whose Mercy and provident care over him, he will to his
experience certainly find, if from a pure and holy heart he earnestly craves
the same: For no less has been offered and promised to all sinners, by him who
wills not, nor desires their death, but that rather they may repent and
live. Jer. 3. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings. Jer. 4. If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, return
unto me, and if thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then
shall thou not remove. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved: How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 29.
For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of
peace and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me,
and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall
seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And I
will be found of you, says the Lord. And again, Joel 2. Turn ye unto me with
all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. And rent
your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him
of the evil. Nevertheless we must always be upon our guard, and take diligent
heed, lest securely trusting to past Pardons and the confident expectation of
Gods future mercy, we never cease to do evil, and learn to do good: that is not
the use, but the abuse of divine Clemency and Mercy. The Mercy of God is,
indeed, from Generation to Generation; but upon those that fear him, and I will
hear, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 85. what God the Lord will say: for he will
speak Peace unto the People, and to his Saints: but let them not return again
to Folly. Again, Isai as says, Isa. 30. Therefore will the Lord wait that he
may be gracious unto you. The Lord will wait that he may be gracious, says he,
not that they who are waited for, should heap sin upon sin, and return unto the
vomit; but because he has promised mercy to them who with their whole heart so
turn unto him, that they stand in awe, and greatly fear any more to offend him:
otherwise, as the same Prophet says, Therefore will the Lord be exalted that
he may have Mercy upon you: for the Lord is a God of Judgment, who denies not
his promised Mercy to any that rightly seek it, but withal does not for ever
delay, but in due time inflict the punishments, which are appointed to those
whose heart is not right and steadfast with him. There is no time with God void
of Mercy toward those who hinder not their own Mercy; Now they do hinder it,
who after the hardness and impenitence of their heart, treasure up to
themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Isa. 66. To this Man will I look,
says the Lord, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word. But concerning those who are not truly poor, of a
contrite spirit, and tremble at his word, he has pronounced this Sentence: He
that kills an Ox, is as if he flew a Man: he that Sacrifices a Lamb, as if
he cut off a Dogs neck, he that Offers an Oblation, as if he Offered Swines
Blood; he that burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol: 1 Kings 8. they have
chosen their own ways, and their Soul delights in their abominations. They
therefore that have committed sin (for, as Solomon says, there is no Man that
sins not) must constantly keep in the way of Repentance, and denying
themselves, hear and follow him, who has said; Not he that begins, but he
that endures to the end, the same shall be saved. They must from their whole
heart and Soul, Renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps, and vanities
of this wicked world, as they have promised and vowed in their Baptism:
otherwise, Jer. 8. thus, says the Lord, shall they fall, and not arise? shall
he turn away and not return? why then is this People of Jerusalem slidden back,
by a perpetual backsliding? The Lord calls it a perpetual backsliding, when
men in their manners, retain and follow that wicked course of life, which in
word or thought they may have condemned, and falsely professing and boasting of
their Repentance, do not conscientiously perform the duty of it, but belying
their own hearts, deceive themselves, and not God nor his Minister, to whom
they promised a serious amendment of life: This the Lord finds fault with, by
the same Prophet. They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return, I hearkened and
heard, but they spoke not aright: no Man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, what have I done? Every one turned to his Course, as the Horse rusheth
into the Battle. The Lord, indeed, waits that he may have mercy upon us, and
uses patience, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance. Come to Repentance, says that Apostle, who knew that Repentance
was necessary to sinners, for appeasing the wrath, and obtaining the mercy of
God. Now the Holy Spirit does plainly tell us, that the long-suffering of God
is not everlasting, tho we believe and confess his Mercy to be infinite. Psalm.
7. God Judges the Righteous, and God is angry with the Wicked every day; if he
turn not, he will whet his. Sword: he has bent his Bow, and made it ready, he
has also prepared for him the instruments of death: He ordains his arrows
against the Persecutors. When God Almighty was about to destroy the old World,
because of sin, he allotted them a certain time to repent in; as it is written,
Gen, 6. And the Lord said, my Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that
he also is Flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. At the end
of which all Mankind perished in the Flood, save only the Family of Noah, who
in that Age was found Righteous in the sight of God. The People of Niniveh
being warned by the Prophet, that after forty days they should be destroyed,
delayed not their Repentance until the last day, but set about it so soon as
they heard the denunciation; all that time, I say, was employed and spent in
fasting and prayer, for averting the wrath of God, imploring divine mercy and
amending their sinful lives: as it is written, Jona 3. And Jonah began to enter
into the City a days Journey, and he cried, and said, yet forty days, and
Nineveh shall be overthrown. So the People of Nineveh believed God, and
Proclaimed a Fast, and put on Sackcloth from the greatest of them even to the
least of them: for word came unto the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his
Throne, and he laid his Robe from him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat
in Ashes, and he caused to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh, ( by
the Decree of the King and his Nobles) saying, let neither Man nor Beast, Herd
nor Flock taste any thing; let them not feed nor drink water. But let Man and
Beast be covered with Sackcloth; and cry mightily unto God; yea let them turn
every one from their evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands.
Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger,
that we perish not? and God saw their works, that they turned from their evil
way, and God repented of the evil that he had said, that he would do unto them,
and he did it not.

The Men of Nineveh will rise in Judgment against those who having been warned
not once, but often, yet have not turned from their evil ways; or who have
delayed the duty of a serious Repentance, to the last day of their life, living
in the mean time wickedly, and following the Vanities, Lusts, Ambition, Pride,
and Vices of the World: whereas no Man ought, or can say, that he is allowed to
put off the exercise of Repentance to the extremity of life; since upon the
first call and admonition, all Men are commanded to turn and be converted unto
the Lord. To day, says the Holy Ghost, if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts. Heb. 4. Let us therefore fear, says the Apostle, lest a Promise
being left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of
it. For unto us was the Gospel Preached, as well as unto them. Let us labor
therefore to enter into that Rest. Now he shall not enter, who obeys not the
voice of him that calls him, nor he be owned, who has not lawfully striven.
1 Cor. 9. Know ye not, says St. Paul, that they which run in a race, run all,
but one wins the prize? so run that you may obtain. We are to run and not go
back, to run and not to stand still, according to the Apostle; We are to run
not slowly but lawfully; and with so much more the greater pains, diligence and
care, by how much the Prize set before us is to be esteemed and preferred
before a Crown of Olive, Smallage, or Oak-leaves. Now what pains and labor
they were at to exercise themselves who were to run in the race, that neither
Luxury might soften, nor Laziness dull them, they who have written on that
Subject, inform us.

Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit,
Abstinuit Venere and vino, etc.
The Youth who strives the wished goal to obtain,
Much anxious toil endures, colds, heats, and pain,
And Wine, and Women shuns, etc.
And they, as St. Paul says, are temperate in all things, that they may obtain
a corruptible Crown: but we an incorruptible. Now it is manifest, that the
long-suffering and patience of God for the repentance of all and every sinner,
is limited within certain bounds; for after death there is no place for
repentance, so that we must, (if ever) repent in this life. And therefore since
experience it self convinces us of the shortness of life, besides what divine
wisdom teaches us, that Man is of few days, and the number of his months is
with thee; Job 14. we ought to consider the extent and limits of divine
patience and long-suffering, and not to trust to that dangerous hope, which
has deceived many, who have deferred the thoughts of serious repentance to the
very last day of their life. For tho the use and improvement of life be left to
the will and pleasure of Man, yet the time and manner of death is not in his
option. Now as the way and manner of living is twofold, the one large and
broad, and the other strait and narrow: so it is left to Man to choose which of
the two he pleases; yet he is not only advised, but even commanded to choose
that which is best and safest; as it is written, Deuteronomy. 30. See, I have set
before thee this day life and good, and death and evil, in that I command thee
this day, to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, that thou may live, etc.
Therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: that thou may
love the Lord thy God, and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou
may cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy days.

Now of the nine hundred and seven ways of death, which are observed to happen
unto Man, without violence; it is not left to him to choose which of all he
would submit unto, but that is reserved to the Providence and Will of God, in
whose hands are the issues of death. It is great madness and folly then, and no
less dangerous temerity, to neglect those things which are laid before us, as
safe, certain, present to our view, and but few in number; and to set our minds
on things that are remote, foreign to our happiness, uncertain, many and
various, and likewise most difficult. Again, who sees not, how wicked a thing
it is, to expect and desire that the designed and affected loss of our whole
life, should be made up by the Prayer of a Minutes or less continuance at last?
And that he should look for the honor and prize of the race or fight, who has
neither run nor fought, when yet he might and ought to have done it? In a word,
how is his judgment depraved who desires wickedly and carelessly to live, and to
die holily? Whatever others may think of this matter, I am little concerned:
but am still of opinion, and do affirm that such opinions are full of danger,
and that many have been thereby deceived. If the instance of that sinful woman,
or of the Thief in the Gospel be objected to us, we shall willingly admit of it
for confirmation of the truth, and retort it back again. For that woman who was
a sinner in the City, when once she had come to Christ, and found him merciful;
by a continued exercise of Repentance, and Sanctity of life for the future, she
secured to herself his favor and blessing: so far was she from estranging him
from her, by new sins and offenses. And the Thief at the same time that he was
instructed in the truth of Christ, began a serious Repentance which with a
constant mind he continued till the last breath of his life, and would in all
probability, have continued it longer, if either he had escaped death that day,
or hung longer alive upon the Cross: whom that common torment of the
punishment, made greater by the breaking of his legs, diverted not from the
thoughts of his own Salvation, nor the contemplation of his Savior. And we
have reason to think, that if he had known the grace and truth of Christ
before, he would have forsaken his wicked courses, and (...) purpose of virtue
and amendment, till the last day of his life? Is that to imitate the Thief,
Mary Magdalene, or St. Peter? who coming to himself, acknowledged his sin, and
avoiding that crowd by whose company and discourses he had been drawn, and
almost forced into his offense, went forth and wept bitterly, returning no more
to those who had been the occasion of his Fall, but cleaving close to the
society of the other Disciples, whom both by example and discourse he confirmed
in the hope of their Masters Resurrection; doing as his Lord commanded him: and
thou, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

These are the instances of a Repentance most acceptable to God and profitable
to Man, which whosoever will seriously imitate to his own Salvation, must
nenounce himself, that is, his concupiscenses, the pomps and vanities of the
World, reform the course of his life, walk carefully in the ways that God does
approve of; and having taken up his cross, with a lively Faith, and constant
Obedience follow Christ, cast off all impediments that may divert him from, or
hinder him in his Journey, and always have in his mind what the Lord has
recommended to our serious practice: Luke 9. If any Man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily and folly me. Mat. 24. And he
that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. And no Man having put
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. He
that has ears to hear, let him hear; God deceives no Man. Let every one take
heed then, that he deceive not himself, nor suffer himself to be deceived by
others. This is the plain, sure and safe way; that has the promise of good
success; Repentance, I mean, which every one ought carefully to set about,
persist in, and prosecute to the end. This is the way that never deceived any
Man, but will certainly bring those that walk therein to eternal Salvation at
last. For it is written, Psalm. 69. Psalm. 105. Your hearts shall live that seek
God. Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face ever more He that seeks
his face always in what manner soever he may end this mortal life, yet his Son
shall live. Psalm. 9. For thou, Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee. The
death of Lazarus was mean and obscure in the eyes of Men, but that of the rich
Man conspicuous, and his Funeral pompous. The rich Man died and was buried:
however the Soul of the former was received into Abraham's bosom, when this
Man's Soul was sent down into Hell. Wherefore let those who either never set
about the work of Repentance aright, or put it off to the hour of death, or
often in their lifetime begin it, and as often again leave it off; let them, I
say, consider, what ground they have to do so, and what divine promise they can
pretend to trust to; for it is not in our power to command our time when we
would, and whether God will grant it to us according to our wishes, is much to
be doubted. As it is written: Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy
Statutes: for their deceit is falsehood. No Doctor of the Christian Church, (for
what I know) ever taught us to put off and delay Repentance and amendment of
life, till the last day of living; nor promised any happy success to those that
did so; nay St. Austin doubts of the condition of those delayers of serious
Repentance, till the hour of death, and we have no reason but, with St. Austin,
to doubt of the same. Woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner
that goes two ways. Woe will be unto many to whom opportunity and the
advantages of amending their lives has been offered and granted, whilst they
were alive and in health, and whilst God waited for them, and who still
persisting in their wickedness, their too late desire of Repentance, will
through their own fault, be unprofitable to them. Many instances of wicked Men,
who die without Repentance happen daily; some snatched away by sudden death,
others killed, some cast away at Sea, others slain in Battle, or brought to
their end by thunder, lightning, and many other ways: who, perhaps, if their
lives had been longer, would have seriously set about the work of Repentance;
but it has seemed otherwise to the Judgment and Decree of God, who, seeing he
does all that is necessary for reclaiming of sinners, is not always wont to
superadd more than ought to be expected, Mat. 11. Had God done the mighty works
in Tire and Sidon, which he did in Chorazin and Bethsaida, he knew, that they
would have repented in Sackcloth and ashes. And if the mighty works which were
done in Capernaum, had been done in Sodom, it also, upon the word of our
Savior, would have remained until this day. But seeing the Almighty had done
for those places what was enough, in his most righteous Judgment, he was not
willing to add more than was sufficient. How many of those, who have led a
wicked and sinful life, and still professed an inclination and desire to die
well, have either had the death they wished for, or a blessed and happy end?
How every Man shall end his days, depends not on himself, but on the Counsel
and Decree of God; as it is written, Psalm. 68. He that is our God, is the God
of Salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death. But God shall
wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on
still in his Trespasses. Most terrible also, and yet most certain, is that
Sentence pronounced by divine Oracle. Psalm. 34. Evil shall slay the wicked: and
they that hate the righteous shall be desolate. But great are the Promises and
hopes that the Scripture gives to those who love piety, and are of a penitent
and obedient heart, which we should always have before our eyes. The Lord
redeemeth the Soul of his Servants, and none of them that trust in him shall be
desolate. Let us then a little consider, what these Men do, who leaving off to
(...) after he had left his The Example of Abraham.
Country, Kindred, and Fathers House, never returned again into Chaldea or
Mesopotamia, but traveled and So journed in several places, according to the
will and appointment of God, spending his whole life, even to death, in the
obedience of Gods commands, and that he would not die, nor be buried any where,
but there where he had received the Promises: nor move a foot from those
places, wherein he was warned from Heaven to tarry and abide. Wherefore the
Holy Scripture admonishing those who are the true children of Abraham, that is,
his spiritual Children, who is called the Father of many Nations, of their
duty, in imitation of their fathers example, says: Isa. 51. Hearken to me, ye
that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the rock
whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug. Look unto
Abraham your Father, and unto Sarah that bare you; for I called him alone, and
blessed him, and increased him: as being a Man who firmly believed, and
diligently obeyed God that called him, Col. 3. So then they which be of the
Faith, (and imitate the example of Abraham) are blessed with faithful Abraham.

Wherefore, my dear fellow Christians, being furnished with all these precepts
and instructions of God the Father, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord and
Master, let us in the first place, take diligent heed that we sin not. For that
indeed is best: but because all the Sons of Adam are under sin, the wisest
counsel and most acceptable to God, that can be given, in the next place is,
that he who has sinned, would with all his heart and mind turn to God: 1 John
2. for we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: and he
is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world. If he be sought of us with a contrite and humble heart:
which the Lord himself declares: To this Man will I look, even to him that is
poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. Wherefore the Apostle
St. John admonishes us, saying, 1 John 3. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his
sight. St. John expressly affirms, that we shall obtain what we ask of God in
order to our Salvation, who will give his good spirit to those that seek him,
if our heart condemn us not: which he says may be proved by this, if we keep
his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. Our Lord
and Master commands the same: John 14. If ye love me, keep my commandments. And
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever; even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive; seein the Lust, and Pride, the Pomp and Vanity, with all the other
Vices of this World are an abomination to him: 2 Timothy 2. But if a Man purge
himself from these, he shall be a Vessel unto Honor, sanctified and meet for
the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

The sum then of all that has been said, in short is this, whoever with a pure
and holy heart believes the promises of God to his own salvation, let him
sincerely renounce the pomps and vanities of this World, and the sinful Lusts
and Desires of the Flesh, and make good his profession of Repentance, by a true
and earnest forsaking of all sin and vice, and a following after Righteousness,
and obedience to the commands of God with a zealous and constant care. Of this
care we shall speak hereafter, having first laid down for a certain truth,
(which we cannot inculcate too often) that the holy spirit cannot dwell in a
heart polluted with the sinful lusts, pleasures, and other corruptions of the
flesh, the spirit, I say, of sanctification, by which, who are acted, are the
Sons of God. For this is the express sentence of God Almighty himself, which
has been alleged already, and ought often to be cited: Genesis My spirit shall
not always strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh. that is to say, so long
as Man is flesh, and obeys the will and lusts of the flesh, he shall not be
partaker of my spirit. And this sentence was pronounced by God, at that time
when the Sons of God coming in unto the Daughters of Men, perverted all the
rules of Piety and Virtue, and turned Righteousness into Iniquity. Now they who
believed the Promises of God made unto Adam the common Parent of Mankind, and
being endowed with that Faith, exercised themselves in the practice of Piety,
are in holy Scripture called the Sons of God: for amongst them was preserved
the knowledge of the Redemption and Salvation of Mankind by the holy Seed of the
Woman: and they being animated with the Faith and Hope of this promised
Salvation, shunned all worldly ambition and corruption, leading a life neither
magnificent nor splendid, nor attended with the glory and delights, which Men
admire, but low, modest, and mean, living in the forry habitations of cottages,
tents, caves and dens, and were satisfied with sober poverty, in imitation of
their common Parents Adam and Eve, whom God, having clothed them with coats
made of Beasts skins, commanded to live contented, willing that they who by
their own fault had forfeited the sovereignty of the World, should live like
strangers and sojourners in it. This example the Sons of God followed. But on
the other hand, the Sons of Men, who either believed not the divine Promises,
or lived in pomp and splendour, gave themselves over to delights and pleasures,
courted glory and worldly greatness; and built to themselves stately Houses,
Towns and Castles; being not a little incited to that course of life, by the
humor and counsel of Women; by whose blandishments and conversation, the Sons
of God also being first allured, and then wholly overcome, they took to
themselves wives of all which they chose: That is to say, when the Sons of God
perceived the delights and pleasures, the pomp and splendour that was amongst
Men, which might tempt humane frailty to prefer them before the rigours of an
austere frugality; but especially being enticed by the sight of Women, among
whom Vanity and Luxury, both in diet and apparel, was most conspicuous, they
forsook the hardships of an austere life, continence and poverty, that they
might embrace riches, wealth, pleasures and luxury; and making Marriages with
the Daughters of Men, they overturned Piety, and perverted the ancient
discipline of primitive virtue and integrity. Whereupon that divine Sentence
was pronounced: My spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is
flesh: because of the Sons of God, they not only became like unto the Sons of
Men, but begat a race much more corrupt than themselves, more licentious in
their lives, indulging themselves in all sorts of vice and voluptuousness, and
prone to all kind of injustice, barbarity and cruelty, Genesis 6. These are the
Giants which were in the Earth in those days; and also after that, when the
Sons of God came in unto the Daughters of Men, and they bare children unto
them: the same became mighty Men, which were of old Men of Renown. And God saw
that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the
Lord that he had made Man on the Earth. So much did the licentious wickedness
of the dissolute life of Men offend God, that holy Oracles assure us, it
repented him that he had made Man on the Earth; and that he resolved to destroy
all Mankind, these only excepted, who continued in the discipline and duty of
the Sons of God, tho they were but very few in number; as it is written; But
Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, because he was a Just Man; being not
only endowed with that Faith of the Sons of God; but through the exercise of
true Repentance, and Obedience to the commandments of God, accepted also of the
Lord: as one who having spent so many years in building of an Ark, and by
frequent Sermons forewarning the Men of that age of the imminent wrath of God,
endeavored to persuade them to Repentance and amendment of life, for which he
got the title and name of a Preacher of Righteousness.

Now, this practice of Repentance which, as we have said, is necessary to all
the Disciples and followers of Christ, must be accompanied with an endeavor of
amendment of life, and of following after Righteousness and Honesty; which, for
illustration sake, we shall call by the name of Obedience; and define Obedience.
Obedience to be an ordering and framing of all the actions of our life,
according to the counsel and will of God. And this is performed by the knowledge
and diligent practice of the commands of God. For it is not enough to know the
precepts and institutions of our Christian discipline, or to talk of, and
commend them in quaint and elegant language, unless we also carefully and
studiously practice and observe them: This is the express Doctrine of our Lord
and Master, Mat. 7. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy name? and in thy name cast out Devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful works? and then I will profess unto them, I never knew you: depart
from me ye that work iniquity. Therefore, whosoever hears these sayings of
mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wife Man which built his house
upon a Rock: and the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew,
and beat upon that House: and it fell not, for it was founded upon a Rock. We
must, therefore, take care that the structure of our salvation be founded upon
this Rock of true Obedience, lest that after we have built much and long, some
contrary gust beating upon it, it fall to the ground. Now this Obedience is
performed in observing the will of our heavenly Father, according to the
Doctrine of our Savior, saying: He that does the will of my Father, who is in
Heaven. And the Father himself has declared that his will is, that we should
know, hold fast, and carefully practice the Doctrine of his dearest Son. Mat.
17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. If then we
would desire to know what we are to do for obtaining the salvation which this
beloved Son has brought into the World; let us seriously consult him, who was
proposed, and confirmed to us by the Father in presence of most reverend
witnesses, two of the Old and three of the New Testament, as the wise and
infallible interpreter of his Will; and we shall hear him thus answering and
teaching us: John 15. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love:
even as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. John 14. He
that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he
that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him: and again, Joh. 15. ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. And elsewhere; Mat. 11. Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. By which words we are
plainly taught, that the desired rest of our souls cannot be found, but by
those who do the Will of the Father. Now, for discovering of this Will, the
Father himself referred us to the hearing of his Son: and the Son tells us,
that it is his Fathers Will, that they who would find rest to their Souls,
should take his yoke upon them, and that his yoke is neither hard nor heavy,
but soft and easy, and that his burden, that is, the sum of the Doctrine of
the Law and Commandments, is a light burden. And indeed, the thing it self not
only speaks it to be so, but the noble instances also of many, who have
submitted to that yoke fully confirm it. For the yoke we speak of, is no more
but that sincere and brotherly love, which by another name, is commonly called
charity: as our Lord and Master does frequently inculcate. John 15. This is my
commandment that ye love one another, as I have loved you. These things I
command you that ye love one another. And he affirms this constant and
perpetual precept to be so properly and peculiarly his own, that he would have
it to be the badg and mark of his Disciples and followers. John 13. A new
Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you,
that ye also love one another. By this shall all Men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. St. John the great Disciple and Witness of
our Lord and Master, again and again confirms this: 1 John 3. Beloved, if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God; and whatsoever we
ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, that we should
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave
us commandment. And of how great necessity the keeping of this commandment is,
the same Apostle fully demonstrates unto us. 1 John 2. He that hates his
brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes. This is so true and plain a
Doctrine of Christian Religion, that that famous Expositor of the divine
Oracles, made no scruple to prefer this love before all the other virtues, acts
and endowments of the mind of Man. 1 Cor. 13. Though I speak with the tongues
of Men and of Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling Cimbal. And tho I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and tho I have all Faith, so that I could remove
Mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. And tho I bestow all my goods to
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing. And so far is Charity commended by this Apostle, that he
calls it, Col. 3. the bond of perfectness.

Now if Charity be so necessary, that without it, the Apostle affirms all
things else to be unprofitable to salvation; how far is he from salvation, who
not only loves not his brother, but even hates and persecutes him? if he who
loves not, banishes from himself the love of God, in what condition is he, and
how shall he be esteemed in the eyes of God, that hates his brother? No less
than a Murderer; and according to the sentence of the holy word of God he is
guilty of that crime. John 3. Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer: in
thought and affection, which God chiefly takes notice of, he is accounted a
Murderer, who loves not his brother; and ye know, says he, that no Murderer
has eternal life abiding in him. As elsewhere: He that hates his brother,
walks in darkness. Wherefore St. James admonishes Christians, lest being
corrupted with this vice, which under some disguise or other uses to creep and
steal into men's minds they should make void the name and profession of
Religion, and so deceive themselves or others.

James 3. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not;
and lie not against the truth, (Calling and boasting your selves to be
Christians) This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly sensual,
divilish. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil
work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality,
and without hypocrisy. We are also plainly and largely taught by our Lord and
Master, how grievous a sin the sin of hatred is, and how great an impediment it
lays in our way to salvation, not only when it appears outwardly in evil deeds,
but even when but conceited inwardly in the heart. Mat. 5. I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment, and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of
the Council: but whosoever shall say, thou fool, (to wit, moved with anger, and
with design to hurt him) shall be in danger of hell fire. Wherefore our Lord
and Master in his divine wisdom, that he might show how expedient it is to be
free from that vice and perturbation of mind, plainly tells his Disciples, that
he who has not first satisfied this command of Charity, must not think to
obtain the favor of God by any Sacrifice or other Religious performance.
Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee; leave thy gift before the Altar, and go thy
way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. In
many other passages he confirms the same, saying. Luke 6. Be ye merciful, as
your Father also is merciful: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: give, and it
shall be given unto you. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Now the charity which our Lord so much commends, is not a cold and ordinary,
but a burning and fervent charity, ready to do good, whereby he bids us to
become like unto God, who makes his Sun to shine upon the good and the bad, and
causes it to rain upon the just, and the unjust. And when our Savior taught
his Disciples to pray, he enlarged more upon the Subject of Charity, Mercy, and
Beneficence, than upon any other; as being of all others the chief and most
convincing argument of Piety, which by the Apostle also, is called the bond o^
perfection: seeing all the commands and duties whatsoever of the Law, are
easily obeyed and performed by those, who are so quickened by Charity, as not so
much to seek their own, as the things of others; according as it is written. 1
Cor. 13. Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity
vaunteth not it self; is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things. Whereas, 1 John. He that hates his
brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes.

The sum then of all The sum of the rule common to all Men.
that a Scholar of Christ ought to know, hold, meditate upon, and practice, is
briefly comprehended under these three Heads, to wit, the Fear of the Lord,
Repentance, and Charity. Now Charity is not here considered only as it relates
to God, whom we ought to love above all things, but also as it is to be
practiced toward Men. 1 John 3. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he
laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.
But whosa has this Worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? My
little children, let us not love in word neither in tongue, but in deed and in
truth. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts
before him. 1 John 4. Let us love him; because he first loved us. If a Man say,
I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar, for he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? and this
commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his brother also.
Whoever, therefore shall carefully observe these three heads, will by
experience find the mercy, goodness, and clemency of God toward him; the
excellency whereof the thought of Man is not able to conceive, and far less his
tongue to express. For the gracious God is always ready to fulfill the promises
of salvation, which have been made and often confirmed to Believers; as it is
written. Jer. 18. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: if that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I though to do unto them. Ezekiel. 18. And if the wicked will turn
from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in
his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all
that the wicked should die? says the Lord: and not that he should return from
his ways and live? So that the Oracles of God do often confirm the Promimises
of life and salvation made even to wicked Men who turn from their ways; to
those I say, who turning from the evil of their way, and following a course of
true Repentance, make it their care and study to obey the commands of God, and
to do Judgment and Justice; for whoever do so, shall live; not by an idle,
lasie and unactive Faith, which is also called a dead Faith; but through the
righteousness which they have wrought, they shall, indeed, obtain life and
salvation, from God the author and fountain of life, which he has promised to
all who believe in him, and obey his world, according to that infinite mercy of
his, which the Scripture celebrates in many places. Psalm. 145. The lord is
gracious and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is
good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works. And therefore he
bears with the sins of men, that he may bring them to Repentance.

Wisdom. 11. For he loves all the things that are, and abhors nothing that
he has made: for never would he have made any thing, if he had hated it. And
therefore it is, that he freely offers and promises his mercy unto all, who
with a true heart and purpose of mind desire to be converted, and to return to
him, as it is written. Ezekiel. 33. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: turn ye, turn turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O House
of Israel? For the Lord is most gracious, and desirous of our salvation, who,
when he would have Men to turn to him with their whole heart and mind, and so
obtain life, he patiently waits for their Repentance: and this the holy
Scriptures clearly testify. Isa. 30. Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may
be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy
upon you. And the Apostle St. Peter says: The Lord is not slack concerning his
Promise (as some Men count slackness) but is longsuffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Now
that the Conversion and true Repentance of sinners, is most acceptable and
pleasing to God, his own Son shows us, in that saving Sermon which he made in
the three Parables of the prodigal Son, the lost sheep, and groat; whereby he
exhorted all Men, that they would endeavor by their conversion to please God,
and cause joy in the whole Court of Heaven, that so they might taste of the
wonderful goodness of God, who is rich in mercy toward all that call upon him
with a pure and single heart, and upon whom, if they approve themselves by
Faith, and the practice of true Repentance and Obedience, he bestows great
mercies, and the spirit of sanctification with all his gifts and graces, which
St. Peter affirms was given to all that obey him, and our Savior promised to
be given, saying: John 14. If ye love me, keep my commandments, And I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you
for ever; even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive. Now in the
sense of St. John, the world are they who live according to the lust of the
eye, the lust of the flesh, or the pride of life; that is, who are slaves to
lust, delights, pleasures, or ambition: for those shall not feel the power and
virtue of that holy spirit abiding in them: as the Lord himself pronounces;
Genesis 6. My spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is flesh.
With Man who is flesh, and striveth not to mortify the deeds of the Flesh, as
the Apostle says: if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: to wit, through
the spirit of God given and communicated unto you; for so it is written. Isa.
66. Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my
Footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of
my rest? for all those things has mine hand made, and all those things have
been, says the Lord: but to this Man will I look, even to him that is poor,
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. Those divine gifts and
graces whereby Men upon Earth are changed into other creatures, and become
almost celestial, avoiding the corruption that is in the World through lust,
and having their conversation in heaven; examples and instances of these gifts,
I say, which were very frequent of old, are now rare to be found on the Earth:
because we have neither that strong and lively faith in the Promises of God,
nor purely and sincerely obey his Precepts; neither are we filled with the holy
fear of the Lord; but by a double and deceitful heart, wicked and perverse
thoughts and actions, we are wanting to our selves, and to the grace and
goodness of God: of God, I say, who tries the heart and searches the reins,
and sees us wholly given over to impure thoughts, the delights and pleasures of
the flesh, and to pride and ambition, like adulterous Women dealing
treacherosly against their lawful husbands; which kind of hearts estranged
from, or divided in their chief love, he neither loves nor approves of. The
mind must be pure and single, and fervent in love, that aspires to the heavenly
marriage of this bridegroom and would have it confirmed and made good to it.
The wise Son of Sirach advises us to endeavor that as much as we can, when he
says. Ecclus 1. 2. Distrust not the fear of the Lord: and come not unto him
with a double heart. Woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner
that goes two ways. And the word of God by the mouth of his holy Prophets,
does also in many places expressly admonish us, heartily to renounce the
vanities, sins and pollutions of this World, and make it our whole care to
forsake them. Jer. 4. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Whosoever
come so provided to seek the Lord, shall certainly find him to be loving,
gracious and bountiful. Jer. 29. Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall
search for me with all your heart; and I will be found of you, says the Lord:
whose blessed Son has also said: Mat. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart: for
they shall see God. God is to be seen by the pure in heart, says our Savior;
He is to be seen dwelling in them, whom he consecrates for a holy Temple to
himself; as it is written. Isa. 57. For thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place;
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Psalm. 147. He heals
the broken in heart and binds up then wounds. This contrition of heart, so
acceptable unto God, and so much commended in Scripture, does not dwell nor
abide with the anxious desire of worldly things, and of the pomp and glory of
the age, which are hateful to the Lord. Nor let any Man persuade himself that
he can serve two Masters, that is, that he can please God, and at the same time
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, pursue the vanities, pride and ambition of the
World, and obey the dictates of carnal wisdom: The Apostle St. James declares
it to be impossible. Jam. 4. Ye adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that
the friendship of the World is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the World, is the enemy of God. Do ye think that the Scripture says
in vain, the spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? And therefore we are
earnestly warned by the Apostle St. John, that being deluded by vain arguments,
or any idle and groundless hope and opinion, we should not retain the love of
this World, but wholly reject it, if we would approve our selves to God, whom
we ought to love: for our own salvation. John 2. Love not the World, neither
the things that are in the World. If any Man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him, for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of
the world. And the world passes away and the lusts thereof: but he that does
the will of God abides for ever. From all which divine sentences we may
conclude, that they who have not carefully avoided the corruption and pollution
of life and manners, and have not labored to shun those things, that are to be
shunned, will, with all their actions, works and oblations be displeasing and
so enemies to the pure and holy spirit of God. Divine wisdom it self asserts
this, and therefore advises us not to lose the fruit of our good works, through
our own fault and negligence. Prove. 15. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination unto the Lord; Eccles. 34. He that sacrifices a thing wrongfully
gotten, his Offering is ridiculous; and the gifts of unjust Men are not
accepted. The most high is not pleased with the Offerings of the wicked;
neither is be pacified for sin, by the multitude of sacrifices. The Prophet
expostulates the same thing, with those who by their perverse actions and
deeds, both public and private, polluted the sacrifices which they frequented.
Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me, the new Moons
and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity,
even the solemn meeting. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul
hates: they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, says the
Lord; tho your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; tho they be
red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the Land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the Sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. This divine
expostulation is made up both of promises and threatenings to those who either
do, or will not obey: wherefore by the same spirit the author of this
expostulation, we are invited and stirred up, by strong and often repeated
reasons, to seek to God for mercy and the accomplishment of his promises. Isay.
55. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts: and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. Seeing therefore it has been made out unto us
by many clear and manifest testimonies and Texts of both the Old and New
Testament, that these three heads, to wit, the fear of the Lord, Repentance and
brotherly Charity, as the pure fountains and sources of all pious actions
accompanied with Faith, are most acceptable to God, and through his gracious
favor very instrumental, not only to make us escape the wrath and indignation
of God, but also find grace and mercy in time of need; and are so necessary to
salvation, that without them we cannot please God, nor obtain the
accomplishment of his promises concerning our immortal state and the celestial
inheritance purchased to us by the death and resurrection of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. And seeing by the Covenant of Grace all Believers are
assured, that through the diligent study and practice of these three points,
every one may attain their share of that Promise and Obligation, which God
himself has graciously and freely proposed to us for our salvation; I thought
it my duty, being moved with Christian zeal, and fervent Charity, to admonish
and exhort all my fellow Christians, not only by what we have hitherto
alleged, but by all the oracles, sentences, precepts, admonitions and
exhortations uttered by the holy spirit, and laid up in the Treasury of sacred
Record, that they would carefully set about the duties of Piety, and diligently
prosecute the same, in the constant practice of these three principal Points,
the Fear of the Lord, Repentance and Charity. For no Man putting his hand to
the Plough and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God; but he that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved. Now that these things may be
religiously and rightly performed, we must put off all the carnal affections
and lusts that war against the Soul; these, I say, which resist divine grace,
and retard and keep back the effects of that love, whereby Joh. 3. God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life. 2 Timothy 2. If a Man therefore
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet
for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work: And being enriched with
the blessings of divine Grace, he shall even in this life being, to taste and
see that the Lord is good to those that love and fear him. That we may
therefore briefly sum up all that has been said of this rule of Christian
Piety, which has been confirmed by the word of God, delivered in the oracles
of the Prophets, and asserted in the sentences of the Apostles, and all Holy
Writ; we affirm that these three heads of Religion are not only of principal
use, but even absolutely necessary to all ranks and conditions of Christians,
for obtaining the salvation of their souls, and the inheritance and possession
of the Kingdom of Heaven; and that this is a rule common to all Men, who would
live according to the Doctrine, Precepts, and Instructions of our Lord. Now
these Heads, which we have often mentioned, are the Fear of the Lord,
Repentance and Charity, or Brotherly love; which all of us who profess the
Doctrine of the Christian Religion, must not only know, but also carefully
practice, through the assistance of the divine grace, which, as we have already
showed, will be denied to none that rightly seek it; as our Lord and Master
himself does plainly assure us: Luke 11. I say unto you, ask, and it shall be
given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
every one that asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that
knocks it shall be opened. If a Son shall ask bread of any of you that is a
Father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a Fish, will he for a Fish give
him a Serpent? or if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer him a Scorpion? if ye
then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children: how much more
shall your Heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask him?

We also testify, and from the reading The Use and Practice of this Rule.
and observation of the holy Scriptures, do affirm and declare, that the
corruption, depravation and malignity of life and manners, which is to be found
amongst Men of all conditions, proceed from the neglect of these three Parts of
Christian discipline, which are as certain first Principles of practical Piety,
known to all Men who are in their right senses. And the necessity of these
three Principles, to wit, of the Fear of the Lord, Repentance and
Brotherly-love, is manifest not only to all Christians, by the light and
revealed will of God preached unto them, but also to the unlearned and those
who know not the written Law, by the similitude and image of the Deity stamped
on their minds: tho, as we have said, they be not proved and confirmed to them
by so many sentences and oracles of holy Scripture: which, perhaps, is their
own fault, seeing they mind nothing less than the serious learning of those
things which make for their own salvation, and whilst they heedlesly and
negligently run over these, diligently study to know and practice the contrary.
But though they have not at all learned, or neglect to be taught the Law, Romans
2. Yet they are a Law to themselves; which show the work of the Law written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. Now if these three heads of
a Christian life, were well known and carefully practiced by all, we should
experience another kind of efficacy of the grace of God in us, find another
cheerfulness of mind, and other evidences of Faith also. Other proofs of our
Religion would appear both in public and private, nor would there so many
detestable instances of vice and impiety so openly abound, in City and in
Country, in Courts and private Families, and in all the societies of
Christians, where monstrous and flagitious wickedness does but two much and two
often reign; and the divine Laws are despised and violated, by bloody
contentions, enmity, hatred, strife, calumnies, fraud, deceit, bitter and
frequent quarrels, robberies, thefts, extorsions, and defrauding of the poor,
besides the innumerable arts of violence and oppression, whoredom and
uncleanness, adultery, fornication, incest, and many other heinous abominations
not to be named. So many places of the Christian World would not abound in
surfeiting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, sinful and sensual
delights and pleasures, and corrupt luxury; nor would there be so much vanity
and ostentation, so immoderate and useless expensiveness, so great emulation
and pride, nor so vast a number of other sins, and monstrous wickednesses and
impieties, as to woeful experience we daily see. But on the contrary, if the
fear of the Lord, accompanied with Repentance and Charity dwelt in the hearts
of all Christians, the actions of their lives would be ordered aright. It would
then be the chiefest care of every one first to stand in a we and fear, lest
they fall into the hands of the living God: and next that they may obtain
forgiveness and mercy from him; and so every one would endeavor to perform
what they promised in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, having entered into
Covenant, before a mortal Man, indeed, yet with the immortal God, the Just Judge
of all the World, the Lord of Hosts, and the avenger of all sin and wickedness;
Psalm. 5. Who is a God that has not pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with him. The foolish shall not stand in his sight; he hates all workers
of iniquity. He shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful Man: The sum of which promise was, To renounce the devil
and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked World, and to lead his
life according to the Laws of him whose Son he would be accounted; and every
one being endowed with divine fear, incited by the desire of amending his life
by Repentance, and inflamed with Brotherly love and Charity; would direct all
his works and actions to the advancement, not only of private and particular,
but also of common and public Peace, Faith, Justice, Righteousness, Mercy,
Honesty, and, in a word, of the general virtue and sanctity of all Men: and
carefully perform the duties incumbent upon him, that he may receive his reward
from him who cannot lie.

Of the several Duties and Offices of all ranks and conditions of Men, to be
examined according to this Rule.
The Second Part.
NOW if these three heads of pure Religion and undefiled before God the Father,
were observed by all Men, we should see many lively instances and effects of
that practice; whereof the sum is, James 1. To visit the Fatherless and
Widows, and to keep himself unspotted from the World; And from these fountains
of all humane actions, that is the Fear of the Lord, the study of Repentance,
and exercise of Charity, the offices and duties of all degrees, ranks and
conditions of Men, might easily be drawn and deduced: so that the whole body of
the Christian Commonwealth, from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, would be more healthful and sound, than at present we see, and would in
all its Members worthily perform its several functions: There would be no
trouble nor discord amongst the various degrees of Men; but all would conspire
for the mutual good and profit one of another: For the variety of degrees,
orders Ministeries and Offices, is not to be condemned, but rather approved of
and commended amongst a Christian People, as being found to be of great use and
advantage, when they are instituted and executed according to the Laws and
Precepts of God. for as St. Paul tells us; 1 Cor. 11. The body is not one
Member, but many. If the foot shall say, because I am not the hand, I am not of
the body; is it therefore not of the body? and if the ear shall say, because I
am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? if the
whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? if the whole were hearing,
where were the smelling? But now has God sit the Members, every one of them in
the body, as it has pleased him. And a little after he subjoyns: That there
should be no Schism in the body; but that the Members should have the same care
one for another* And whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it:
or one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it. Now ye are the Body
of Christ, and Members in particular. When the several Members are once
persuaded of this, and in the fear of the Lord; in the study of Repentance and
practice of Brotherly love and Charity, they know their Duties and Offices,
there is no doubt but that they will religiously set about the performance of
the same. That we may then begin with the first and chief orders The Duty of
Pastors, Rulers and Governors.
of the Christian state, it is manifest, that it is the duty of Rulers and
Governors, and of those who are to guide and direct others, to take care to
maintain the honor of God, and to provide what is necessary as well for the
salvation of the souls, as for the honest and lawful concerns of the bodies of
Christian People, and faithfully and diligently to discharge their part of the
Office and Care, that they have severally taken upon them: not to give
themselves over to sloth and idleness, to luxury, delights and pleasures: but
by day and by night, though with hunger and thirst, colds and heats, losses and
crosses, perils and dangers both of life and fortune; to behave themselves as
becomes good, faithful and approved Ministers and Servants, and as that honest
Keeper of another Man's Cattle, affirmed of himself in relation to the Flocks
committed to his care. Genesis 30. This twenty years have I been with thee; thy
ewes and thy she-goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock
have I not eaten. That which was torn of Beasts, I brought not unto thee, I
bare the loss of it; of my hand did thou require it, whether stolen by day, or
stolen by night. Thus I was, in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost
by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes. And as that excellent shepherd
did, whose task was neither more easy nor less dangerous, as he himself
intimates. 1 Samuel 17. Thy Servant kept his Fathers Sheep, and there came a
Lion, and a Bear, and took a Lamb out of the Flock: and I went out after him,
and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth: and when he arose against me,
I caught him by his beard, and smote him and slew him. Since these holy
Shepherds, then, showed so much care and diligence, so much faithfulness and
assiduity, for sheep, goats, and brute beasts, that their owners might suffer
no loss, what care then, behooves it them to take, Psalm. 78. who feed Jacob the
People of the Lord, and Israel his Inheritance? that they may feed them
according to the iniegrity of their heart: and guide them by the skilfulness of
their hands: whom they know to be the Flocks not of an earthly and mortal, but
of an eternal and immortal Lord and Master, 1 Pet. 1. Not redeemed with
corruptible things is Silver and Gold; but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. Now they must be led out and fed
not in strange Pastures, but in the Meadows and Fields of the Lord; as it was
the care of Jesus Christ himself, who enjoined the same to the Pastors, who
lawfully discharge that duty, not once or twice, but a third time, saying: John
21. Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? to which when he had
answered, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee: he says unto him, feed my
Lambs. He says unto him again, Simon Son of Jonas love thou me? and he
answering; yea Lord, thou know that I love thee, he says unto him, feed my
Sheep. And he said unto him a third time, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me?
and when he had answered the third time: Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee: he says unto him: feed my Sheep: This care which
Jesus Christ so earnestly and affectionately commended to Pastors, the Ancients
Religiously undertook, and gloried in the performance and discharge of the
same; as particularly St. Paul: 2 Cor. 11. In labors more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, of the Jews five times
received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered Ship-wreck; a night and a day I have been in the
deep: In Journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils
by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren;
in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things that are without,
that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and
I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? The Apostle was not only
satisfied that he had suffered these things for the sake of the souls committed
to his charge, but also, as we have already observed, gloried and greatly
rejoiced that by undergoing such troubles and care he might approve himself
unto God; wherefore he subjoyned, 2 Cor. 12. Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, in Reproaches; in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for
Christ's sake. Of the like mind were the other holy Ministers of the Gospel
also, Acts 5. who departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name. And daily in the Temple,
and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. Such
endeavors, and such instances of duty and faithful obedience God always
expects of his Pastors and Ministers, and when they are needful requires them.
Now when are they not needful? what time is there, that affords not occasion
and opportunity for a strenuous discharge of the Ministry? what reason, color
or pretext can be given for idleness, and neglecting of the Sheep? what if
there be no dangers, but all things in peace and quietness? yet opportunities
and seasons of doing those things which concern the salvation of Souls are
never wanting: there is always occasion for procuring and increasing the favor
and love of God, and for avoiding such a complaint and reproof as this. Ezekiel.
34. Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves: should not the
Shepherds feed the Flocks? ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool, ye
kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the Flock. The diseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound
up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost: but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered, because there is no
Shepherd; and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were
scattered? My Sheep wandered through all the Mountains, and upon every high
hill: yea, my Flock was scattered upon all the face of the Earth, and none did
search or seek after them. Therefore ye Shepherds hear the word of the Lord; as
I live says the Lord God, surely because my Flock became a prey, and my Flock
became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no Shepherd, neither
did my Shepherds search for my Flock, but the Shepherds fed themselves and not
my Flock: Therefore, O ye Shepherds, hear the word of the Lord; Thus says the
Lord God, behold I am against the Shepherds, and I will require my Flock at
their hand, etc. Consonant to these complaints and dreadful threatenings of the
Lord God, are the rebukes given by our Savior to the Lazy, Ambitious, Covetous
and negligent Ministers and Pastors of his Flock. Luke 11. Woe unto you, ye
Lawyers: for ye lade Men with burdens grievous to be born, and ye your selves
touch not the burden with one of your fingers. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead Men's bones, and of all
uncleanness. Those Pastors and Ministers who dread such reproofs and
threatenings of the Holy Ghost, will forsake other affairs which concern not,
but rather obstruct their function, and with all diligence and pains, will set
about the discharge of that duty which has been committed to them from above:
Nor will they think it enough to entrust others with the Government of their
Churches, who seriously mind their profit, but slightly their duty, or others,
by whom Children are only taught to say a few Prayers by heart, whilst by age
they are unable to do or understand any thing else: Nay, rather, themselves
being neither tired out by labor, frightened by dangers, nor discouraged by
difficulties, will never leave off to watch over, visit, and take account of
the Flock of God, and to take care of, and instruct Christians of all ages,
ranks, and conditions in the necessary duties of true and solid Piety. This,
indeed, is a heavy charge, and not to be performed without much labor and
pain; but it is likewise most acceptable to the Lord and Master of the Flock,
who laid down his life for his sheep: and will never withdraw the help and
assistance which he has promised, to those who study to discharge aright the
office of their Ministry. And lo, said he, I am with you to the end of the
World.

Now it behooves every one, with a Religious awe and fear to take heed and look
to himself, that by Ambition, Avarice, Bribes, Interest or other arts he aspire
not to that noble Ministry, nor be found so doing by that Just Judge from whom
the secrets of the heart and actions of Men are not hidden, and who allows no
Man for his own ends, by his own arts and industry, and without a-lawful Call
and Election, to canvass for, or step into that holy function, nor to undertake
the duties of the same, unless he be endowed with those virtues and qualities;
which are set down and expressly described by the Holy Ghost: for, Tit. 1. A
Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God; not self-willed, not soon
angry, not given to wine, no striker, nor given to filthy lucre; but a lover of
hospitality, a lover of good Men, sober, just, holy, temperate; holding fast
the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound
doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. Happy is that Flock
that has a Pastor so endowed and qualified, then would there be fewer diseases,
less slothful idleness and fewer scabs and putrefying sores to be seen amongst
the Sheep; so much error, ignorance, delusion and superstition would not be
found amongst them. In a word,

Non insueta graves tentabunt pabula foetas,
Nec mala vicini pecoris contagia laedent.
No novell food their teeming Flocks would cloy,
Nor no contagious neighboring ills annoy.
But on the contrary, at what time the sovereign Lord, should come to visit the
Flock which he has committed to the care of good Shepherds; he would find it
pure and clean, free from all impious and false doctrines, without errors,
nurtured and bred up in sound Discipline and solid Institution, healthy and
plump, comely and beautiful, as being fed with the sound food of pure and
heavenly Doctrine: which will not only be most acceptable to their Lord and
Master, but will also procure to the Pastors a most certain and excellent
reward. And what, and how great that may be hoped to be, the chief of the
Apostles St. Peter, declares to his fellow laborers in the Gospel. 1 Pet. 5.
The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witness of
the Sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be
revealed: feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but wilfully; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the
Flock: and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of
glory that fades not away.

And we make no The Duty of inferior Ministers.
doubt but that if the three Heads which have been already proposed, be
carefully observed in the lives and manners of inferior Ministers, Priests and
Deacons, and all that serve at the Altar; it will be a most profitable and sure
way to procure the grace and favor of God, not only to themselves, but to all
those also, who war under their conduct in the Church of Christ: for where the
fear of the Lord, the study of Repentance and the fervent virtue of brotherly
love and Charity dwell abundantly; there, neither Pride nor Ambition, neither
Hatred nor Injustice, neither Backbiting, Vanity, Pomp nor Ostentation, nor any
of those vices, which are wont to war against the foul, and the honesty and
integrity of life, have any place: but rather Honesty. Industry, Justice,
Peace, Concord, Mildness, Mercifulness, Continence, Civility, Gravity, and all
the other Virtues which accompany these, and spring from those three Heads, as
from pure Fountains of Christian Piety, will be eminent and conspicuous.
Superiors will Rule, Govern and Correct their Inferiors, with paternal love
and affection. Inferiors will submit unto, obey and love their superiors, as
the Vicegerents and Vicars of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, the Lord, Master, and
Head of his Church. And both will retain in their minds, and practice in their
lives, what is enjoined by our Savior. Luke 22. The Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them, are
called benefactors. But ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you,
let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve.

Now in all that we have already said, or shall hereafter say, it is not our
intention to observe what the practice of all and every one is, but only to
admonish and declare what they ought to do, as we premised in the beginning of
this Treatise. For it has always been our design and constant purpose, not to
give offense to any Man living, but only to propose to all what Christ our
Supreme Lord and heavenly Master requires of us and of all that would be his
Disciples and Followers.

And therefore, that we may prosecute the Offices of the several ranks and
qualities of Christians, ar we have proposed in the beginning; how useful and
advantageous the three chief Heads of our Christian Rule, to wit, the Fear of
the Lord, Repentance and Brotherly Love, are to Kings, Princes The Duties of
Kings, Princes and Magistrates.
and Magistrates, for ordering and carrying on their affairs with Prudence,
Wisdom, Dexterity and Success, and thereby for the working out of their own
Salvation; the very Offices and Charges which they bear, do declare. For such
Ministers are appointed by God; not that they should only consult their own
interests, and indulge and please their own humors, but that they should with
all care and industry provide for the people of God those things that are known
to conduce to the promoting of true Christian Piety, public honesty, peace and
tranquillity, innocence and uprightness, according to the Precepts and
directions of the divine wisdom. Now they who endeavor and study to do so,
must show themselves to be Princes indeed: not slaves to pride, ambition,
strife, hatred, deceit, frauds and avarice; not approving, desiring, or
admitting any thing that is not good, just and honest; not imitating crafty
arts, the slyness of dissimulation and humane cunning: nor out of private
revenge, or for fulfilling their own lusts, or ambitious desires, being the
authors of the devastations, plundrings and ruin of Countries, Cities, Towns
and Villages: nor vexing and oppressing poor Christian People with heavy and
insupportable Taxes and Impositions: but proposing themselves as patterns and
examples to other Men, of public equity innocence and righteousness; and
making their lives and conversations a rule to private Men, of continence,
modesty and godliness; reckoning themselves, no less than other Christians,
bound and obliged by that Covenant which they entered into in their Baptism,
and diligently observing that necessary renunciation which they then made of
the Devil and all his works. If these things were rightly observed, one Prince
would not invade the Kingdoms, Cities, Towns and Rights of other Christians,
nor detain what he had unjustly usurped. By this means, mutual Charity and
Peace would keep, not only Princes themselves, but also their Vassals and
Subjects in their duty; honesty would commend, and Majesty and Authority adorn
them; Justice would reign amongst People; the zeal of Gods honor every where
appear, in exact obedience to the precepts and holy commandments of God: and
lastly, in common and united desires, purposes, words and works, that promise
would be fulfilled, which was made by all Christians, none excepted, in
Baptism. For if the true nature of Regal, Imperial, and Princely Authority be
considered, it will manifestly appear; that these high and supreme dignities,
have for that end been instituted by God, that they who are honored with them,
should be the Guardians, asserters and avengers of the holy Laws of God, be,
and have the title of the fathers of their People; that they should rightly
administer Justice, punish the guilty and transgressors of the Law, put to
death open and incorrigible Malefactors, protect the poor and weak from the
violence and oppression of the powerful and rich, defend the innocent against
the attempts of the wicked, and maintain the fatherless and widows: In a word,
that they should endeavor what in them lies, to keep and preserve all the
Members of the State, both high and low, great and small, rich and poor, in
peace, concord, tranquillity and security. This, I say, is the true end, for
which the dignity and authority of Kings, Princes and chief Magistrates is
appointed by God, from whence it follows, that needless Pomp and ostentation
with voluptuous greatness, the affectation of Arbitrary dominion, the designs
of boundless ambition, and the consequents thereof the dangers and losses of
souls, bodies and estates, and the excessive harassing and overcharging
Subjects, are both displeasing to God, and grievous to the people.

Nor is it only the Office of Kings and Princes, to cause the rest of Mankind
to be instructed and kept in the duties of Religion, Piety, Honesty, and in the
fear of God, and to show themselves the Ministers of the Will of God and
Ecclesiastical Discipline, but it is their proper duty also as they are
Princes, To know the Law of God, carefully attend to, and diligently practice
and obey the same, being led by the fear of the Lord, in all the actions of
their lives and administrations of their Government. As it is enjoined by this
singular Precept: Deuteronomy. 17. It shall be when the King sits upon the Throne
of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a Book, out of
that which is before the Priests and the Levites. And it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the
Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law and these Statutes, to do them:
that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside
from the commandment to the right hand or to the left: neither shall he
multiply Wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he
greatly multiply to himself Silver and Gold; lest trusting therein, he fall
into avarice and covetousness, which the Apostle calls Idolatry, and the root
of all evil. They are not to respect persons in Judgment, nor to take bribes;
Eccles. 20. For Presents and Gifts blind the eyes of the Wise, and make them
liable to that dreadful Sentence pronounced against those that pervert
Judgment: Deuteronomy. 27. Cursed be he that perverteth the Judgment of the Stranger,
Fatherless and Widow. Of which execrable practice, these Judges and Magistrates
are taxed, of whom it is written: 1 Samuel 8. They turned aside after lucre, and
took bribes, and perverted Judgment.

But seeing it is impossible that so many Provinces, The Duty of inferior
Magistrates
Cities and Towns as may happen to be in one Christian Kingdom, can be Governed
by the pains and care of the Prince alone; divine Providence has appointed that
Judges, Magistrates and other public Ministers should be constituted, who may
carefully and dutifully discharge the Offices and Trust that is reposed upon
them. Deuteronomy. 16. As it is written, Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in
all thy Gates which the Lord thy God gives thee throughout all thy Tribes: and
they shall Judge the People with just Judgment. Thou shall not wrest Judgment,
thou shall not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift does blind the
eyes of the Wise, and pervert the words of the Righteous. That which is
altogether Just shall thou follow. And in another place. Exodus 18. Provide out
of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating
Covetousness; and place such over them, to be Rulers of Thousands, and Rulers
of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers of Tens. And let them Judge the
People at all Seasons, etc. Which kind of Men when Jehosaphat had chosen, he
thus admonished them: 2 Chronicles. 19. Take heed what ye do: for ye Judge not for
Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in Judgment. Wherefore, now, let the
fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. Thus shall
ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart. And that
this course was followed by Princes and Magistrates who were approved of God*
Holy History assures us.

Now so much holier ought Christian Princes and Magistrates to be, so much more
versed in the study and knowledge of Law and Equity, by how much they have
obtained a more perfect Testament than the Ancients did, not only because of
the clear and plain exposition of the divine Precepts made by Christ and his
Apostles, but also because of more abundant grace promised and prepared for
Believers under the Gospel. It is very far from their duty then, either by
commission or omission to break the Law, and violate the sacred Precepts; and
that they who are commanded always to read and meditate on the Law, and not to
turn aside from the right, neither to the right hand nor to the left; should
mind nothing but pleasures, pomp, ambition and avarice, and go astray after
their own inventions, making and imposing Laws upon others, which make more for
the appetites and desires, the greatness, State, Majesty and Glory, (as they
are pleased to call it) of the Governors; and for establishing many new titles
of Authority, Prerogative and Superiority, which they daily invent, than for
the true Worship of God, and good of the People. Besides, it is a sort of
perverseness most odious to God, for Princes, or inferior Magistrates, to
covet to be rich, and to leave great Estates to their Children, out of the
public Revenues: and not being satisfied with an honest reward for their
labors, that is, with a modest competency of subsistence, according to their
quality, to be insatiably set upon the getting of wealth and riches, either by
the liberality of Princes, or defrauding the Public, and to make it the whole
desire of their Souls, that they may raise great Houses and Families, whereby
they may perpetuate their Names upon Earth, rather by a long Succession of
Heirs, than by the Monuments and Examples of Virtue, Innocence, Sanctity and
real Honor.

Samuel born in Ramah, a little Town, and in a Montainous Country, being from
his childhood brought up in the sacred Ministeries of the Temple, had a garment
given him yearly by his Parents, suitable to the meanness of their Fortune.
When he was grown up to be a Man, by the command of God he took upon him the
Government of the Commonwealth, and during the space of forty years, as
Prince, Judge, and Ruler, in Peace and in War, Ruled the populous, rich, and
flourishing State of the whole twelve Tribes of Israel, being as painful and
assiduous, as vigilant and active as any Governor, either before or since; and
yet during that whole time, he neither increased his Estate, nor changed his
abode from his own mean native habitation, to a more conspicuous City, at least
in his own Tribe; nor for his pleasure made use of the delights and varieties
that other places did afford: but having in War recovered and reestablished the
State of the Israelites, and settled a firm Peace all over the Country, he kept
Assemblies at certain times for administering Justice to the People, and when he
had done so, that he might not be troublesome or chargeable to any Town or
Family, he returned home to his own mean, but contentful habitation, where he
neither excused himself from business, nor omitted any opportunity of promoting
the worship of God. As it is written, 1 Samuel 7. And the hand of the Lord was
against the Philistines, all the days of Samuel. And the Cities which the
Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto
Gath, and the Coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the
Philistines: And there was Peace between Israel and the Amorites. And Samuel
Judged Israel all the days of his life. And he went from year to year in
Circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and Judged Israel in all those
places. And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house: and there he
Judged Israel, and there he built an Altar unto the Lord. By the short
description of this instance, the Holy Ghost manifestly shows us, with how much
care, diligence, innocence, piety, continence and abstinence, that great Man
discharged the Offices of a valiant and expert General in War, and of an
excellent Prince and Magistrate in Peace, who, when afterward he had dimitted
the Government, and resigned up the Authority to a chosen King, was neither
richer nor more wealthy, nor was his Family advanced to greater dignity or
splendour; but he contentedly returned to the same stat^ wherein he was born.
For Samuel went to Ramah, where he spent the rest of his days; neither did he
build Palaces or stately Houses, either in Ramah, or in any other more
conspicuous place, nor erected for himself a magnificent Monument or burying
place, on which, either at Jerusalem, or any other City taken in War, he might
transmit to Posterity the Trophies of his Achievements, or the Titles of his
Fame. 1 Samuel 25. But Samuel died, and all the Israelites were-gathered together
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah.

For they who aim to be rich by their Magistracy, must of necessity either
cheat the King, or defraud the Public; and apply that to their own private use
which might far better and more profitably be expended on the Public: Now the
public treasure being exhausted, the people must needs be harassed with new
Taxes and Impositions; and so the Wealth and Riches of a few, must cause the
want and poverty of many. But how much God is offended at these covetous
desires, the Prophet plainly declares, Isa. 5. Woe unto them that join house to
house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed
alone in the midst of the earth. In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a
truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without Inhabitant.
Now if it be unbeseeming a Christian Magistrate to heap up riches from the
Salaries or larger Perquisits of their Offices; how detestable and accursed
must it be in the sight of God, to get Estates and Dignities, by accepting of
Persons, Injustice, Rapine, Fraud, Bribes, Oppression, Calumny and Cheating?
God forbids Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, to multiply to themselves Gold and
Silver: for the greedy thirst after Gold and Riches, sets the minds of those
who are infected therewith, upon the committing of any Sin and Wickedness: it
is the cause of the Oppression of People with grievous and heavy Impositions,
of Quarrels, Strife and Wars amongst Princes themselves, of the slaughter and
murdering of Subjects, and other abominable and flagitious cruelties, that are
committed by Soldiers; and, in a word, of the ruin and loss of many Souls, as
the Holy Ghost himself assures us: Jam. 4. From whence come Wars and Fightings
among you? Come they not hence, even of your Lusts that War in your Members? ye
lust and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and
war, and ye have not, because ye ask not: ye ask, and receive not, because ye
ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts. And whilst matters go thus
amongst those who profess the Faith, and pretend to Piety and Religion: the
Christian Commonwealth and true Piety are lessened and impaired; the barbarous
and wicked Empires and Kingdoms of Christ's enemies, increase and are enlarged,
Heresies and erroneous and accursed Sects, spring up and daily grow greater and
greater. God set before us an illustrious and noble pattern of Chastity and
Continence, in the persons of his own Princes: saying, He shall not multiply to
himself many Wives, that may allure his mind. That was not lawful to the
ancient Kings of the people of Israel: and shall it therefore be lawful to
Christian Princes, to deflower Virgins, rob Women of their Honor and
Reputation, and by their foul example tempt others to the desire or act of the
same filthiness, till they know no more the number of them they have debauched
and wronged? Kings and Princes who would approve themselves to God, are
forbidden in Scripture to lift up their hearts in Pride above their brethren.
It would be horrid wickedness then, to use Tyranny, Inhumanity, Pride,
Ambition, Haughtiness, Arrogance, Insolency and Cruelty toward Christian
Subjects; and so to treat them, as if they were Heathen Slaves bought with
their Money, for the satisfaction of their Lusts and Pleasures, their Luxury,
Vanity and Pride. God forbids any Man to aspire to Power and Supremacy, to
arrogate it to himself or any way to invade it; he will not have any Man to be
the Lord and Master of his People, except those who are appointed by his Favor
and Authority, or are declared to be such by the just Right of Inheritance. And
therefore we dare be bold to affirm, that it is not Lawful for any Man that
professes himself to be a Disciple of Christ, and fears the Judgment of God,
either by Favor, Interest or popular Faction, or by Force, Fraud or Deceit, by
Money, Gifts or Promises, to invade the Rights and Places of others, or to
detain them being unjustly invaded. It is a barbarous and inhumane thing to do
so, altogether repugnant to the Christian Doctrine, and only to be practiced by
Heathenish Tyrants, and perverse Infidels, who are therefore liable to the
severe and grievous punishments of a terrible Judgment.

Now seeing it is the command of God that the Ministers and Officers of Kings
and Princes, should be chosen from among the best and fittest of the People,
who are far from Covetousness and Ambition. It would be a bad custom amongst
Christians, to appoint those for the administration of Ecclesiastical or Civil
employments, who endeavor to screw themselves into Place by Bribes or
Largesses, Arrogance or Ostentatiom, or other such arts and politic slights;
and it would be worst of all, if unworthy and unfit Persons, vicious, covetous
and ambitious Men, should be advanced to Magistracy, either by the sole favor
of Princes, without any consideration of merit, or for a reward of other
ignoble services, or upon the account of Money, solicitation of friends,
recommendation of Ladies, or other worldly by-respects. But if Princes and
Magistrates being endowed with the three abovementioned Heads of Christian
Piety, will carefully and diligently set about the performance of the duties of
their several places and employments, they will omit no occasion of executing
Justice and Judgment with all integrity, and they will give no place, either in
City or Country, in public or in private, to the saucy, disobedient,
licentious, froward and corrupt humors of wicked and perverse Men: The fruit
whereof will be, that delights and pleasures, luxury and uncleanness, pride and
violence, brutishness and sensuality, and, in a word, the contempt and neglect
of the Laws of God, reigning and abounding no more in Christian Countries,
Cities and Towns; they will not be like unto those Cities, which St. Paul
says, were for unrighteousness delivered up to a Reprobate sense; or be by
God, Judged worse than Sodom and Gomorrah, nor be liable to that character,
which the Prophet put upon those who neglected Righteousness and Judgment. Jer.
9. They be all Adulterous, an Assembly of treacherous Men. And they bend their
tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the Truth upon
the Earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the
Lord. Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother,
for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with
standers. And they will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the
truth; they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to
commit iniquity. Jer. 6. For from the least of them even unto the greatest of
them, every one is given to covetousness; and from the Prophet, even unto the
Priest, every one deals falsely. All these things happen where the fear of the
Lord, true Piety and Justice are neglected by Princes and Magistrates: which is
the cause that Thefts, Robberies, Murders, Adulteries, whoredom, Blasphemy,
Perjury, Usury, Disobedience to Parents, Irreverence toward Superiors; in a
word, the forgetting and contempt of the commandments of God, and all other
horrid vices and impieties, are so frequent, and that besides the eternal
destruction to which they hurry Men headlong, they make Christ, and the most
pure and holy Christian Religion, not only to be despised and contemned, but
also reproached and evil spoken of by barbarous and unbelieving Nations, and
perfidious Jews; when they see and observe Christian Countries and Cities full
of Murderers, Usurers, Deceivers, Cheats, Backbiters, Robbers, Thieves, Bauds,
Whores, Adulterers, and other flagitious Sinners; abounding in Hatred, Envy,
Suspicions, Injuries and Offenses; void of Peace, Sincerity and Honesty: and
lastly, practicing Carnal Licentiousness, and all the tricks and artifices of
Fraud and Cunning. All which vices and wickednesses are banished from thence,
where the decency of an honest Christian Conversation, and the Obedience and
love of Gods Commands are encouraged by Princes and Magistrates, where
Injuries, Villainies, Revenge and Contentions, are not reckoned Honorable, but
Disgraceful to Persons and Families; where Virtue only is applauded; but
Cruelty and Injustice, Immodesty, Inhumanity, Pride and Arrogance are
discountenanced and hissed at. Now it is impossible that in those places where
Rulers and Governors do their duty, and give good example to others, Murderers,
Thieves, Robbers, Blasphemers, Adulterers, perjured Persons, Panders, Usurers,
Cheats, Covetous and hurtful persons, Witches, Wizzards, Sorcerers, or any
despisers and transgressors of the Laws of Heaven should harbor and abide, but
that all, according to the direction of God, should, as much as may be, be
entirely rooted out, not only lest by their crimes and wickedness they may hurt
others, but lest they should by their filthy Conversation corrupting the whole
Body of the State, and especially the tender Youth, allure them into the like
Crimes, and render their Scholars worse than the Masters: because we are all
apt to learn and imitate wicked and bad examples; for as the divine Oracle
says, Genesis 8. The imagination of Man's heart is evil from his Youth.

Nor would any reason of State allow, if the fear of the Lord, Repentance and
Brotherly-love, dwelt as they ought, in the hearts of Princes, that open
Malefactors, disturbers of the public Peace, and those that hurt and corrupt
the Innocent and Simple, who by the Authority of divine Law are utterly to be
expelled and cast out of Christian Governments, should either be suffered to
live in their own Country, or be received, protected and defended by other
Princes; or secured by Pass-ports and safe conducts; lest thereby they might be
continued alive to the ruin and destruction, either of the Princes and
Magistrates from whom they have fled, or of those by whom they are received. If
this were punctually observed, we should find greater reverence paid to the
Law, less licentiousness and wanton and rash Factiousness amongst Christians.

For neither is divine Justice divided; nor is any wicked, impure, or
incorrigible person, tho transported to any place of the Earth, approved of, or
accepted of God, nor ought good and godly Princes ever to admit such to any
place in their favor or affairs. for it is written: Psalm. 5. For thou art not
a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. The
foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hate all workers of iniquity. Thou
shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abher the bloody and
deceitful Man. Now that this Judgment and Counsel of God ought to be followed
by those Princes, who study and endeavor to approve themselves to the Lord and
Prince of Princes, that holy profession of the Prince according to Gods own
heart, plainly demonstrates. Psalm. 101. I will walk within my house with a
perfect heart. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of
them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. A froward heart shall depart
from me: I will not know a wicked person. Whosoever privily slandereth his
neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has a high look, and a proud heart,
will not I suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they
may dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. He that
works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that tells lies, shall
not tarry in my sight. I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land: that I
may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. The authority of divine
Justice is perpetual and unalterable; which ought equally to be regarded by all
Christian Princes, nor must they think it is divided, or to be executed by
halves, but they must observe it wholly and entirely, squaring it by the Will
and Precept of the King of Kings, and Lord of all the Earth: who when he had
appointed Cities of Refuge or Sanctuaries amongst his People, whither they who
had killed any one without malice or inveterate and confirmed hatred, might fly
to escape revenge; concerning others who with a deliberate purpose of mind
committed the fact, he thus Enacts. Deuteronomy. 19. If any Man hate his neighbor,
and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that
he dies, and flees into one of these Cities: then the Elders of his City shall
send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die: thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shall put away
the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee. The
same Justice he commands to be executed Deuteronomy. 17. 19, 22, 24. against Thieves,
Robbers, Cheats, Ravishers, Adulterers, and other open Offenders, and public
violators of Justice, Truth and Honesty, all whom he will have taken out of the
way, that the evil may be put away from Israel; and therefore to the several
sentences he adds: And so shall thou put away the evil from among you.

And since the Christian Doctrine has taught the rest of the Officers of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, all Judges, Lawyers, Advocates, Proctors, Clerks,
and other subservient Ministers of Magistrates and Courts of Judicature, the
fear of the Lord, Repentance, and Brotherly-love; it will not allow them to
Practice or get Estates by Fraud, Deceit, Cavilling, Petty-fogging, malicious
interpretation of the Law, protracting of Suits, starting of litigious
Processes, superfluous invention of Pleas, or by false information against the
Innocent, or unjust defense of the Guilty. For this Doctrine condemns all
haughtiness of mind, Luxury, Pride, and Ambition, and all vices that are fed
and cherished by riches even innocently got; but much more severely condemns
Men who get Estates and live splendidly of the sweat and blood of their
Christian Brethren, and by their Fraud, Craft, cunning and overreaching, and
such ways as exceed; the perverseness of which God sadly complaining, thus
threatens by the Prophet, Jer. 5. Among my People are found wicked Men: they
lay wait as he that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch Men. As a Cage
is full of Birds, so are their Houses full of Deceit: therefore they are become
great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they over pass the
deeds of the wicked: they Judge not the Cause, the Cause of the Fatherless, yet
they prosper: and the right of the needy do they not Judge. Shall I not visit
for these things? says the Lord: Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation
as this? from such crimes must all the Officers of a State flee, who in
prospect of Salvation, endeavor to live Godly, Justly, and Honestly in this
present wicked world; and they ought to make it their whole care and business,
that Equity, Justice and Moderation may flourish, both in public and private;
and that the powerful, rich and crafty, may not unjustly impose upon the weak,
poor and simple, since that charge is seriously pressed upon them by God
himself. Isa. 1. Learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, Judge
the fatherless, plead for the widow.

Now as to the Rich, and such as The Duty of the Rich.
endeavor to be so; if they would remember their promise made in holy Baptism,
and confirmed by covenant with the Lord, if they resolve to follow after, and
practice holiness according to the rules of Christian Piety, they may easily
and plainly learn from the Doctrine of our Lord and Master, contained in the
three aforementioned Heads, how far otherwise they ought to behave themselves,
both in getting and spending of Estates, than most part of Rich Men usually do.
For the Unjust, Covetous and Insatiable Desire of Riches, and the vain,
superfluous, ambitious, or selfish use of them, are not consistent with the
fear of the Lord, the duty of Repentance, and Brotherly-love of Christians,
which approve not those advantages that wealth abuses to pleasures and luxury;
but rather condemn them; The Christian Doctrine that advises those who would be
saved, not to trust to Riches, commending Honesty, Modesty, Temperance,
Innocence, Continence, Mercy, Bounty, Liberality, and the other Duties of Piety
and Religion; and on the contrary detesting and dissuading from the opposite
vices, as Pride and Haughtiness, Delights and Pleasures, Injuries, Robberies
and Oppression of the Poor, detaining or Cheating the Laborers Wages, Usury,
Monopolies, enhaunsing of prices, and every thing else, that is either
disgraceful to the doer, hurtful to our Christian Brethren, or inconsistent
with the public good, in the Judgment of God himself. For he who reckons all
Christians his Brethren, and Children of one Common Father, the Just, Merciful
and Bountiful God, and shall know that they stand in need of his help, ought to
assist them partly by giving, and partly by lending without any hope of profit,
benefit or interest; and thereby magnify God the Father, who has enabled him
to show that kindness to his Brethren, which the liberal goodness of God has
promised to recompense with a sure and excellent reward. For so it is written,
Luke 6. Do good and lend, hoping for nothing again: and your reward shall be
great, and ye shall be the children of the highest: for he is kind to the
unthankful and to the evil. Be ye therefore Merciful, as your Father also is
Merciful. To this duty of beneficence enjoined by Christ to his Disciples, we
may add that strict command of God. Deuteronomy. 15. If there be among you a poor Man
of one of thy brethren, within any of thy Gates, in thy Land which the Lord thy
God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy
poor brother: But thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely
lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wants. Beware that there
be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, the seventh year, the year of
release is at hand: and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou
give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto
thee. Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when
thou give unto him: because that for that thing the Lord thy God shall bless
thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto. For the
poor shall never cease out of the Land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou
shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in
the Land. The sincere Disciples of Christ ought to set before their eyes, and
think on that command of God, that is backed with so many reasons, commended by
so many promises, and armed with so many threatenings against the neglecters of
it, and freely bestow and lend according to their abilities; avoiding what in
them lies, that sentence pronounced by the Holy Ghost, against the rich Men of
this World, and not in good works. Jam. 5. Go to now ye rich Men, weep and houl
for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your
Garments are Moth-eaten, your Gold and Silver is Cankered; and the rust of them
shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye
have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold the hire of the
Laborers, which have reaped dawn your Fields, which is of you kept back by
Fraud, erieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth, and been
wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

Consonant to this sentence is that dreadful commination of Christ: Luke 6. Woe
unto you that are rich: for ye have received your consolation. Woe unto you that
are full, for ye shall hunger: woe unto you that laugh now: for ye shall mourn
and weep. And is it not a very terrible sentence that is pronounced, and with
an asseveration confirmed by our Savior against rich Men? Mat. 19. Verily I
say unto you, that a rich Man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
And again I say unto you, it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God. The reason of
this difficulty the Holy Ghost affirms to be, because the desire and love of
riches deceives Men, and turns them often out of the straight road of Equity
and Justice. For he that desires to be rich, hastens to be so: but then what
respect is there to the Law? what fear or shame in him who sets his soul upon
wealth? nay plenty and opulency when once it is acquired, debauches both Men
and Women from an innocent, modest and honest way of living, into luxury,
vanity and pomp, into pride and strife, and into other violations of the divine
commandments, and contempt of Christian simplicity, setting off enormous vices
with great and plausible names; so prone is the sinful appetite of Man to abuse
even the advantages and blessings of earthly things; a fault carefully to be
avoided, as the Apostle admonishes: 1 Timothy 6. But they that will be rich, fall
into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown Men in destruction and perdition: for the love of money is the root of
all evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. And therefore, that good Men may
be ware of that deceitfulness of riches, Psalm. 62. The holy Ghost by the mouth
of the Prophet, gives this admonition. If riches increase; set not your heart
upon them.

Nor is the holy Doctrine of our Lord and Master The duty of Merchants and
Tradesmen.
more remiss or obscure in informing all those who live, and endeavor to get
Estates by Traffic and Trades. For such are taught by the fear of the Lord,
the study of Repentance, and Brotherly Love, to deceive no Man; not to
adulterate or change; diminish or increase their goods and commodities, nor to
neglect any thing that relates to them, which the nature of the goods require;
not to change and raise their prices, nor to deal fraudulently in weights and
measures: for the holy Scriptures assure us, that all such frauds and cheats
argue a contempt of divine Justice, Christian simplicity and uprightness, and
are extremely offensive to the supreme Judge of all Men. Prove. 11. A false
balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is his delight. And
again, Prove. 20. Diverse weights and diverse measures, both of them are alike
abomination to the Lord. Nor is that custom of cheating and circumventing our
brethren, by false prices and oaths, and a cunning wheedle of words, less
abominable to God; as it is written. Amos 8. Hear this, O ye that swallow up
the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to fail, saying, when will the new
Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying the
balances by deceit? That we may buy the poor for Silver, and the needy for a
pair of Shoes; yea and sell the refuse of the wheat? The Lord has sworn by
the excellency of Jacob, surely I will never forget any of their works. Shall
not the Land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells therein?
whosoever are the true disciples and followers of Christ will fear and stand in
awe to offend God, and to be liable to such threatenings: whatever art or
profession they follow, they will manage the same with all faithfulness and care,
and behave themselves modestly and justly in the business they set about,
neither wronging their brethren in their work, nor exacting too much for their
labor, nor overvaluing the goods they sell them; but proposing to themselves
charity and the good of others, rather than covetousness, and abominating all
filthy and forbid gain, they will be content with the lawful gettings of their
callings, and shun and despise the pride of life, as a thing altogether
inconsistent with the simplicity of their vocation.

But that we may now descend from the public society and duties of Mankind, to
the particular relations of private persons, and enter into the houses and
families of Christians; we are to take notice, what the mutual duties of
private persons in a family are; and how they are to be performed by
Christians, as in the presence of God, who is a Judge and witness of all their
actions.

Christian Women and Wives who desire to order their lives according The duty
of Women and Wives.
to this short but universal rule of Christian Piety, must studiously avoid all
Pride, Arrogance, Vainglorious Boasting, Envy, Haughtiness, Backbiting, and
evil speaking; showing nothing in their conversation, of Voluptuousness,
Wantonness, Lustfulness, Idleness, or Curiosity, and giving no example of
Anger, Hatred, Discord, Grudge nor Malice: Put on the contrary, they are in all
things to approve themselves Modest, Peaceable, lovers of Truth, Charity and
Simplicity, and Dutiful and Obedient to their Husbands and Yokefellows, in all
things that are lawful and honest. For these ornaments and certain proofs of
true virtue, are always conspicuous in those Christian Women, who fear the
Lord, practice Repentance, and live holily in Brotherly-love and Charity with
all Men: To which they are also enjoined by the holy Precepts of the spirit of
God, with assurances of his favor if they perform, and of his anger and
indignation, if they omit and neglect their duty. Ephesians. 5. Wives submit your
selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord. For the Husband is the head of
the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church: and he is the Savior of
the body. Therefore as the Church is subject to Christ, so let the Wives be to
their own Husbands in every thing. Wives who sincerely and heartily study
Piety, will not mind gorgeous attire, rich, costly and gaudy apparel, which by
decking and setting off the body, Eclipses the beauty, gravity and modesty of
the mind, but such as being prepared by virtue, is an argument of probity and
chiefly designed to render them acceptable to God and beloved of their own
Husbands. For that attire and dress is most commendable and graceful in a Wife,
which adorns the mind, and makes her lovely in the sight of God, and her own
Husband, and venerable to all others; that being the ornament which the Holy
Ghost prescribes and commends, as becoming a Christian Wife. 1 Pet. 3. While
they (the Husbands) behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose
adorning let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of
wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: but let it be the hidden Man of
the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after this
manner in the old time, the holy women also who trusted in God adorned
themselves, being in subjection unto their own Husbands. And tho God would not
have such to be ignorant or negligent of their own duty; yet he does not
approve that they should be tatlers, or disputers, or that they should arrogate
to themselves wisdom and knowledge, nor would he have them to be greedy of many
teachers, or desirous of much learning; but being satisfied with the knowledge
of true Piety, and Christian Candor and Simplicity, that they should busy
themselves in the exercise and practice thereof. 1 Cor. 14. Let your Women keep
silence in the Churches: for it is not permitted to them to speak; but they are
commanded to be under obedience, as also says the Law. And if they will learn
any thing let them ask their Husbands at home: for it is a shame for Women to
speak in the Church. And again in another place. 1 Timothy 2. Let the Women learn
in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the Man, but to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, then
Eve, And Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived was in the
transgression. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childbearing, if they
continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety.

The same Doctrine The duty of Husbands.
and Discipline of Christian Piety comprehended under the three aforementioned
Heads, the fear of the Lord, Repentance, and Brotherly-love, if it be rightly
known and practiced, will also keep Men in their duty, and to the performance
of the chaste Vows and Promises of Marriage; for it enjoins Husbands to love
their Wives, and to have the same care of them as of themselves, but
especially, as the most important concern of Marriage, to consult and provide
for the eternal salvation of the Wife, not only by frequent and reiterated
admonitions, but also by good and wholesome examples, and, if it be needful, by
undergoing all kinds of danger, and running the risk of life and fortune for
accomplishing that end. The whole of this duty is by the Holy Ghost summed up
in this Precept. Ephesians. 5. Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved
the Church, and gave himself for it: that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water, by the word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and without blemish. So ought Men to love their Wives, as their
own bodies: he that loves his Wife, loves himself. For no Man ever yet hated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church:
for we are Members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause
shall a Man leave Father and Mother, and shall be joined unto his Wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular, so love
his Wife, even as himself; and the Wife see that she reverence her Husband.

Now those houses Domestic Discipline.
and families are most acceptable to God, which are reared upon the Foundations
of the fear of the Lord, Repentance, and Brotherly*love, where Children and
Servants are both by institution and example instructed in the duties of Virtue
and true Piety, and taught to discharge the several offices of their stations;
to fear and reverence their Fathers and Masters, and to submit to the Authority
of the Master of the Family, as appointed and established by the Laws of God.
Wherefore it ought to be the care and study both of Masters of Families, and of
Children and Servants, That all should diligently discharge their several
parts, the one in commanding, the others in obeying, and all in mutual helping
and assisting of one another, in promoting the good of the Family, the practice
of Piety, and the salvation of their Souls. For so are Families enjoined by the
Holy Ghost, to know and practice their duties. Ephesians. 6. Children, obey your
Parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
(which is the first Commandment with Promise) that it may be well with thee,
and thou may live long on the earth. And ye Fathers, provoke not your
Children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ: not with
eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart; with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to
Men: knowing that whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he receive
of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. And ye Masters, do the same things
unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in Heaven,
neither is there respect of persons with him.

Nor is it consistent with Christian Doctrine and Truth, that Children who
ought to be educated by their Parents in the fear of the Lord, and in the
knowledge and practice of Piety, should be bred up in the Principles of corrupt
and perverse Doctrine, and led in the broad way that tends to destruction,
being from their infancy indulged and pampered in Pomp and Pride; countenanced
in Luxury, Worldly Delights, and Lustful Pleasures; taught all the lewd Songs,
Sports, and Exercises of the Age; and made acquainted with the factious
Principles, Feuds and Animosities of their Parents, which from their Cradle
upward they pursue and promote: seeing thereby it happens, that the Children of
Christians who ought to be holy and imitable examples to all the World, of
Religion, Honesty, Reverence and Piety toward God, become the scandalous
patterns of Dishonesty, Uncleanness, Irreverence and Impiety both against God
and their Parents. Servants and Domestics also encouraged by the public and
private examples of wickedness, both in societies abroad and families at home,
grow, through the neglect of those who should punish and correct them, proper
instruments of Unfaithfulness, Disobedience, Robberies, Thefts, Oppressions,
and the disgrace of Families; so that all those employments almost which in
themselves are good and lawful, run out of course, and degenerate into corrupt
Nuysances. Now it is manifest that this perverseness and depravation of manners
always happens, when Christian People are not taught the pure, simple, true and
severe Discipline of the Gospel: or if they be taught it, either through an
inveterate habit of sinning, wholly slight and neglect it, or if they commend
and approve it, yet think it not so absolutely necessary, as that they ought to
prefer it before all other things that come in competition therewith, and so
receive the word that is sown by the Husbandman, in stony or thorny ground.
But we ought greatly to fear and have a care that that complaint of the Lord
may not seem to be uttered against us. Jer. 5. A wonderful and horrible thing
is committed in the Land. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and my People love to have it so: and what will ye do in
the end thereof?

Now to conclude, what sinner soever moved by the fear of the Lord, shall
seriously consider upon the wrath and indignation of God, that he has
deserved, and the severe and terrible Judgment to which he has made himself
liable; and shall again meditate in his own thoughts that Grace, Mercy, and the
blessing of Heaven is ready prepared for him, if he will but carefully and
heartily endeavor to be clothed with the Wedding Garment, that is, to follow
the rule of Piety above described; unless he be more than impious, and given
over to a reprobate sense; there is no doubt but that he will turn with full
purpose of heart and soul, from Vice to Virtue, from corruption to integrity,
from madness and folly, to a sound mind, and, in a word from the slavery of the
Devil, to that merciful Lord, who is so pleased with the serious and true
Repentance of Sinners, that with an Oath he has sworn he desires it, and has
freely promised his blessings to those who hope in his Mercy, and turn to him
with their heart. As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. He that has
ears to hear let him hear, and turn to Repentance, if he desire to obtain mercy
from the most High; who heals the broken in heart, and binds up their
wounds: by whose grace, assistance, good will and pleasure, we have written
this practical Rule of Christian Piety, for the instruction of our
Fellow Christians; hoping that the meditation and study thereof may be useful
to them for obtaining salvation, through the goodness of God; to whom be honor
and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

It has not been our purpose to set off this Christian Institution, with the
ornaments and flowrishes of exquisite Language and Rhetoric; but rather in few
and plain words to accommodate this Doctrine of Piety to the capacities of all
Christians, who might thereby more easily both learn and retain it; it being
our desire rather to deliver and teach useful and good sense, than gay and
painted words. Now the sum of all that has been said, is shortly this. That
extraordinary and supernatural gifts and graces are promised to all Men, who
will believe and accept the same, not only in this life, but also more
especially in that which is to come; and the same purchased and conveyed to
them by the virtue and efficacy of that wonderful mystery of the conception,
birth, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ the Son of God; who is ready to
bestow them on every one, who in the fear of the Lord obeys the holy dictates
and precepts of the Law, and is diligent and sincere in the practice of
Brotherly-love and Charity. For God requires that Men should fear, obey,
worship and serve him, and upon these conditions gave us his promises; to the
performance of which he obliged himself out of mere grace and bounty. And this
is the duty which every Christian, whether high or low, learned or unlearned,
ought to know and practice.

But for all other things which Men may desire to know and learn, relating
either to their private capacities, or to the rank and quality which they bear
amongst Men, and wherein they may be deceived, mistaken and err; since all Men
are not competent Judges of such things, we have purposely omitted them,
exhorting all and every one, that having diligently considered and observed the
abovementioned three heads, they would keep that station, wherein by right and
Law they are placed; not declining to the right or to the left from their
common duty, which being faithfully performed, God of his goodness, will impart
to all, what is necessary to be known and practiced by every one in the place
and degree that he is called to in society. Now if any thing appear unseemly
and not altogether so justifiable in the actions and conduct of others; it is
not the part of any private Man to Judge and Censure it, or to endeavor any
change or alteration in the Duties and Offices of others; but to leave the care
of that to the lawful Ministers, and Magistrates, and to pray the Lord of the
Vineyard, that he would send fit Laborers into his Vineyard, and that he would
advance, protect and defend his own Harvest. Without doubt, the Lord will have
pity on his inheritance, and take care of the welfare and prosperity of his
people; and will highly approve, that no Man for the fault or error of
another, withdraw himself from the unity and concord of the established Church
and Government; but that every Man mind, not what other people do, but what be
ought to do and perform himself, and with heart and soul set about it.

FINIS.

