AN ACCOUNT Of the Proceedings of His MAJESTY'S Army In Scotland, With the
Manner of the Taking of Argile, Together with a Defeat that the Lord Ross gave
to a Party of the Rebels Commanded by Sir John Cochran.

And Also The Proceedings of His Majesty's Forces In England.

Dublin, Reprinted by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham, and are to be Sold by
Samuel Helsham at the Colledge-Arms in Castle-street: 1685:

An Account of the Proceedings of His Majesty's Army in Scotland, etc:
Edinburgh, June 18. THursday at Noon, We have an account this day that the
late Earl of Argile, upon the notice he had of the arrival of his Majesty's
Ships, had resolved to cause his Ships and Boats to Sail into Lochsyne, but
being detained by contrary winds, his Majesty's Ships, the King-Fisher and
Faulcon came up to the entrance of Lochrowan, where the Rebels Ships lay, by
which they were so discouraged, that laying aside the design of sailing into
Lochfyne, they began upon the 10th. instant to fortify a little Castle called
Ellergreg, and a Rock that lies near to it in a little Island, for securing
their Ships in Lochrowan, which done, himself marched away toward the head of
Lochfyne, leaving 150 men for the guard of the Ships, having first put his
Cannon, Arms and Ammunition into the Castle. Upon the 11th. a party of his
Majesty's Forces, under the Command of the Marquess of Athol, consisting of 300
Foot, encountered a party of the Rebels of 400 Foot, and 80 Horse, and defeated
them; some of the Rebels being killed upon the place, several wounded, and some
of their Horses and Arms taken; upon which they marched back to Ellengreg,
where they continued until the 15th. at which time the Rebels having passed
Lochlong, mayched toward the Lenox in the Shire of Dumbarton. The same day his
Majesty's Ships came up to the Castle, where the Rebels Arms and Ammunition
still stay, with a resolution to batter it, and to destroy their Ships; but
upon the firing of the first Gun two men came off in a Boat with a white Flag,
and told them they might save their labor, for there were none to oppose them,
all the Rebels having sled; whereupon they sent a Boat on shore, and sinding it
to be so, took possession of the Castle, Ships and Boats, with all the Arms,
Ammunition, Cannon, etc. A particular account whereof cannot be given at
present, but what are already found, do amount to 5000 Arms, 500 barrels of
Powder, with Ball and other Stores in proportion, besides the Cannon, some
whereof are mounted, and others sunk, though easily recoverable. The Rebels had
a design to blow up the Powder, but it was prevented. On the 16th. they marched
by the head of Gairloch toward the Fords of the River Levin, betwixt
Lochlomond, and the Town of Lumbarton On the 17th. in the morning the Earl of
Dumbarton, having an account of their passing that River, and of their being
entered into the Shire of Dumbarton, sent 3 Troops of Dragoons to prevent their
crossing the River Clyde, under the Command of the Lord Charles Murray their
Lieutenant Colonel, while the Earl of Dumbarton, with the Army under his
Command is marching with with all diligence from Glascow toward the Rebels,
who are about 12 miles distant, to attack them. The Rebels have the River of
Clyde on the right hand (guarded by the aforementioned Dragoons, and the Troops
of that Country) the Duke of Gordon on their lest, and the Marquess of Athol
in their Rear.

An Express from the Marquess of Athol does inform us, that he met considerable
numbers of the Rebels deserting, not only for fear, but also for hunger, having
no sort of provisions: On the other part, the Noblemen and Gentlemen now in
Arms for his Majesty's service, show great zeal and forwardness, and when any
of them are sent home (their attendance being judged unnecessary) they repine
to be deprived of the Honor to serve his Majesty upon this occasion.

We have just now received Letters from the Borders, assuring us, that all is
in perfect Peace there, both on the Scotch and English side.

Edinburgh, June 19. This morning arrived an Express with an account, That the
Earl of Dumbarton, Commander in chief of His Majesty's Forces in this Kingdom,
having notice that the Rebels had passed the River Levin above Dumbarton,
marched from Glascow the 17th very early in the morning after them, they taking
their way toward Sterling, and overtook them in the Parish of Killerne. The
Horse and Dragoons kept up the Rebels till the Foot arrived, but they were
posted in so strong a Ground, and it was so late in the evening, that it was
not thought sit then to attacque them, so the Kings Army stood in batalia all
night, to be ready so soon as day light appeared to fall upon them, but the
Rebels with great silence marched off in the night toward the River Clyde,
which they swam with their Horse, and carried over their Foot in Boats near a
Village called Kilpatrick, and so got without much resistance into Renfrew: The
Kings Army missing the Rebels in the morning, marched with all diligence to
Glascow, where, after they had rested two hours, the Earl of Dumbarton with the
Horse and Dragoons marched after them, leaving the Foot to follow with all the
haste they could make.

Edinburgh, June 21. On the 17th the Rebe's in the night passed the River
Clyde, several having run away in the dark. At Renfrew Sir John Cochran
undertook to provide Guides to carry them safe to Galloway; but they mistaking
their way, carried them into a Bog, where having lost their horses and baggage,
the Foot dispersed into small parties, whereupon the Earl of Dumbarton likewise
divided the Kings Forces to pursue them. The late Earl of Argyle returned
toward Clyde, and was fallen upon by two of Greinocks Servants, but would not
yield, firing at them when they called to him: He received a wound in the Head:
upon which, not trusting his Horse, he alighted and run into the water: The
Noise brought out a Countryman, who run into the water after him, where he was
almost up to the neck. He presented his Pistol to the Countryman, but it
mis-served, upon which the Countryman gave him a wound in the Head, which
stunned him so as he fell, and in the falling called out, Unfortunate Argyle;
before he recovered they took him, and carried him to their Commander. A Party
of 40 Horse commanded by the Lord Ross, with as many Dragoons commanded by
Captain Cleland, sell upon a party of the stoutest of the Rebels, commanded by
Sir John Cochran, who had taken the way to the Sea; as the Kings Officers came
up to them, they posted themselves within a small Enclosure, in which they were
covered Breast high; notwithstanding whereof, the Lord Ross Charged them; but
the ground being too strong for the Horse, and the Captain of the Dragoons
being killed in the coming up, the Lord Ross slightly wounded, Sir Adam Blair
shot through the Neck, and Sir William Wallace nf Craigie shot in the side,
before the Dragoons had time to come up on foot the Rebels had got into a Wood
just behind the Enclosure; which the Kings Forces had so beset, that the taking
of all of them is not doubted. A Party of five of the Earl of Arrans Militia of
Cledsdale took Rumbold the Malster, and his Man, who fought desperately,
killing one Militia-man upon the place; Rumbold is wounded, but they think not
mortally; and one Colonel Ayloff and about 200 more are already brought in
Prisoners to Glascow, and there are more coming in from Parties who are still
abroad in pursuit of the Rebels; and there is no doubt a good account will be
given of them all. The Earl of Dumbarton with His Majesty's Forces are marched
into the South to observe the motions on the Borders, whilst 3000 Highlanders
are ordered into the West, to secure that Country and to search out the lurking
holes the Rebels lie hid in. Just now the late Earl of Argile is brought hither
from Glascow by the Watergate, all the way to the Castle being guarded by His
Majesty's Company in this City, having his hands bound behind him, bare headed,
and the Hangman going before him; he is now Prisoner in the Castle; Colonel
Ayloff, who should have been brought with him, the night before he should have
come from Glascow, ripped his own Belly with a Penknife, so that his recovery is
despaired of.

Whitehall, June 21. WE have an account from Chard of the 19th. instant, that
my Lord Churchil, having upon his arrival there with his Majesty's Forces under
his Command, sent out Lieutenant Monaux with twenty commanded men, and a
Quartermaster of the Earl of Oxfords Regiment, they came up within two miles of
Taunton, with a party of the Rebels of the same number, and charging them,
killed 12 of them upon the place, and wounded most of the rest, and then
perceiving another party of the Rebels, they retired. Lieutenant Monaux was
shot in the head, so that he cannot live, and three of his men were wounded;
this party of the Rebels were very well Armed, being their best men.

We are informed that the Rebels are between Taunton and Bridgewater. His
Majesty's Forces commanded by the Earl of Feversham, are marching toward them,
and we doubt not to have in few days a very good account of them.

June 24. The Rebels, according to the last account, were about Giassenbury; My
Lord Churchill observing them narrowly with part of the Kings Forces, he sent
out the 22th instant a party of 40 Horse from Langport, who met a Squadron of
the Rebels of double the number and beat them into their Camp, The Duke of
Albemarle, who has put the Companies into Lime, was with the Militia of Devon
at Wellington about five miles from Taunton. The Duke of Somerset was with the
Militia of that County at Bath. The Duke of Beausort with the Militia of
Gloucestershire and some of the adjacent Counties at Bristol, where all things
were in a very good posture, and the Inhabitants very forward and zealous to
express their Loyalty to His Majesty. The Earl of Feversham, Lieutenant General
of His Majesty's Forces, arrived on Monday last with a detachement of His
Majesty's Horse-Guards, of the Granadiers, of the Earl of Oxfords Regiment, and
of the Dragoons, at Chippenham, where the Earl of Pembroke with the Militia of
Wiltshire joined him; and the Militia of Hampshire was expected the next day;
The Duke of Grafton is likewise marching with 2000 men of His Majesty's
Foot-Guards, followed by a Train of Artillery, to join the Earl of Feversham;
So that we may in few days expect a very good account of the Rebels.

We are informed by a Letter from Captain Trevanion, Commander of the
Suadadoes, of the 20th instant, That at his arrival at Lime with His Majesty's
Ships uner his command, he found there two of the Rebels Ships, a Pink and a
Dogger in the Cob; and 40 Barrels of Powder, and Back, Breast and Head-pieces
for between 4 and 5000 men in the Town, which he secured, together with the
said Vessels. The chief of the Corporation were made Prisoners by the Rebels,
because they would not be assisting to them.

FINIS.

