AN ACCOUNT OF THE Public Affairs IN IRELAND, Since the discovery of the Late
PLOT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1679.

READER,
I Have been long a loser by Adventures in Ireland, and must own I have been
led to think that every thing there went amiss, because my own Concerns did
suffer. So that even before, but especially since the discovery of this Hellish
Plot, I have very liberally helped on, whatever I heard to the disadvantage of
the Government there, whether in the management of the Duke of Ormond, or the
Administration of the Council. But having found by some turn of the Tide, That
the great outcry of neglect and evil doing, has called some Parties concerned,
to give an Account of their Proceedings; I have been much changed in my
Opinion, not only by particular Letters, but by sight of a Paper lately given
in by the Earl of Ossory to the House of Lords. So that I know not well how to
expiate for all the uncharitable and injurious Reflections, which I confess I
have contributed to, but by helping to undeceive others at my own Charge, and
by putting the said Paper, with what I have since learned, into Print.

And truly, besides this way of reparation, which in Justice I owe to those
concerned, I think it some service to the Public Safety, that the true extent
of our Dangers and Security be known, and that we do not rend our Friends in
pieces, instead of our Enemies. For such a method cannot fail to make our
defense hopeless.

For my own part since my Opinion has turned to better thoughts of things in
Ireland, it must honestly be owned by us all, That the Duke of Ormond has been
still on the Loyal side, as also firm in all turns to the Protestant Cause. And
when I consider with my self, how great a Fortune he has in several parts of
that Kingdom, which draws naturally on him a dependence of great Numbers; and
that he has also many Relations, among those of the Popish Party; and how, on
the other side, the present quiet of that Kingdom can hardly arise from the
terror of a small Army, or the poor provision of Stores, where the Papists are
so very disproportionable in Numbers to the Protestants: I do plainly think
that he said Duke is acting an extraordinary part; that by his Influence and
Interest he comes to know and divert the Evils that might happen: and prudently
turns his Personal Advantages to the service and safety of the Public.

This is plain, Things are there in full Peace and Plenty, and for ought I
hear, they fear nothing there, but what we fear here also. And my daily Prayers
are, for a Blessiing on the public Counsels, that it may be better with us
both.

AN EXTRACT of some Letters, Orders, and Proclamations, which have come from
Ireland, some to the Council Board, and some to particular hands, which in part
show what has been done since the Discovery of the Plot, and how things stand
there in general: referring for full and exact Information unto such account,
as by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of that Kingdom will doubtless be given,
when required thereunto.
1. THat when News of the Discovery of the Plot, and his Majesty's Order of the
first of October last, came to the Lord Lieutenant, which was about the 7 th
following: his Lordship was then at Kilkenny, newly returned from a Progress
made by him into Munster, to view the Forts and Places fit for Fortification;
and in particular from seeing the new Fort begun by his Order the March
preceding, for the defense of the Harbor of Kinsale, which work has since
gone on, and upon which is already expended above the value of 5000 l. it being
a work of great Importance to the Safety of that Kingdom, and the security of
all Ships resorting to that Harbor.

2. That according to the said Order the Lord Lieutenant did presently give a
Warrant for the Seizure of Peter Talbot and of his Papers, and he was
accordingly seized and made close Prisoner in the Castle of Dublin: where he
now so remains, and the Examinations taken were transmitted to his Majesty in
Council, and from thence to the House of Lords the last Parliament, together
with a Paper writ in his own hand, being an account of Treason laid to his
Charge by one Sergant, which Paper it is probable he desired should be found;
for no other Paper of moment could be found either in his Chamber or in his
trunks, he having had time enough to put all out of reach, by the tidings it is
likely he and many other Papists did receive of the discovery of the Plot, by
Mr. Oats at the Council Board, on Saturday the 28 th of September, and the
Intelligence sent away that Night. The Lord Lieutenant did also according to
his Orders, secure Mr. Butler, a Son of the Lord Mountgarrets: but that Lord
himself being of extreme age and infirmities, was and lies still Bedridden. And
Colonel Richard Talbot was also committed to safe and close Custody, as soon as
ever the Orders and Accusations against him were transmitted into Ireland, and
so he still remains.

3. The Lord Lieutenant also hastened to Dublin, and arriving there the 11 th of
October, he presently called upon the Council, and they met from day to day, to
consider of the public Safety: and did issue from time to time several Orders
and Proclamations as follows.

A Proclamation, October 14. 1678
strictly requiring all Officers and Soldiers to repair to their respective
Garrisons and Quarters, and not to depart from them without License.

Another Proclamation, requiring all Titular Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars
General, October 16. 1678.
Abbots, and other Dignitaries of the Church of Rome, and all others exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Authority from the Pope; as also all Jesuits,
and other regular Priests, to depart the Kingdom by the 20 of November next.
And that all Popish Societies, Convents, Seminaries, and Popish Schools should
dissolve and separate themselves* under the penalties therein mentioned. All
Persons were forbid to harbor them, and all Magistrates commanded to enquire,
punish or certify the disobedience therein. And that the Persons so commanded
to leave the Kingdom, might not pretend want of convenience for Transportation;

November. 6. 1678.
Another Proclamation issued, requiring all Owners and Masters of Ships, bound
to parts beyond the Sea, to set up Notice in Writing in the most public Places,
of the time of their departure. And they were required to take on Board all
such Ecclesiastics, as should desire to go with them. And the Officers of the
Customs were commanded to stop all Ships, that did not give such notice of
their departure.

November. 2. 1678.
Another Proclamation issued, Commanding that no Papist in the Kingdom should
thenceforth presume to ride with, carry, buy, keep or use any Arms whatsoever,
without License. That within twenty days after the date thereof, or 7 days
after the Receipt of any Arms, they were required to deliver them up to certain
of the most noted Protestants, for that purpose named in the several Counties,
who were to take such Arms and give Receipts for what they took, and send the
same to his Majesty's Stores. That the Justices of the Peace and Officers of
the Army should, after the time expired, search for and seize the Arms of
unlicensed Persons; or if they found more Arms than were expressed, with those
that had License, they were to bind the Delinquents over to the next Assizes or
Sessions of the County. And all Persons of the Popish Religion, and all
Merchants and others, retailers of Powder, were required to send in an account
of their Stores, if the same exceeded one pound, and of any Powder which they
might afterward receive.

Another Proclamation issued, November. 20. 1678.
forbidding Papists to come into the Castle of Dublin, or into any Fort or
Citadel of that Kingdom: Appointing also that the Fairs, and weekly Markets of
certain places, viz. Drogheda, Wexford, Cork, Limerick, Waterford, Youghal and
Galloway, be thenceforth kept without the Walls of the said Garrisons. And that
Papists be not suffered to continue or reside in the said Towns, or in any
Corporations, where Garrisons were kept, unless they had for the greatest part
of twelve months past, inhabited in such Towns. And that no persons of the
Popish Religion any ways armed, be suffered to come into the said Fairs or
Markets. And also strictly requiring all Papists to forbear any unseasonable,
or night-Meetings, or in great or unusual Numbers in any part of the Kingdom.
And commanding all Officers Civil and Military, to be careful to prevent and
dissolve all such Meetings, to commit the principal Offenders to Prison, till
they find good security to answer the same the next Sessions; and to return an
account of their Proceedings therein, with the Names of such as occasioned or
countenanced the same unto the Council Board.

November. 20. 1678.
Another Proclamation issued the same day, promising a Reward of 10 l. for every
Commissioned Officer, 5 l. for every Trooper, and 40 s. for every
Foot-Souldier, to such as should discover any of them, to have been perverted
to the Romish Religion, or heard Mass, who had formerly taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. And the like to the Discoverer of any that should
afterward be perverted.

Besides that, It was a Rule begun in the present Lord Lieutenant's first
Government after the King's Restoration, and ever since continued, That the
Muster-master should check the Pay of every Officer and Soldier of the Army,
who does not produce a Certificate from the Bishop or Minister of the Place, of
his having taken the Sacrament according to the Church of England, twice every
Year.

That being Informed, December 2. 1678.
That several of the Titular Bishops, and Regular Clergy, had not obeyed the
Proclamation of the 16 th of October last, for their Departure, there issued a
circular Letter from the Lord Lieutenant and Council: whereby all Justices of
the Peace are commanded to make deligent search after them; to commit them to
Prisons: and to return the Names of their Receivers and Harbourers, that they
might be proceeded against according to Law.

Another Proclamation issued, December 12. 1678.
highly resenting the slackness of the Justices, etc. in executing the late
Proclamation for searching after and seizing of Arms, requiring therefore a
further search, and proposing a method for preventing of forged Licenses. And
to look upon all who should be remiss in their Duties, as Contemners of the
King's Authority, and proceeded against as the Abettors of those who disturb
the Peace.

December 13. 1678.
Another Proclamation issued, taking notice of a Letter scattered in the Streets
of Dublin, intimating a Conspiracy against the Life of the Lord Lieutenant,
promising Protection and 200 l. Reward unto the Discoverer. And it afterward
appeared that one Jephson a young man, perverted from his Religion by some
Irish Priests was a Party engaged in that Design; and two Irish Priests, his
Abettors therein, were taken and put into Custody: and their Examinations
transmitted to the Council here, and from thence sent to the House of Lords.

There were two great Questions among others under the serious Debate of the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, from whence much ill grounded Reflection has
arisen; The one about securing the principal Heads of the most considerable
Clans, or Families of the Irish, who have lost their Estates: some supposing
that it might conduce to the safety of the English, if such Heads were in
restraint, and that their Followers would not then presume or adventure to run
into Rebellion. But upon serious Considerations it was thought, That such a
proceeding might rather quicken a Rebellion than prevent it. For the Numerous
Followers who depended wholly upon their Masters Interest and Authority, for
the support of themselves and Families, being angered or afrighted at the ill
usage of their Principals, and being loosned from all Dependances, might rather
put themselves upon some unlawful way of Living, by turning Tories, than
entrust themselves to the pleasure of the Government, and in the quality of
Tories they would be equally mischeivous, and especially to the English
dispersed in their remote Dwellings, as a small Rebellion. Besides this,
further reason did dissuade the taking up these chief men as Hostages. For if
their Followers were but few, they could not do the English much hurt, as they
are, but if strong and numerous it would be easily in their power to surprise
so many English Gentlemen living in their remote and scattered Dwellings in the
Country, as would soon redeem such Hostages, and thereby render all the Charge
and Care of such an Undertaking fruitless, and only serve to breed ill blood.
So that the Lord Lieutenant has in some measure steered a different Course, by
showing civility, and giving good words, to such of the Heads of the Irish as
come near him; whereby he finds out early what is doing among their Dependants,
and has conceived this method of obviating Dangers more safe, than either by
Rigors to compel them or their Followers to live always in Conjunction, and
talk of their misfortunes, or by Imprisonment of so many of the Nobility of a
Kingdom without Crimes objected, or Commands from hence, incur the Censure of
Arbitrary Proceedings, which are neither safe or fit for him to bear.

Another Point which has been under Consideration before the Lord Lieutenant
and Council, was a Proposal for dreyning the Corporations (especially those
that are Garrisoned) from the numbers of Irish Papists that live among them, in
order to prevent any Surprise or Private Conspiracy. But when it was reflected
on, That notwithstanding the several Orders and Proclamations that have from
time to time been issued from the Government for the Expulsion of Irish
Inhabitants and Servants from the Towns and Garrisons; and that very few in
respect of the number complained of were Licensed to return: It was manifest
that it was the English themselves, who did in most places receive them in
again for their own advantage, not knowing well how to live without them. They
wanted Servants and Tenants and Tradesmen (for of such are these numbers in the
Towns constituted) and the Irish Papists supplied them with such: and the
English did not conceive this sort of People to be so dangerous as beneficial
unto them: So that the Lord Lieutenant and Council do only forbear their
expulsion in whole or in part, for convenience and gratification to the
English. However it is certain there can never be a true Remedy herein, as to
the security and improvement of that Kingdom, unless by a large accession of
English and Protestants there. And until that shall happen, all other Trials
upon those sort of Irish will be in a manner but to lay some Towns, and very
much of the Lands of the Protestants quite wast and untenanted. And yet it so
falls out, That many on this side not considering the disproportion of the
Irish to the English, nor the difference of the Laws there as to Capital and
pecuniary Mulcts from what they are in England, do think many things are
defective, because they are not there executed as they are, and may be executed
in this Kingdom.

Upon these and other reasons of weight, the two Propositions forementioned
were thought impracticable. But the principal and present security of that
Kingdom consisting in the ballancing the Numbers of Irish with a superiority of
strength and leaving them naked, and the English in Arms, The Lord Lieutenant
and Council did think fit to revive the Commission of Array, so that the
Militia of that Kingdom has been raised in all parts, and is now found in a
better Condition than ever it was known to be. And to supply the defect of Arms
for such Militia, there were not only appointed some Merchants as public
Undertakers to bring in Arms from abroad: but withal not wholly to depend upon
their performance, the Lord Lieutenant has procured a supply out of his
Majesty's Stores here of Powder and Arms to the value of about 13000 l. which
are now actually landed in Ireland, and for payment of which he himself stands
engaged to the Office of Ordnance here, until a Parliament do meet in Ireland
to make provision for things of this Importance. But surely to have proceeded
with any Degree of Precipitation while the English were so unfurnished, had not
been very prudential.

As to his Majesty's Forces in that Kingdom, they are well disciplined and well
paid, and it has pleased his Majesty lately to send over a reinforcement of
about 1200 Men. And the Army is so distributed, as that the Cities (which are
the Garrisons of that Kingdom) are secured as well as it is possible for the
proportion of such a Militia, and such an Army to make them.

There is all the discountenance given to Mass-Houses in all places, which the
Laws of that Kingdom will bear. Nor is there License for any Arms given to any
but such as need them, and for no more than is necessary for their security
against Tories in their remote and scattered Habitations, and for whose Loyalty
and peaceable Demeanor, the Lord Lieutenant is first sufficiently certified by
some Protestants of Note.

The Forts are in as good a Condition as the Stores and the Revenue of that
Kingdom will allow, and perhaps somewhat better. But it is manifest that much
more is needful in every kind in case of Foreign Attempts. And therefore
seeing the Charge of the Government, and the Income of the Revenue are so
exactly balanced by a settled Establishment, that it is not in the Power of the
Lord Lieutenant to alter the same, and that no Money can be raised from the
Subject but by Act of Parliament; Therefore the Lord Lieutenant has been long
endeavoring to have a Parliament called, and to that end several Bills were
transmitted the last Summer from the Lord Lieutenant and Council, which now
remain at the Council Board here, together with a large Representation of the
State of Accounts depending with the Lord Ranelagh and his Partners, who were
late Undertakers for the Revenue of that Kingdom. And until there shall be
leisure (which since the discovery of this horrid Plot there scarce has been)
to send back these things, with the mature Considerations they deserve, there
is no visible means left for the raising and augmenting the Public Revenue to
such a proportion as may put that Kingdom in a sufficient posture of defense,
as to Army, Fortifications and Stores, in case of any powerful Invasion.

But for the present all things are there in full Peace and Quietness.

And for further account of the present State of that Kingdom, and of what has
there been done, or further reason of the particulars here mentioned, or of any
other thing which may have been left undone; There is no doubt but full
satisfaction will be given by the Lord Lieutenant and Council, when such
particular Enquiries and Demands are made as shall be thought convenient.

All which is humbly submitted.

A Continuation of the former Account, from such faithful Relations, as have
since come to several Hands from Ireland.
ORders having been issued forth to the Commissioners of Array for viewing the
Militia, and they certifying by several Returns, that many Arms were wanting
both in the Troops and Foot-Companies; the Lord Lieutenant made application to
his Majesty, to have Arms and Ammunition sent from England.

And some Merchants in this Kingdom, viz. John Rogerson, and John Castleton of
Dublin, and George Mac Cartney of Bellfast, did propose to bring in several
quantities of Arms and Ammunition, and to place the same in his Majesty's
Magazins, or to sell or dispose of them in such manner as the Lord Lieutenant
and Council should appoint, at reasonable rates. And accordingly Licenses were
granted and signed for them, and the said Mac Cartney took out his License.

But the Officers of the Ordnance in Ireland, proposing to bring Arms and
Ammunition out of his Majesty's Magazine in the Tower of London, and to furnish
the Kingdom with such proportions, as the Lord Lieutenant should think fit, at
as reasonable Rates, as any others could do, for as good and servicable Arms:
The other Licenses were stayed, having not been called for by the said
Merchants, before these Proposals of the Officers of the Ordnance.

Letters from the Council Board issued to the Commissioners of Array in the
several Counties, March. 3. 1678.
giving them notice of the expectation of the sudden arrival of Arms and
Ammunition out of England: and that they should certify to the Board the
quantity and quality of the Arms they would have occasion to buy for the use of
the Militia, and to have the money ready to be paid upon delivery of the Arms.

Letters were sent to several persons at Galway and Buffin, March. 11. 1678.
to be diligent in searching and seizing on any Arms that might be brought in
there, upon intimation, that at Breast, Arms were put on board two Fly-boats
belonging to Galway, the Masters whereof were Papists.

And Directions were given to the Farmers of the Revenue to write to the
Officers of the several Ports in the Kingdom, to be very diligent in searching
for and securing all Arms and Ammunition which should be brought into the
Kingdom.

March 26. 1679.
A Proclamation issued out against Tories and Robbers. And, for the reasons
therein expressed, for seizing their nearest Relations, that is to say, their
Wives, Fathers, Mothers, Brothers and Sisters of such of them as shall be out
upon their keeping, that is not ameaneable to Law, and committing them to close
Prison, until such Tories shall be killed or taken.

And also for seizing and committing to Prison the respective Popish pretended
Parish Priests, and transporting them thence beyond the Seas: unless within
fourteen days after any Robbery, Burglary or Murder committed, the Persons who
are guilty shall be Killed or Taken, or Discovery made within that time, so
that such Offenders may be apprehended, and brought to Justice.

A Proclamation issued forth for Reward to such Persons, March. 16. 1679
as shall apprehend any of the popish regular Clergy, who have not transported
themselves, according to a former Proclamation.

Viz.

For every Titular Archbishop, or Bishop, and every Jesuit ten pounds; and for
every other person commanded by the said Proclamation to depart, five pounds.

An Order of the Lord Lieutenant and Council, Mar. 31. 1679.
was sent to the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of Dublin, for Dissolving and
Dispersing the Meetings in several Mass-houses in the City and Suburbs of
Dublin, And not to permit any Popish Services to be celebrated in the said
Houses, or other Public places within the said City or Suburbs. And to
apprehend and commit to Prison such as shall offend, until they find security
to answer at the Quarter Sessions.

Letters sent from the Council Board in order to the removing of all Papists
Inhabitants out of Galway, Lymrick, Waterford, Kilkenny, Clonmel, and Drogheda,
except some few Trading Merchants, Artificers, and others, necessary for the
said Towns and Garrisons; those being the principal in the Kingdom, where the
Papists are most numerous.

Letters sent from the Council Board, to the Chief Magistrates of the several
Corporations of Cork, Lymerick, Waterford, Youghal, Clonmel, Galway, Kilkenny,
Drogheda, Kinsale, Wexford, Athlone and Ross, for suppressing the Assemblies of
the Papists, and prohibiting the celebration of their Popish Services within
and without the Walls of the said Corporations.

April. 7. 1679.
An Order issued out from the Lord Lieutenant, commanding Colonel Fitz-Patrick
immediately to depart from the City of Dublin, and not to come within twenty
miles thereof, or of any other place where his Lordship should at any time
reside, as he should answer the contrary at his utmost peril.

FINIS.

