THE Art and Mystery OF VINTNERS AND WINE-COOPERS: CONTAINING Approved
Directions for the Conserving and Curing all manner and sorts OF WINES, Whether
Spanish, Greek, Italian, or French, very necessary for all sorts of People.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Whitwood, at the Cross-Keys at Salisbury-street in
the Strand. 1682.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou art here presented with a new Treatise of the Art and Mystery of Vintners
and Wine-Coopers, in their Conserving and Curing all sorts of Wines; which
though but small, I can assure thee, does fully comprehend all that can
possibly be said concerning this Subject: And so it is like Homer's Iliads in a
Nut-shell; and all this with so much plainness, that the weakest Capacity may,
by the help of this little Book, become Master, without a Master, of this
Mystery. For here he may behold how; as in many other Cases, so in this of
Wines, Art oftentimes is Nature's Physician, in curing them of the Distempers
to which they are often incident. For does it happen that through Age, or other
Accidents, they are fallen into a Consumption, or decay of Nature? here the
Artist prescribes your restorative Cordials to revive them. Does any
heterogeneous Matter offend or overburthen them, which they cannot of their own
strength, or helpof Fermentation, discharge? here are proper Catharticks laid
down for expelling such a troublesome Guest. Or have they after some Fit of
Sickness, or other ways, lost their natural Color and Beauty? here you will
find variety of means of re-embellish and adorn them. Lastly, The which and the
rest are common to Wines with Animals: Have they lost their Taste? here you,
find approved Remedies for its recovery. In recompense of all which Favors
received from the Art of man, Wine is of so generous a nature, that it
gratefully and reciprocally repays him, with the most precious Cordial under
the Sun; the true Elixir Vitae, Salutis, Proprietatis, or whatsoeve^ other Name
the cheating Chemists give their sophisticate Trash: by this conserving him to
a florid old age, by cherishing his natural Heat, helping his Concoction,
removing all Sadness, Obstructions and Winds, so as it were revivifying him.
And thus having acquainted thee what great Benefits thou may reap from the
buying of this Book, I have no more to say, but to tell thee, If thou art
curious to be further informed concerning this Subject, thou may be fully
satisfied from a Treatise of this kind, written by the learned Dr. Charleton.
And so I bid thee Adieu.

THE Art and Mystery OF VINTNERS AND WINE-COOPERS.
1. The best way for to help the fretting or boiling of any piece of Spanish
Wine.

TAke the Butt or Pipe that fre^s or boyls, and rack it off clean from the
gross Lee; then take two or three pennyworth of the strongest Aqua vitae, and
put it in at the Bung-hole, as you do a piece of Scent, and it will burn in the
Pipe very well: Be sure that you drain the Pipe well; and this will lay the
fretting of it.

2. To keep Wines sound and fresh all the year.

YOu must fill your vessel once a month or six weeks with your best Reeds you
can get: for Reeds do preserve the Claret as Soot does Malmosey or Bastard.
Fill White and all other Wines with the same; and those you intend to keep,
give them their Lees a day together; then at night lay them upright, and be
careful to keep them; if lack vent in any place they will faint and spoil.

Note that July and August are the worst months to keep Wines in.

3. For Canary that has a flying Lee.

IF your Canary has a flying Lee, and will not find down, draw him into a
fresh Butt or Pipe with fresh Lees, and give him a good pearl with the whites
of 8 Eggs, and beat them with a handful of white Salt: And if it be any whit
tawny, put thereto a gallon of Milk, and beat it well, then lay it upright,
stop it close; and in two days broach it if you will.

4. To make or divide Malmosey.

IF you have three Butts of Malmosey you may make four if you please: If you
have two, you may make three; if one Butt, you may make one and a half thereof,
with such Laggs as you have of White, Claret, and Canary that are old, with two
gallons of Cut to every Butt, so that it be Spanish Cut. This way you may rid
your Legs and old Canary away. The Art follows.

5. The Art of Making or Dividing Malmosey.

TAke to every Butt six Eggs both yelks and whites, and a handful of Bay Salt,
beat them well together, mixing therewith a pint of old Sack, and put it into
the Butt; then beat the Butt well; and if it want a color, take two gallons of
Red-wine, and a quarter of a pound of Coriander seed well beaten sinall; mix
them together, and put them into the Butt; then give it six or eight strokes
more, then stop it three or four days; broach it after at your will.

6. For Claret that has lost his Color.

TAke a pennyworth of Damsons or Bullace, or more if you see good, and stew
them in Red-wine, and make a pottle or more of the Syrup.

7. For Bastard that pricks.

RAck him upon a good Muscadine Lee, then take three gallons of the best Ale,
and put therein two or three Almonds, then fill it up with Bastard Syrup or
Canary mixed with your Laggs, and it will draw for Bastard or Muscadine.

8. Another for the same.

TAke five gallons of clarified Honey, and put it into your Cask, and beat in
it a pearl of the whites and yolks of 6 Eggs, and let it rest.

9. To make brown Bastard.

TAke the Laggs of Clarret or White Wind, and put them into your Cask, with
your Laggs of Spanish wine before you do prick; then take 30 or 40 pounds of
Bastard Syrup, and beat it well with the same wine in a half Tub, then put it
into your Cask and beat it up with pearl of the yelks and whites of Eggs, and
let it rest.

10. For White Wind that has lost its color with lying.

OVerdraw the Hogshead of wine some five or six gallons; take three gallons of
new Milk, put it into a pale, and let it remain there till the cream be settled
for 30 hours; then skim it and put it into the Hogshead, and beat it well, and
then all it up; and if it be in the morning, the next morning it will be fine:
you may add to it a little Starch and a little Bay Salt beaten together as
aforesaid.

11. Sack that is lumpish or lowering.

BEat the whites of 6 or 8 Eggs with Bay Salt, Roch-allom, and a quart of Bean
flower or beaten Rice, if it be brown, but if white use Milk; beat all these
together, then blow off the froth very clean, and lay a clean sherd of a Tyle
over the Bung-hole: let it lie till it be fine, then rack it off with a good
scent, and it will draw well.

12. For Sack or any other Wine that does prick or boil.

TAke 30 or 40 of the whitest Lime-stones you can get, slake them in a pottle
of the same Wine in a Cann, then take more wine and stir them together; and
put it into your Cask, and stir it well till you think it be enough. Let it
rest till it be fine, and it will take away the pricking, and make it drink
kindly.

13. How to make Scent.

TAke four ounces of Brimstone and a little Allom, and a spoonful of Aqua vitae
and mix them together, then take a piece of new Canvas and dip therein; then
must you have in readiness the powder of Nutmegs and a few Cloves or Orange
peels, a few Coriander-seeds and Anniseeds, being ready bruised before your
Brimstone be cold: strew them upon your Cloth, and when it is cold lay it upon
a clean paper, and it will be very good for your Cask.

14. How to make Ipocris.

TAke for a gallon of White a pound of Sugar, one ounce of Cinnamon beaten, 2 or
3 ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Gallingall, half an ounce of Grenes; bruise
your spice together with a handful of Rosemary, and let it stand and steep 12
hours, then stir it well together, and put it into an Ipocris bag, and let it
run into a clear Vessel, and so you may draw it.

15. To fine your Wines and make them pleasant.

TAke white peble stones, and bake them in an Oven till they begin to crack,
then beat them to fine powder; then with a good quantity of Stone-honey
clarified, and so in some of the same dissolve them and put them into your
Cask, and stir them with your padlestaff, and in a day they will be fine.

16. For Ipecris Gyle.

Cinnamon one ounce, Ginger half an ounce, grains 2 d. Long-pepper, Cloves,
Coriander-seeds, Calimas andores, Nutmegs, Cariway-seeds 2 d. Lemons,
Rosewater, Bay Leaves and Rosemary.

17. Another for the same.

GInger 3 ounces, Cinnamon 3 ounces, Calamus one ounce, Cloves half an ounce,
Coriander seeds three ounces, Nutmegs three pennyworth, Long-pepper three
pennyworth.

18. Another for the same.

Cinnamon 3 ounces, Cariophilorum 2 ounces, Cardimum and Cubebis, Gallingal half
an ounce, Jingiberis one ounce, Cantherum 3 pennyworth, Grana Paradica 3
pennyworth.

19. Then for the Spanish-Wines, Sherry, Sacks, white and hard be best.

RIght Malagaes are as good as Canaries, but the other are pleasanter.

Right Muscadines are hard to come by, therefore they are commonly compounded.

20. Wines commonly compounded.

IPocris, Brown Bastard, White Bastard, Rumrey, Hallacker, Aligant: and these
likewise, Frantigniack, Tent, Cut, Rhenish, and Deal Wines.

21. The fittest times to rack Wines.

RAck your Wines when the wind is in the North, and when it is clear and
temperate weather; in the Increase of the Moon, when she is under the Earth,
and not in the full height. They turn eager before Whitsuntide; through
extraordinary heat they turn eager, or otherwise ill-conditioned.

22. For White Wind that has lost its Color.

FIrst rack him for his Lees, then if you have any Coniack Lees, you may put
your faint and tawny Wine upon them; roll them over and beat them, and within
the space of 10 or 12 days rack them off; then shall you have it drink brisk
and white.

23. How to break Wine that roaps.

TAke a course harden Cloth, and put it before the Bore when you have set it
abroach; then put in your Leathers, and rack it into a dry Cask; then take 5 or
6 ounces of beaten Allom, and put it in, and beat that Wine and Allom well
together, and it will fine down very well.

24. How to make any Wine fine speedily.

TAke a handful of dried Lemmonrine, and put it into 10 or 12 gallons of White,
and put therein a pint of Damask-Rose-water; then roll it up and down, and lay
it upright; then take a sprig of Clarey that is seeded, and let it steep 24
hours; then take it out, and it will cap very well.

25. If a Hogshead of Claret has lost its Color.

TAke one gallon of Sloes and Damasons, or Black-Cherries, bruise them well and
strain them, and put the juice into a Hogshead of tawny Wine, and it will drink
very well.

26. How to mend the Color of Whitewine.

TAke 3 or 4 gallons of Milk, or less, according as you think fit, or do find
the Color of the Wine decayed; put it into your Hogshead; then roll it well;
and then open your Bung, and put in 3 or 4 ounces; then fill up your HOgshead,
and roll it 4 or 5 times over, and lay it up, that you may rack it when it is
fine.

27. How to mend a Piece of Canary, or a Butt of Malaga that is brown.

TAke 5 or 6 gallons of Milk, if it be very brown; if not, take as much as you
think fit, and over-draw your Butt or Pipe; then put in your Milk, and beat it
a good while; and when it is well beaten, take 5 or 6 ounces of Roach-Allum,
and put it therein; then give it some 30 or 40 strokes; then fill up your Cask,
and let it lie till it be fine; then rack it off from its white bottom, and
rack it into a clear Cask, and burn a piece of Scent init; and then fill it up,
and let it lie till it be fine, and it will spend very well.

28. For to flower a Butt of Muskadine.

TAke one grain of Musk, one ounce of Cloves, one ounce of Nutmegs, one of
Anisceds, and one ounce of Coriander-seeds, and two handfuls of Orange and
Lemon Pills well dried and beaten, and a grain of Long-Pepper together; put it
into a bag, and hang it in the Bung-hole for some 2 or 3 days together with 10
gallons of Bastard.

29. How to make Rhenish-wine.

TAke one handful of dried Lemonpeels, and put them into 10 or 12 gallons of
White Wind, and put in one pint of Damask-Rose-water; then roll it up and down,
and lay it upright, and open the Bung of it, and take a little branch of
Clarey, and let it steep 24 hours; then take it out, and it will taste very
well.

30.

A Butt of Malaga if it be full gaged 126 gallons, the Tun is 232 or 252
gallons, and every Sestron is 4 gallons, and at 12d. the gallon.

31. A Pearl for Malmosey.

AS you pearl your Muskadine, so you must your Malosey, but use not the Whites
of Eggs.

32. A Pearl for Muskadine.

WHen it comes to be fine, within 4 hours after take new-laid Eggs, beat them
Shells and all, with two handfuls of Bay Salt; put to the same a quart of good
Sack which is old; a handful of white Sugar Candy beatch small; then beat them
all together very well; then over-draw your Butt some 8 or 10 gallons; then
beat your Butt an hour; then put in your Pearl; then beat him again gently half
an hour, stop him close up, and in 24 hours broach him.

33. How to make tawny Bastard white.

IF it be full, draw out 10 or 12 gallons; then fill it near up within 10
gallons, with the Lags of Rothal and Gascoign Wines for Sack; and take 5
gallons of Milk, and 8 Whites of Eggs; a handful of Bay Salt, and as much
Whiting; beat them all together; then mingle them well with Milk, and put them
into the Bastard, and beat it well for half an hour; then fill him full with
your Lags, and give him 8 or 9 strokes, stop it close, and within 3 days you
may broach him.

34.

IF red Wine be faint, draw it out into fresh Lees, and put into him 4 or 5
gallons of Allagant; then turn him twice in the Lees, and let him lie with the
Bung upright 7 days before you broach him, and it will have a good color and
taste.

35. A Pearl for Scent and Flavor for a Butt of Muskadine.

TAke a quarter of a yard of Canvas, and make a Bag of it; then take an ounce
of Calamus Aromaticus; of Floras 2 ounces; of Orras one ounce; of
Coriander-seed as much; of Aniseeds bruised and beaten: Put these into the Bag,
and let it hang in the midst of the Wine 3 days and nights; then take it out;
after that 2 grains of Civet; as much Musk; a pint of Damask-Rose-water; warm
the Water bloud-warm, rub well the Musk with the back of a and so put it into
the Butt, and stop it close, and roll him, but turn him not over, and it will
be perfect in 2 days.

36. If White have an ill Taste or Scent.

HAlf draw him out; then take to either part 2 gallons of Mornings Milk, or
more, and a handful of Rice, and as much Bay Salt; beat them together with a
Paddle-staff for half an hour; then fill up the Hogshead, and roll it well, and
turn it over in the Lees, and broach him within two days.

37. If Claret be faint and want color.

DRaw it off into a fresh Hogshead and fresh Lees as can be gotten, and draw it
out very closely; then take 2 pennyworth of Turnsel, lay it in steep in 3 or 4
gallons of the same Wine for 3 hours; then rub it and all to wash with your
hands, till it color your Wine deeply; then put it into the Hogshead; then
draw as much out and use accodingly, and so the 3d or 4th time roll it half an
hour, and lay it up stopped, and in 3 days broach it.

38. A pleasant Scent for Red-wine.

TAke 2 ounces of Brimstone, ounce of Calamus; mix them together in a pint and
half of Burrage-water; melt the Brimstone in a Pan, and let the rest be with it
therein; dip it in so many clothes as will take it up, and put the clothes in
your Hogshead; then take out your Ashes, and rack your Wine in; then put in it
a pint of Rose Water, roll it well half an hour, and it being close stopped, let
it lie 2 days, and this shall give it or any other Gascoign-wine, a pleasant
scent or taste.

39. If a Butt of Sack be small.

TAke half a peck of Lime-stones well burned, put them in at the Bung-hole
amongst the Wine, then beat or roll it well together, and let it lie till it be
fine, then rack it off into a clean Cask, and fill it full, and draw it off
when you please.

40. If Wine at any time grow Long or Lowering.

TAke 2 penniworth of Roach Allom and bruise it small to powder: over-draw the
Hogshead four gallons, then strew the powder therein, and beat it well half an
hour; then fill it up and broach it within three days, and be sure it take no
vent.

41. If Sack or White Wind have lost its color.

TAke four gallons of Milk, let it stand three hours in a Tub; skim off the
cream, and overdraw your Hogshead 6 gallons: take the yelks of six Eggs beaten;
put them into your milk, and beat them together, and put them into the Wine,
and beat the Wine well, and stop it up close, and in four days draw it.

42. How to mend a Butt of Sack, Malaga, or Pipe of Canary that pricks.

TAke about 8 or 10 ounces of mere Chalk, beat it very well, and put it in
steep in 4 or 5 gallons of Milk; put in about two pounds of powdered Suggar
according to the hardness of the Wine: let this lie in steep a day and a night;
stir it together now and then, so as when you put in your Wine beat it
reasonably well before you put it in, then put it in as fast as you can, and
beat it lustily for a quarter of an hour: lay it upright and it will take away
the prickin of it and fine it.

The end of the First Book.
The Second Book.
1. To correct the Rankness and Eagerness of Wines, as Sack and Malaga, or any
other Sweet Wines.

TAke 26 or 30 of the whitest Lime-stones, and stake them in a gallon of the
best wine, then add more wine, and stir them together in a Half-Tub with a
Paddlestaff: pour this mixture into the Hogshead, and again use the
Paddlestaff: Let the Wine settle, and then rack it off from the white bottom.

2. Against the pricking of French-wines.

TAke of the powder of Tyle one pound, Roch-allom half a pound; mix them and
beat them well together with some of the Wine, then put them into your Hogshead
as the former.

3. When Rhenish-wines prick.

RAck them into a clean and strongly scented Cask or Phatt; add then to the
Wine 8 or 10 gallons of clarified Honey, with one gallon or 2 of skum'd Milk;
beat them all together, and let them settle.

4. For Claret that has lost its briskness.

RAck it upon a good Lee of red Wine, and put into it a gallon of the juice of
Sloes or Bullace; which after a little fomentation and rest makes Wine drink
brisk and rough.

5. Another.

THe like may be done with Virginian Pears, otherwise called Metagane Sunaux,
which has a deep sanguine color, and a rough taste.

6. To meliorate the taste of hungry and too eager White-wines.

DRaw off 3 or 4 gallons of the Wine, and infuse therein as many pounds of
Malaga-Raisins, stoned and bruised in a stone-Mortar, till the Wine has
sufficiently imbibed their sweetness and tincture, which it will do in a days
time; then run it through an Hippocras-bag, and put it into a fresh Cask well
scented, together with the whole remainder of the Wine in the Hogshead, and so
leave it to fine.

7. To help stinking Wines.

THe best way is to rack them from their old and corrupt Lee; besides you must
give them a fragrant smell or flavor, by hanging in them a little bag of
Spices, such as Ginger, Zadoary, Cloves, Cinnamon, Orrisroots, Cubebs, grains of
Paradise, Spicknard: Or you may use these only; A few-Cinamon-canes hung in it;
some use Elder-flowers, and tops of Lavender.

8. For Claret that decays.

RAck it upon a new and fresh Lee, and the shaving of Firwood, which will bring
it to its body again.

9. How to make Bastard.

TAke 4 gallons of White, 3 gallons of Canary that is old, 5 pound of
Bastard-Syrup; beat them well together, and put them into a clean Runlet well
scented, and give it time to fine.

10. How to make Rhenish.

TAke a Hogshead of Rochel-Cogniacks, or Nants-White-wine; rack it into a fresh
Cask strongly scented; then give your white Pearl; put into it 8 or 10 gallons
of clarified Honey, and 4 pound of coarse Sugar; beat it well, and leave it to
clarify; then to give it the flavor, add the Decoctio of Clary-seeds or
Gallitricum, and that will give it the right taste.

11. How to make Muskadel.

TAke a convenient quantity of Rose Water, of Musk 2 ounces, of Calamus
Aromaticus one ounce, of Coriander-seeds beaten half an ounce; and whilst this
Infusion is yet warm, put it into a Runlet of old Sack or Malmosey.

12. If an Hagshead of Claret be scund, and has lost its color.

ADd to it Red-wine, Tent or Allegant, or by an Infusion of Turnsole, as much
as you think convenient, infused in 2 or 3 gallons of Wine; and then put it
into the Vessel to be well stopped, roll it a quarter of an hour; this Infusion
is twice or thrice repeated sometimes, according as more color is to be added
to the Wine; some 3 hours infusion of the Turnsole will be sufficient, but then
it must be rubbed and wringed. What Turnsole is, see the Notes or the Arts of
Glass.

13. White-wines that come over sound, and have lost their color, and turn
brown.

TAke of Alablaster-powder 3 or 4 ounces, and draw over the Hogshead 3 or 4
gallons; then put of this powder into the Bung as much as you think fit, and
beat it up with a Staff, and then fill it up to full; the more the Wine is
stirred up, the siner it will become upon the Lee.

14. To color Sack white.

TAke of white Starch 2 pound, of Milk 2 gallons, boil them together 2 hours;
it being cold, beat it well with a handful of Salt therein, the Salt must be
white common Salt; let your Wine be racked, and then put it into it; the Wine
being racked into a fresh Butt or Pipe, beat it well together with your
Paddle-staff, and it will make the Wine pure and fine.

15. Of Rhenish-wine.

THe first Buds of Ribes nigra infused in Wines, especially of Rhenish-wine,
makes it diversick, and more fragrant in smell and taste, and so does Clary:
The inconvenience is, that the Wine becomes more heady; the remedy of which is
Elder-flowers added to Clary, which also betters the fragrancy thereof, as it
is manifest in Elder-vinegar; but these Flowers are apt to make the Wine ropy.

16. To help Malagaes, or any other Spanish Wine, that has lost their color,
or turned brown.

TAke the powder of Orras-roots, and Saltpeter, of each 4 ounces, he whites of
8 Eggs, to which add as much Salt as will make Brine; put this mixture into the
Wine, and mix them with a Paddle-staff.

17. To mend the taste and smell of Malagae.

TAke of the best Almonds 4 pound, make with them and a sufficient quantity of
the Wine to be cured, an Emulsion; take then the whites of twelve Eggs, and a
handful of Salt; put all into the Pipe or Butt, and beat it well with a
Paddle-staff.

18. To help Claret that is tawny or muddy.

TAke of Rainwater one quart, 8 Eggs, a handful of Salt; beat them well, and
let them stand six hours before you put them into the Cask; then use the
Paddle-staff, and it will come to it self in 3 days.

19. To mend the taste and smell of French Wines or Rhenish, that are foul.

TAke a gallon of the Wine, a pound of Honey, a handful of Elderflowers,
Orras-powder one ounce, a Nutmeg, and a few Cloves; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of the Wine to be cured, of the consumption of half; when it is cold,
strain it, and beat it with a Stick; put a little Salt, if the Wine be sweet
enough; add of spirits of Wine one pound to a Hogshead, and give the Cask a
strong scent; spirit of Wine makes any Wine strongly brisk, and fines without
any further mixture.

20. A Lee of the Ashes.

OF Vine-branches one ounce; a quart to a Pipe being beaten into the Wine cures
the ropiness of it, and the same infallbily does the Lee of Oaken ashes; for
Spanish ropy Wines, rack it off from its Lee into a new scented Cask; take of
Allom one pound, of Orras-roots powdered half a pound; beat them well into the
Wine with a Paddle-staff; add fine and well dried Sand, put it warm to the
Wine; if the Wine besides prove brown, add 3 pottles of Milk to a Pipe;
otherwise it cures ropy Wines, used before they begin to fret.

21. To order Rhenish-wines.

WHen fretting commonly in June, when Wines begin to ferment and grow sick,
then have a special care of disturbing them, either by removing, filling of
Vessels, of giving Vent, only open the Bung, which cover with a Salt, and as
often as the Slate is foul, cleanse it and the Bung from filth; and when the
Fermentation is past, which you shall know by applying your ear to the Vessel,
then give it rest 10 or 12 days, thta the gross Lees may settle; then rack it
into a fresh-scented Cask.

22. To mend and preserve the Color of Clarets.

TAke red Beets-roots (q.s.) scrape them clean and cut them into small pieces;
then boil them in a quart of the same Wine, till a third part be consumed; skim
it well, and when it is cold, take what is clear of it (or Decant) and use the
Paddle-staff.

23. Another for the same.

TAke of the Wine and Honey of each 2 pound, of Rainwater a pottle, 12
Beet-roots, 4. or 5 handfuls of ripe Mulberries; boil them to half, and when
it is cool, decant with the use of the Paddle-staff.

24. To meliorate vicious Wines, and especially French, both in smell and taste.

TAke of the best Honey one pint, of Rainwater 2 parts, and the 3d part of
Wine old, of the same kind; boil them on a gentle fire to a 3d part, skimming
them often with a Skimmer, and dip the Skimmer into a Pail of clean water every
time after it has been skimmed, once to rince the Skimmer; then put this
mixture into a Vessel of fit capacity, and let it stand unbunged till it cool:
Some to better this, put in a bag of Spices this mixture, called by the Dutch,
So, will serve to fine Wines new or old; it will amend the hard taste of
Wines, and in each putting of a gallon thereof into a Hogshead, and using the
Paddle-staff, let it rest 5 or 6 days at least; but if mild enough, add white
Mustard seed bruised.

25. To mend and preserve the Lees of Clarets.

TAke to a Teirce 10 Eggs, make a small hole in the top of the shells; then put
them into the Wine, and all will be consumed.

26. To prevent Scouring of French Wines.

TAke grins of Paradise (q.s.) beat them in a Pan, and hang them or put them
loose in a Vessel; some use Lavender-tops.

27. To help French -Wines that are sower.

TAke 4 ounces of the best Wheat boiled in fair water till it break, and then
when it is cold, put it into a Phatt in a bag, and use the Paddle-staff;
otherwise take 5 or 6 Cinamon-canes, bung them well.

28. To help Spanish -Wines that are sower.

FIrst rack the Wines into a clear Cask, and fill it up with 2 or 3 gallons of
Water; after 3 or 4 days it must be racked and filled up again with Rainwater;
if the first does not do, some use Lome or Plastering: If these Ingredients
make the Wine bitter, correct the fault with Nutmegs and Cloves.

29. To help stinking Wines.

TAke Ginger half an ounce, Zedoary 2 drams; pound and boil them in a pottle of
good Wine, which put scalding hot into the Phatt; bung it up, and let it lie
the space of two days; Diambrae and Diamosne dulce do the same, and so Nutmegs
and Cloves, which also give a kind of Raciness.

30. To help Wine that has an ill savor from Lees.

RAck it into a clean Cask, and if it be White or Claret, give it a fresh Lee
of the same Wine; then of Cloves, Ginger and Cinnamon 2 ounces, Orras-roots 4
ounces; powder them grossly, hang them in a Bag, and taste the Wine once in
three days, and when it is amended, take out the Bag.

31. Or as some do it.

TAke of Cloves hafl a pound, Mastick, Ginger, Cubebs, of each 2 ounces,
Spicknard 2 drams, Orras-roots half a pound; make thereof a fine Powder, and
put it loose in the Phatt, and use the Paddle-staff, then make a good fire
before it.

32. The best time to rack Wines,

IS at the Decrease of the Moon, and when the Wine is free from fretting, the
Wind being at North-east or North-west, and not at South, the Stern free from
Thundrig and Lightning.

33. For a Scent for French and Spanish Wines.

TAke Orras-roots, Mastick and Brimstone, of each 4 ounces, of Cloves 2 ounces,
ordering ut supra; in making Wines this will serve for all Wines, adding if you
please, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinnamon, and other Spices; double the quantity of
Orras-roots for the Spanish Wines.

34. To help Malagaes that will not fine.

TAke crude Tartar-powder sifted and dried 2 pounds, mix it with the whites of
6 Eggs dried to a powder; then sift them again; then overdraw the Pipes as much
as will serve to mix this powder, and fill the Pipe therewith, beating it with
a staff as before, and the Wine will be fine in 10 days.

35. To fine French Wines.

HAng a piece of Scent in the Cask, and when it is burned out, put in a pint of
the best spirit of Wine, and stir it about; some add a little Salt well dried;
this fines Wine in 24 hours.

36. To keep Must a year.

TAke Must, put it into a Cask pitched within and without half full, stop the
Bung close with Mortar; others sew the Cask in Skins, and link it for 30 days
in a Well or River; or else a Garland of Pulvium Montanium to hang in the
Vessel; or else rub the inside with Cheese: These preserve the Rhenish Must, as
the Scholiast Ondodorus in Dutch.

37. To keep Wines from turning flat, faint or brown.

ALlom ut into a Hogs Bladder keeps Wine from turning flat, faint or brown, and
beaten with whites of Eggs removes its Ropiness.

38.

WInes recovered with Spirits of Wine, Raisins and Sugar, or Molosses; and
Sacks, by drawing them on fresh Lees.

39. How to make Muskadine.

TAke 30 gallons of Soot, which is Wine boiled to a consumption, of half to a
Butt of Wine, or the Lees and droppings boiled and clarified; its flavor is
made of Coriander-seeds prepared, and the shavings of Cyprus-trees: Some
instead of Soot make of Sugar Molosses and Honey, or mix them with the Soot.

40. To make Hippocras.

TAke of Cardamons, Carpobasamus, of each half an ounce, Coriander-seeds
prepared, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each 2 ounces, Cloves 2 drams; bruise and infuse
them 48 hours in Rerer and White Wind, of each a gallon; after stirring of
them, add thereto 3 pints of Milk, strain it through an Hippocras-bag, and put
thereto a pound of Sugar Candy to sweeten it.

41. For the boiling of Canary or Sacks.

DRaw off 4 or 5 gallons, then put to it 21 gallons of Milk, from which the
Cream has been skimmed; beat them till they be thoroughly commixed, adding one
penniworth of Roach-Allom dried in a Fire-shovel and powdered, and as much of
white Salt: After this take for the boiling of Canary or Sack, the whites of 10
or 12 Eggs, and a handful of Bay Salt; having beaten them together in a Tray,
put them also in the Wine, filling up the Wine in the Pipe again, and letting
the Wine stand 2 or 3 days, in which time the Wine will recover to be bright to
the eye and fine, and quick in taste; but be sure you draw it off from that
bottom soon, and spend it as soon as you can.

42. For Claret that frets, and has a flying Lee.

TAke 21 pound of the powder of Pebble-stones baked in an Oven, the whites of
10 or 12 Eggs, and a handful of Bay Salt; having beaten them well together in 2
gallons of the same Whine, then mix them with that in the Cask, and after 2 or
3 days draw off the Wine from the bottom: The same Pearl serves for White Wind
upon the fret, by the turbulency and resting of their Lee.

43. For Rhenish that frets.

TO which it is most prone after Midsummer as aforesaid, They seldom use any
other Art but giving of it Vent and Covering; then open the Bung with a Tyle or
Slate, but be sure to wipe the filth off the Slate when there is any, and when
it has done fretting, let it rest for a week; then rack it off into a new
scented Cask, and this will cure it.

44. For Spanis Wine disturbed by a flying Lee.

TAke of whites of Eggs, Bay Salt, Conduit-water and Milk; beat them well
together in a convenient Vessel; then pour them into the Pipe of Wine, having
drawn first out of the Pipe a gallon of Wine or two; blow off the Froth very
clear; thereby the Tumult will in 2 or 3 days be composed, the Liquor confined,
and the Wine drink pleasant, but will not continue so long: Therefore I counsel
to rack it off from the milky bottom after a weeks settlement, lest otherwise
it drink foul, and change color, and this will do.

45. For Spanish or Austrian Wines, grown yellow or brownish.

TAke as much Milk as you think fit, sometimes alone and sometimes with
Izinglass well dissolved, and sometimes with white Starch, by which the Sulphur
is forced to the bottom of the Vessel: The same effects Flower-deluce-roots,
and Saltpeter 4 or 5 ounces, of whites of Eggs 8 or 10. and a convenient
quantity of common Salt mixed and beaten in Wine.

46. To correct Wines that are lumpish, foul and ropy.

TAke Powder of burnt-Allom, Lime, Chalk, Plaster; for Spanish, white calamed
Marble, Bay Salt, and other the like Bodies, which cause precipitation of the
gross and used parts of the Wine there afloat.

47. An Example to attenuate Spanish Wines that are foul and lumphish.

HAving racked them into a new scented Cask, make a Pearl of burnt Allom, Salt
and Conduit-water; then add thereunto the Powder of Bean-flower or Rice a
quart, and if they be brown and duskish Milk, beat all these together with the
Wine, blow off the froth, and cover the Bung with a clean Tyle; after a few
days rack the Wine again, and put it into a Cask well scented: Here some
perhaps will not understand well what is meant by scenting of a Cask; for this
purpose I explain it as follows.

48.

TAke a Brimstone 4 ounces, burnt Allom one ounce, Aqua-vitae 2 ounces; put
them into an earthen Pan or Pipkin, and hold them over a Chafing Dish of
glowing Coals till the Brimstone runs; then dip therein a piece of new Canvas,
and instantly sprinkle thereon the powder of Nutmegs, Cloves, Coriander-seeds
and Aniseeds. And this is the Scent.

49.

ONe this is: First, You must give it a Pearl, then draw it from the Lees,
after the clarification by that Pearl; this done, infuse 2 pound of Turnsole in
good Sack all night, and the next day putting strained Infusion in the Wine in
the Hogshead with a Spring-Funnel, leave it to fine, and after draw it for
excellent Wine.

50. Another.

MAke the Lees of the Ashes of Vine-branches, or of Oak-leaves, and pour t out
into the Wine, and after stirring leave it to settle; put a quart of Lee to a
pint of Wine.

51. To mend Claret decayed in Color.

FIrst rack the Wine upon a fresh Lee, or Aligant, or red Bourdeaux-Wine; then
take 3 pound of Turnsole, steep it all night in 2 or 3 gallons of the Wine, and
having strained the Infusion in a Bag, pour the tincture into the Hogshead;
sometimes they suffer it first to fine of it self in a Runlet, and cover the
Bung with a Tyle, and so let it stand for 2 or 3 days, in which time the Wine
usually becomes well-colored and bright, some use only the tincture of
Turnsole.

52.

YOu may take for the same purpose a bushel of Elder-berries, pick them from
their stalks, bruise them, and put them and the strained juice into the
Hogshead of discolored Claret, to make it drink brisk and bright.

53.

IF the Claret be not sound and good, overdraw 3 or 4 gallons, then replenish
the Vessel with as much good Wine red, and roll him upon his bed, leaving him
reversed all night, next morning turn the Bung uppermost, which being stopped,
leave the Wine to fine: Observe in these Causes, to set such newly recovered
Wines abroach the very next day after fined, and draw them for sale speedily.

The End of the Second Book.
The Third Book.
1. For faint Sack.

BEat it with Soot, and whites and yelks of Eggs.

2. For a Butt of Malaga that boyls.

TAke a pound of Roach-Allom, boil it in a Pan of Iron, take off the skim, and
beat it together with 6 Eggs and 13 gallons of Milk, beat it well in the Butt
or Pipe together.

3. For a Butt of Sack that pricks.

TAke 3 quarts of Bean-flower, put some of the same Wine into it, beat it well
for fear of clogging, put it in the Butt, and beat it 2 hours, then fill it
again, and it will keep it.

4. For Sack that is faint and tawny, and will not fine.

BAck them into a clean Cask, give them a scent of Aqua-vitae, put at the least
2 penniworth in the Butt, put in 3 or 4 gallons of Milk, beat it for half an
hour, make a Pearl of 10 whites of Eggs, Baysalt and Conduit-water, beat it
again, and fill it full of Wine, and blow off the froth; then lay a Tyle on the
Bung, and put half a pint of Aqua-vitae in it.

5. For Sack that is hagar.

Take 3 or 4 Lime-stones that are white, put them into a Can, and pour a pottle
of the same Wine over them, let them stand 3 or 4 hours till they are like
Flower; then put 2 or 3 gallons of Wine more of the same, stir it well till it
be like Milk; then put it into your Butt, let it be half an hour; then taste
it; if the pricking be not gone, put more Lime to it; when you find the
pricking gone, then take 3 gallons of Milk, the whites of 3 Eggs, some
Bay Salt, a little Conduit-water, and half a pound of burnt Allom beaten
together, and in a short space it shall be perfect white, and fine without
pricking.

6. How to make a gallon of Hippocras.

TAke 4 gallons of White Wind, 4 pound of powdered Sugar, 5 ounces of Cinnamon,
half an ounce of Cloves, 4 ounces of Ginger, and (...) penniworth of Long
Pepper, 2 penniworth of Coriander-seed; bruife them, then steep them in the
Wire, and let it be close covered, and (...) quart of the best Sack, put them
i^ and stir them well together; th^^ run it very well 4 times through (...) Bag
till you see it fine, give your Vesel a scent, and put it therein.

7. To make Bastard White.

PUt 4 or 5 gallons of Milk into your Butt or Pipe, beat it well, and give it a
Pearl of 10 whites of Eggs, and it will fall fine.

8. To make a Butt of Muskadine.

TAke the Lags of all sorts, and put them into a Muskadine-Butt, and be sure
your Lags do not prick; put thereto one or two gallons of Soot, beat it up and
so let it lie; but if you want Soot, the Syrup of Bastard is as good or better;
four pound will serve to a Butt.

9. For Claret that has lost his Color.

FIll it up with Red-wine, and roll it well, and lay it upon the Bung all
night, lay Gravel upon it in the morning.

10. For White Wind that is lumpish and lowering.

TAke a pound of Roach-Allom, burn it and beat it to powder, and the whites of
6 Eggs; beat them and the Allom in a gallon of the same Wine, with a handful of
Bay Salt; it will be fine by morning.

11. A Flavor for a Pipe of Canary.

TAke 10 ounces of Torsh, 10 ounces of Lymon, 10 ounces of Coriander-seeds, let
them be beaten very small, and put into a little Bag; then take a little
Civit-water, and put it into a little Fruit-dish on a Chafing Dish of Coals,
and make the Water lukewarm; then take your Bag, and dip it in till it has
drank up all the Water; hang it into your Pipe 3 foot, and when you think by
your taste it is enough, take it out, and it will serve for another.

12. To make an excellent Scent.

TAke 4 ounces of Brimstone, a little Allom, a spoonful of Aqua-vitae, mix them
together; when you have done, take a new piece of Canvas and dip therein, and
have in readiness the powder of Antugus, 8 Cloves, 2 Races of Ginger,
Orange-peel, and a little Coriander-seeds, well beaten together; then cast them
upon the Canvas while it is warm, so keep it in a dry place.

13. The best time to taste Wines.

WHen the Wind is Eastward; for when the East-winds blow, the Wines begin to
move themselves, showing what they are in goodness or badness.

14. For Spanish -Wine that will not fine.

TAke half a peck of Callis Tauta, and put it into the Vessel, let it be well
beaten together; let it stand then and it will be fine.

15. Another for the same.

TAke 12 Eggs new laid, and a pint of Conduit-water, and a handful of Bay Salt,
beat them well together, and put them into your Vessel; then beat them well
again and it will fine; but let not the Vessel be unfilled.

16. For Whiting of a Butt of Sack.

TAke 5 or 6 gallons of Milk, four handfuls of Bay Salt, draw some of the same
Wine, and put them into the Butt together one hour; and when the Lees are
fallen, rack it, otherwise it will fret and boil.

17. For high-Countrey Wines.

RAck them off their gross Lees within a week after they are fallen; and if
they are brown, put a gallon of Milk into your Hogshead, and a good scent; let
it be always filled, and your Wine will keep the better.

18. For White-wines that fret.

DRaw 6 gallons, and take a handful of Bay Salt and a gallon of Milk, a handful
of Flower and the whites of 6 Eggs; then beat these very well together, and
give it a good scent; put these into the Vessel, and rack it at 4 or 5 days end.

19. For Spanish -Wines that prick.

TAke a handful of Rosemary at the Bung-hole of your Vessel, bruise it before
you put it in, and let it hang in the Wine till it be without pricking.

20. to make Malaga for a need.

TAke a Hogshead of green Sherry, and 3 pound of white-Candy Syrup; beat these
in the Wine, give it a Pearl, and put it into your Vessel, and draw it for good
Malaga.

21. For Sack that has lost its Color, or is musty.

TAke a quart of Barley-meal, the whites of 20 Eggs, half an ounce of Cloves
well beaten, and a pottle of the same Wine; beat them and put them into your
Wines, so let it rest with Vent, and it will be pursued.

22. To preserve Malmsie.

IF it fade, put into the Vessel 20 ounces of Mossel; then roll your Vessel,
and let it (...) Vent, and so it shall (...) good to the end.

23. For a Pipe of Sack that is long (...)

TAke a pound of Roach-Allom, beat it well, and mix it with some of the Wine;
then put it into the Butt, and beat it well, and when it is fine, rack it, and
this will help it.

24. To help the boiling of Gascoign -Wine.

IN Summer take a Hogshead, wash it clean and scent it well, be sure your Scent
be very fine from the Lee, the foul Lee makes it boil; take a handful of
Pebble-stones, and those will help it.

(...) a Pipe of Alligant.

(...) a Pipe and wash it very clean, (...) and take a Hogshead of
high-^ountrey Claret that is sweet and fine, and rack it into the Pipe; then
take 8 gallons of Soot and put to it, and beat it as you do Muskadine; before
you put it in, take 8 gallons of Sack, and the rest of any Laggs of Claret; if
it be not deep enough, you may put Red-wine into it; if not sweet enough, 2
gallons of Honey, and beat it till it have a Pearl, and fill it into the Pipe;
let it stand till it be fine, then rack it into another Pipe; then take 20
ounces of Aniseeds, bruise them and put them into a Bag in at the Bung, and
there let it be 12 or 14 days; then take it out, and it will serve very well.

26. For Claret that is tawny.

TAke a pound of Turnsole, and steep it in some of the same Wine 24 hours; then
put it into the Hogshead through a Catch, beat it, and it will make perfect
white.

27. If Red-wines be dark.

PUt into the Vessel a gallon of Milk, then take as much Turnsole as you did
before to your Claret, and use it as abovesaid.

28. How to make 10 gallons of Hippocras.

TAke 10 ounces of Cinnamon, as much Ginger, 5 ounces of Long Pepper, and 5 of
Nutmegs, of Cloves 2 ounces, as much of Caraway-seed; beat all these together,
and lay them in steep 24 hours in the Wine, the first half being Malaga, the
other White Wind; stir them well together, and let the Wine run through a
Cloth; take a pound of powdered Sugar, then run a pottle of Milk through the
Bag into the Wine; when it is fine, put it into your Runlet, and give it a
scent, and it wi^^ keep a quarter of a year.

29. To make Scent.

TAke a flat earthen Pan, put into it two penniworth of Brimston^ beaten small,
and a penniworth of Aqua-vitae; put it over the fire, and when it is ready to
boil, let it run through a linen Cloth, and let it be cold; and add a pound of
Coriander-feed, Nutmegs, and Long Pepper beaten, and these will make a good
Scent for any Wine.

30. How to make 10 gallons of Soot.

TAke 6 pound of Honey, and a quarter of a pound of Liquorish, when the Bark is
taken from it; beat it in a Mortar with 2 penniworth of Long Almonds, and boil
them in a Kettle stirring them well; and when it is cold, strain it, and put it
into a Runlet, and draw it with your Sack or Gascoign-Wine, and it will be
pleasant enough.

The End of the Third Book.
The Fourth Book.
1. For White Wind that is faint, and has lost its Color.

RAck it from its Bed, and if you have any Connick-Lees, you may put your faint
or tawny Wines upon them; then roll them over, or beat them twice a day, and
within 10 or 12 days you may rack it off, and you shall have it brisk and white.

2. Another for the same.

TAke your Wine and rack it from its Lees; then take a pint of Roach-Allom, the
whites of 6 Eggs, a handful of Salt, and a quartern of Bean-flower, or a pound
of Rice, and a little Conduit-water.

3. To make white Lags.

TAke a clean Runlet that will hold the quantity of them, and beat them with a
Pearl made of Eggs, Bay Salt and Roach-Allom, and whiten them with some Milk,
and if you will, put some Canary in them, and it will draw very well.

4. To make your Claret lose Lags.

DRaw them into a Runlet, put to them some Red-wine, as much Turnsole as will
make it bright; beat it with as much Allom as will serve for the quantity of
the Wine, and when it fines, you may draw it away with what you think good.

5. Another for making of white Lags.

IF you have any white Lags, rack them upon half a Butt of Malaga and Canary
Lees; let them lie about 3 weeks, and beat them up every other day upon those
Lees, till you have gathered the strength thereof; let them abide thereon till
they begin to fine, then rack them into a clean Cask, and give it a strong
scent, and if it be brown, white; if not, give it a good Pearl, and when it is
fine, you may draw it as you see good.

6. For Claret that has lost its Color.

IF his Lee be good and sound, overdraw him 3 or 4 gallons; then fill him up
with good Red-wine, and roll him well upon his Lees, and let him lie all night
upon his Bung, and in the morning lay it upright, and let it rest till it be
fine; then shall you have it well colored.

7. For Claret that is faint, and has lost its Color.

RAck it into a fresh-drawn Hogshead upon the red Lees; then take 5 pound of
Turnsole, and steep it in part of the Wine; then wash your Rapes clear out, and
put it in the Hogshead, with a pound of the best Allom; roll them well
together, and your Wine will be brisk and bright.

8. For Red-wine that is faint, and has lost its Color.

RAck it upon a fresh Lee of Alligant or Red-wine; then take 3 pound of the
best Turnsole, steep it in some of the same Wine, and when it is well steeped,
wring it out, and put the Wine so colored into a Runlet until it be fine; then
draw it off, and put it into your Hogshead, and it will make it perfect and
bright.

9. Another way for the same.

TAke hal^ a bushel of Elder-berries where they be full ripe, pull them from
their stalks, bruise them and preserve them, and put the juice of them (when
you have occasion) into your Red-wine, and it will make it drink brisk and
bright.

10. To rack Rhenish-wine.

RAck your Cask very clean, and let it remain full of water all night, and the
next morning draw it clean out, and put a good Scent into it, and it will make
the Wine fret and boil; then if your Wine be hard, take 8 or 10 gallons of
clarified Honey, with a gallon or two of Milk, as you shall see good, beat it
strongly; if it be lumpish, give it a Pearl, and it will do well.

11. To make Rhenish-wine.

TAke a Hogshead of Rochel-wine, scent it with a very strong Scent; then take
the whites of 8 or 10 Eggs, Bay Salt or Conduit-water, then take 10 or 12
gallons of clarified Honey, take 60 or 80 pounds of Sugar; then stop it up
close after you have beaten it well, and you shall have it perfect, fine and
good.

12. For Sack that is lumpish or long.

TAke the whites of Eggs, Bay Salt, Roach-Allom, and 2 quarts of Bean-flower or
beaten Rice, beat them together; if brown, use Milk; if white, use all these
together; then blow off the froth, and lay a piece of Tyle over the Bung; then
let it lie till it be fine; afterward rack it off with a good Scent, and it
will drink very well.

13. Another way.

TAke a Hogshead of Sherry-Sack, and 40 pounds of Canary-Syrup, it will cost
you 9d a pound; then take a half-Tub; then draw some of your Wine, and beat it
with a short stubbed Broom; then put it into your Hogshead, with Milk to whiten
it; then beat it up with a Pearl, and if you sweeten it, you may draw it for
Malaga or White Bastard.

14. A Flavor for Sack or Bastard.

TAke half a pound of Aniseeds, a penniworth of Ginger, Cloves, Grains,
Long-Pepper and Liquorish, of each a penniworth; beat them, and hang them in
your Wine in a linen Bag, until the Wine taste enough of the flavor; then
take it out.

15. For Bastard that pricks.

RAck it upon a good Muskadine-Lee; then take 3 gallons of the best Ale, and 2
or 3 of the best Almonds; then fill it up with Bastard-Canary, or Sherry of
Bastard, mixed with your Lags, and it will draw for Bastard or Muskadine.

16. Another for the same.

TAke 5 gallons of clarified Honey, and put it into your Cask, and beat it up
with a Pearl of whites and yelks of Eggs, and let it rest.

17. For Spanish -wines.

FOr Sack that has lost its Color, and has a flying Lee, make a Plea of
whites of Eggs, Bay Salt and Conduit-water, and Milk, so much as you shall see
good, beat all these together; then fill it up, and blow off the froth very
clean, and it will be white and good; and if you would keep it long, you must
rack it into another Cask, and it will not then flower nor be ill-conditioned,
for Milk will make it so.

18. Another for your Rhenish-wines.

TAke a good handful of Firr beaten to powder, as much Juniper, with the juice
of 2 or 3 Lemons, and a few Cloves; beat all these together, and bruise them in
your Wine till it taste strong of the Flower; then take it out, and draw it as
you shall see good.

19. For Alligant that pricks.

TAke 2 or 3 Canns of brown Bastard, the sweetest you have, and a pound of
Turnsole, and wash out the color, then put it into your Wine; and if it be
hard, then put in some more Bastard; if it be tawny, Put in more Turnsole; or
for want of Bastard, cut or clarified Honey as much will serve.

20. To part a Butt of Muskadel.

DRaw half your Wine into another Butt; then take your Lags of all sorts that
do not prick, and so much Syrup as will not prick; then take your Part and beat
them up, and let it rest after you have blown the froth from off it.

21. The Flavor of your Muskadine.

MAke a Bag of linen Cloth, about a foot long; then take 4 ounces of
Coriander-seed, 20 ounces of Ani-seed, 10 ounces of Allamus alamatus, one ounce
of Cloves, one ounce of Ginger, a little handful of Sanders, a little Musk or
Ambergreese; bruise all together, and put them into the Bag, and let it hang in
the Wine till it has given a flavor; then take it out and let it rest; or you
may put in 3 grains of Musk, and some Cyprus, according as the quantity of your
Wine is.

22. How to use a Butt of Sack when it is musty.

TAke a gallon of Lime, and beat it small, and put it into the Butt; then take
a Staff and beat it, and let it stand a day or two.

23. For Claret that has lost its Color.

TAke a penniworth of Damasons or Bullace, or more as you see good, and stew
them in Red-wine, and make a pottle of Syrup or more.

24. To make brown Bastard.

TAke the Lugs of Claret and White Wind, and put them into your Cask with your
Lugs of Spanish-Wine; and before it will prick, take 40 pound of Bastard-Syrup,
and mingle it well with some of the same in a half-Tub; then put it into your
Cask, and beat it up with a Pearl of whites and yelks of Eggs, and let it rest.

25. A Receipt for Muskadel that pricks.

IMprimis, For two penniworth of Grains, as much of Storax, Benjamin and Musk
fere.

26. A Receipt for Sack that pricks.

IMprimis, For Orras-powder, take half an ounce of Ani-seeds, 3 penniworth of
Spanish-white, 2 penniworth of Rose Water, and Allom boiled with the
Rose Water, and so take it and put it into the But.

27. A Receipt for Sack that will not fine.

TAke 2 penniworth of Rice, and beat it up very small, and 2 penniworth of
Allom; this will keep your Wine from quarrelling, and make it fine.

28. How to help Wine that has lost Color and Strength.

TAke 6 quarts of new Milk, the Cream being taken off, the whites of 22 Eggs, a
handful of Bay Salt, a quart of fine white-Flower, and 2 penniworth of
Roach-Allom; beat these things a long space, and put them into the Hogshead; 2
pound of Stace will do well.

29. To give Sack Strength, if it lack and grow faint.

MAke a Match of Ani-seeds and fine Fennel-seeds, a little Brimstone, with a
little quantity of Long-Pepper beaten not too small; put all into a linen Bag
that will go in and out at the Bung-hole; then stop it up close for the space
of 6 or 8 days.

30. A Receipt for the Crist.

GInger and Cinnamon, of each 3 ounces, Cloves 4 ounces, Nutmegs 10 penniworth,
Coriander-seed 2 ounces, Carraway-seeds 11 ounces, Calamus 2 penniworth.

31. A Note for Wines, and what Country.

THe Wines of Bourdeaux are called Jasterre; you shall know them by their small
Hazel-hoops, and likely they be full gage.

32.

THen there are high-Countrey Wines, and they come not till Christmas, for if
they do they are forfeited; you shall know them by their Willow-hoops, and they
most commonly want of gage.

33.

THen have you Galliack Wines in Pipes and Hogsheads, and they be
high-colored, and 3 quarters bound, and lack of gage 2 Testers.

34. A Remedy for the same.

WAsh your Cask very clean, and let it be all night full of Water, and the next
morning draw it clean out, burn a good Scent in it, and it will make your Wine
fret and boil; then if your Wine be hard, take 8 or 10 gallons of clarified
Honey, with a gallon of Milk or two, as you shall see fit, beat it strongly; if
it be lumpish, you may give it a Pearl, and it will do well.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE CONTENTS.
THe best way to help the fretting or boiling of any piece of Spanish Wine.
page 1 To keep Wines fresh all the year. p. 2 For Canary having a flying Lee.
ib. To make or divide Malmosey. p. 3, 4 For Claret that has lost its color.
p. 4 For Bastard that pricks. p. 5 To make brown Bastard. ib. For White Wind
that has lost its Color with lying. p. 6 For Sack that is lumpish or lowering.
ib. For Sack or any other Wine that does prick or boil. p. 7 How to make Scent.
ib. How to make Ipocris. p. 8 To fine your Wines, and make them pleasant. p. 9
For Ipocris Gyle. ib. Another. p. 10 Wines commonly compounded. p. 11 The
fittest times to rack Wine. ib. For White Wind that has lost its Color. ib.
How to break Wine that roaps. p. 12 How to make any Wine speedily fine. ib. For
an Hogshead of Claret or White Wind that has lost its Color. p. 13 How to
mend a Piece of Canary or Butt of Malaga that is brown. p. 14 To flower a Butt
of Muskadine. ib. How to make Rhenish-wine. p. 15 A Pearl for Malmosey and for
Muskadine. p. 16 How to make tawny Bastard white. p. 17 A Pearl for Scent, and
Flavor for a Butt of Muskadine. p. 18 If Wine have a Taste or Scent. ib. If
Claret be faint and want color. p. 19 A pleasant Scent for Red-wine. p. 20 If
a Butt of Sack be small. ib. If Wine grow long or lowering. p. 21 If Sack or
White Wind have lost its Color. ib. How to mend a Butt of Sack, etc. that
pricks. p. 22 For pricking of French-wines. p. 23 When Rhenish-wine pricks. p.
24 When Claret bath lost its Briskness. ib. To help the Eagerness of hungry
White Wind. p. 25 To help stinking Wines. ib. For Claret that decays. p. 26 To
make Bastard. ib. To make Rhenish and Muskadel. p. 27 If an Hogshead of Claret
or White Wind lose its Color. p. 28 To color Sack white. p. 29 Of
Rhenish-wine. ib. For any Spanish wine that has lost its Color and Taste. p.
30 For muddy or tawny Claret. p. 31 For foul Rhenish or French-wines. ib. A Lee
of the Ashes. p. 32 To order Rhenish-wines. p. 33 To mend and preserve
Claret-colour. ib. and p. 34 To mend Wine in Smell and Toste. p. 34 To mend and
preserve the Lees of Claret. p. 35 For sour French and Spanish-wines. p. 36 For
stinking Wines. p. 37 For Wine that has an ill Savor from Lees. ib.
Otherwise. p. 38 The best time to rack Wine. ib. A Scent for French or
Spanish-wines. ib. For Malaga's and French that will not fine. p. 39 To keep
Must a year. p. 40 To keep Wines from turning flat, etc. ib. To make Muskadine
and Hippocris. p. 41 For the boiling of Canary, etc. p. 42 For Claret all
Rhenish that frets, etc. p. 43 For Spanish-wine disturbed, etc. p. 44 For
Spanish, etc. grown yellow, etc. p. 45 To correct roapish Wines, etc. ib. An
Example to attenuate Spanish, etc. p. 46, 47 For Claret decayed in Color. p.
48, 49 For faint, pricking and boiling Sack, etc. p. 50 For Sack that will not
fine and is hagar. p. 51 To make a gallon of Hippocras. p. 52 To make Bastard
white. p. 53 To make a Butt of Muskadine. ib. For Claret that has lost its
Color. ib. For lumpish and lowering White Wind. p. 54 A Flavor for a Pipe of
Canary. ib. To make an excellent Scent. p. 55 The best time to taste Wines. ib.
For Spanish that will not fine. p. 56 For whiting a Butt of Sack. ib. For
high-Countrey Wines. p. 57 For White-wines that fret. ib. For Spanish-wines
that prick. ib. To make Malaga for a Need. p. 58 For Sack that has lost its
Color, or is musty. ib. To preserve Malmsey. ib. For a Pipe of Sack that is
long. p. 59 To help the boiling of Gascoin-wine. ib. To make a Pipe of A^^gant.
p. 60 For tawny Claret. p. 61 For dark Red-wines. ib. To make 10 gallons of
Hippocras. ib. To make Scent. p. 62 To make 10 gallons. of Soot. ib. For
White Wind that is faint and has lost its Color. p. 64 To make white Lags. p.
65 To make your Claret lose Lags. ib. Another to make white Lags. p. 66 For
Claret that has lost its Color. ib. For Claret and Red-wine that is faint,
etc. p. 67 Another way. p. 68 To rack Rhenish-wine. ib. To make Rhenish-wine.
p. 69 For long or lumpish Sack. ib. Another way. p. 70 A Flavor for Sack or
Bastard. ib. For Bastard that pricks. p. 71 For Spanish-wines. ib. Another for
Rhenish-wines. p. 72 For Alligant that pricks. ib. To part a Butt of Muskadel.
p. 73 The Flavor of your Muskadine. ib. How to use a Butt of Sack when it is
musty. p. 74 For Claret that has lost its Color. ib. To make brown Bastard.
ib. A Receipt for Muskadel that pricks. p. 75 A Receipt for Sack that pricks.
ib. A Receipt for Sack that will not fine. p. 76 How to help Wine that has
lost Color and Strength. ib. To give Sack Strength, if it lack and grow faint.
p. 77 A Receipt for the Crist. ib. A Note for Wines, and what Country. ib. A
Remedy for the same. p. 78
FINIS.

