THE SPEECH OF THE Earl of ARGYLE AT HIS TRIAL On the 12th. of December 1681.
My Lord Justice General and Remanent Honorable Lords of Iusticiary
I Look upon it as the undoubted Privilege of the meanest, Subject, to explain
his own words in the most benign Sense.

And even when Persons are under an evil Character, the misconstruction of
words, in themselves not ill, can only amount to Presumption or Aggravation,
and not a Crime.

But it is strangely alleged (as well as impossible to make any that knows me
believe) that I could intend anything, but what was honest and honorable,
suitable to the Principles of my Religion and Loyalty, though I did not explain
my self at all.

My Lord, pray be not offended, that I take up a little of your time to tell
you, I have from my youth made it my business to serve his Majesty faithfully;
and have constantly to my power, appeared in his service, especially in all
times of difficulty; and have never joined, nor complied with any Interest or
Party, contrary to his Majesty's Authority, but have all along served him in
his own way, without a frown from his Majesty these thirty years.

As soon as I passed the Schools and Colleges, I went to travel to France and
Italy in the beginning of the year 1647 and continued abroad till the end of
the year 1649.

My first appearance in the World, was to serve his Majesty, as Colonel of his
Foot-guard; and though at that time all the Commissions were given by the then
Parliament, yet I would not serve without a Commission from his Majesty, which
I have still the Honor to have by me.

After the misfortune of Worcester, I continued in Arms for his Majesty's
service, when Scotland was overrun with the Usurpers, and was alone with some
of my Friends in Arms, in the year 1652. and did then keep up some appearance
of Opposition to them by taking several of the Castles they had garisoned in
Argyle-shire; and taking and killing three hundred of them in one day. After
which, I joined with those his Majesty had Commissioned, and stood out to the
last, till the Earl of Middleton his Majesty's Liuetenent General gave me order
to capitulate, which I did without any other engagement to the Rebels, but bail
to live peaceably; and did at my capitulating, relieve several Prisoners by
exchange, whereof my Lord Granard out of the Castle of Edenborough was one.

It is not well known that I was imprisoned by the Usurpers, who was so jealous
of me, that contrary to their faith, they seized on me, and kept me from Prison
to Prison, till his Majesty's happy Restoration, only because I would not
engage not to serve him, though there was no Oath required?

I do with all Gratitude acknowledge his Majesty's Bounty and Royal Favors to
me when I was pursued before the Parliament in the year 1662. His Majesty was
graciously pleased not to send me down in any opprobrious way, but upon a bare
verbal Bail, upon which I came down Post, and presented my self a fortnight
before the time; and having satisfied his Majesty at that time, of my entire
Loyalty, I did not offer to plead by Advocates, and his Majesty was not only
pleased to pardon my life, and to restore me to a Title and Fortune, but to put
me in trust in his Service in the most eminent Judicatories of the Kingdom, and
to heap Favors upon me beyond whatever I did, or can deserve, though I hope
his Majesty has always found me faithful and thankful, and ready to bestow all
I have, or can have, for his Service; and I hope he never had, nor never shall
have ground to repent any Favor he has done me: If I were now guilty of the
four Crimes libelled, I should think my self a great Villian.

In the Prosecution of the Story of my Life in the year 1666, when the
Rebellion broke out, that was repressed at Pentland Hills, upon a bare
Advertisement from the now Lord Archbishop St. Andrews, without any order
either from the Council or General, the intercourse being stopped, did I not
bring together about two thousand men, and sent a Gentleman to General Dailyel,
offering to join with him, if the Rebellion had not presently been happily
crushed? And when I met with considerable trouble from my Neighbors
rebelliously in Arms, and had Commissions both in public and private accounts,
have I not carried dutifully to his Majesty, and done what was commanded with a
just Moderation, which I can prove under the Hands of mine Enemies, and by many
infallible Demonstrations?

Pardon me yet a few words. Did I not in this present Parliament show my
readiness to serve His Majesty and the Royal Family in asserting vigorously the
Lineal Legal Succession of the Crown, and had a care to have it expressed in
the Commissions of the Shires and Boroughs in which I had interest? Was I not
for offering proper supplies to His Majesty and his Successor? And did I not
concur to bind the Landlords for their Tenants, though I was mainly concerned?
And have I not always keep'd my Tenants in obedience to His Majesty?

I say all this, not to arrogate any thing to my self for doing what I was in
Honor and Duty bound to his Majesty; But if after all this, upon no other
ground, but words that were spoken in absolute Innocence, and without the least
design, except for clearing my own Conscience, and that are not capable of the
ill sense wrested from them by the Libel, I should be further troubled, what
assurance can any of the greatest Quality, Trust, or Innocence have, that they
are secure, especially considering, that so many scruples have been started, as
all know, not only by many of the Orthodox Clergy, but by whole Presbyteries,
Synods, and some Bishops, which were thought so considerable, that an eminent
Bishop did take the pains to write a Treatise (which was read in Council, and
allowed to be Printed, and a Copy given to me), which contains expressions that
may be stretched to a worse sense than I am charged for. Have I not showed my
Zeal to all the ends of the Test? How then can it be imagined, that I have any
sinister design in any thing that I have said? If I had done any thing contrary
to the whole course of my Life, which I hope shall not be found, yet one Act
might pretend to be excused by a Habit. But nothing being questioned but the
sense of words misconstrued to the greatest beight, and stretched to imaginary
inclinations, quite contrary to my scope and design; and so far contrary, not
only to my Sense, but Principles, Interest and Duty, that I hope my Lord
Advocate will think he has gone too far in this Process, and say plainly what
he knows to be true by his acquaintance with me, both in public and private,
that I am neither Papist nor Phanatick, but am truly Loyal in my Principles and
Practice.

The hearing of this Libel would trouble me beyond most of the Sufferings of my
Life, if my Innocence did not support me, and the hopes of being vindicated of
this and other calumnies before this public and Noble Auditory.

I leave my Defenses to these Gentlemen that plead for me: They know my
Innocence, and how groundless that Libel is. I shall only say, As my Life has
been most of it spent in serving and suffering for his Majesty, so whatever be
the event of this process, I resolve, while I breathe, to be loyal and faithful
to his Majesty; and whether I live publicly or in obscurity, my head, my
heart, nor my hand, shall never be wanting where I can be useful to his
Majesty's service, and while I live, and when I die, I shall pray, that God
Almighty would bless His Majesty with a long, happy and prosperous Reign, and
that the Lineal Legal Successors of the Crown, may continue Monarchs over all
His Majesty's Dominions, and be Defenders of the true Primitive Christian
Apostolic Catholic Protestant Religion, while Sun and Moon endure.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Ianeway, in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1682


