AN ACCOUNT OF THE Proceedings to Judgment AGAINST THE CHARTER OF THE CITY of
LONDON; As it was given in Court of King's Bench, the 12th of this Instant June,
Anno. Dom. 1683.
Entered according to Order.

THis day Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Raymond, and Mr. Justice Withens;
taking their Places in the Court of King's Bench, Mr. Attorney General moved
the Court for Judgment against the CHARTER of the City of London, etc.
whereupon the Court declared, That there having been a Quo Warranto brought on
the part of the King, to inquire by what right they for one Month before
occupied the said CHARTER, as Body of Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, to Plead
and be Impleaded as a Body Politic and Corporate; and that thereunto they had
Pleaded Magna Charta, the Grants of several Kings, and especially of His
present Majesty for Justification; when it was again objected, that they,
contrary to the said Grants, had unlawfully, amongst themselves, made Bylaws
to Levy Toll or Taxes upon the King's Subjects, both Citizens and Strangers,
bringing any goods into the Markets, within the said City and Liberties,
whether they were Sold, or not Sold; and to Justify themselves therein, they,
the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens did suggest, that they, as One Body
Corporate, had, time out of mind, taken Toll of such as brought Wares to the
said Markets; and that the Commonalty, or Common Council, to the number of 252.
or thereabout, had, upon all occasions, for many years past, made and provided
such Bylaws, as were not oppugnant to Acts of Parliament, for the good
Government and Ordering the City; to which it was said, That on the part of the
King it had been plainly demonstrated, that such Levying of Taxes or Toll was
oppugnant to Acts of Parliament, and grievous to the King's Subjects, and an
Encroachment upon the Fundamental Laws of the Land, for which their CHARTER
ought to be surrendered into His Majesty's hands as forfeited: That it was
further alleged by Mr. Attorney, That they, the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in
Common Council Assembled, did, contrary to the known Laws, agree to, and cause
to Be Allowed, Printed and Published, on the 13th of January, (upon the
Prorogation of the Parliament, from the 10th of January to the 20th of the same
Instant) a scandalous Petition, to bring the King's Person in hatred with His
Subjects, and the sam did disperse, to stir up His Majesty's Liege People to
Sedition and Rebellion; or to this Effect: And that thereunto the Aldermen,
Commons and Citizens had Reply, That there was at that time a dangerous Plot
against the Person of the King's Majesty, the Government, etc. To prove which
they instanced the several Attaindures of Traitors, the Impeachments of the
Lords in the Tower, the several Proclamations on the account of the said Plot,
the Opinion of His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, together with
several Votes, all plainly demonstrating that there was a Plot; yet that it had
been by Mr. Attorney plainly demonstrated, That the said Petition was Evilly
and Maliciously intended, to Alienate the hearts of His Majesty's Subjects, and
to Induce them to a hatred of his Royal Person, contrary to their Allegiance,
and the Well Government of Corporations, according to the Constitution and
Institution of Body Politics, whose Continuation depends upon the good
Government of those that are Entrusted with the CHARTER or CHARTERS, Grants or
Privileges, or to this Effect; And it is in His Majesty's Power to call any
CHARTER or Grant in question, as in His Royal Wisdom it shall seem fir; and
that if by their Intrenching on the Fundamental Laws, by presuming
unwarrantably to Exceed their Grants, Infranchisements, Privileges, etc. the
said CHARTER is forfeited, and may be seized into the hands of the King, which
was the Case of the CHARTER of London, by which the Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens, were Empowered as a Body Politic Incorporated to Plead or be
impleaded as one Man, which they themselves had owned they were, and that they
must stand or fall as such as in their Rejoinder, etc. And several Arguments at
the Bar in relation to the said CHARTER, and in defense thereof it had appeared.

These being the main Points appearing to be insisted on by Mr. Attorney on the
behalf of the King, the Court declared, That the Records and Evidences both
Ancient and Modern, had been perused, and narrowly Examined; and that they had
seen Copies on both sides, which compared, differed not; all things therein
contained, being coherent and owned by Plaintiffs and Defendants Council, as
true Copies, nothing on either side there against objected; which having been
seriously considered, did not warrant either an Exaction of Toll, or Levying
any Tax upon His Majesty's Subjects, as had for many years past been Exacted
and Received by Officers thereunto Appointed by the said Major, Commons and
Citizens of London, but by Act of Parliament it appeared, that such a Levying
of money was a manifest breach of the Laws, and rendered their CHARTER
forfeited, and liable to a surrender and seizure into the hands of the King,
the Act of Oblivion not extending to their Relief, although they alleged the
By-Law was made soon after the Fire of London.

That as to the Petition, the Proceedings therein were altogether
unwarrantable, and that nothing offered on the part of the Corporation could
justify them therein, for that it was a manifest Breach of the Trust Imposed
in them, which Breach, and the other Assigned was a Violation of their CHARTER,
and rendered it forfeit.

The Sum of what had been formerly Argued being these, or to this Effect.

Mr. Justice Jones upon the particulars as they offered gave his Opinion, and
afterward declared that he and his brethren the rest of the Judges of that
court present had attended the Lord Chief Justice Saunders about that Important
affair, and that they had received his opinion in the Matter, and that he and
they were of opinion that the CHARTER of the City of London upon the breaches
Assigned by Mr. Attorney General was forfeited and according to Law to be seized
into his Majesty's hands to be disposed of as he in his princely wisdom should
think convenient; In which opinion Mr. Justice Raymond and Mr. Justice Withens
concurred, declaring that they had used great Diligence in perrusing the
Records and other Evidences and had Attentively heard the Arguments on Either
part, and that the breaches Assigned being plain and found unwarrantable the
CHARTER was forfeited.

Judgment thus given Mr. Attorney General Moved that all further proceedings as
to entering up Judgments, etc. might be suspended till his Majesty's pleasure
was further known, of which Motion the Court ordered the Clark of the Office to
take notice.

London, Printed for Langley Curtis at the sign of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey's
Head near Fleet-Bridge. 1683.


