Licensed,

ROBERT MIDGLEY.
November the (...) 1685.
Aristotle's RHETORIC; Or the True GROUNDS and PRINCIPLES OF ORATORY; SHOWING,
The Right Art of PLEADING and SPEAKING in full Assemblies and Courts of
Judicature. Made English By the Translators of the ART of THINKING. In Four
Books.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1686.



To the Honorable Coll. HENRY SYDNEY, AMBASSADOR Extraordinary From His late
Sacred MAJESTY TO THE STATES of HOLLAND.
Honorable Sir,
THERE is not any of Aristotle's Writings wherein that Ancient Author seems to
have been more Elaborate, then in his four Books of Rhetoric. And this the
Famous Philosopher does in some Measure acknowledeg in his last Piece, which is
dedicated to Alexander the Great, and written in Obedience to his Commands.
Which made him doubtless employ the choicest of his thoughts to gratify so
Excellent a Prince. Nor is it to be thought that Aristotle deemed it a small
Honor to be so Illustriously Patronized.

The Emulation of the English Version to approach as near as might be to the
Greek Original, and to follow the Authors Example, emboldened this Address to
your Honor. For they were not the Pedantic Rudiments of Rhetoric, which
Aristotle offered to one that had been his Royal Pupil, but the most
substantial Part, which he therefore fits and appropriates to the Practical
Management of Human Life. As knowing the Potent Effects of Learned Eloquence in
the Conduct of all Great Affairs, whether at the Council Board, or in the Field.

What then was once thought worthy the acceptance of a Prince, seeks now for
Harbor in your Honors Favor. For where should Learning, when Important, seek
for Patronage, but to a Person so well acquainted with Her, as your self? The
Greatest Glory and the Greatest Justice she can do her self, is to lay her
humble offering at the Feet of Honor and Virtue. Accomplishments, which you
your self so conspicuously inherit by a long descent of Famous Ancestry. Story,
that near will dye, admires Ireland once governed with applause by Great and
Prudent Sidney; no less Famous for the Overthrow of Shane, Oneal and all his
Rebel Crew. Nor can Time deface the Memory of Sr. Philip, of whom Thuanus,
Juvenis virtute, ingenii solertia and eruditione praestans; nor of his Sister
the Countess of Pembrook, once the Ornament of her Age. And if your Noble
Father excelled in Learning and Philosophy, well may we say, your self the Son
of such a Parent have raised your self no less Conspicuous Monuments of your
Wisdom and Prudence, both at home and abroad; while the Deep Affairs of late
Negotiation and Treaty still Crowned your Transactions with eminent success,

No wonder then that Alexander and Aristotle dubious what entertainment they
may find in English Dress, make their Applications to your Honor, for a new
Passport through the Commonwealth of Learning; since their Fate depends upon
your Pleasure.

For my own part, I was glad of the Opportunity, not knowing (though under some
Relation to the Noble Blood of the SYDNEYS) how I might approach your Presence
in better Company, or that could better excuse the Presumption of

(Honorable Sir) Your Honors most obliged and Devoted Servant, H. C.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER
THE Universality of Things is discerned in Three places; In this same living
Fabric of Heaven and Earth: then again it shows it self in the Mind as in a
Looking Glass; and lastly in Oration or Speech, which is a kind of Image
representing the Minds of Men. For neither is there any thing in the World, nor
in the Mind, which is the other World, or which can be conceived by the Mind,
about which Oration or Sense does not in some Measure or other exercise it
self. Wonderful therefore is the Force and Prevalency of Oratory, to Transfer
and delineate in the Eively Colors of Words, as in a Picture, the whole
Spectacle of Nature into the Mind and Senses of him that hears thee, by which
means the knowledge of things is as it were embodied and transformed into the
Mind it self, and all things are made one and incorporated with it. A Faculty
which is both one and the same, and lies in a narrow compass, which way soever
it may be made use of. And therefore they do ill that load it with an Infinite
Crowd of Precepts. Since the whole force of it consists in conceiving in the
Mind, in expressing by Words, and in Conforming to the Auditory. The Knowledge
of Human Customs, Civil Institutions, of all Histories, of the whole Series of
Antiquity and of all things in Nature, flows from hence, as from a Copious
Fountain. However there is no great difficulty in conceiving, provided we be
watchful and attentively diligent to store up in our Minds the Force and
Moments of Human Transactions, and to observe carefully the Nature of things:
Which is the True Fountain of Elocution. For all things imprint their forms and
shapes in the Mind, and leave certain footsteps of themselves behind, which are
imprinted by Nature. Which he that takes notice of while they are before him,
shall recall 'em the more easily to mind being past, and from thence shall be
able to form to himself the Forms and Images of things as often as necessity
requires. In expression there is a great Proclivity or Proneness, if the Things
be well conceived, and imprinted, if the Mind of the Orator, which is the
Spectator, Observer, Arbitrator and Judge of Things be furnished with good
judgment. For the Tongue, the Lips and Countenance all move according to the
Habit of the Mind. Therefore they mistake, who believe Elocution to be the
Force of Words, which is the Strength and Efficacy of the Mind. For which
Reason, this is a short Maxim, That He who will speak according to the Habit of
the Mind, must take care in the first place rightly to adorn and perfect his
mind.

In conforming to the Auditory there is more difficulty; and this is that which
has produced such an infinite number of Precepts. For we see the vast Variety
of Times, of Places, Persons, Causes and Moments of Things. Therefore seeing
the Former require a kind of Civil and Boundless Exercitation; This is to be
obtained from conversing with Men, and from the Customs of Nations, and to be
learnt from our Infancy. Now whether Cicero has rightly comprehended these
things, in those few words What? Wherein? At what time? and how to be spoken?
the Orator is to take care. Aristotle does the same here, discoursing of the
First, in the first place, of Conformity in the next, and of Expression in his
Third Book.

And now should we go about to speak in ^raise of the Author, as it is the
Custom of most Interpreters, we might justly fear the ^ame Reproof as was given
to him that went abou to applaud Hercules, among the Lacedaemonians. For who,
cried they, is there among us that has the least Evil Thought of Hercules, or
that does not already reverence and adore him, as being ascribed into the
Number of the Immortal Gods? For such is the High Esteem of Aristotle in the
World, and his Authority among Men, that it would be a vain thing to make any
farther Encomiums upon his Wit and Learning, the Profoundness of his Knowledge,
or his Diligence in explaining what he wrote; and whom therefore Tully also
allows to be the Prince of all Philosophers.

Aristotle's RHETORIC TO Theodectes.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
That Rhetoric and Logic treat of the same Subject. That they who treated of
Rhetoric before, did not rightly understand it, and of the Benefit of Rhetoric.

RHetoric and Logic are near of kin the one to the other. For both treat of the
same things, which are in a manner known by all Men, and belong to no certain
Science. And therefore one way or other all Men participate of both; seeing
that all People by some means or other endeavor to find out and maintain an
Argument, or to impeach and defend; which many do rashly and without
Experience, many through Exercise, and several naturally and habitually. Which
being either way to be done, it is apparent that there is a way and method to
be found out, to which the matter may be reduced when both attain their Ends,
as well they who proceed according to the dictate of Nature, as they who search
into the causes and reasons of what they do; which all will grant to be the
Office of Art. Whoever therefore till this time have composed the Art of
Eloquencs, have found out but a small part of it; for when only Art prevails to
gain Credit and Belief by Persuasion, other things are only additional; they
make no mention of Enthymemes, which are the Sinews of Persuasion, but make a
great pudder about those things which are little to the purpose. For
Crimination, Compassion, Anger and those other affections of the Mind are
nothing to the business, but only serve to move the Judges. And therefore as it
is the custom in many Cities* especially such as are governed by good Laws, if
the same were observed in Judgments, they would have nothing left for them to
say. For so all People partly believe it should be ordained by the Law; partly
they retain the same Constitution, to speak nothing from the purpose; as in the
Areop^gus, wherein they did well. For it is no way laudable to pervert a Judge
by moving him to Anger, Envy or Pity. Which is no more then if a Man should
pretend to make use of a Rule, and be^d it crooked. Besides that whoever sets
up a Controver^y, has no more to do then to demonstrate whether the thing is,
or i^ not? whether it were or were not done? Now whether the Act were great or
of little Consequence, whether just or unjust, whatever the Legislator has not
distinguished, that the Judge ought to know, and not to learn from him that
propounds the Controversy. Therefore it is convenient that good and wholesome
Laws should make a distinction of all those things themselves, and leave as few
as possible to the opinion of the Judges. First, because it is more easy to
find one, or but a few Prudent Persons that are able to make good Laws, and
give true Judgment then many: In the next place, Laws are made by such as take
long time to consider. Judgments are suddenly pronounced, and therefore it is a
difficult thing rightly to dispense what is just and profitable. But this is
the chiefest thing of all to be considered, that the judgment of the Legislator
does not confine it self to Particulars and things Present, but dilates and
extends to Universals, and things to come. But the Senator and the Judge
determine of things definite and present. Whence it happens that their own
affection, or hatred, or private advantage intervening, they make but a
negligent enquiry into the Truth; while their Judgments are swayed by their own
gain or loss. So that as to other things, as already has been said, the least
power of determining that may be is to be left to the Judge; but whether done or
not done, whether it be or not be, will come to pass or not, all this of
necessity must be submitted to his Determination; since it is impossible for a
Lawgiver to make sufficient Provision in such Cases. Which being so, it is
apparent that they teach those things that are quite from the purpose, who
treat of other things, as what the Proeme, what the Narrative ought to contain,
or any one of the other parts. For therein they teach us no more then how to
dispose the Mind of the Judge this way or that way. But as to artificial
Persuasion they inform us nothing, that is, how a Person may become a good
Argumentator. Seeing therefore there is the same Method to be used in popular
Orations, as in Pleadings at the Bar, and that it is much more noble and of
greater use to be a popular Orator, then a litigious brangler about Contracts
and private Bargains, they do ill in being so silent as to the former, so
voluminous as to the latter, believing it is of less concernment to be
extravagant in popular Arguments, and less wile and subtilty in that then in
Bar*Pleading, as being more common. For in the former the Judge determins of
what in part concerns himself; so that there is no more required then to
demonstrate the thing to be, as the Adviser says. But in causes of Meum and Tu
m that will not suffice where it is necessary to take the Ears of the Hearer;
for the Judgment is to be of other Men's concerns* So that while they consider
their own profit, and hear with favor, they give themselves up to the Pleader,
but make no determination. Therefore in many places the Law forbids digressions
from the Matter, and there the Judges exactly observe that Law. But in regard
it is manifest that the artificial way relates and consists in Persuasion, and
that Persuasion is a kind of Demonstration, (for then we chiefly believe a
thing when we suppose it to be demonstrated,) and for that Rhetorical
Demonstration is Argument; which if I may so say, is the most powerful way of
Persuasion; and for that Argument is a a certain Syllogism, and seeing all
Syllogisms are under the Consideration of Logic, either in whole, or in part;
it is manifest that he who can most readily find out of what, and how a
Syllogism is Composed, will prove the sharpest Argumentator, especially
Understanding in what things Enthymemes are of chiefest use, and how they
differ from Logical Syllogisms. For the same Consideration will find out what
is true, and what is like to Truth. For Men are sufficiently inclined to Truth,
and for the most part attain to the Truth. Wherefore he who attains easily to
Probability by conjecture, takes the same course to find out the Truth. Why
therefore others have been so nice about things which are nothing to the
purpose, and why they have made judicial Pleading, the Subject of their Labor
is apparent.

Now Rhetoric is therefore useful, because that by Nature those things that are
just and true, are much better then their Contraries; and therefore if
Judgments be not properly and conveniently made, there is a necessity of their
failing, and being easily refuted; the consequence of which is nothing but
disgrace and reproof. Besides it is not an easy thing to persuade some Men with
all our talking, though we have never so exquisite a Knowledge of the thing; (for
the Speech of Instruction is that which proceeds from Knowledge) which being so
difficult, if not Impossible, there is a necessity of procuring the Impressions
of Belief and Reason from common things, as we have already said in our Topics
concerning Haranguing to the unskillful Multitude. Nor is it amiss to be able
to persuade contraries, as in Syllogisms, not that we ought to persuade those
things that are evil, but that we may not be Ignorant how they stand in
Competit^on with Truth, and when such Arguments are unjustly made use of by
others, that we may be able to refute 'em. Now of all the other Sciences none
conclude contraries Syllogistically, except Rhetoric and Logic; for they both
discourse of Contraries; though it is not so with their Subjects; but always those
things which are naturally best and truest, are much more fit for Argument, and
most proper to persuade. Moreover it would be very absurd that it should be a
disgrace for the Body not to be able to help it self, yet no shame for a Matis
reason to be defective, which is of more use to Man then the defect of his
Body. If it should be objected that it might prove of very ill Consequence for
a Man to make a bad use of an effectual power of Reason, that certainly is no
more then what is common to all things that are accounted good, unless Virtue
it self; but more especially the Fate that attends those things that are most
beneficial to Mankind, as Strength, Health, Riches, and Command. For he that
makes a just use of these things is commonly a great Benefactor; but he that
abuses those advantages, oft-times becomes a public Pest. Now then that
Rhetoric is not under any certain and Determinate kind, but as Logic is, and
equally useful, is apparent by what we have said. For persuasion it self is not
its Duty, but to see what may be appositely made use of for convincement upon
every Subject, as in all other Arts and Sciences; For it is not the Office of
Physic to create Health; but as far as it is possible to reform an ill habit;
for it is possible to Cure those, that it is impossible to restore to a sane
Constitution. In like mannerit is also the part of Rhetoric to consider what is
Persuasive and what is probably convincing, as of Logic to discern what is a
Syllogism, and what a seeming Syllogism. For a cavilling Disputant, is such not
in force of Argument, but in pre election. On the other side, one Man shall be
a Rhetorician by virtue of his Knowledge, another by Election. But no Man shall
be a good Logician by Pre-election, but by the force of his Arguments. Now
therefore as to this same Method it self, we shall endeavor to make out how
and by what Principles we may attain to what we have propounded, beginning
again with the definition of Rhetoric.

CHAP. II.
What Rhetoric is? what its Subject? how it relates to Logic? and of what
Things Oration chiefly consists?

LET Rhetoric therefore be a Power or Faculty, to consider in every Subject
what is therein contained proper to persuade. For this is the Duty of no other
Science. For particucular Arts are both Doctrinal and Persuasive, as to what is
their Subject; as Physic in reference to Health or Sickness; Geometry in
reference to Bodies and their Accidents, and Arithmetic in reference to
Numbers, and so of the rest of the Arts and Sciences. But Rhetoric makes it her
Business to consider the probability, or truth of the thing propounded whatever
it be. And therefore we say it has not any proper and peculiar operation upon
any peculiar Genus. Now of Proofs or Convincements, some are without Art,
others Artificial. Those I call done without Art, which we never study for;
Artificial, those that are invented by reason and Method; so that it behooves us
of these two sorts, to make use of the one and invent the other. Now of those
Proofs which Reason affords us there are three sorts. Some in the Manners of
the Speaker; some in the disposition of the Hearer, some in the Oration it
self, by virtue of its Demonstration or Probability of Demonstration.
Convincement by manners is when the Oration is so pronounced that the Orator
may be thought a person worthy to be credited. For we believe the Virtuous more
easily and sooner, and barely in all things; but absolutely in these things
where there is not that Certainty, but a suspense of Judgment, and difficulty
of Determination, in regard of the various opinions of Men. However this ought
to come to pass, out of some respect gained by the delivery of the Oration, not
out of Partiality, advancing the undeserved Credit of any Person. For then like
some Rhetoricians, they do not place the probity of the Speaker in his Skill,
which they look upon as no way conducing to Convincement, but as if the chief
Argument of persuasion lay in the virtue of an Orator.

Again the Auditors believe in respect of themselves, when they find the
Impulse of some affection raised in their Minds. For we do not give the same
Judgments, when we grieve as when we are glad; when we love as when we hate
Concerning whi^ch things the Writers now adays pretend to give Instructions; of
which Particulars we shall say more, when we come to discourse of the
affections.

Convincement by the Orations themselves is when we demonstrate what is true,
or what appears to be so, by what is most proper to persuade in every
Particular. Seeing then that all Convincements arise from these things, it is
apparent that all these three ought to be made use of, to the end we may obtain
the faculty of Ratiocination, that we may be able to consider the conditions
and virtues which ought to give perfection to Men, and as to the affections,
that we may understand what they are, their several sorts, and whence and how
they arise, and from all these to make Syllogistical conclusions. So that
Rhetoric seems to be a kind of shute growing out of Logic, and the doctrine of
Manners, and may therefore justly be said to be Political. Wherefore also
Rhetoric seems to Personate Politics; and they who challenge the knowledge of
it, claim that knowledge partly through Ignorance, partly through arrogance,
and partly upon other human Reasons; for it is a kind of Particle and
Similitude of Logic, as we have said in the beginning. For neither of both is
the Science of any thing determinate, but a certain faculty and ability to
invent Arguments. Now as to their effective Power, and how they relate one to
another, enough has been said. But as to those things which are said, or appear
to be demonstrated, there is one way to do this by Induction, another by
Syllogism, or by that which seems to be a Syllogism. For Example is Induction,
and an Enthymeme a Syllogism: Now I call an Enthymeme a Rhetorical Syllogism,
and Example a Rhetorical Induction; since all Men prove by Demonstration,
producing either Examples or Enthymemes, and little else beside. So that if it
be absolutely necessary that he who makes use of a Syllogism or Induction, must
demonstrate some thing, or some Person; which is manifest from our discourse of
Analitics, by the same necessity must both those be like to both these. Now
what is the difference between Example and an Enthymeme is manifest from the
Topics. For there we have formerly spoken of Syllogism and Induction. Since if
by many and like Arguments we show the thing to be so, in the first there is
Induction, in the latter Example. But where some things being granted, there
are some things else that for their sakes happen to be not granted, in regard
such things are either altogether or for the most part, the one is called a
Syllogism, the other an Enthymeme, and it is apparent that both are to be
commended in Rhetoric. For what has been said in the discourse of Method, holds
good in these things; for as some sorts of Rhetoric are exemplary, others
Enthymematical; so some Orators move by Examples, others by Enthymemes.
Therefore Orations consisting of Examples are no less persuasive then others;
but Enthymematical Orations more distract the judgment then the former. But we
shall enquire afterward into the causes of either, and how to make use of
both; at present let us examine these very things a little more plainly and
distinctly. Seeing then that Persuasion is persuasive to some Body; and this is
immediately persuasive of it self, the other because it seems to be
demonstrated by such Arguments; seeing also that no art inspects into
Singulars; as Physic does not consider what is wholesome for Socrates, or
Callias, but what is for every one, which is the true design of Art; seeing
moreover that Singulars are infinite, and not to be comprehended by knowledge;
so neither is Rhetoric to consider what will convince every particular person,
as Socrates, or Hippias, but what will convince the Generality, as Logic also
does. For Logic also makes use of Syllogism, not from whatever they see (for
some things appear to Madmen;) but Logic raises her Syllogism from such things
as stand in need of reason; Rhetoric argues upon those things that fall under
Consultation. For it is the duty of Rhetoric to discourse of such things about
which we consult, and have no Art to direct us, and among such Auditors that
cannot see through multitude of things, nor discourse of things remote; but we
discourse of things that seem possible to be brought about one way or another.
For as to such things which it is impossible they should be otherwise, either
at present or for the Future, no Man consults, at least upon such a
Supposition, in regard there can be no consultation concerning things that can
not be otherwise. But we reason and draw our Collections either from what has
been Collected by Syllogisms before, or from things confused that want the
contraction of Syllogism, because they do not seem to be probable. Of which
some are of that sort as not easily to be understood by reason of their
Prolixity, let the Judge be never so candid; and other things not convincing, as
neither being taken for granted, nor looked upon as probable. Wherefore there
is a necessity to make use as well of Enthymeme, as Example, to prove things to
be so, which may be otherwise; Example requiring Induction, and Enthymeme
Syllogism, and that from but a few or fewer things, then the first Syllogism
consists of. For if there be any thing there which is perspicuous, it is not to
be mentioned; for the Auditor supplies that himself. As when a Lacedaemonian
has been victor in such a game wherein he won the garland, it suffices to say,
he was a Victor at the Olympic Games; but to say that he was crowned because he
won the Prize at the Olimpic Games is superfluous, there being no Man who is
ignorant of the Victors being Crowned. But because there are few necessary
things from whence Rhetorical Syllogisms are drawn, in regard that many things
which fall under judgment and deliberation happen to be otherwise, since Men
consult and deliberate about what they have to do, not of necessity, but by
choice; therefore common Accidents are collected from common Examples;
necessary things are proved and persuaded by necessary Consequences. Whence it
is apparent, that of those things from whence Enthymemes are drawn, some are
necessary, others such as are so for the most part: For Enthymemes are deduced
from Probables and Signs: So that of necessity, both of these must be the same
to the other. That being probable that for the most part and most usually
happensto be; not simply, as some would have it to be; but as being that, which
in those things that may be otherwise, has the same relation to Probable, as
universal to particular. Of Signs there are some that have the same Relation
one to another, as singular to Universal; others, as something Universal to
Particular. Of these some are necessary, which are called (...); but such, as
not necessary, have no name according to this Distinction. I call those
necessary, out of which a Syllogism is Composed; which is therefore called an
Argument. For when they believe there can be no contradiction of the thing
Propounded, then they think they have brought a (...), or Sign that the thing
is Demonstrated, Limited, and Determined. For Tekmar, and Term or Limit signify
both the same thing in the ancient Language. Now because of these same Signs,
some hold one to another as the singular to the Universal, as if we should say
it is a sign that wise Men are just, because that Socrates being a wise Man was
just. This is a Sign; but such a one as does not always hold good, tho` what
was said were Truth, for it cannot be Syllogistically concluded without a
Contradiction. But this necessarily follows, such a one is Sick because he has
a Fever. Such a one has had a Child, because she has Milk. Which is the only
Argument by Signs, when the Sign alone is so true that it cannot be
contradicted. The other sort of Signs have the same relation one to another as
the whole to the part. As if a Man should say, it is a sign he has a Fever; for
he breathes short, and yet this may be contradicted, though it were true when so
said. For it happens that many who are not troubled with Fevers, breath short.
And thus far what is probable, what a sign, what an argumentative or conclusive
sign, and how they differ one from another. We have also shown that Example is
Induction, and wherein Induction consists. But Induction is neither as the
whole to the part, nor the part to the whole, nor as the whole to the whole;
but as the Part to the Part, and as the like to its like, as being both subject
to the same Genus, though the one is more perspicuous then the other. As for
example, Dionysius affected a Tyrannical Government, because he required a
Guard. For Pisistratus, who affected the same before him, demanded a Guard, and
when it was granted him he became a Tyrant. In like manner Timagenes of Megara;
and whoever were known to have acted in that manner are examples to prove the
Intention of Dionysius, while the thing was in Consultation whether to allow
him a guard or no, and before they knew the reason why he demanded it. All
which Examples fall under the same general Whole, that he who affects
Tyrannical Government, first demands a Guard. And thus much to show from whence
seeming Demonstrative Proofs may be drawn.

But there is a great difference between Enthymemes, and besides there are very
few that understand the method of Syllogisms in Logic. For some are
appropriated to the method of Rhetoric, as others to that of Logic; some appear
in other Arts which are extant, others ^eserv'd for other Arts not invented.
Wherefore they lie hid from the Auditors, and they that meddle with 'em more
then is fitting, wander from themselves. All which a further Explanation will
make more manifest. I say therefore that Logical and Rhetorical Syllogisms are
such, to which we ascribe their common places. These are such as are commonly
reduced under the Heads of Justice, Philosophy, Politics, and many other things
specifically* different, as the Topics greater and lesser; nor is there any
restriction from arguing more upon one then another Subject or Topic, be it
what it will, or never so specifically different, and these are general Topics.

Particular Topics are such as belong to every Genus and Species of
Proposition: as for Example, those are Topics or Propositions belonging to
natural Philosophy, from whence no Enthymeme or Syllogism can be drawn that has
any relation to Ethics, and others are Propositions proper to Ethics, that have
no relation to natural Philosophy; and so in all other arts and Sciences
whatever. But these things will not give a Man to understand any one Genus, as
not being fixed to any Subject. But he that can with most Judgment select these
Propositions, e're he is aware shall frame a Science distinct from Logic and
Rhetoric. For if he happen upon Principles, it is neither Logic nor Rhetoric;
but that Science whose Principles it contains. But most Enthymemes are drawn
from those Forms, which are particular and proper; fewer from those which are
common. And therefore the Genus's of Enthymemes are to be distinguished, as are
also the places from whence they are taken. I call Forms the Propositions
proper to every Genus. Places, such as are alike common to all. Now then
concerning Forms. But first let us take along with us the Genus's of Rhetoric,
that when we have distinguished how many they are, we may discourse apart of
their Principles and Propositions.

CHAP. III.
Of the three kinds of Causes, and their Ends.

THE forms of Rhetoric are in number three; for so many sorts of Auditors there
are that hear Orations. The Oration it self also consists of three things, the
person that speaks, the matter discoursed of, and the Person to whom the
address is made, in whom, that is to say the Auditor, the end is included; for
the Auditor is either a Spectator or a Judge, the Judge is either a Judge of
things past or to come. The Judge of future things is the Senator; the Judge of
things past, is the determiner of Causes, the Judge of the force of the Oration
is the Spectator. So that of necessity there must be three kinds of Rhetorical
Ratiocinations or Discourses, Deliberative, or appertaining to the
Council Board, to the Bar, or Judicial, and Demonstrative. As to that which
concerns the Council Board, the one part of it is persuasive, the other
diswasive. For always they who privately debate, or publicly harangue, intend
one of these two things. Of the Judicial one part is the accusation, the other
is the Defense. For they that are in Controversy must do one of these two
things, either complain or defend. Of the Demonstrative, the one part is
Praise, the other Disgrace. Seasons also are accommodated to every one of
these. To the Privy-Counsellor the future, for he consults about what is to
come, either to procure or prevent. To the Judge of Controversies the time past;
for all suits relate to what has been done. To the Demonstrative, the present
time is most properly allowed; for they approve or dislike, as the Instant of
Delivery. But they make use of things past and future to the same purpose,
calling to mind things past, well or ill alleged, and conjecturing of future
things whether well or ill judged by the Orator.

But in every one of these there is a different End. The end of the Counselor
is either good or bad; for he that persuades, persuades for the best; he that
diswades, diswades from the worst: to which he adds just and unjust, bravery,
and ignominy.

The Judges of Controversies propose also Justice or Injustice; but they that
praise or dislike, chiefly look upon honor or disgrace; including also those
other Ends of Good and Bad, Just and unjust.

And the sign that these are the Ends that every one of the three propose, is
this; for that they never call the rest in question. As for Example, he that is
sued at Law, will allege that he never did the thing, or that he did no harm
in doing it; but will never confess that he did unjustly; otherwise there would
be no need of Determination. In like manner they who consult for the public,
grant all the rest; but that they advise what is hurtful, and dehort from what
is for the common good, they will never admit. But whether it is just to
enslave their Neighbors, and such as do them no Injury, they never consider.
In the same manner they who praise or disproove, never mind whether the Person
has acted for the public good or not; but more often applaud him, because he
never minded his own Interest, that he might act like a good Commonwealths
Man. For they commend Achilles, because he undertook to assist his Friend
Patroclus, though he were certain to dye himself, and that his friend should
live. For to him such a death was more honorable; Life only beneficial.

From what has been said, it appears therefore necessary to be furnished with
Propositions in the first place concerning these things. For argumentative
Marks, and Probabilities, and Signs are Rhetorical Propositions: Seeing that
every Syllogism consists of Propositions, and every Enthymeme is a Syllogism
consisting of the foresaid Propositions. But because it is impossible for
Impossibilities to be acted, or that they will be acted hereafter, but only
things that are possible, or that those things that never were, nor ever will
be, should now be done, or ever can be done, it is necessary as well for the
Consulter and the Judge, as for him that goes about to demonstrate, to be
fur^ish'd with Propositions of Possibility and Impossibility, whether itwere or
were not, whether it will be or no. Moreover, seeing that all People who either
approve or dislike, persuade or diswade, sue or defend, endeavor to show not
only what has been already said, as what is useful, what is hurtful, what is
honest, what disgraceful, what just; what unjust; but whether the thing be of
great or small moment, either considering useful and hurtful, honest and
dishonest, just and unjust in themselves, or by comparing one with another; it
is manifest, that they must be furnished with Propositions of great and little,
more and less, with respect to Particulars as well as Universals; as what is
more, what less profitable, which the greater, which the lesser Injury or
Injustice, and so of other things: And thus much as to those things of which
Propositions must be made. Now we must distinguish every one of them apart; and
first to which Deliberation, next to which Demonstration* lastly to which
Judgments belong.

CHAP. IV.
Of what things Men usually Deliberate?

FIRST then we are to consider about what things good or hurtful the Politician
consults for that he does not deliberate upon all things, but upon what may be,
or may not be done, in regard it is in vain to deliberate upon things that are
or will be of necessity, or such as it is impossible that they ever will be.
Nor yet upon all Accidents neither. For there are some good things which
proceeding from Nature and Fortune, happen sometimes to be, sometimes not to
be; upon which it is not worth while to Deliberate. But we are to consult of
those things that may be referred to us, whose Original and Cause is within our
selves. For we deliberate till we have found whether the things may or may not
be done by us. Nevertheless it is not our present Business to enumerate every
particular, nor to digest the several subjects of Deliberation into their
several Species's and Forms, nor to enquire what may be determined concerning
'em according to Truth. For that belongs not to Rhetoric, but to a more prudent
and certain Art; though much more then what falls properly under her
Consideration, is now adays allowed her. For what we have already affirmed is
true; that Rhetoric is composed of the Analytic Science, and that part of
Politic's which relates to manners, and partly resembles Logic, partly
sophistical Oration.

However if any one go about to teach either This or Logic, not as Faculties,
but as Sciences, he secretly subverts their Nature, while he dilates them into
Sciences of certain Subject Matters, and does not confine them to Oration alone.

But now let us therefore show what things more properly fall under Political
Consideration, and are more proper to be explained.

The chiefest things then of which all Men consult, and argue upon in
Deliberation are five in number; of Wealth, of War, of Peace, of the
Preservation of the Country, and of what things are exported and imported, and
of the making and observance of Laws.

He that consults about the raising of Treasure, ought to understand the
Revenues of the Country, and whence they arise, that if there be any
deficiency, it may be supplie^* and if it be too small, that it may be
augmented; also that all unnecessary Expenses of the City may be cut off; and
all profuseness moderated. For not only addition of Treasure, but frugality in
Expenses, increase Wealth. And this not only appears from our experience of
private affairs; but there is a necessity for him that wouldspeak to thepurpose
concerning these things, to know the Observations of others.

He that consults concerning War and Peace, must understand the Forces of the
City, what they are at present, and how powerful they may be; what sort of
Strength there is at present, and what sort of additional Force is to be
provided: also what Wars, and in what manner the People have carried on their
Wars before. Nor is he only to understand the Concerns of his own Country, as
to these Particulars, but to be well informed of the State and Condition of his
Neighbors, especially of those with whom his Country may have an occasion to
enter into a War: and what is the equality, or inequality of Force on both
sides, that he may make a Peace with the stronger; and be at his own Liberty,
whether or no to make a War with the weaker: and then again which is the most
wealthy Commonweal of the two; for in that also we may be either Superior or
Inferior.

Moreover he ought not to be ignorant how the Country may be best preserved and
defended, nor of the number or quality of the Soldiers, fit to be kept on Foot;
nor of places proper for Garrisons; which it is impossible to do, without an
exact knowledge of the Country; that if the Garrisons are too weak, they may
re-inforc'd; if superfluous, they may be dismantled, and Garrisons placed in
more proper places. Also what Expense is necessary to supply the City with
Provision, what the Country will afford, and what must be supplied from abroad.
What commodities are fit to be imported, what exported, that Leagues may be
considered accordingly. There being a necessity for a Commonweal to keep fair
with two sorts of People, with those that are superior in Strength, and
benefical to it in Commerce.

But as the knowledge of these things very much conduces to the Preservation of
a Commonweal, there is one thing no less beneficial, which is the skill of
making Laws. Wherefore it is necessary to understand how many sorts of
Governments there are, what Constitutions are most profitable, and by what
Adversities or Prosperities they may be upheld or destroyed; for the safety of
a City consists in the observance of the Laws. I say, destroyed by Prosperity;
for that unless it be an absolute constitution of Government indeed, all others
are dissolved or depraved by rigorous Severity or Remissness.

As Democracy is not only weakened by Remissness; but also when it is too
rigorously severe; so that at last it falls under the Power of a few. Like
Noses that being moderately flat, or Hawk-Beak'd, look well enough; but when
too much bent or Arched, or flatted to the Face, can hardly be discerned to be
Noses. Therefore it mainly conduces to the making of good Laws, as well to
gather from the benefit of former Constitutions, how the Commonweal thrived at
that time, as to understand the condition of other Common-weals, and what is
most agreeable to the conditions of the People: whence it is apparent that a
good Lawmakers ought to be a great Traveller, there being nothing so necessary
for him as to understand the Constitutions of other Nations* and to enable him
for public Council, to be exact in the knowledge of History. But these things
belong to Politics, and not to Rhetoric. Thus much therefore concerning those
things which a good Counselor ought chiefly to deliberate upon. Now let us see
upon what he ought to employ his g ifts of Persuasion or Disswasion.

CHAP. V.
Of the Felicity and End of Deliberations.

FOR the most part there is a certain end which every Man in particular, and
all Men in General aiming at, either choose or reject. And that end in a word
is Happiness, and those things that belong to it. Wherefore for examples sake,
let us explain what this Felicity is, and what are the parts of it. For all
persuasions and diversions have an Eye upon this, and those things that attend
it, and their contraries. For those things that procure this, or any of its
parts, or being less; render it greater, are to be observed and done; but
whatever deprave or hinder it, or procure its Contraries, is uttterly to be
rejected.

Therefore let Felieity be a prosperous acting with Virtue; or contentedness of
Life; or a most pleasant Living in security, or a sound constitution of Estate
and Body, with a powerful faculty to preserve and cause these things. For of
these Enjoyments, either one or more, all Men confess to be felicity. If this
then be Felicity; the parts of it must be Nobility of Extraction, Multiplicity
of Friends, and those good Men; Wealth, numerous and hopeful Offspring, and
long Life. And then for Bodily perfections; Health, Beauty, Strength, Luster,
Proportion, Glory, Honor, Success, Agility in Combat, Success and Victory,
Virtue, and its parts; as Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice; for surely
he must be contented with his Lot, who is the person possessed of all these
Enjoyments, both External and Internal; for besides these, there are no other
of Moment. Internal are the Blessings belonging to the Mind; and those within
the Body. External, Nobility, Friends, Wealth, and Honor; we also think it
convenient to add Strength and Success: for thereby our Life is secured. Let us
then consider what every one of these is. Nobility therefore is to be a Native
of the same City or Country, of most ancient descent, numbering a long Progeny
of famous Captains, and Persons Illustrious, for such worthy actions as all Men
emulate. In private persons. Private Nobility is either by the Man or Woman's
side, and a Legitimacy from both; as in Cities and Kingdoms there is a
Superiority in Virtue, Wealth, or any other Ornaments honored among Men,
together with a race of Men, and Women, old and young, conspicuous for their
Virtue, so in private Nobility. As for a virtuous and numerous Offspring it is
plain what it is. Commonly it is taken for a numerous company of young
Children, and virtuously inclined. The virtues of the Body are Proportion,
Beauty, Strength and activity. The Beauties of the Mind in Youth are Temperance
and Fortitude. In private Families that is said to be a numerous and virtuous
Issue, where the Children are many, and lawfully begotten both Male and Female.
The virtue of Wives as to the Body, is Beauty and goodly shape; as to to the
Mind, Sobriety, and Sedulity, without avarice. And as well in private as public
Famlies both in Men and Women, every one of these Virtues are required to be;
for wherever these Virtues are wanting, as among the Lacedaemonians, the men
hardly enjoy the half of Happiness.

The parts of Wealth are many, Lands, Manors, rich Furniture, store of Cattle,
and a numerous retinue of strong, healthy, and handsome Slaves. All which
things ought to be secure, free, and useful. Useful implies Profitable, Free
implies Pleasure and Enjoyment. Profitable I call those things that yield a
Revenue. The Definition of Secure is to possess in such a place, and such a
manner, that the use of what he enjoys, or the Power to alienate or keep, the
Properties are still in himself. I call Alienation giving or selling; so that
to be rich, consists rather in Enjoyment and use then Possession. For the use
and performance of such things are properly to be called Wealth.

Reputation is when a person is by all Men esteemed a person of Virtue; or is
accounted to be endowed with that which all or most Men of Integrity and Wisdom
value.

Honor is the Sign of a high Opinion of a man's Liberality, and therefore they
are justly and most deservedly honored, who are most liberal and bountiful. He
is also honored who is able to do kindnesses. Now Beneficence is that,
whatever it be, which is the cause of either our safety, and that we are, or of
our attaining Riches, or some other Benefit, which we cannot eithor altogether,
or in such a place, or at such a time readily and easily attain to. For several
attain to honor, which they never merited, but the manner and the
opportunities are the Cause. Now the parts of Honor are Sacrifices, Eulogies
in Prose and Verse, Crowns, Temples, Possessions, Monuments, Statues, and
public Salaries. Among the Barbarians, Cringing Adoration, giving place, and
Presents which are universally valued. For a gift is the giving of Possession,
and a mark of honor. And therefore while they who are covetous of Money, and
ambitious of Honor, eagerly desire the one and the other, they both by that
means attain their desires. For the Covetous gain the Possession of what they
desire, and the ambitious attain to Honor.

The virtue of the Body is health, whereby we have the use of our Limbs free
from all Diseases and Distempers. For no man will believe them to be happy that
only enjoy the Health of Herodicus. For he, for the Preservation of his Health,
was forced to abstain from all or most of those things, which other Men make
use of.

Beauty varies according to Age. For he is a beautiful young Man, who has a
Body able to endure racing and violent Labor, having a pleasant aspect with
all. Therefore they that exercised the five Games were most beautiful, as being
born to Strength and Swiftness. A handsome Man is he, who being able to endure
the toils of War, appears with an Aspect pleasing, but yet stern and awful. A
comely old Man is such a one as having a Body strong enough to undergo
necessary Labor, lives altogether free from the Pains and Diseases of old Age.

Strength is that whereby a Man is able to move what he desires to move as he
lists himself. Now we move a Body either by drawing to us, or thrusting from
us, by lifting up, or easting down, or by crushing and squeezing together; So
that a strong Man has Strength to do all these things, or many of 'em.

The virtue of Magnitude is to excel in length, depth and breadth, so that the
motion of the Body be no way hindered by its Bulk.

The wrestling or contending virtue of the Body consists in Bulk, Strength, and
Agility, or Swiftness* for a swift Man is a strong Man; for he that can move
his Legs swiftest and farthest is a Runner. Who can grapple and hold fastest, a
Wrestler. Who can keep off from his Person by striking, a Boxer. Who can do
both, a Pancratiast or general Wrestler; who excels in all, a Pentathlian, or a
Man for all the five Exercises of Cuffing, Leaping, Running, Hurling the Bowl,
and Wrestling.

A happy old Age is that which comes late, and brings no Pains or distempers
with it. For he who sooner or later grows old, if he be tormented with Aches
and Distempers, leads an uneasy Life.

Now there are some which are virtues both of the Body, and of Fortune; for he
that is of a sickly Constitution, and not Strong, shall not be free from Pain;
or though he be, he shall not be long lived; nor can he last without Fortune; for
there is another way to live long without Strength and Health, seeing that many
live long without the Virtues of the Body.

But a farther Examination of these things is needless at present. Now what is
multiplicity of honest and virtuous Friends, shall be shown in the definition
of a Friend. A Friend is therefore he, who does for his friends sake whatever
he thinks will be for the advantage and profit of his Friend. He then who has
many such friends is the Friend of many, and if they be persons of Integrity,
he has many good and virtuous Friends.

Prosperity is that, when all, or most or the chiefest part of these Blessings,
of which Fortune it self is the cause, flow into a Man, and make him happy. Now
Fortune is the cause of many things artificial, and of many things without Art,
which though they proceed from Nature are Preternatural; as the air is the cause
of Health; nature the cause of Beauty and Stature. And those Benefits that
altogether proceed from Fortune, which are still the Subject of other Men's Envy.

Fortune is also the cause of those Benefits, for which no reason can be given;
as when all the rest of the Brothers are deformed, and one alone proves to be
Beautiful; or when all the rest of the Brothers oversaw the Treasure, and one
had the luck to find it out. Or when the next Person happens to be struck
through with an Arrow, and the other escapes. Or when only one Person came not
to a place, who was never wont to fail, and all the rest that came who never
used to come, came only that time, and happened to be all killed. For all these
things seem to be the act of Fortune. As for the Virtue of ohe Mind, because it
is a Topic most proper for the discourse of Applause and Commendation, we shall
refer it to Demonstration.

CHAP. VI.
Of Profitable and Good.

WHAT we ought to aim at in persuading, whether in reference to things present
or to come, or in dissuading, we have already made manifest. For they that
dissuade, dissawade the contrary. Now in regard that Profitable is the scope of
him that advises, and they that advise, consult not about the End, but those
things which relate to the End; and for that these things are profitable in the
Effects, if rightly acted, and profitable is good, we are to consider the
Element of good and profitable simply. Good is therefore that which is to be
desired for its own sake, and that for whose sake we desire something else; and
which all things or Creatures desire, if they have Sense and Understanding, or
would desire if they had; and whatever the Understanding dilates to every one,
and what the understanding Dictates concerning each Particular, good to every
Man, that is good to all in general. Which being present, the Mind is at rest,
and contented in it self. Which is sufficient for it self; and which is the
cause and Preserver of these things, and upon which those things attend that
prevent and destroy the Contraries to it. Now those things attend upon it two
ways, either at the same time or afterward; as Knowledge attends Instruction,
but afterward; but Life and Health go both together. The Efficient causes
attend three manner of ways, sometimes as soundness of Body attends upon
Health; sometimes as Diet, attends Health; sometimes as Exercise attends it,
for it generally procures Health. These things thus laid down, there is a
necessity that the Election of things good, and the rejecting of what is
hurtful, should be good. On the one side it follows that we are not pestered
with what is hurtful at the same time; on the other, that we obtain the good
afterward, and instead of the lesser good we choose the greater, and in lieu
of the greater Evil, we choose the less. For the same reason that the greater
exceeds the less, therefore we choose the one, and avoid the other.

And of necessity all Virtues must be good, it being always well with those
that are endu'd with 'em. Besides that they are the efficient and active causes
of Good; but to say what and of what nature they are, requires a distinct
discourse of each.

Pleasure also is most certainly a Good; since all Creatures naturally covet
it: wherefore it is necessary also that delectable and honest should be good.
For Honest is the effective cause of Pleasure. And honest things are partly
delightful, and partly chosen for their own Sakes.

But that we may discourse of each particularly; of necessity these must be
good things.

First Felicity, because it is desired for its own sake, sufficient, and that
for whose sake we desire many other things; as Justice, Fortitude, Modesty,
Magnanimity, Magnificence, and all the rest of the Virtues of the Mind,
together with Health, Beauty, and the like. For these are the Virtues of the
Body, and the effective causes of many things; as Health is the cause of Life
and Pleasure. And therefore some account it the best of good things, as being
the cause of those two things which are the chiefest of good things, Life and
Pleasure.

Then Riches, wherein consists the virtue of Possessing; which is the effective
cause of many other Benefits. Next, Friends and Friendship; for Friendship is
desirable for its own sake, and is the effective cause of many good things.
Honor also and Fame. For they are delightful and produce many good things, and
generally show that they contain those things within themselves, for which they
are admired. Next the faculty of speaking and acting. For they are also the
effective causes of good things. Likewise Wit, Memory, aptness to learn,
excellency of Mind and Thought with all other things of the same Nature. For
all these are faculties productive of good things. In the same List we may
number the Arts and Sciences, and Life it self. From whence though no other
good should flow, yet it is desirable for its own sake. Just is also in the
same Roll, because it conduces to the public advantage, These are the chiefest
part of those things which all Men account good things.

As to those things that are called in question, Arguments are thus framed to
prove them good. That to which evil is contrary, is good, and the contrary of
that which is serviceable to our Enemies; as if to be Cowards is a kindness to
our Enemies, it is manifest that Fortitude is a great good to our selves and
our Country. And in a word, what our Enemies desire and rejoice at, the
contrary to that must be advantageous to us: Therefore it was well said of the
Poet.

Sure Priam will rejoice. However these are not always, but for the most part
good things, since it may happen that sometimes the same things may be of
advantage as well to our Adversaries as to us. Whence it is said that Misery
reconciles Men, when the same thing is pernicious to both. Also the Mean
between both is good. For that which is greater then it ought to be is bad, and
that for whose sake Men have endured many hard labors, and wasted much
Treasure; for now it is a seeming Good, and as such, is looked upon as the end,
and the end of many things; but the end is good. Whence that of Homer.

-- But Fame.
Indeed was only Priam's aim.
And that other of the same Poet.
-- But Delay
Will shame us, if we longer stay.
With which the Proverb agrees, There lies a Snake at the door. Moreover what
many Men covet and contend for is good; for many are looked upon as the
generality, and what they commend is fit to be commended. For there is no Man
will applaud that which is not good. As also what our Enemies and wicked Men
approve; for indeed we may say that all men confess, if the bad confess the
same. For because it is undeniable, therefore it is confessed on all hands; as
that they are bad whom our Friends discommend, and that they are good of whom
our Enemies speak no ill. And therefore the Corinthians thought themselves
affronted by Simonides for saying, However Ilium does not Corinth blame.

Also the good opinion of wise and good Men or Women. Thus Minerva preferred
Ulysses; Theseus, Helena; Alexander was preferred by the Goddesses, and
Achilles by Homer. And in general, whatever things are desirable before others.
Now Men choose to act not only those things which have been already spoken of,
but to serve their Friends, and mischief their Enemies, and by such means asare
possible. Now Possibilities are twofold, such as may be done, and such as may
be easily done. Facil things are such as may be done either without Pain, or in
a short time For facility is terminated either by Pain, or length of time or if
they be done according to their Wish; but Men wish either for no Evil at all,
or for much le^s then the Good, which may come to pass, it either they can hide
themselves from the Punishment, or procure it to be small. Also what a Man
wishes of his own Election, not made choice of by any Man else, but beyond the
common road. Hence the more honor. And what are agreeable to their Genius;
such are those things which are most suitable to their Fortunes, or their
Strength, and what Men believe they are defective in, tho little things; for
they choose to act in those things to gain or recover Credit. And what may be
performed by any one. All these things may be done, as being easy. And another
may do those things, which all or many, like, or les^er have well done before.
And what will make us acceptable to our Friends, and odious to our Enemies. And
what every one admires, they chu^^ to act. And those things wherein Men are
ingenious and expert; for such things they believe they shall more easily
accomplish: and such things as they desire; for then the Pains is a Pleasure.
And which the wicked refuse to undertake; for such acts are so much the more
Praiseworthy. And such things upon which Men have most singularly placed their
affections: As the Wa^rior upon Victory, the Ambitious upon Ho^o^^, the
covetous Person upon Money, and so of the rest. And thus much concerning good
and profitable.

CHAP. VII.
Of the greater and lesser.

NOW because they who grant both to be profitable, cannot agree upon which is
most profitable, therefore we must say something of the greater good, and of
that which is most Profitable. That which exceeds is therefore that which is so
much and more. The excess, that which is within it, and always greater, and
more in respect of the less; but great or less, many or fewer, in the respect
of the Magnitude of many. And the excess is called great, the defect little,
and so of many and few Since therefore we call Good that which is desirable for
its own, and not for the sake of another; of which all the parts are coveted;
and which every Creature that has Sense and Understanding would covet, and that
which is the efficient and Preservative cause of all; and upon which all things
of that nature depend, of which the why and the wherefore is the end, and the
end is for whose sake all the rest; and this is good for this or that, which is
most appropriated to it; of necessity the more must be the greater good then
one, or the lesser, according to the number of the one and the lesser: because
it exceeds, and what is contained within is exceeded. For if the greatest be
exceeded by the greatest, those also must be exceeded by themselves; and if the
Kinds are thus exceeded by the Kinds, the biggest by the biggest; as if the
biggest Men are bigger then the biggest Women, Men are absolutely bigger then
Women; and if Men are absolutely bigger then Women, the biggest Man is bigger
then the biggest Women. For the excess of the Kinds, and of those things that
are contained in the Kinds, hold the same proportion one with another. The same
may be said when this follows from that, but that does not follow from this.
Now that which follows, follows either together or afterward, or potentially.
For the use of that which follows is in the other. Now it follows together if a
Man be in health, that he lives; but it does not follow that he is in health
because he lives. But Knowledge follows the being taught afterward. Potentially
it follows, that if a Man be a Sacrilegious Person, that he may rob a Temple,
seeing a Sacrilegious Person will rob. And they are greater that exceed the
same thing in greatness; for of necessity the greater must be exceeded. The
Effective causes also of the greater good are greater; for by that means the
Efficient cause became greater, and in the same manner the effects of the
greater cause must be greater. For if wholesome be more to be desired, and a
greater Good then Pleasant, Health is greater then Pleasure, and that which is
more desirable inits self then that which is not more to be desired in its
self; as Strength, then Health. For that is desirable for its own, this not for
its own sake* which is the true condition of good. Also if this be the End,
that not the End; this is m^re to be desired than that; for this is desired for
that, and that for its own sake; as that the Body may be kept in Exercise, and
by Exercise in Health: And the less defective then the other, or the others is
most desirable, as being more sufficient. Now the lesser is defective in
wanting fewer or more easy; or when this cannot be accomplished, or be without
that; but that may be accomplished without this. For that which is not
defective is most sufficient in it self, and therefore it is apparently the
greater good. Also if one be a Principle, the other not; if one thing be the
cause, the other not. For without the Cause or the Principle nothing can be, or
be done. Now where there are two Principles, that which proceeds from the
greater Principle is the greater. Where there are two causes, the Product of
the greater cause is the greater. So that either way the thing must be greater
whether one be a Principle, the other not; or whether proceeding from the
greater of two Principles. For the end is greater and not the Principle. As
Leodamus said, when he accused Callistratus. He who advised was more in fault
then he who acted. For had not the thing been advised, it had never been put in
Execution. But Chabrias argued that he who acted was more to blame then he who
advised; because the thing had not been put in Execution, had it not been
advised; for Action is the end of Consultation. Moreover that which is more
scarce is more desirable then that which more Plentiful, as Gold then Iron.
For Iron is less profitable. Therefore the possession of Gold is greater,
because it is more scarce to be found. But in another Sense, that which most
abounds is the greater, because we make more use of it. At other times that
which is scarce, is exceeded by that which is Plentiful, and therefore we say
the best Water. Briefly, difficult things are exceeded by those things that are
more easy, because they are more scarce; but in another Sense easy things
exceed difficult, because we can obtain 'em when we please.

Alsowhere the contrary exceeds; as likewise where the Privation exceeds. Also
where the Virtues and Vices of Men are greater; there their Actions are more
eminent and greater. For such as the Causes and Principles, such are the
Effects; and such as are the Effects. such the Principles and Causes. Also
where the excess is (...) we desirable, or more beautiful; as a quick Sight is
better then a quick Smell: Sight being more desirable than Smelling; also it
is much nobler to covet Friends then Money; wherefore love of Friends is better
then love of Money. The excesses of the best things are best, and more virtuous
the Excesses in Virtue: and of which our desires are more honest and generous.
Such things also of which the Knowledge is more honest and ingenious: As also
the things themselves, which are more honest and Lawful. For as it is with
Knowledge, so it is with Truth; for every Science teaches those things that
belong to it; and therefore the Sciences and the things taught, hold the same
Proportion. Also what all, or many, or most Men of Prudence and Learning have
deemed and decreed to be the greatest good, that either ought simply so to be,
or so far as they have in their Prudence adjudg'd it. But that is common to
other things. For the what, and how much, and the what sort are to be looked
upon as Knowledge and Understanding have decreed. But we have numbered Prudence
however among good things, as having defined Prudence to be that which all Men
would desire if they had Prudence. And therefore that must be greater which
Prudence so adjudges.

Also what is contained in the better things, either as they are simply so, or
as they are better; as Fortitude is better then Strength of Body. Also what a
person of more worth would choose, as rather to suffer then do an Injury; which
a more just Man would choose to do. And what is more pleasing and delightful
then what is less. For all follow Pleasure, and covet it for delights sake. But
the good and end of Pleasure is bounded within Limits. For that which is more
delightful is as well that which is less irksome, as that which is more durably
delightful* and more honest, or less honest. For honest is either delightful or
to be desired for its self. And what Men most desire to be the Authors of
either to themselves or Friends, those are the greater benefits; what they
least desire, the lesser Kindnesses: and the more lasting then the less
durable, and the more solid, then the less firm. For the use exceeds of the one
in time, of the other in the Will; For where the will is, there the use of a
thing constant prevails. And as when from consequences and like cases, other
consequences arise; as when that which is stoutly and honestly done, is to be
preferred before what is acted temperately; also Fortitude is to be preferred
before Temperance, and to be strong before being temperate. And what all
prefer, before what all do not prefer, and what more then a few. For good was
that which all coveted; therefore that is greater which is more desired. Also
in Lawsuits, where are Plantiffs, Judges, and Defendants. Here that prevails
which all affirm; there what the Judges Pronounce, as excelling in Power and
Knowledge. Sometimes that is greatest of which all participate; for it is a
disgrace not to participate. Sometimes those things which are most
Praiseworthy, as being most Honest. Sometimes degrees of Honor make the
Honors greater; for Honor is a kind of price or value set upon a thing. The
greater Punishments also are the greater, and such things as are greater than
the things which are apparent and granted; especially when divided into parts;
for then exuberancy of many is apparent, which was the reason that the Poet to
excite Meleag^r uses these words.

What Mischiefs most thy Subjects then bewail,
If into hostile Han is the City fall?
Slaughter and Fire their Masions will invade,
And helpless Children will be Captive led.
And then addition and aggravation, as in Epich. rmus; which is apparent,
partly by the same reason, that dividing the parts makes the thing greater; for
Aggravation plainly shows the Excess. Partly because the Original and cause of
things seems greater: and then because that is greater which is less frequent,
and more difficult. Opportunity, Age, Time, Place, and Force, make things
greater; for beyond the Strength, the Age of such an one, beyond others here,
there and then, denote excess of Beauty, Goodness, Justice, or their Opposites.
Whence the Epigram upon the Olympian Victor.

Though formerly it is true, so mean my Trade,
With heavy Dossers on my Shoulders laid,
From Argos to Tegea still I trudged,
To sell my Fish, till Victor here adjudg'd.
And Iphicrates gave himself this Encomium, from whence all these. Moreover,
Genuine than acquired: wherefore said the Poet, Schooled only by my self, these
Songs I sing.

Also the greater part of a great thing. As Pericles speaks in an Epitaph, that
Youth being taken from a City, rendered it equally deformed with a year that
had no Spring. Also such things as are desired as most useful in greater
necessity, as in old Age or Sickness; and of two things, that which approaches
nearest to the end: also that which is in it self, and simply of value. Also
possible is better then impossible; for the one is in it self, the other not;
also what is at the end of Life; for that is more the end then what is farther
often. Also what come nearer to Truth then Opinion, or Vainglory. Now the
Definition of what belongs to Opinion or Vainglory, is this, what a Man would
not choose if he thought it would be concealed. Therefore '^is better that a Man
should receive a kindness then give it; for a Man would receive a kindness not
caring whether any Body knew of it or no; but the giver would not choose to
give, if he thought it should not be known: and what would be greater then they
seem to be; for they approach nearer to Truth. Therefore they say Justice is
but a small thing, because it is better it should seem to be then be; but it is
not so with Health. Also what is Serviceable for many things, as for Living,
for well Living, to enable a Man to act honest things, and for delight. And
therefore Riches and Health seem to be the greatest things; for they are
serviceable to all these things. Also that which is less painful, and that
which brings Pleasure; for they are more then one; so that Pleasure is a good,
and absence of Pain. And of two things that which being added to the one, makes
the whole greater, and those things which being present, appear, then those
things which lie hid; for they approach nearer to Truth. And therefore to be
Rich, is a greater good then to seem Rich. And what is to be beloved by some
singly, by others with intermixture or addition of other things. And therefore
the Punishment is not equal to condemn him that has but one, and him that has
two to the loss of one Eye; for the only thing beloved is thereby taken away.
As thus much for Instruction from whence to fetch our Arguments in dissuading
or persuading.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Number and Forms of Common-weals.

BUT there is nothing that furnishes a man with a more sublime and powerful
ability, to persuade and advise with prudence and discretion, then to know all
sorts of Common-weals, the manners and constitutions of each, and to
distinguish which is most profitable. For they convince all men by uttering
what is for advantage; and it is therefore advantageous, because it preserves
the Commonweal. Moreover the sentence of the Sovereign firm and undeniable, is
Dominion. But Dominion is distinguished according to the forms of Common-weals;
for as many Common-weals as there are, so many sorts of Dominion there are. Now
there are four forts of public-weals; Democracy, Oligarchy, Aristocracy and
Monarchy. So that the supreme and determining authority, is either a part of,
or else the whole of these. Democracy is a Commonweal wherein the Magistrates
are chosen by Lots. Oligarchy, when they are chosen by their Estates;
Aristocracy when they are elected that excel in Discipline: And I call that
Discipline or Education, which is regulated by the Law. For they who are most
obedient to the Law, are the best, and govern in Aristocracy. From whence the
name. Monarchy, according to the signification of the word, is where all are
subject to one Supreme and Sovereign. And this being limited to certain
constitutions, is called a Kingdom, being unlimited, it is called Tyranny. Now
we are to understand the end of every Public-weal; for Men make choice of those
forms that relate to the end. Now the end of Democracy is Popular Liberty, of
Oligarchy, Riches* of Aristocracy and Monarchy, wholesome Laws and good
Government; of Tyranny, single Preservation. Therefore the manners,
constitutions and advantages of every one are to be distinguished; for men make
their choice with reference to these things. And because convincement is not
only that which demonstrates by oration, but by Ethical discourse, for we
believe the speaker because we take him to be an honest Man; or a man of
understanding, or both, therefore it behooves us to understand the customs of
every sort of Public-weal. For of necessity nothing can be more prevalent with
every one, then the approved constitutions of every public-weal, which are only
to be found in the Governments themselves. For manners appear by pre-election,
and pre-election is referred to the end. And thus much as to what they ought to
understand, who desire to convince by Elocution, what arguments they ought to
fetch from profit and advantage; as also from manners and customs, and with
what, and by what means we ought to abound, enough has been said for the
present, for the more exquisite discourse of these things, we refer to our
Politics.

CHAP IX.
Of Honest and Laudable, which belong to the Demonstrative kind.

NOW let us say something concerning Virtue and Vice, Honest and Dishonest. For
these are the Aims of those that praise or dispraise. But it will happen while
we discourse of these things, that we shall also explain those other Things,
which will give us the repute of being in some measure a Person of good
Manners; which is the second step to Convincement: Seeing that from thence we
may gain credit, as well to our selves and others, for being virtuous. But
because we happen to praise sometimes in jest, sometimes in earnest, not only
Man or God, but things inanimate, we are also in like manner to consider these
things.

Honest therefore is that which is desirable for its own sake.

Praise worthy, is that, which being good, is therefore delightful, because
good. Now if this be honest, of necessity Virtue is honest. For being good, it
is also Praise worthy.

Virtue is a faculty which produces and preserves good things; also a Benefic
Faculty affording many and great things, and all in all things.

The parts of it are Justice, Fortitude, Modesty, Magnificence, Magnanimity,
Liberality, Mildness, Prudence, Wisdom. Now in regard that Virtue is a faculty
to do good, of necessity they are the greatest Virtues that are most profitable
to others; therefore we chiefly admire the just and courageous. For the one is
most useful in War, the other in Peace: Next the Liberal, for they never
contend about Money which others are so covetous of, but freely bestow it
abroad for the public good.

Justice is a Virtue which distributes to every one their own as the Law
commands. Injustice is that by which men seize upon that which is not their
own, contrary to what the Law ordains.

Fortitude is that by which men perform great actions in the midst of danger,
and as the Law commands, being also Assistants and Supporters of the Law.
Cowardice the contrary.

Temperance is a Virtue, by which we make such a use of corporeal pleasure as
the Law ordains; Intemperance the contrary.

Liberality is the bountiful use of Money, to the benefit of others,
Illiberality the contrary.

Magnanimity is a Virtue that excites us to do great actions, Pusillanimity the
contrary.

Magnificence is a Virtue that consists in the sumptuousness of expense, of
which pinching and narrow-sould Parcimony are the contrary.

Prudence is a Vettue of Reason, enabling us rightly to deliberate of evil, and
those blesli^gs that pertain to happiness.

And let this suffice in general at present concerning Virtue and Vice, and the
parts of both; and for the rest, they fall under an easy consideration. For of
necessity, those things that are the causes of Virtue must be honest, as
relating to Virtue, and being produced by Virtue. Of which sort are the marks
and works of Virtue. Now because the marks, and such like, whatever they be,
which are the Acts and Sufferings of a good man; of necessity, whatever are the
Acts or Signs of Fortitude, or whatever are acted courageously, are noble and
honest. And so it is with the signs and acts of Justice; but not in the
sufferings. For in this one virtue alone, not always that which is just is
honest and laudable. For it is rather an ignominy to be condemned, if justly,
then unjustly. And so of the rest of the Virtues. And where honor is the
reward, those things are virtuous and laudable; as also where honor rather
then money. And whatsoever among those things that are desirable, which a man
acts not for his own sake. And whatsoever are simply good, and whatsoever a man
acts for his Countries sake, contemning his own Interest: And which are
naturally good, and which are good, but not to himself. For what is good to
himself he acts for his own sake. And which attend the memories of the dead
rather than the living. For where same and honor attends the living, they seem
to act rather for their own sakes. Also whatever acts are done for the sake of
praise. For these are done less for a man's own sake. Also those things that
are serviceable and prositable, not to himself, but to others, and chiefly to
Benefactors.

Thus Justice and Munificence are profitable to others. Also the contraries to
those things, of which we are ashamed, either speaking or acting, or about to
speak, or do. For Men that say, or do, or are about to commit ignominious
actions, are ashamed, as when Alcaeus said, There Is something I would tell
thee, but for shame,
That will not let me the occasion name.


To which Sappho made answer,

Speak freely on, for if a true desire
Of good and virtuous does thy thoughts inspire.
And that thy Tongue be not designed to frame
Report and calumny, beseeming shame
Will hover over thy Brows, and aw thy Pen,
To speak the truth; and I defy thee then.
Also those things about which Men fearlesly contend. For men are most affected
with those things which most conduce to glory. Also the virtues and deeds of
those who excel by nature, are most praise worthy, and the virtues of Men
rather then Women; and such as with which others are more endowed then
themselves. Wherefore just and justice are applauded; also revenge rather then
reconci^iation. For it is but just to return evil for evil, and justice is
honest. For a stout man also to be invincible for victory and honor, are
desirable: For though they bring no advantage, yet they are to be desired, and
show a conspicuous Virtue. Also Commemorations and Monuments: And the more
famous they are, the more noble. However those are more noble that attend upon
the dead, and to whom the greatest honors are attributed: Also such as are
extraordinary and belong to the Person alone; for as they are more memorable
yet unfruitful possessions, they seem more liberal: Also what things are proper
to particular persons; and the marks of such things that are praise worthy,
among those with whom we inhabit, as among the Laced^emonians to wear long
hair. For it is a mark of Liberty, for it is not for him that wears song hair,
to do any servile drudgery, it being the mark of a Freeman not to live under
another.

We are also here to take in those things that approach to Virtue, as being the
same both in respect of praise and dispraise. As wary timid and deceitful: A
fool and one good natured; a person not sensible of pain, and one mild and
gentle: And thus from the consequences according to that which is best; as to
call an hasty surious man, silly; an arrogant man magnificent and great; and
such as take the excesses of Virtue for the Virtues themselves; as if we should
call a rash man stout, or a prodigal person liberal; seeing that many so
fallaciously conclude from the causes outwardly appearing. For he that is so
ready to run into danger, when there is no occasion, will be much more, when he
finds it necessary: And if he be liberal to every body, much more to his
friends: For it is the excellency of that Virtue, for a man to be bountiful to
all men. We are also to consider from whom praise is proper. For, as Socrates
said, it is no difficult thing to praise the Athenians among the Athenians. But
we must call that honorable which is honorable every where; as among the
Scythians, the Lacedaemonians, among the Philosophers; and in a word, whatever
is honorable we may affirm to be honest. For they seem to approach near to
virtue. And whatever looks like praiseworthy, as for a man to do those things
that are worthy his Ancestors. For it is an addition to his felicity and to his
honesty, to advance his Reputation. Or if besides that which is becoming, he
act that which is best and most honest: As if a Man make a moderate use of his
Prosperity; and show himself magnanimous in adversity: Or the higher he
ascends, the more generous and affable. And such was that of Iphicrates, from
which to what* or that of the Olympic Victor, Tho formerly, it is true, so mean
my trade, etc.

And that of Simonides, Whose Father, Husband, Brothers, rare to see
All S^vereign Kings, yet ^^re the prouder she.


Now because praise arises from Actions, and for that it is the property of a
good man to act by Election; we must endeavor to show how he acts by Election;
which he may be said to have done, if he have so frequently done. Wherefore
those things which are done by chance, or fortune, are to be attributed to
counsel and judgment. For when many things and similar are joined together,
they will seem to be a mark of virtue and judement. Now seeing that praise is a
speech that sets forth the greatness of virtue, of necessity we must
demonstrate those actions to be of the same nature. For Encomiums are upon
actions: But the circulating arguments that make for convincement, are Nobility
of Birth and Education. For it is most likely that good men beget good men, and
that a person so educated will act according to his education. There we
celebrate in Encomiums those that act; which actions are the marks of the
habit. Since we should praise him that never acted, if we thought him to be
like the other. And the means whereby men become happy and fortunate, are the
same in themselves; but not the same in reference to these. But as Felicity
contains Virtue, so the making of a man happy contains Felicity. For praise and
deliberation have something common one with another, seeing, that what we
propound in advising the same things, by the alteration of the speech, beget
praise. Therefore when we know what we have to act, and what the person ought
to be: These things being said, as it were by way of advice, are to be changed
and transp^s'd in words; as when we say, a man is not to boast in the successes
of Fortune, but in what he wins through his own Virtue, which being so said,
has the force of a precept; but thus becomes an Encomium, glorying not in the
succesles of Fortune, but in the acts of his own Virtue. Therefore consider
what to praise when you advise, and what to advise when you praise. For the
speech will of necessity be opposite, when that which prohibits and that which
allows are transposed. We may also make use of many of those things, which
avail to amplify: As whether he acted alone, or the first, or with many, or
whether he were chiefest in the action; or whether he observed time and season,
or whether he did the same thing often? For that is great and shows him not
beholden to Fortune, but his own Virtue. And whether those things which
encourage us to virtue and raise us to honor, were thought on and prepared by
him; and upon whom the first Encomium was made: As it happened to Hippolychus,
Harmodius and Aristogeiton, to have their Statues set up in the Market place.
And the same thing is to be observed in the contraries. Of which, if there be
not a sufficient quantity to be found singly, compare them with others, as
Isocrates was wont to do, as being accustomed to pleading at the Bar. Which
comparisons ought to be made between the most remarkable things, as having a
power to amplify, and is most commendable, when a man appears to excel in
sincerity. Which enlargement falls deservedly upon praise. For it consists in
excellency, and excellency consists in goodness. Therefore although the comparison
be not made between things most remarkable, at least it ought to be made
between other things perhaps of lesser note, in regard the excellency denotes
the virtue. And indeed of all those forms which are common to all Orations,
Amplification is most apt to demonstrate. For they take the actions for
granted, that they may have no more to do, then to add to them, Grandeur and
Beauty. But Examples are more fit for Deliberation; for conjecturing of future
things, from things formerly transacted, we make our judgment. Enthymemes are
more fit for judicial pleadings: For the fact admits of the cause and the
demonstration, because it is obscure. And thus from whence all praises and
dispraises are produced; what we ought to look upon, when we commend or
discommend, and of what things Encomiums and dispraises consist, is apparent by
what has been said. For these things being known, their contraries as may
readily be discovered.

CHAP. X.
Of Accusation, and Defense.

IN the next place we are to speak of Accusation and Defense; of what, and of
what nature they ought to prepare their Arguments; to which purpose we are to
consider three things. Wherein, and to what end, Men do Injuries. Next how they
are affected, and thirdly what sort of People they are, and in what Condition.
When we have therefore def^n'd what it is to do an Injury, we shall proceed
with the rest. To do an Injury then, is to offer harm and violence to another,
contrary to the Law. Now the Law is either peculiar or common. I call that
peculiar, according to which being set down in Writing, Men act politically:
Common, that which though not set down in Writing, prevails among all Men. We act
spontaneously, whatever we act knowingly, and not by constraint. Yet where we
act willingly, we do not all things of choice: but where we act by choice, we
do all things willingly and knowingly; for no Man can be Ignorant of what he
makes a choice beforehand. Now the choosing to do harm, and commit evil acts,
contrary to the Law, isa Vice and Intemperance. For whoever are addicted to one
or more Vices that render 'em wicked, are also Injurious. As the Miser in
Money, the Intemperate in Pleasures of the Body, the effeminate in Sloth; the
Timorous in danger. For through Cowardice, they desert those that are in the
same Jeopardy. The Ambitious in Honor; the Hasty in Anger; the desirousof
Conquest for Victories sake; the Violent for Revenge sake; the Imprudent,
because he is deceived in what is just and good; the Impudent, through contempt
of Reputation: and so of the rest, every one according to the subject of his
Passion. But these things are and will be manifest partly from those things
that have been spoken concerning the Virtues; Partly from those things that
shall be explained concerning the Affections. It remains to declare for what
reason, and in what condition Men do Injuries, and whom they injure.

First therefore let us explain what we desire, and what we avoid, while we
endeavor to do an Injury. For the Accuser must consider how many, and which of
those things, which all Men coveting, injure their Neighbors, make up the
Composition of his Adversary: and he that defends must consider which and how
many of those things the Adversary misses; for all Men act all things partly of
themselves; partly not of them selves. Whar they do not act of themselves, they
act partly by Fortune, partly by Necessity. And of those that a^^ by Necessity,
some act by Force, some by Nature. So that all things whatsoever they do not
act of themselves, some proceed from Fortune, some from Nature, and some from
Force. But of those things which they act of themselves, and of which they
themselves are the causes; some are through Custom, others out of a desire: and
of those, some out of a rational Appetite, others out of an Irrational; but the
Will is a rational desire of Good; for no Man covets but what he believes to be
good.

The Irrational Appetites are Anger and Lust. Wherefore of necessity all things
that they act, they act for seven Causes. Fortune, Force, Nature, Custom,
Reason, Anger, Lust. Nor must we distinguish those things that are acted,
according to Ages or Habits, or any thing of that nature; for if it happen that
young Men prove Choleric and Lustful, it is not because of their Age, but
because of the Passions that reign within 'em that they act so. Nor are Riches
or Poverty the cause that rich or poor Men covet or desire. But it happens that
the Poor for want, covet Money; and that the Rich through Licentiousness covet
unnecessary Pleasures. However they are not actuated by their Riches, or their
Poverty, but by their desires. In like manner the just and unjust, and all
those that act habitually, are actuated by all these things; either by Reason
or Passion; some by honest Inclinations and Affections, some by their
contraries. However it happens, that such Consequences attend such Habits, such
and such others. For a temperate person, by reason of his Temperance, has
always good and lawful opinions and desires of Pleasure. But an intemperate
Person quite the contrary. Therefore these divisions are to be omitted, and
while we are to consider, which most usually follows which. For whether a Man
be black or white, or great or little, nothing to our purpose follows from
thence. But if a young or an old Man be just or unjust, there is then a
difference, and in a word whatever things cause a difference in the conditions
of Men: as it will make a distinction whether a Man be Rich or Poor; whether in
Prosperity or Adversity. But of these things more hereafter, now of the rest.

Those things proceed from Fortune, of which there is no determinate cause;
which are not done for such an end, nor always, nor for the most part, nor
usually. Which is manifest from the definition of Fortune. Naturally those
things are done, whose cause is in themselves, and orderly; for they happen
either always, or for the most part. For as for those things which are
preternatural, whether they proceed from some fort of Nature, or from any other
cause, it will be needless here to enquire, though Fortune should seem to be
the cause of such things. By force those things are acted which are done by the
Agents themselves, through cogitation, or desire.

Men act by custom when they do those things which they have often done before.
Those things are acted by Reason, which are done for advantage, as being of the
number of those good things already mentioned, or as the end, or conducing to
the end. For the Intemperate sometimes act many things that are useful, not for
the sake of being prositable; but to gratify their Pleasure. Anger and Choler
is the cause that many act to sati^^^ revenge; but there is a difference
between Punishment and Revenge; for Punishment is inflicted for the sake of him
that suffers. But he that acts a piece of Revenge, does it to gratify himself.
But as to those things that are done through Anger, we shall say more when we
come to speak of the Affections.

For the sake of Lust all those things are acted which appear to be pleasant,
in regard that those things which are familiar to usby use and custom, are
delightful; and many things also that are not naturally delightful, being made
familiar by Custom, are acted with delight. So that in short, all those things
which Men act of themselves, are either good or seemingly good, either pleasing
or seemingly pleasing. For I place the eschewing of Evils, or of seeming Evils,
or the choice of the greater for the less, in the number of good things* as
being in some measure desirable; and the eschewing of things painful, or
seemingly painful, or the choice of the less for the greater, among those
things which are delightful. Wherefore we are to understand how many and what
things are profitable or pleasant. But of those things that are profitable in
deliberation, already has been spoken: We are now to discourse of what is
delightful; of which the definitions will be sufficient, though they be not
altogether so exact, if they be not obscure.

CHAP. XI.
Of things delightful.

LET us therefore suppose pleasure to be a certain motion, and entirely
sensible disposition of the mind, according to the present condition of nature:
Grief the contrary. Which if it be pleasing and delightful, must be the cause
of the said affection; but whatsoever depraves or causes a contrary disposition
of the mind is painful. Therefore of necessity those things must be delightful
that proceed according to nature, especially when being acted according to
nature, they have assumed their own nature: In regard that custom is a second
nature. For most frequently approaches near to always: Nature being always,
Custom most frequently; provided it be not violent; for violence is
preternatural. Wherefore necessity is painful; for which reason it was rightly
said, Whatever must of necessity be done,
As harsh and irksome all men look upon.
Therefore cares, distraction of thoughts, and intentness of mind, are painful.
For they are of necessity, and by constraint, unless men be accustomed to 'em.
For custom begets pleasure; but the contraries of these are delightful: And
therefore Sloth, Ease, Rest, Mirth, Recreation and Sleep, are in the number of
pleasant Things, in regard they are not done by compulsion. Whatever also
allures our desires is pleasant and delightful. For desire is an eager reaching
of the appetite after pleasure. But of these desires, some are rational, some
irrational. Irrational are those which are without any consideration; such as
are natural and the appetites of the body, as hunger and thirst after
nourishment: There is also an appetite after all sorts of nourishment, as also
in tastes and venereal sports, and general in the smell, the touch, the hearing
and sight. Rational are such, as when we desire by persuasion. For we are eager
to desire and enjoy many things upon report and persuasion. But because we then
are said to enjoy pleasure, when we are affected with some sort of sense, and
for that the imagination is a sort of weak sense, and consequently a certain
imagination of the thing remembered and hoped for, attends upon him that
remembers and hopes, it is apparent that they who have strong memories and
hopes are affected with great pleasure, because they have a deep sense of what
they remember and hope for. Therefore all pleasant things of necessity consist
in the sense of things present, the remembrance of things past, or the hope of
things to come. For we are sensible of the present, remember what is past, and
hope for what is to come. Therefore those things which we preserve in our
memory are pleasant, not only those things, which at the time of enjoyment were
delightful; but also some things that were painful; if afterward they produce
any thing of profit or pleasure. According to that of the Poet, Pleasing it is,
when once from dangers free
To tell the Tales of former misery.
And that other: For Dangers escaped, and Labors undergone
To those are pleasing that renown have won.
For which reason it is, that it is a pleasing thing to be free from pain. And
then again, of those things which consist in hope, whatever seem to delight at
present, or to be very helpful, or to be helpful without trouble. Generally
tho, whatever delights at present, delights b^th those that remember, and those
that hope for the most part. Wherefore it is sometimes a pleasing thing to be
angry: According to that of Homer, concerning furious anger. Sweeter than Honey
from the fragrant Comb --
For no man is angry with those upon whom it is impossible to act his revenge;
and with those that are far their superiors in power, either they are but very
little angry, or not at all.

Also there is a certain pleasure that attends most desires: For either in
remembering what they were, or in hoping what they will be, we enjoy a certain
pleasure: As it fares with them who are thirsty in Fevers, while they remember
how they did drink, and hope to drink presently again. In like manner Lovers,
when they discourse, write, and sing, are always tickled with some pleasant
fancy concerning the thing which they love. For in all these things they
believe themselves sensibly present with the person they love, when they
remember him. And this is the beginning of love in all people, when they are
not only pleased with the presence of the person, but remember him when he is
absent. And therefore they are sad and melancholy in the absence of the thing
beloved: Insomuch that there is a kind of pleasure in weeping and mourning. The
sadness proceeds from the absence of the person beloved, but the pleasure
consists in the remembrance of the person whom they behold in imagination.
Whence that of the Poet. Thus having said, he raised in every one
A pleasing strife his sorro^s to bemoan.
It is also a pleasure to be revenged of another. Of which, if a man happen to
fail, he is troubled; if his design hit, he is overjoyed. And for Choleric men,
they are in a rage if they miss their revenge; but they are pleased with the
hopes of revenge. It is also delightful to get the better, not only to those
who are eager after victory, but to all mankind. For there is an imagination of
excellency, which all men seek after, either more or less ardently. Seeing then
it is a pleasing thing to vanquish, therefore of necessity, all sports and
exercises relating to War, Music or Disputation, of necessity must be
delightful, in regard it was a frequent thing to be victorious in those things:
as also all manner of Games, as Cards, Dice, Tennice, Tables, etc. where there
is an Emulation or desire to win: and so of Games and Exercises accounted more
serious: of which some are delightful through use and practice; others
naturally so; as all manner of Hunting. Wherefore pleading of causes and
contentious disputes, are pleasant to those that are accustomed thereto, and
know themselves to be nimble at disputation. Honor and Reputation are also in
the number of those things which are most delightful, in regard every one is
willing to fancy himself such an one. So much the more when affirmed by them
who believe they speak truth. Such are Neighbors rather then those that live
at a distance; Friends, Acquaintance and Citizens, rather then Foreigners; and
such as are in Being, rather then such are yet to be born; prudent rather then
imprudent, and many rather then a few. For it is most probable, that all
already mentioned, speak truth, rather then their opposites. For as to those
things which a man despises, as Children and Beasts, no man regards their
honor or esteem, for the sake of Reputation it self; unless he have any other
reason. Friends are also in the number of things delightful; also to love is
delightful: For there is no man, a lover of Wine, who is not pleased with Wine:
And it is also delightful to be beloved. For then men imagine there is
something in 'em, which all men desire that are endued with sense. But to be
beloved, is to be carress'd by another for his own sake. Also to be admired is
pleasant, because it admits a man to be honored. As also to be flattered, and
a Flatterer, are both things that please: For a Flatterer seems to be both an
Admirer and a Friend. Also frequently to do the same thing is pleasing; for
what is customary is pleasing: Exchange is also pleasing, for exchange is
proper to nature, in regard it is always the same, begets a satiety of the
constituted and fixed habit. When it is said, that there is a pleasure in the
vicissitude of all things. Wherefore the alterations of process of time,
whether in men or fashions, is pleasing: As being an alteration from what is at
present; as also for that what space of time produces is less frequent. Also to
learn and to admire, is for the most part delectable. For there is desire in
admiration. Wherefore what is admirable excites desires. For learning is the
perfection of Nature. Also to do and receive kindnesses are in the number of
delectable things; and because that whatever avails to do good is pleasing,
therefore men are delighted in correcting the miscarriages of their Neighbors;
and to amend what is defective. And because it is a pleasing thing to learn and
admire such things, of necessity those things must be pleasant which are
expressed by imitation, as Painting, Sculpture and Poesy: And whatever else is
done by imitation, though the imitation it self be not pleasing. For they are
not delighted with the imitation, but they argue from thence, that this is
that, and so they come to learn something. Also variety of unexpected
accidents, and the narrow escapes from danger; for all these things are to be
admired. Also because all things that are natural are delightful, and for that
those things which mutually agree one with another, are natural; there all
things that are alike in agreement are natural. As Men with Men, young Men with
young Men, Horses with Horses. Hence those celebrated Proverbs; like to like,
the Whale to the Whale, the Blackbird to the Blackbird, and so of the rest. And
because like and homogeneous, are always delightful to themselves, and every
thing is thus or thus affected toward it self, of necessity all men must be
lovers of themselves, either more or less. For all such things chiefly have a
regard to themselves. And because all Men are lovers of themselves, those
things which are their own, must of necessity be equally delightful, as their
Works, their Orations, their Poems, etc. Wherefore for the most part they love
their Adorers and Friends, their Ambition, their Possessions and Children; for
Children are their own works. Also to finish what they have begun is
delightful, for it was their own work before, and because it is most pleasing
to be the chiefest, therefore to be thought wise is most delightful. For it is
Prince-like to be wise. For Wisdom is the knowledge of many and admirable
things. And because they are generally ambitious, they delight in reproving
their neighbors. And to abide by that, wherein every man thinks he has a
particular excellency. According to that of Euripides,

To this does He, with eager thought
The chiefest part of every day devote,
Himself to make the best, and better too,
Nay, better then himself, if toil would do.
In like manner, because all Recreation is pleasant, together with relaxation
of Mind, therefore Mirth and Laughter are delightful, and also most ridiculous
things are pleasant; as well ridiculous Men, as Speeches and Performances; but
as for things ridiculous, we have discoursed in our Art of Poetry. And so let
this suffice to show what things are delightful; what things are irksome will
appear by their Contraries. And thus much for those things which are the causes
of Injustice and Injury.

CHAP. XII.
How Men believe themselves capacitated to do Injustice, and by what means they
do it.

NOW let us see how Men are capacitated to do an Injury, and by what means they
do it. These People therefore when they think the thing possible to be done,
and to be done by themselves, they consider likewise whether they can conceal
themselves when they have done it; or if they cannot, whether they shall be
questioned, or if they come to suffer, whether the Punishment will be greater
then what they have got by the Act. But as to what may be done, and what not,
we shall afterward declare, for these things are common to all the parts of
Rhetoric. Now they believe themselves most able to do an Injury, who think
themselves of greatest ability both to speak and act; whether out of their
Experience in contention and controversy, or confiding in their Friends and
their Riches: for if they find themselves thus supported, they believe
themselves able. Or otherwise whether they have such or such for their Friends,
Assistants, or Accomplices; for perhaps by the help of such Aids, they may
accomplish their ends without fear of Punishment, or else conceal themselves
from it. Or if they be in Friendship with those that suffer the Injury, or with
the Judges; for Friends are careless of Injuries, and easily reconciled before
Prosecution. The Judges also are willing to gratify their Friends, either by
acquitting 'em, or by inflicting but a small Punishment. Moreover it is easy
for them to conceal themselves, who are adjudg'd unable to commit the offense,
as if a lame Person should be accused for beating a Man, or a poor, or a
deformed person be accused of Adultery. Or if the Crime be said to be committed
publicly, and in the face of the World, for People are not apt to believe such
things; or if the Crimes be so great or so many that never were committed
before. For Men are not aware of such Injuries: in regard all Men shun common
actors of mischief, like so many Pests or Diseases. But as for him that never
was sick, no Man avoids him, and such as have no Enemies or many. For these
believe they may conceal themselves, because they are not suspected. Others
believe they may conceal themselves, because it cannot be thou^ht they would
set upon those who are aware of 'em; or that it would be an Argument that thev
did never make the attempt, because they were sure to find resistance. The same
may be said of such as are provided of a means to escape, or of some place at
hand to secure themselves, and of such who if they cannot conceal themselves,
can put off the cause by delay of Justice, and corruption of the Judges. Or if
he be amerc'd, is sure to delay or buy off the Payment, or if he be such a one
who through Poverty has nothing to lose; or such whose gains are apparent,
great, and at hand, their Fines but small, hard to be found, and at a distance.
And where the Punishment cannot be equal to the Profit. And such as gain by the
Injury, but are only shamed by the Punishment. Or where the Injury may seem
commendable, as if a Man revenge an Injury done to his Father or Mother, as it
was Zeno's Case; where the Punishment is only a Fine or Banishment, or some
such thing; for both do an Injury, whether this way or that way done: though both
are not the same Persons, but contrary in their Manners and Dispositions. Also
they who have often had the good Fortune to conceal themselves, and never more
to be called in question, also such as frequently fail in their Attempts. For
there are some in such things, as well as in warfare, who are still prepared to
renew the Fight. Or such as obtain a present Pleasure, but the loss follows
afterward, as it fares with the Intemperate; for there is Intemperance in all
things which are desired. On the contrary, such as presently suffer pain or
loss, but attain to Pleasure or Profit afterward, though later. And such are the
things which the abstemious and prudent seek after. And such as may seem to
have acted by Fortune or Necessity, or by Nature or Custom, and to have been
mistaken ^ltogether* and not to have done any Injury. Partly such as could not
otherwise obtain their right, partly such as were in want. Now Men happen to be
in want two ways: either they want Necessaries, as the Needy, or Superfluities,
as the Rich. Partly, they who are Men of Repute, or Infamous: Those because
they shall not be the less esteemed, these because they shall not be the more
esteemed: and under these Circumstances they both attempt. And they injure
those who are furnished with such things, of which they stand in need, either
necessaries, or for superfluity, or pleasure, and as well those that live at a
distance, as those that live near at hand. The one are soon apprehended, the
other more slowly punished; as they who robbed the Carthaginians. Also the
unwary, and such as are not watchful, but credulous; for it is easy to deceive
all these, also the negligent. For he that seeks revenge must be dilligent. The
bashful also, for they seldom contend for gain. Also those who being injured by
many, never care to take revenge. For to use the common Proverb, these are the
Mysians Prey. Also those who never, or they who were frequently injured, for
both are neglectful: These because never, those because they think they shall
be no more. Also those that are or may be easily oppressed with scandalous
Reports. For such never choose to defend themselves, fearing the Judges; nor can
persuade the contrary; of which sort are they whom many hate, or many envy. And
against whom they have any Pretenses, either of their Parents, or of their own,
or of their Friends, either that they have or would do wrong, either to their
Parents themselves, or such as are their dearest Relations, who are under their
Protection. For as the Proverb says, Improbity only wants a pretense. We also
injure our Friends and our Enemies; for it is easy to do the one, pleasing to
do the other. Also those who have no Friends, who are not in a condition to say
or do. Also such as are neglectful of Revenge, or apt to be reconciled, or
never prosecute to the end. Or such as to whom it is not worth their while to
spend time to stay for Judgment and recompense, as Forraigners, and Handicraft
Tradesmen, who are contented with small satisfaction for an Injury committed.
Or such as have done many Injuries to others, or themselves have suffered
several like to what they have done. For that does not seem an Injury, when a
Man has suffered no more then what he has often done himself, as if a Man
should be a person that used to give ill Language to others; or such as have
done an Injury, or intended it, or were about to do it. For in so doing there
is both satisfaction, and applause; nor does it seem for the most part* to be
an Injury. Or such who do an Injury, that may be grateful to their Friends or
their Masters, or those with whom they live. Also such as from whom they easily
hope for Forgiveness. Also when they have accused a Man and are at odds with
him; as it was the case between Calippus and ^^o. For such Acts do altogether
seem to be Injuries. Also those not doing harm themselves, are oppressed by
others, as if it were then too late to consult a Remedy, as Aeneside^us is
reported to have written to Gel^, when Cata^ia was by him disp^opl^d; that he
wanted but a little of preventing him, as if he intended to have done it
himself. And such to whom if we once do an Injury, we may do many things justly
by way of Satisfaction. As Jason of Thessaly said, we must do Injury in some
things, that we may do Justice in many. Also they more easily commit those
things which all or many do: hoping easily to obtain Pardon for such things.
Also Men are ready to commit Injuries which may easily be concealed. As when a
Man takes unjustly from another such things as are easily consumed, as things
that are eatable; or which are not easily detected, because of their changing
Color and Complexion, or such things as are Portable, and hid in a small Room,
or things that are like to many things, which he that did the Injury possessed
before; or which a Man is unwilling to disclose, as the Adulteries of his Wife,
or his own, or his Childrens miscarriages, and such things that show the
Prosecutor to be a contentious person, and given to Strife: things of little
Consequence, and for which Pardon is frequently allowed. And thus, how Men are
capacitated to do an Injury, by what means, who they are that act and suffer,
and wherefore Men seek to injure others let this suffice.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Injury, and things done justly.

NOW let us distinguish between all Injuries and Lawful Actions, beginning
first from hence. Just things and unjust are therefore destinguish'd according
to the Laws, and the Persons to which they relate, two ways. Now I say the Law
is either Proper or Common. Proper, that which concerns all Persons in
particular one among another; and this is either written or not written. Common
is that which is according to Nature; for there are some things that are just
or unjust by nature, and would be so if there were no Society or Agreement
among Men. As Antigone in Sophocles seems to intimate; when she avers it to be
a thing naturally just to bury Polynices.

For neither now, nor yet of Yesterday,
But always this has born perpetual sway.
In all Men's Minds; nor is there one that knows
From whence this secret Law of Nature flows.
And as we find in Empedocles against Murder; for Murder is not just among
some; unjust among others. But a fixed Law in all Men's Breasts, where e're,
Heaven's Immense Light shines through the spacious Air.


Which also Alcidamas confirms in his Messeniac. Now where they are determined,
they are two ways determined; for what we ought to do or not to do relates
either to common Society, or to one supreme thing in that common Society.
Therefore we may do right and injustice two ways; for either we hurt one single
person, or a common Society. For he that commits Adultery or beats a Man, harms
a certain person; but he that deserts his colors, injures the public. To
suffer an Injury is to be injured by him that does it willingly, and with an
Intention so to do. For we have already defined doing an Injury to be a
voluntary act. And because he that suffers an Injury receives a mischief
unwillingly, and all Injuries consist of those things already repeated (for we
have already distinguished between things good and evil of themselves, and what
Men do spontaneously, that they do willingly) of necessity all offenses relate
either to the public, or to private Persons; and that they are committed either
unknowingly or unwillingly, or else willingly and knowingly: and of these, some
are committed out of Pre-election, or out of Affection. Now what things Men
make choice of, and in what Capacities, has been already said. But because some
Men who confess they have done such a thing, either will not acknowledge the
declaration of matter of Fact in the complaint* as if it should be said, that
he stole the thing where he took it. Or if he confess that he struck first; but
did not give the first Provocation; that he was in the Woman's Company, but did
not lie with her: or that he did commit the Theft, but it was not Sacriledg; as
it was also laid in the Declaration; or that he brake up Land, but not
belonging to the public; or that he discoursed the Enemy, but not as a Traitor;
Therefore when we treat of these things, we define, what is Theft, what
Contumely, what Adultery, that whether we would demonstrate it to be or not to
be, we may declare what is just; for in all these things, the question is,
whether the thing be unjust, or wicked, or not: For Improbity or Injury
consists in Election. And words indeed of this nature demonstrate the Election;
as Contumely and Theft. Yet he that strikes a person, does not presently offer
an indignity to the same person, but if he do it to some other purpose and
intention, as either to disgrace the same person, or else for to please
himself. Nor can he that takes a thing privily be said to steal, but if he do
it to the damage of another, and to his own proper benefit. And the same rule
is to be observed in other things of this nature.

And because there are two sorts of just and unjust things; for some are set
down in writing, others not; o^ what are delivered in the Law we have already
spoken; but of those things which are not set down in writing, there are two
sorts besides. And these are partly according to the exuberancy of Vertur and
Vice, wherein are ignominy and praise, dishonor and honor, and gifts and
gratitude to a Benefactor, and returning kindness for kindness, to be assisting
to a man's friends and the like: Partly a supplement to the written and proper
law. For equity seems to be ^u^t, and equity is that which is just, besides
what is set down in the written Law. And this happens, sometimes though the
Lawgivers are unwilling; sometimes by their connivance. Unwillingly, when they
were ignorant of the matter; willingly when they cannot determine, but there is
a necessity to speak in general terms, not so, but as is most usual; or where
they cannot distinguish because of Infinitv, as to give rules if a man wounds,
with what sort of mettle, and how much of any sort: For it would be tedious to
enumerate those particulars. If therefore, when the thing is Indefinite, a Law
must be made concerning it, nothing can be said otherwise then simply and
bardly. Wherefore if a man having a Ring upon his Finger, strikes another, or
lifts up his hand, he is guilty according to the written Law, and has done an
injury; though in reality he has done none. And this is Equity. If then what we
have said be Equity, it is apparent what things are equal, what not, and who
are men of Equity. For where pardon is allowable, there is also Equity; nor is
it equal to judge offenses and injuries, and injuries and misfortunes worrhy of
equal punishment. Now misfortunes are such things as happen contrary to
expectation; and not through improbity: Offenses such things as happen, not
contrary to expectation, yet not out of a wicked intention: But injuries happen
from a wicked inclination, according to expectancy. For what proceeds from
desire, proceeds from wickedness. And it is but equal also to pardon human
frailties; and not to have a respect to the Law, but the Lawgiver; not to the
words but the sense and meaning of the Lawgiver; not to the act, but the
pre-election; not to the part, but to the whole; not what a man is now, but
what a man was always, or for the most part; and to remember to what good
things his inclination leads him, then to what bad things: And the benefits he
has received, then what he has done; and his patience in suffering injuries,
and his desire to be judged rather by words then deeds; and rather to refer
himself to Arbitration, then go to Law and Trial. For an Arbitrator considers
Equity; a Judge looks upon the Law, and therefore an Arbitrator is chosen; that
Equity may prevail: And thus much concerning things Equal.

CHAP XIV.
Of the greater or less Injury.

THE greater Injury is that which proceeds from the greater Injustice.
Wherefore sometimes the least crimes seem to be the greatest; as when
Callistratus accused Melanopus, for taking three small Vessels of
inconsiderable value from the Builders of the Temple, because the Vessels were
sacred. But in Justice, *it is quite contrary. For those other things seem so to
be, because they exceed in the virtual consequences; in regard, that he who
would steal three sacred Vessels of small price, would do a greater injury. And
sometimes it is so indeed the greater, sometimes it is so judged according to
the harm that ensues: And where the punishment is not equal, but every way
less, and for which there is no remedy; for that is terrible, and almost
impossible, and where the sufferer can receive no recompense, in regard no
remedy can be found. For judgment and punishment are the remedies: And if the
sufferer cannot brook the Ignominy. Moreover if he that did the injury more
deserves the punishment; as Sophocles pleading for Euctemon, because he that
could not brook the indignities killed himself, affirmed that he would not have
meaner thoughts of the contumely, or think it deserved less punishment, because
he that had suffered had punished himself. Or if a man does an injury alone, or
first of all, or engaged with a few: And to commit the same injuries often, is
a great injustice. Great are also those crimes for the prevention of which
great punishments and torments, are sought and invented, and Prisons built for
their restraint. And among the Argives he is fined and amere'd, who occasions
the making of a new Law. The most Bestial injury also is the greater, and that
which is premeditated: And which they, who when they hear it, are more afraid
of, then pity. And where we contemn or transgress many just things, as oaths,
pledging of Faith, and Conjugal Vows. For it is an exuberancy of many injuries.
Also their crimes are not mean, which are committed where the unjust are
punished; such are false Witnesses; for who may be counted Offenders, if not
they who offend in Courts of Justice: Also those which the greater ignominy
attends. Also they that injure their Benefactors. For he multiplies injuries,
as well in doing ill, as in not doing well. And they that act against the Laws
unwritten; in regard it is better to be just when uncompell'd. Now the written
Laws were made through necessity, but not the unwritten. For he that awed by
fear, and liable to punishment, commits an injury, will not scruple to do werse
where no punishment hangs over his head. And thus much concerning the greater
and the lesser injury.

CHAP. XV.
Of Vnartificial Proofs.

WE are now to speak of proof which is Unartificial; which is proper in
judicial causes. Now there are five things that make up this sort of proof; the
Law, Witnesses, Compacts, Examinations and Oaths. And first of the Laws, what
use is to be made of 'em, as well by him that disswades, as by him that
persuades; by him that accuses, as by him that defends. For it appears, that if
the written Law be contrary to the fact, the common Law is to be made use of,
and equity, as being more just. For he proceeds according to the best advice,
who does not always make use of the written Laws. For Equity always remains and
never changes, no more then the common Law, as being according to nature; but
the written Law changes often. As it is said in Sophocles's Antigone, that she
had acted contrary to the Laws of Creon, but not contrary to the unwritten Law.

Which neither now, nor yet of Yesterday,
But still in all men's minds perpetual sway
Has born; and for that reason did deride
Not only this, but all men, Laws beside.
Seeing then, that just is somewhat which is true and profitable; but that
which seems so is not; therefore that which is written is no Law, because it
does not perform the duty of Law. Moreover, the Judge is like him that essays
both Silver and Gold, to discern what is truly just from what is adulterate:
And besides, it is more becoming the Character of a judicious man, to make use
of unwritten then written Laws, and to stick close to them. Whether this
unwritten Law be contrary to some approved Law, or opposite to its self, as
when the one commands all contracts to be firmly observed; and the other
forbids any contracts to be made contrary to the Laws. Or if it be ambiguous,
that he may weigh and consider, to what part to accommodate the just, and to
what the profitable; and so to make the best use of it. And if the grounds and
reasons upon which the Law was made, are ceased, but the Law is still in force;
this must be endeavored to be explained; to show the repugnancy of the Law to
its self. But if the written Law be agreeable to the occasion or the fact, then
it is rightly and truly to be said, that the Law was not made for the Judge to
act, for the sake of what is contrary to the Law; but least he should perjure
himself, being ignorant of the Law; and because no man chooses what is barely
good, but all make choice of what is good for themselves; and because there is
no difference, whether there be no Laws, or whether no use be made of any; and
because that in diseases, it signifies nothing to cavil against the Physician;
although the error of the Physician is nothing so prejudicial, as to accustom
our selves to disobey our Rulers. And because the best Laws forbid any man to
show himself wiser then the Law. And thus much concerning the laws.

The Witnesses are sometimes ancient, and sometimes modern, sometimes
participant of the danger, sometimes out of all hazard. I call the ancient
Testimonies, such as the Poets and other famous men, whose judgments and
sentences are approved, as the Athenians made use of Homer, for a witness about
Salamina; And the Tenedians of Perian^er the Corinthian, against the Sigaeans,
Leophron made use of Solon's Elegies against Criti^s, to show that his Family
had been infamous, for so long time, for uncleanliness. Otherwise Solon had
never said,

By ^ Critias vaunting in his Golden Locks,
Obedient to his Parent, sh^^ the Rocks
Of Youths Intempera^ce --
These are therefore Testimonies concerning things past; but as to future
things, the Interpreters of the Oracles, as Themislocles alleging, that wooden
Walls signified to the Athenians to make themselves strong in their naval
force. A Proverb also is a kind of Testimony. As if a man deliberating whether
to seek the friendship of an Old Man, meets with the Proverb, Never place a
benefit upon an Old Man. He that deliberates whether to kill the Children with
the Parents, meets with another Proverb. A Fool is he, that once the Children
slain, the Father saves.

Also the Evidence of modern Testimonies being of good credit, are useful in
suits at Law. As Eu^ulus urged in a Trial, a certain Sentence of Plato against
Chare^^^, which Plato had urged against C^arib^^s. That it was all long of him
that the People confessed themselves all wicked in the City.

Some are participant of the danger if they seem to swear false. But these are
only Witnesses of things of this Nature, as whether done, or not done, and
whether it be or be not; but not at all of the quality, as whether just or
unjust; profitable or not profitable. However ancient Testimonies may be used
to prove the quality; for not being to be corrupted, they are most undeniable
Evidence. And therefore they who have no other Evidence, make use of this
assistance, which is to be judged from Probabilities. For that is an excellent
method of judging; that probables cannot be corrupted with money; and are never
accused of giving false judgment; which Testimonies he that has, will make use
of against him that has not, because that probable will delay the sentence: In
regard there would be no occasion of Witnesses, could the matter be proved by
reason.

Now Testimonies, some relate to our selves, some to the adversary; some to the
matter, some to the Circumstances. Whence it is apparent, that we never can be
in want of profitable Testimony. For it will relate to the matter, either for
us or against our adversaries: Or the Circumstances of reputation; what our
own, what the repute of our adversary.

In reference to Contracts, there is this use of Oration, to increase or
extenuate, to show their credibility or incredibility. For if the probability
and credibility be on our side, it is for us; if not it is against us. But he
that will show the probability or improbability of things, must consider what
we have already said concerning the Witnesses. Now if it be granted there was
such a contract; then Amplification must be used on our side. For a contract is
a private Law in reference to the particular part. However the Laws are not
confirmed by contracts, but contracts are confirmed by the Laws: And the Law is
absolutely a certain agreement. And therefore he that will not believe, but
overthrows a contract, subverts the Law. Also exchange of Commodities to an
again; also whatever we do voluntarily, we do by agreement. Therefore he that
endeavors to render contracts invalid, destroys all commerce and conversation
among Men. But if these things are on the Adversaries side, all things are
first to be urged to invalidate the force of the contrary Law. For if the Laws
do not appear to be rightly made, but salaciously imposed by the Law makers, it
would be an absurd thing to believe our selves not bound to obedience; but yet
that it was of necessity to stand to the contract. Moreover because a judge is
a dispenser of Justice, and therefore he is not to consider what is just, but
what is most just. For it is not for Justice to be perverted, either by fraud
or through necessity: For it is natural. But contracts may be made by persons
deceived, or in necessity. Therefore it is to be considered whether they are
contrary to any written or common Law, or to what is just and honest: Or
whether to any former or latter contracts: for either the latter stand good,
and the former are cancelled, or the former stand good and the latter are void:
And so we must plead what is most for our turn: then we are to consider,
whether they may be any way prejudicial to the Judges; or whatever else may
occur of the same nature.

Examinations also and Torments are a sort of Testimonies, and they seem to be
of some credit, because they are constrained. And therefore it is no difficult
thing to understand their force, and how far use may be made of 'em. Which if
they prove for us, then we are to amplify, as if they were the only true
Testimonies; if against us, and for the Adversary, then to invalidate the
Evidence, by speaking generally of Torments. For that they who are constrained,
speak far more untruths then truths. Enduring, on purpose to conceal the truth;
and readily lying, to be out of their pain: And for collateral confirmation,
examples are to be brought which the Judges know.

Concerning Oaths, the consideration is fourfold. For in this case, there is
either giving or taking, or neither, or both. Another way thus, whether the
thing be sworn, and whether by this or by that person. The reason is, because
men easily forswear themselves; nor does the swearer restore; besides, he
believes judgment will pass without any Witness to swear, and because there is
less hazard to commit himself to the Judges; for he confides in them, not in
the Witness.

The other then again will not take, because he detests to be bribed to swear:
because that if he were a Villain he would swear; and better it would be to be
a Villain for something then nothing; for by swearing he shall get nothing, and
therefore he refuses the money, not to avoid swearing, but out of a virtuous
Inclination. Whence that of Xenophanes, that the challenge is not equal of an
i^pious person against a man of Religion and Honesty, but as if a strong lusty
person should challenge a weak Impotent Cripple to fight him. If he takes, it is
because he confides in himself and not the Giver. So that inverting the saying
of Xenophanes, we may say thus, that it is the same thing whither the wicked
offer, or whether the Virtuous person swearer: for it is a hard thing that he
should refuse in those things, concerning which they think fit to give sentence
upon his Oath. But if he gives as willing to commit his cause to the Gods; or
because he has no need of appeal to any other Judges, he offers to him, that he
may be his Judge: And because it is absurd that he should refuse to swear to
such things, which others are thought worthy to swear, and will be sworn to.
And thus as it appears what is to be done in singulars, it is as apparent also
what is to be done in Copulatives. As if the same person will give, but not
take; or take and not give, or if he be ready to give and take or refuses to do
either. For by what has been said of necessity, they must be coupl'd; as must
their Reasons and Consequences also be. Hence it is apparent, that if a Man be
deceived by his Adversary, it is no Perjury. For Injury proceeds from the Will,
and Perjury is an Injury; but such things as are done by Violence and fraud are
not voluntary. Hence Perjury appears to be in the Mind and not in the Mouth.
Wherefore if the Adversary swear that he subverts all things who will not stard
to his Oath, the Answer is at hand. For this reason it is that you subvert the
(...) in Swearing* Cry you, we think it just that you should abide by your
Caths, and submit to our Judgment; but we will not abide by our Oaths: or
whatever else may be spoke by way of Amplification. And thus much concerning in
artificial Proofs.

Aristotle's RHETORIC TO Theodectes.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
That the Affections of the Auditors are to be moved.

NOW because Rhetoric is all for the sake of Judgment; (for Men judge of
Deliberations, as Judgment belongs to the Seat of Justice) therefore it will be
necessary to show how it is adapted, not only to accomplish two ends of
Demonstration, and gaining Belief; but also to render himself and the Judge so
and so qualified. For chiefly in Deliberations, and then in Judgments it mainly
avails to the gaining Belief, that the Speaker may seem to be so quallifi'd,
and by the Hearers be thought to be some way or other affected toward 'em, and
farther that they be in some measure affected toward him. Now that the Person
of the Orator should be most regarded, is most proper in matters of
Deliberation; but that the Hearer should be affected, is most proper in Courts
of Justice. For the same things do not appear to those that love and hate; nor
to the hasty and the mild; but another thing altogether, or as it is in
bigness. For to a Friend, he that is to give the Judgment seems to none or but
very little wrong; but with an Enemy it is quite otherwise. Also to him that
hopes and desires well, if what is expected be pleasing, it seems both that it
will be, and that it will be a happiness if it come to pass. Quite otherwise it
will be to him that despises and fears the Issue. There are three things
therefore which render an Orator worthy of Credit, besides Demonstration,
Prudence, Virtue, Benevolence. Wherefore they who speak or debate, fail either
for want of all these, or for want of some one of these. For either through
folly they do not rightly think, or if they think aright, for want of Honesty,
they do not say as they think; or though they guess right and are virtuous, yet
are they easily thought not to give the best advice, though they knew how to do
it, because they are not accounted Benevolent. These are the three things, for
want of which they only fail. Therefore if they be but thought to be endowed
with all these Virtues, of necessity he must be thought a Person of Credit by
his Hearers. Now how Men may come to be thought Prudent and Virtuous, is to be
gathered out of what has been discoursed concerning the Virtues; for from
thence he may learn to make not only himself, but another so. We are now to
speak of Benevolence and Love, and in general of the Affections.

The Affections therefore are those things, wherewith Men being moved, make a
different judgment of things. Which affections are attended either by Pleasure
or Pain; as by Anger, Pity, Fear, and the like, together with their Opposites.
To every one of which there belongs three Considerations: as in reference to
Anger, how Men affected with that Passion become Angry, with what things they
are accustomed to be angry, and in what sort of things. For if we aim at one or
two, and not all of those things, it will be impossible to move the Hearers to
anger. And so of the rest.

CHAP. II.
Of Anger.

ANger is therefore the desire of apparent Revenge, accrewing from a distaste,
by reason of some appearing, though undeserved contempt of themselves, or their
Friends. Which being Anger, of necessity when any one is angry, he must be
angry with some one in particular* as with Cleo: though not with the Man;
otherwise then because he did or would have done something to himself, or some
one of his Friends. So that always some Pleasure attends upon all Anger, in
hopes of revenge; for it is a pleasure for a Man to think he shall obtain what
he desires: since no Man seeks after Impossibilities* wherefore an angry Man
covets Possibilities. Wherefore it is rightly said of Anger, That it encreas^s
in the angered Breast
More sweet then Honey, that so charms the Taste.


For it is attended by a certain Pleasure, as well for the reasons alleged, as
also for that Men dwell upon the Imagination of Revenge, which Imagination is
like to the Pleasure we have in Dreaming.

Now in regard Contempt is the operation of Conceit about that which seems to
be of no value (for we do not slight either good or bad things, or their
Consequences, but we never value those that are none at all, or the least)
there are three sorts of Contempt; slighting, vexation, and affront: For he
that slights another, contemns him; seeing that what Men have but little value
for, that they slight: but they contemn things of no value. And he that vexes
another, seems to contemn him. For vexation is when any Man becomes a hindrance
to another Man's Will: not to gain any thing himself, but to prevent the other.
And therefore not aiming at any Profit to himself, he despises the other. Which
is apparent from hence, that it will be no damage to himself; (for if he did
he would be afraid and not contemn the Person) nor advantage to the other in
any thing of Moment. Otherwise he would be careful to seek his Friendship. And
he that offers an affront to another, despises him. For to affront, is to vex
and trouble another in such things, wherein it is an Indiginty to him to
suffer; not that he aims at any thing more then what he does, but only that he
delights in the Act. For they that return the Injury, do not affront but take
revenge. But it is a pleasure to him that offers the affront, to think that in
doing the Injury he excells the other, and shows himself to be the better Man.
Therefore young Men and Rich People are Contumelious, believing it shows their
Superiority to give an affront. For it is the nature of Contumely to disgrace;
and he that disgraces another, contemns him: For whatsoever is worth nothing,
has no esteem or repute either of being good or evil. Therefore says Achilles
in his Fury, -- The asfront my Honor stains
While he my Valors Guerdon thus detains.
And that other, As is some Despi^able Runagate.


Which were the reasons of his Provocation. Now Men think it convenient to be
exalted above their Superiors, because of their Birth, their Strength, their
Virtue, and briefly in every thing that is an excellency in others: as the
wealthy excells in Riches; the Eloquent in the gift of utterance; he that
commands him that is commanded, and he that is thought worthy to govern,
excells him that is not thought worthy. And therefore it is said, Great is the
wrath of Jove descended King's
And in another Place, Deep in his breast his brooding Anger lies,
To perfect what is fury shall devise.


For they impatiently brook affronts, in regard of their high dignity and
superexcellency, Others by reason of the benefits they have done, or do, either
by themselves, or their friends, or will or would do for his sake. And thus it
is Apparent how men come to be angry with whom and for what causes they are
angry. For some are angry when they are aggreiv'd. For he that is aggreiv'd
desires something whether it be by any Opposition directly made against him; as
to hinder a man from drinking that is a thirsty; or not directly, as if a man
does not oppose, yet does not lend his Assistance; or if any other greivance
happen, all these things raise anger in a man. And therefore, sick People, Poor
People, Lovers, thirsty People, and in a word all that desire, without
obtaining their desires, are angry and easily provoked, especially with those
that despise their present Condition. As those that are sick with those that
upbraid; or whatever is the cause of their Distemper: The Poor are angry with
their Poverty; the Warrior with his ill success; the Lover, for want of his
satisfaction; and so of the rest; seeing that every one is prepared for his
Passion by the disturbance that is within him. Moreover if the person expected
things contrary. For what is great and unexpected causes a greater greivance;
as it causes greater delight, when a thing happens contrary to expectation.
Hence it happens that seasons, hours, ages, and dispositions make it apparent
who and which are most Subject to anger, and when and where and which
overruling render the Tempers of men more froppish and testy. They also are
angry with those that laugh, deride and scoff at 'em: for such affront 'em: and
with those that offend 'em in such things as are the signs of contumely; of
which number are those things which are done to no end, and are no way
profitable to those that give the Offense: and therefore they are contumelious.
People also are angry with those that slight and speak ill of those things
wherein they chiefly delight: as when they speak evil of Philosophy before such
as study to excel therein: or if another dispraise the shape of such a Man's
Body, which they think handsome: and so in other things, more especially if they
suspect themselves to want those Perfections which are taxed to be wanting in
others. But if they are confident of their own parts and beauty, they never
mind what others say. Also men take these things more unkindly at their friends
hands then at the hands of others; as expecting at their hands more civility
and respect. Also with such as were wont to respect and honor 'em, but forbear
their former civilitys: for then they think themselves contemned; otherwise
they would continue their friendship. Also with those that show themselves
ungrateful, and do not return Quid for Quo; and with such as act quite contrary
to what they do, especially if their Inferiors. For all these things are looked
upon as contempts, the one of Inferiors, the other by Inferiors. More
especially if they be contemned by those who are of no esteem themselves. For
Anger rises from a contempt that no way becomes the Contemners: now it does not
become Inferiors to despise their Superiors. And friends are no friends, if
they do not say and do well; much more if they act or say quite contrary to
their friends, and if they are not lensible of their wants, as was Antipho's
Plexippos with Meleager: for it is a sign we are not sensible of the disrespect
we show: for where we are careful of our behavior, we consider what we do.
People are also angry with those that rejoice at their Misfortunes, more
especially if they sport with their Calamities: for both are signs of contempt
or Enmity. Also with them that care not whether they be troublesome or no.
Wheresore they are angry with those that tell 'em ill news: and with those that
hear of or see their Misfortunes without being concerned, for they resemble
Enemies or Contemners. For friends condole with friends; and all men greive at
their own Misfortunes: People are also angry with five sorts of men: with those
with whom they stand in-Competition for honor; those whom they admire; with
those by whom they would be admired, with those whom they reverence, and with
those by whom they are reverenced.

For if they are despised by any of these, they are more Passionately incensed.
And if they are contemned by those whom they are obliged to assist; as Parents
Children, Wives, Subjects. And with the ungrateful: for such a contempt is
unbeseeming: and with such as dis^emble toward such as are serious. For
Dissimulation is affrontive. And with those that are liberal to others, not to
them: for it argues contempt to be only thought unworthy. Forgetfulness also
causes anger, as of names, though it be a small matter; for it proceeds from
negligence, and negligence denotes contempt. Thus it is manifest that an Orator
ought to frame his Auditors to such a Temper as they use to be in when they are
angry, and the Adversary to be guilty of such things which provoke their anger,
and to be such with whom they have just cause to be angry.

CHAP. III.
Of Mildness.

NOW in regard that to be Angry is contraty to be Mild, and anger opposite to
mildness, we are to consider the temper of mild People, what things render 'em
so, and toward what sort of Persons they so carry themselves. Mildness
therefore is a suppression and sedation of anger. Since then men are angry with
such as despise, and despite is Spontaneous, it is apparent that they are mild
and gentle toward such as do none of those things or unwillingly, or else are
seemingly such: or with such as would do contrary to what they have done: and
with such whose behavior is alike to others as to themselves; for no man
despises himself; or toward such as make an acknowledgement, and repent. For
looking upon it as a Piece of Justice done 'em that the other repents, and is
sorry for what he has done, they cease being angry. Which is apparent from the
Chastisement of Servants. For men chastise more deservedly the stubborn, and
such as deny the fact: but when they confess themselves to be severely
punished, we forbear. For it is a piece of imprudence to deny those things that
are manifest; and imprudence is a contempt: and therefore we despise those we
do not reverence.

Therefore also we are mild toward those that carry themselves submissively and
do not contradict us in our anger. For they seem to confess themselves our
inferiors; but inferiors stand in fear, and therefore not worth anger.

Now the very Dogs are a demonstration that our anger ceases toward those that
humble themselves; who never bite those that sit still. We are also kind to
those that are serious when we are serious. For then we seem to be observed,
not contemned. Also toward those who have been greatful in a greater matter;
and toward those that beg and entreat: for they seem to be the more submissive:
also toward such as are neither contumelious, Scoffers, or contemners, either
of any Person, or of none but the wicked, or of such as are no way like to
themselves. In general those things that pacify and assuage are to be
considered by their contrarys. Also toward such as we fear and reverence.

For men in that temper are never angry. For it is impossible to reverence the
same Person and be angry with him at the same time; For sometimes when men have
done a thing in passion, we are either not angry at all, or very little moved:
in regard they did not seem to have done the thing out of contempt: for no man
contemns that is angry. For grief never accompanies Contempt, as it does Anger.
Men are also mild to those that respect 'em. Moreover those that carry
themselves quite contrary to those that are angry, may be said to be mild; as
in Play, in Jesting, at Festivals, in Felicity, in Success, in Plenty, and
briefly in all manner of Indolency, in harmless pleasure, and honest hopes.
Also toward those by whom they have not been molested for a long time; for Time
appeases Wrath. Revenge also taken formerly of another pacifies the fiercer
Anger of some men. Wherefore Philocrates being asked by another why he did not
clear himself before the enraged People? answered it was not yet seasonable.
When then, said the other. When I have seen another, Condemned before me,
replied Philocrates. For they grow tame, when they have spent their Anger upon
another. As it happened to Argophilus; whom the people absolv*d, though they were
more enraged against him then against Callisthenes, because they had first
condemned Callisthenes to death. Also when the offenders have suffered more
damage then they received from those thatwere angered; for they believe such a
one sufficiently punished. Or when they be lieve themselves to have done
unjustly, and to suffer justly: For anger never proceeds from what is lawfully
done or said. Therefore when Men believe they suffer undeservedly, they are to
be reproved in words; which is Anger. Therefore we are more gentle to Servants
that brook their Chastisement patiently. Or if they believe them not sensible
of the offense done 'em, or for whose sake they suffered. For as it appears by
the definition, Anger is against particular and singular Persons. Wherefore
Ulysses is rightly called A Destroyer of Cities. As if he would not have taken
his Revenge unless he had been sensible* both of the from whom, and for what.
Therefore we are not angry with those that are not sensible, as for example
never with the dead. Which was the reason that when the Poet would appease
Achilles's Anger toward Hector then dead, he used this expression; For all this
fury is but spent in vain
On the Deaf Earth; therefore thy rage refrain.


Hence therefore it is apparent that if we design to appease wrath we are to
speak from these Topics, so as to render the Auditory qualified to our minds;
and to show that they with whom they are displeased, are either to be feared,
or to be reverenced or such as have well deserved, or such as offended
unwillingly, or are sorry for what they have done.

CHAP. IV.
Of Friendship and Love, and their Contrarys.

TO Love is to wish what is truly beneficial to another, for the sake*of that
Person, and not for his own ^ake that wishes, and to use his utmost endeavor
to bring those things to pass.

A friend is he that Loves and is beloved again; and they are said to be
friends, between whom there is this mutual Correspondency. Which being granted,
a friend must be such a one as rejoices at his friends felicity, and condoles
with him in his Misfortunes; not for any other reason but because they are such
either good or bad, which happen to their friend. For all men are glad if
things fall out according to their wishes; if otherwise, they grieve and are
sorry. Wherefore Gladness and Sorrow are the signs of good or bad wishes.
Moreover they who account the same things good* or evil, who have the same
friends and the same Enemies. For of necessity these must wish the same things.
Now he that wishes the same things to another as to himself, for that very
reas^n seems to be his friend. For they love those that have either done them
kindness, or those that are under their care; especially if the kindness were
great, if frank and free, if seasonable, and for his own sake: or whoever they
believe have a good will do them good. and those that love whom they love, and
those that are beloved by them, who are beloved by themselves, and their
friends; and hate those whom they hate, and Enemies to their Enemies. For they
believe the same things to be beneficial to all these as as well as to
themselves; so that they wish no other to themselves then what their friend
enjoys. Also those that are liberal of their purses, and for their security.
Therefore we love the Liberal, the Stout, as also the Just. And such they
believe those to be that live by their Labor, Husbad men, and good necessary
Tradesmen. Also such as are temperate, because they are not unjust: and such as
are not given to meddle with other People's business for the same reason. And
such whose friendship we would desire, if they would but seem to desire it;
such are those that surpass in virtue, and are famous either among all Men, or
among the best of Men, or among those whom they admire. Also such as are
pleasant and merry in daily Converse. Such as are facetious and harmless in
their Discourse, neither reproving the faults of other Men, nor contentious,
nor obstinate. For all such are given to strife. And such as are contentious
never seem to wish the same, but contrary things. And such as are quaint in
giving and taking Jeasts. For in both these things men strive to be facetious,
as well he that gives as he that takes the Jest. And such as praise the
present felicitys, especially those which they are afraid to loose at the same
time themselves. And such as are neat in their Dress and Habit, and such as
never reproach the Miscarriages of others, nor the good Turns which they have
don'em; for both are signs of Contention. And such as never bear injuries in
mind, n^r observers of other men's faults, but such as are easily reconciled.
For as we find them to be to others, such we believe they will prove to us. And
such as are never given to slander, neither understanding their own nor the
failings of others, but only their Virtues. Also such as never contradict such
^s are in Passion or Serious; for these are accounted Contentions. And those
who are so affected toward us, that they respect us, believe us virtuous and
delight in our Company: and are chiefly so affected with us in those things
which we most delight to follow and take pleasure in, and for which we are most
esteemed whether for pleasure or profit. And such as are of the same Calling
and Profession, unless they seem to interfere one with another according to
that of the Proverb, The Potter envys the Potter. And such as desire the same
things, if there be a possibility of their partaking: if not, the reason
proceeds from the same Proverb of Hesiod. Also those who so behave themselves
toward all men, as not to be ashamed to discover their Opinion, yet not to the
contempt of others: and such as are ashamed to discover their real infirmities
and miscarriages committed. And such between whom their is a generous
Emulation, yet they desire not their Envy, but either are or would be their
friends. And whose good they study, least greater Mischiefs should befall
themselves, and such by whom they are beloved as well present as absent. And
such as are firm to their friends and never forsake 'em; for among all
blessings, men love chiefly true and good friends. And such as never feign
stories of themselves; such are they that proclaim their own Vices. For it is
said, among friends, we are never ashamed of our Reputation. If therefore he
whom we are ashamed of, does not love us, he of whom we are not ashamed may, be
said to be like one that loves.

All such as are not to be feared, and in whom we confide: For no man loves the
Person that he fears. Now Society, Famliarity and Kindred are sorts of
Friendship. Now that which creates Friendship is favor, and the doing of a
kindness not required, and not divulging it when it is done. For so he seems to
have done the kindness for his own, and not for his friends sake.

But as for Enmity and hatred, we must look upon 'em as proceeding from
contrary Effects. For the Effects of Enmity and Hatred are Anger, Detraction,
and Calumny. Now Anger is reckoned among those things that are in the Person
himself; but hatred is distinct from the Person himself: For if we believe a
Man to be such a one, we hate him. Anger also has a respect to singular
Persons, as to Callias, Socrates, etc. but hatred to many and in general. For
every man hates a Thief, or a Sycophant. And the one is curable by time, the
other incurable. The one offends by giving trouble, the other by doing
mischief. He that is angry desires to make the other sensible of his Anger; the
other takes no such care. Now all things troublesome, are of that nature, that
men are soon sensible of the inconvenience. And what are the greatest evils are
least perceptible, as injustice, imprudence; for the presence of Vice is no
offense. The one is with trouble, the other without. For the Passionate man is
troubled in his thoughts, he that hates finds no such disturbance. The one
compassionates where the effects of his Anger are too great, the other never
minds the greatest misfortunes of those he hates. Hence it is apparent, that by
these things we may find who are Friends and who are Enemies, when they are so,
and what will make 'em either, when they are not so: what will dissolve
contracted friendship; and enforce men either to Friendship or Enmity, when
there is any Controversy between 'em.

CHAP. V.
Of Fear and it is Contraries

FEAR is a perturbation of mind out of an apprehension of some future Evils at
least such as are capable to produce great mischiefs, or destruction it self;
not such as are seen at a distance, but near approaching. For mischeifs a far
off are not much feared: since all men know they shall dye, but because they
know not thetime, they are not much troubled. If this thenbe Fear, of necessity
those things must be dreadful, which appear to have a great power to destroy or
to cause such mischief as bring along the greatest Molestations and
disturbances. Therefore the signs of such things are dreadful. For that which
is dreadful appears nigh at hand; and therefore danger is the Approach of a
thing dreadful. Such are the Enmity and Wrath of those that are able to
Execute: for is apparent that when they both are resolved and are able, they
are not far from acting. Therefore is Potent Injustice feared. For because a
man chooses to be unjust, therefore he is unjust: Also Valor injured when it
has power: For it is manifest that as it always chooses to act, when it is
provoked. Also the fear of such as are able to execute. For of necessity they
must prepare before hand. Nevertheless, because some men are worse then others,
and more covetous of gain, and fearful to hazard, it is to be feared that he
may depend upon other assistance, who intends the mischief. Therefore they who
are Associates with another in any hanious Villainy are to be feared, least they
should discover or desert the Principal. Also they who are Potent to do
injustice, are always dreadful to those that are liable to suffer the
Injustice, as unable to defend themselves. For generally men do an injury, when
they find themselves able. And such as are injured, or so believe, for they
always wait an opportunity. And they who have done an injustice, when it was in
their power are to be feared, for they are still in fear of Retaliation, as
being that which they dreaded at first. And they who are Competitors for the
same things, when they cannot both be equally satisfied; for that breeds a
perpetual Quarrel. And they who are dreaded by their Superiors, are more
dreadful to their Inferiors since it lies in their power to do more mischief
to their Inferiors then Superiors: and such whom their Superiors stand in
fear of for the same Reason: and such who have slain their Superiors: and such
as make attempts upon Inferiors; for either they are to be feared already, or
else when they grow into Strength and Power. And among those who have suffered
injury, and as among Enemies and Adversaries, not those who are Hasty and
Choleric, and liberal of their Menaces, but the Close, the Soft, the
Dissemblers, and the Malicious: for they that are at hand, lie concealed. They
that are open, seem to be at a distance, and they prevent the Storm by their
own Blustering. But of all things formidable, those are most to be dreaded,
where the Miscarriages are never to be corrected; but altogether impossible to
be recovered, as being not in their own, but in the power of their Enemies.
Also such things for which there is no help, or very difficult to be obtained.
In a word all those things are to be dreaded, which when they do or shall
happen to others are lamentable in their Consequences. And these are the
chiefest things that are dreadful to men, and of which they stand in fear. Now
let us see, how men are affected, when they are afraid.

Seeing then that fear proceeds from the Imagination of some destructive
Chance, it is manifest that no man is afraid when he believes he shall suffer
nothing; nor of those things which he does not expect; nor of those persons.
But therefore those persons have most reason to be afraid, who believe that
they shall suffer something, and from such Persons, and in such things, and at
such a time. They do not believe they can be afraid of any thing who possess
ample Fortunes, and therefore they are apt to contemn, to be injurious, and to
be bold in all their violent proceedings. Their props are Riches, Strength,
Power and multiude of Friends. Nor do they fear who believe they have suffered
the utmost of Misery, whose hopes are extinct, and they as it were dead and
buried in Calamity, like those that have endured the torments of the Rack. Only
they might have some hopes before, that they might have escaped. Which is
demonstrable from hence, that fear induces men to consult. For no man consults
when he finds there is no farther hope. Wherefore, when it is requisite to
strike a fear into the Minds of the Auditors, we ought to render 'em such and
so prepare their Ears, that they may believe they may suffer those things, when
greater then they have suffered the same; and to produce Examples of such as do
or have suffered the same things from such as they never expected; and such
things and at such a time, when they least dreamed.

Now as confidence is the contrary of Fear; so what we confide in is contrary
to what we are afraid of* So that Hope is accompanied with animagination of
Safety and Security being athand; and that there is nothing to be dreaded, or
else at a very remote distance. That which breeds confidence is the hope of
danger being at a distance; and Prosperity at hand; As if there be ways to
amend miscarriages, and Assistances at hand, either many or considerable, or
both together. Also if they never did, nor received, any Injury; if they have
no Enemies, or such as are no way powerful; or if they have power, yet are
equaled by the other party in friends by them obliged, or to whom they are
obliged. Also it is of great importance whether more are engaged or better or
both. They also are confident who have done many noble acts, and never
suffered: or that have run themselves into many dangers, but still escaped. For
men become two ways scornful of danger, either through inxperience, or
assurance of aid; as in dangers at Sea, they who are unexperienced, are
confident, because they know not the danger, and the expert know how to help
themselves, and are therefore assured. Sometimes equality lessens the dangers,
sometimes those that are Inferiors scorn it, at other times men think
themselves above it. In all which cases surplusage of Money, strength of Body,
wealth of the Country, warlike preparations and the like make men confident;
Religion also and Piety toward the Gods, and the Answers of the Oracles make
men confident. Also heat of anger begets confidence; for to be injured, when a
man does no injury raises choler. And God is also thought to succor those that
are injured. And when being the first Aggressors, they believe they have done
well, and shall receive no injury thereby.

CHAP. VI.
Of Shame and want of Shame.

SHame is a perturbation of the mind proceeding from evils either past, present
or future which procure disgrace. Want of shame or impudence is a contempt and
insensibility of those things.

Shame being therefore what we have said, of necessity we must be ashamed of
those evils which are a disgrace either to our selves or those for whom we have
a kindness. Of this nature are a Soldiers loosing his Arms, or Flight, as
proceeding from fear: the denial of a trust reposed, as proceeding from
Injustice. To lie with Women with whom he ought not, where and when he ought
not, as proceeding from sust. Also Paltry and ignominious Gains, and from the
Impotent, as from the Poor and the Dead: because it proceeds from a base and
covetous mind. Whence the Proverb, To rob the dead. Also not to assist with a
man's purse when he is able, or with less then he is able, and to borrow of
those that are Poorer then himself. To take up at interest and yet seem to beg;
to beg, and yet seem to demand; and to praise a thing in hopes it will be given
him; these are the acts of a sordid and covetous Spirit: as also to beg and be
refused. To praise a man to his face, to set too high a value upon what is
good, and to speak against his knowledge when required to give his Judgment of
what is bad: to condole beyond measure with him that is in Grief; these are
signs of Flattery. Not to endure the labor which his Elders, his Betters, and
those that are much weaker endure; These are all signs of Effeminacy. To
receive kindness from another, and reproach another with his own favors, These
are signs of Pusillanimity. To brag of a man's self, to promise Mountains and
never perform, to assume other men's works to himself, These are signs of
Arrogance. Like to these are the Acts and signs in all other vices of human
manners. For they are ignominious and procure shame. Also to be ignorant of
those things both profitable and virtuous, of which all men, or all his equals,
or most are well versed in. Equals I call those of the same Nation, City, Age,
Kindred, and in a word all that are alike in condition and Estate. All which
things are the more ignominious, if his ignorance appear to be the Effect of
his own negligence and sloth. Also they that suffer, or have suffered, or shall
suffer any thing to be done or said to their scandal or reproach have reason to
be ashamed; whether in reference to their own Bodies, or any other ignominious
Acts, whether venereal or otherwise, whether voluntary or by Compulsion. Also
in respect of courage, where a man suffers himself to be abused and through
sloth or Cowardice refuses to defend himself. And those are the things of
which men have generally reason to be ashamed.

Now because shame is an imagination proceeding from some injury done to
Reputation, for Reputations sake, and not of the Events that happen; and
because no man would have any care of his Reputation but because of that esteem
which generally men have of it; of necessity a man must esteem that which all
men value. Now they who esteem, esteem those whom they esteem, and those by
whom they would be admired; all those with whom they have an honorable
Emulation, and whose good fame they do not contemn.

By these therefore they would be admired and respected, and they reverence
those who have any thing of Virtue or Honor; or are masters of those
perfections which they earnestly covet; as it is the nature of Lovers. But Men
contend for honors with their equals; and they reverence the prudent for their
Truth: such as are their Seniors and their Masters. Also what they behold in
the Countenance, openly. Whence the Proverb, that shame is seated in the sight.
Therefore men give grater respect to those that are present, and such as are
their Tutors, because they are still in view. And such who are not guilty of
the same Offense; for they know themselves to be not in so good a Condition:
and such as are not apt to forgive: for where a man is apt to transgress
himself, he does not take it amiss to see the same faults punished in others.

Also such as are given to tell abroad what they know. For it is the same thing
not to seem bad, and not to be so reported. Now they that are oppressed with
Injury, tell it abroad, because they have had occasion to observe the
particulars: and Backbiters, who being ready to slander the Innocent will never
spare the Guilty. And such as make it their business to spy* and pry into the
faults of others; as your Satyric Poets and Comaedians: who are a sort of
Backbiters and prone to twattle. As also those from whom they never were denied
what they asked: for they are of the same Nature with their Admirers. Therefore
men are ashamed the first time they ask, because they never ak'd a Curtesy
before; and therefore could not believe themselves to have the Repute of a
Friend. But on the other side those that ask the first time, are respected,
because they never begged a Courtesy before; such are those that make their
first Addresses for Acquaintance and Friendship: as having seen something
Extraordinary in the Person. Wherefore the Answer of Euripides to the
Syracusans was well. And old familiar Friends, if t axt of no Trangressions.
Therefore men are ashamed not only of things said, but also of their signs: So
we are not ashamed only of the Act of Venery, but Venereal Postures, and
Lascivious discourse. Nor are they only ashamed of such loose Persons but of
their Acquaintance and Friends.

But we are not ashamed of those things, where many misdoubt the Truth of the
Reporters: for no man is ashamed of Childrens Report: Nor are we ashamed of the
same things among our Acquaintance, and those we know not. For among our
Friends we are ashamed of nothing but what is true; among Strangers opinion and
prejudice by Report has some prevalency. But they are thus affected who are
ashamed. First if they be such as we have already said we ought to be ashamed
of. These were they who make a wonder, or are wondr'd at, or such as by whom
they would be admired at, and from whom they want some thing, which they shall
obtain, as being infamous, and of no Credit, and these are such as are in
sight; as Cydias, who at the debate about the Division of the Lands in Samos,
asked the Athenians, to suppose all the Greeks to be standing round about, not
only as hearers, but such as saw their Decree: Such then may either be at hand,
or may be otherwise sensible of the thing. Therefore they who are under a
Cloud, are unwilling to be seen by their Emulators, for those that Emulate make
a wonder: Also when they lie under such Circumstances and have done such an
Action, as taints their own and the Reputation of their Friends and Relations,
and altogether such as of which they themselves are ashamed. To these may be
referred the Teachers and Advisers of such things, or of whom they were the
Teachers and Advisers. Also if others be their equals with whom they contend in
Honor. For in those cases People out of shame will do, and refuse to do many
things. Also when men must be seen and exposed abroad, their Consciences strike
them with shame. Wherefore Antipho the Poet, being sent to Execution, when he
saw those that were to be Executed with him, pull their Caps over their Eyes,
as they passed along; Why do you hide your faces, said he, Who will see you to
morrow? And thus much for shame. Impudence will appear by its contraries.

CHAP. VII.
Of Favor and Charity.

CHarity is that whereby men are said to do any kindness Gratis, to him that
desires it; not for any reward, nor for any advantage to him that gives, but to
him that is in want. Now these favors are very great, either because of the
great wants of him that deserves, or because the favors desired, are very
great and difficult to be granted, or else in hard and difficult times, or or
else in respect of the Person, being the only, the first, and for whose sake
chiefly. But Indigences are desires of those things, the want of which causes
sadness ad inconvenience: such are the desires of Love, and our desires in
pains and dangers of the body. Therefore they that relieve men in beggary and
flight, though the relief be but small, yet considering the pressure of the
necessity and the seasonableness of the relief, it may be great, as the gift of
the poor man, that gave a Matt to the Lycaeum. And therefore relief is
necessary in such Exigencies, or in such as are equal, or in greater. Since
then it is apparent from hence, when, and what sort, and to whom Charity is
necessary, it is likewise from hence manifest, that we demonstrate that others
are, or were, in like distress, and that others supplied those Persons in those
necessity's by such and such manner of ways. Hence also it appears where
Charity may be disgraced, and who may be rendered incapable of it, either
because they relieve, or have relieved for their own sakes, and then it is no
Charity: or else it was done by Chance or by Compulsion; or else they only
restored, and did not give, whether they knew it or no: for either way it is
but quid for quo: and so neither would this be Charity. Therefore it is to be
considered through all the predicaments; for Charity is either this, or so
much, or such, or when, or where. But if he has done less then at another time;
or given to an Enemy, these, or equal or more considerable reliefs; these are
signs they were not done for our sakes. Or if he knew the relief to be of no
value, for no man confesses his craving from Indigency it se^f. And thus much
concerning Favor and Charity.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Pity and Compassion.

PIty is a certain Sorrow proceeding from some apparent destructive Mischief,
causing sadness in one that deserves not to suffer, or in any of his Relations,
and this such as appears to be nearly resembling the sadness of him that
suffers. For of necessity, he who would be thought to be Compassionate, must be
such a one, as believes he suffers the same evil either himself or some one of
his friends, and some evil of the same nature, like to that in the definition.
Therefore they that are utterly lost never take Pity; for they have suffered as
much as they can. Nor they who believe themselves in full Felicity; for they
generally laugh at others Miserys. For while they believe they enjoy complete
happiness, it is apparent they believe they can suffer no evil. But there are
such who believe they may suffer, as having suffered and escaped, and these are
of the number of those that Pity; Also Old men by reason of their Prudence and
Experience; and the weaker sort, as being more timorous. The Learned also, for
they argue from Reason. Also they who have Parents, Wives and Children; And
such as are not over Power'd with Anger or Confidence* for they have no
Consideration of the future: Also they they that are given to Contumely: for
they do not think themselves liable to suffer. Therefore always they that keep
the Medium. Nor they who are not extremely timorous. For they being once
terrified Pity none but themselves. Also they that believe that there are some
good Men; for they who believe there are none think all deserve alike. And in a
word such as can call to mind that the same Misfortunes have happened to them
and theirs, and be Sollicitous for themselves or their friends in reference to
the future. These are the qualifications of those that take Pity. What things
are miserable appears from the definition. For they are of that sort which
procure sadness, are destructive and have Power to destroy. Of the same Nature
are all considerable Calamities occasioned by Fortune. The destructive and
efficient causes of Sadness and Grief are Death; Stripes, Afflictions of the
Body, old Age, Diseases, Hunger. The Miseries occasioned by Fortune are want of
Friends, and therefore to be torn from Friends and Acquaintance is a Miserable
thing. Also Deformity, Weakness, Lameness: and where we expected Good to find
Evil, and that frequently: and when Comfort comes too late. Like the relief
sent to Diopithis by the King, which arrived after he was dead. And where no
relief comes; or if come, no Power to enjoy it. These are in general what
things are lamentable, with several of the same Nature.

Now men Pity their Acquaintance, so they be not too nerely related; for with
such we share, as if the Miserys were our own.

Thus Amasis when he saw his Son Ied to death, never shed a tear; but he wept
when he saw his friend beg. The latter is miserable, the ^ rst terrible. For
terrible is a different thing from miserable, and expels Commiseration, and
therefore more useful sometimes to the adversary. Also men take Pity, upon the
approach of any thing terrible we pity our Relations also, according to their
Ages, Conditions, Endowments, Quality and Birth. For in every one of these
things we may be highly damnify'd. For this is a Maxim, That whatever men are
afraid should happen to themselves, they are by the same things moved to
compassion when they befall others. But in regard those Miseries are most
prevalent upon our affections, that are most visible to the sight, whereas the
stories of what happened ten thousand years ago, or Prophesies of what shall
happen ten thousand years hence little move us, as being past our remembrance,
and out of the fear of expectation; therefore of necessity those things that
are represented to us by Postures, by the Voice, by the Habit, and Action, make
the Miseries seem the greater, as being by those means exposed nere at hand to
the Eye. And of the same nature are those things lately done, or which shall
suddenly happen: as also the Postures, Actions, and Habits of those that lately
suffered: or the Speeches and behavior of Men at their Executions; especially,
if looked upon as Men of Virtue and Religion. For all these things approaching
the Eye, more effectually move Compassion.

CHAP. IX.
Of Indignation.

OPposite to Compassion lies chiefly that which is called Indignation. For to
grieve by reason of Adversity undeservedly happening, is in a manner opposed to
it, and proceeds from the same Inclinations that cause us to be sorry when we
see men prosper undeservedly. And both these are perturbations of honest
Inclinations. For it beseem's us to condole when any one is unjusty vexed, as
also to be offended at their ill usage. For what is contrary to desert, is
unjust. And therefore Indignation is attributted to the Gods themselves.

Envy also seems to be opposed to Pity in the same manner, as nearest to it,
and almost the same thing with Indignation. But it is another thing: for Envy
is a troubled sorrow and repining at the Prosperity of one that is unworthy of
it, but onethat is in the same state of Equality and Similitude of parts and
conditions. But Indignation arises, not because something of adversity happens
to himself, but because it befalls his friend. For, as they say, there ought to
be an equal distribution to all men. For if a man be perplexed, as fearing lest
some evil should betide himself from the happiness of another, this is no
longer Indignation, nor Envy, but Fear: and it is manifest, that contrary
Passions will follow these. For he that is offended at the evils which befall
the undeserving, will certainly be glad, or at least not be sorry, when those
that deserve ill, are punished according to their merits; such as Parricides,
or Murderers, whose deserved Executions no good man pities. For it behooves us
to rejoice at the punishment of such, as we do at the rewards of the Virtuous:
there being an equal Justice in the two different sorts of Recompenses. For of
necessity we ought to wish the same good fortune to those that are like our
selves, as to our selves. All these things therefore proceed from the same
constitution of mind: but the contrary to these, from contrary dispositions.
For, to rejoice at other men's Misfortunes, is the same thing as to be Envious:
since that whenever a man is offended at a thing that is or may be, of
necessity he must rejoice at the privation or destruction of that thing.
Therefore all these things expel pity, but they differ one from another as has
bin said: wherefore they are all alike effectual to render things incapable of
pity.

Now then if Indignation be a Vexation of mind to see an undeserving Person do
well in the world; first, it is thence manifest, that we ought not to Stomach
all good things in the same Person. For we ought not to take it ill if a Person
otherwise undeserving, be just or courageous, or be endu'd with any sort of
Virtue. Nor does compassion consist in the contraries to these: but men are
offended at the Riches, the Power, and such like Advantages of Persons
undeserving: as also at those advantages which they have by Nature, Beauty,
Birth, and the like. And because Antiquity seems to approach near to natural,
they who have been of long continuance in prosperity, disdain those that are
newly sprung up; For they who are lately become wealthy, are more troublesome,
then Persons of ancient Estates by descent. And the same may be said of men in
authority, men powerful, men begirt with friends, full of Children, and the
like; and so if any other Advantages happen by means of those already
mentioned. For Persons newly enriched become more troublesome, as being
advanced to Power by reason of their Riches, thensuch as have been long in
possession of wealth; and so of the rest. The reason is, because the latter
seem to enjoy their own, the other, not. For what seems to have been long in
the same condition, seems to be true. Wherefore new upstars do not seem to
enjoy their own: and because every man is not worthy of every good thing; but
that there is a consideration of Proportion and what is fitting: as Beautyful
Armor is not proper for the Just, but for the Stout; nor Noble Matches for
upstarts, but ancient Nobility: Therefore if any Person to virtue happens to
enjoy what is not proper, men presently Stomach him, as also the Contentions of
Inferiors with their betters. Especially where the subject of the dispute is
the same. And therefore said the Poet,

Therefore did he in single Combat shun
To grapple the bold Son of Telamon:
For his presuming Pride did Jove offend,
That with a better Man he durst contend.
Or whither he be Virtuous or Noble or no, let him be who he will, if an
Inferior: as if a Musician contend with a just man; For Justice is better then
Music.

Now they that are most prone to indignation, are they that are most deserving,
and enjoy what they deserve: for it is not just to believe them worthy of the
same benefits, who are not alike in deserts: In the next place if they are not
only virtuous but serious and considerative. For then they judge aright, and
hate what it unjust: or if they are Ambitious of Honor, and desirous to
perform such or such atcheivements, and seek after those things to which others
undeservedly have attained. And generally who ever think themselves worthy of
certain things of which they believe others unworthy. And therefore servil
minds, evil men, and contemners of honor are voi'd of Indignation; not
believing themselves worthy of any thing of that nature. Hence it is apparent
what sort of Persons those are, at whose Misfortunes, or Crosses in the world,
as not thriving, or missing their Aims, we ought to rejoice at, or be sorry
for. For from what has been said, the Opposities are apparent. So that unless
an Orator do so prepare the Judges, that he may be able to demonstrate when
they are petitioned to for Compassion, with reasons alleged, who are
unworthy, who worthy to obtain it, he shall never obtain his end.

CHAP X.
Of Envy.

ENVY is a trouble of the Mind by reason of those happinesses seemingly enjoyed
by their Equals, not so much because they are not enjoyed by themselves, as
because they are enjoyed by others. For the Persons that will envy, are such,
as to whom some others are equal, or seem so to be: I mean equal either in
Birth, or Kindred, or Age, or Conditions, or Repute, or Riches; and such as
want but little of being Possessors of all together. Therefore they who perform
great Actions and are Prosperous in their undertakings are more subject to envy
others: for they believe every thing their own that is given to others: and
such as are particularly honored for some particular Excellency, as Wisdom, or
Felicity; and those who are ambitious of honor are more envious then they who
are not so; and such as have an opinion of their wisdom; for they are ambitions
after wisdom; and in a word, they who seek for honor in any profession
whatever envy all others that vie with 'em in the same. And pusillanimous
Persons for to them all things seem to be great. And thus much for the
Happinesses which breed envy in men. For in whatever undertakings, men love
glory, and contend for honor, to gain the Applause and opinion of Men, and in
all the Effects of good fortune there is envy, especially as to such things as
men desire, and believe to be but the rewards of their deserts; or of which
they either exceed in the enjoyment, or are but a little defective. And it is
no less apparent whom they envy, that is to say, those that are their equals in
time, in place, in age, in glory, and esteem. Whence it is said, For Kindred is
to envy prone. --


And those with whom they contend for honor, who are such as are living at the
same time. For men never contend with such as lived ten thousand years ago, or
shall live ten thousand years hence, or with the Dead; or with those that live
beyond Hercules's Pillars; nor with those whom they believe by many degrees
their superious, or as much their inferiors. But because men chiefly contend
with their Rivals and Competitors, and such as aim at the same ends, therefore
they chiefly envy these Persons, whence the Proverb of The Potter envys the
Potter.


And such as have speedily, or are within a little of obtaining their desires:
and those who though they do enjoy, or bring a thing to Perfection it becomes a
disgrace to 'em: in regard these are near alike. For it is manifest that they
did not gain by their own merits, and that breeds envy. Those also that enjoy
or have those conveniences and enjoyments they ought to have or once had.
Therefore Old men envy young people. Also they who have laid out much money,
envy those that have laid out but little about the same thing. Hence on the
contrary it is manifest, what such sort of people rejoice at, with what sort of
people they are affected, and how they themselves are qualified. For as they
that miss of enjoyment are sorry, so they that gain are pleased with the
contraries. So that unless they be so prepared, and that they who are deemed
worthy of Compassion, or to obtain any other request, be such as these are said
to be, they shall never obtain pity from the Judges.

CHAP. XI.
Of Emulation.

EMulation is a certain disturbance of mind, by reason of an appearing
enjoyment of honorable happinesses, which it is not impossible for him also to
attain, in things naturally alike; not because they are enjoyed by another, but
because they are not enjoyed by himself: So that Emulation seems to be a
virtue, and about virtuous things: but envy is evil and evil things are the
subject of it. For the one through Emulation endeavors to attain to good
things; the other endeavors to prevent his neighbor from attaining those good
things through Envy: and therefore those that emulate, must believe themselves
to be worthy those good things which they have not: For no man deems himself
worthy of Impossibilities; therefore are young men and Magnanimous Persons of
this sort. And such as enjoy those accomplishments which are deemed worthy men
of honor, as Riches, Favor* Authority, and the like. For as if it concerned
'em to be virtuous, because these are felicities belonging to the virtuous,
therefore they emulate these virtues in others. Also such as others esteem
Persons of worth; or such whose Ancestors, Kindred, Acquaintance, or Country
are famous, strive also to emulate their Accomplishments; for they believe
those to be their own, and therefore believe themselves worthy of 'em.

Now then if good things which are honorable are the Subject of Emulation, of
necessity virtue must be of the same nature, and whatever things are profitable
to others and assistant to Liberality. Also those happinesses which men enjoy,
as Riches, Beauty, Health, etc. these are such as are proper Objects of
Emulation: For they are the Persons that enjoy these felicities and such like,
as Fortitude, Prudence, and Dominion. For Princes are able to bestow many
favors upon many Persons. Also such whom many desire to be like, such as have
many, friends and acquaintance, such whom many admire, and themselves among the
rest. Also such whose praises and achievements are set forth by Poets and
Historians. These men they Emulate the contrary they contemn. For contempt is
contrary to Emulation. And to contemn and to Emulate are contraries. Of
necessity therefore they who are so qualified as to Emulate some, and to be
Emulated by others, must be so tempered as to contemn those who are noted for
those imperfections which are contrary to the Objects of Emulation.

Wherefore often times they contemn the Fortunate, in regard that good fortune is
not always attended with those perfections which are of greatest value. Thus
how the affections are moved, and with what things, and how they are allayed,
also whence Proof and Credit arises, has been said.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Affections and Habits of Youth.

I Call the Affections Anger, Desire, and the rest, of which we have already
discoursed. The habits are virtues and vices, of which already has been spok'n;
as also which every one chooses, and practices. Ages are Youth, Manhood, and
Old Age. I call Fortune Nobility, Riches, Power, and their contraries, and in a
word, Prosperity or Adversity. Young men are in their natures prone to desire,
and strong to act for the obtaining their desires. But chiefly they are led by
those desires that are venereal, in which they are incontinent. They are
inconstant in their desires, and apt to loath what before they loved. They
ardently desire, soon grow cold. Their wills are eager, not impetuous, like the
hunger and thrist of sick people. Also prone to anger, and vehement, and apt to
follow their most eager Appetites. They are overcome with passion, as not
brooking contempt through Ambition; and are impatient when they believe they
have received an injury. Ambitious also of honor, but more of victory. Youth
covers to exceed; and victory is a certain excess: and therefore they cover
both these, rather then money; which is that they least mind. For as yet they
have not experimented want; according to the Elogy of Pitta^us upon Amphiaraus.
Not Malicious, but downright: as not having much used themselves to Intrigues
of ^uttlety. They are also credulous, as not having been often deceived. They
are also naturally hot, like men heated with Wine. Full of hopes also, for hope
respects the time to come; Memory relates to what is past. And to Young Men,
the future is Long, Past time, short. Therefore easy to be deceived, because
they easily hope. The more stout therefore, because they are easily angered and
hope well. The one makes them fearless, the other confident. For no man fears
when he is angry, and because he hopes the best, he is confident. They are also
modest, for they look upon things to be honest no otherwise then through the
Optics of natures Simplicity, and know nothing but what the Law has instructed
'em. They are also Magnanimous, as not having been depressed by the Misfortunes
of life, but altogether unexperienced in necessity. Now for a man to deem
himself worthy of great things is Magnanimity; which is the effects of good
hopes. And they rather choose to practice things honest then Profitable. For
they live more by custom, then by reason. Now reason looks at profit, Virtue at
honest Actions. They are also much more desirous of Friends and Companions then
other Ages. For they rejoice in Society, as judging nothing yet by the Rules of
profit, not so much as seeking advantage in Friendship. For they do all to
excess, and transgress more violently, contrary to the saying of Chilo. For
they act to excess, they love to excess, they hate to excess. In other things
tempered equally. They believe also and affirm they know all things; the
reason, that they always over-do. They injure others out of Contumely, not out
of Malice. They are compassionate, because they believe all men good and
honest. For they measure other men by their own Innocence: wherefore they
believe such people suffer undeservedly. They love merriment, as being
facetious: For Jests are polite Contumelies. Thus much for young Men.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Affections and Habits of Old Men.

THE Dispositions of Men stricken in years and aged Persons are for the most
part quite the contrary. For having lived a long while, they have been
frequently deceived, often erred; and because most things are evil, they slowly
affirm any thing, and put a less value upon things then they ought: for they do
nothing, but stuff their discourses with perhaps's and if's and and's, and so
conclude nothing. Also they are morose and ill-natured for it is a sign of ill
nature to interpret every thing in the worst sense. Also they are suspicious,
because increduious, and incredulous, because experienced. For the same cause
they neither love to excess, nor hate to excess; but according to the Precept
of Bias, they love as if they would hate, and hate as if they would love. They
are Pusillanimous, as having felt the hardships of life: nor do they covet what
is great or pompous, but only what is necessary: not are they over liberal. For
one of their necessary things is their Estate: and as they are experienced,
they know how hard it is to get, how easy to loose an Estate. They are
fearful, and afraid of all things; for Old Age open's a way to fear, as being
cold: for fear is a kind of Refrigeration. They are desirous to live,
especially when nearest their ends; as covetous of what they shall leave
behind; and what we think we shall most want, we most covet. They are more
querulous then needs; which proceeds from their Pusillanimity. They live
according to the rules of profit, not of honesty. For profitable is to
themselves advantageous; Honesty but a Good in it self. They are rather
Impudent then modest; for having a different esteem of profitable and honest,
they little value the semblance of Honesty. They are apt to despond, as having
but small and fluid hopes, by reason of their Experience. For which reason, and
because they are fearful, they frequently come by the worst. They live more by
Memory then by Hope; for the remainder of their days is but small; the longest
part is past; which is the reason of their Loquacity, for they love to talk of
old Stories, as taking delight in remembrance. In their anger vehement, but
feeble. In their desires impotent, only in the desire of gain: and therefore
they seem to be temperate: remiss in their lusts, and Servants to their
avarice. They live rather by reason then custom: and their Injuries are
mischeivous, not contumelious. They are also compassionate, but not for the
same reason as young Men; these, out of humanity; they, through Infirmity: For
they think the miseries of others neat themselves: whence they become
querulous, but not facetious: nor do they mind jollity or mirth. For to whine
and moan are contrary to mirth and laughter. These are the several Dispositions
of young and old Men. Wherefore since all approve Orations adapted to their own
Dispositions, it is hence apparent how an Orator is to frame his Oration to
suite with this variety.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Dispositions of middle Age.

BEtween these two lie the Manners of middle Age, pruning off the Excesses of
both. For they are neither over confident, which is rashness; nor over
timorous; but fairly in a medium between both. Neither confiding in all men,
nor mistrusting all Men: but rather judging according to the Truth: neither
living altogether according to the Rules of Bravery, nor altogether following
profit: but between both: Neither parsimonious, nor luxutious; but according to
what is laudable and convenient. Observing the same measures both as to anger
and desire; temperate with courage, and courageous with Temperance. Which
things are divided in Youth and old Age. For young Men are strong and
Intemperate; old Men temperate and cowardly. So that to speak in a word,
whatever Youth and Age divide apart between 'em, as to what is profitable, that
middle age enjoys entire. Where they exceed or are defective, middle Age
observes the Medium, and the moderate. Now the Body is in its full vigor from
thirty to five and thirty; the Soul from thirty to nine and forty. And thus
much for the three Ages of Man.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Humors of Noble Men.

AS to the humors of Noble Men, most certain it is, that he is most covetous of
honor who possesses it. For all Men desire to add to the heap which they have.
Now Nobility is the honor due to Aucestry. Therefore Noble Men are apt to
despise those who are like their Progenitors: For remote Renown is more
venerable then honor newly got, and more fit to be boasted of. Now Noble
proceeds from the virtue of Lineage: Generous, is that which does not
degenerate from Nature: Which does not frequently happen to the Noble; but
sometime they become Persons of mean and abject Spirits. For there is a
fertility in the Progenies of Men, as in the products of the Earth. Sometimes a
fertile Stock bears a race of Illustrions Persons; but then the Stock being
worn out, the Fruit degenerates. And many time the offspring of sublime
Ancestry corrupts into cruelty and insaneness; like those that descended from
Alcibiades and Dionysius: and mild Genius's sink into sloth and effeminacy,
like the Descendants from Conon, Pericles and Sorates.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Humonrs of the Rich.

THE Humors that attend upon the Rich, are easy to be discerned by all Men.
For they are Contumelious, and excessively Proud, as being swelled up with
their Wealth. As if they looked upon themselve to enjoy all the Happiness in
the World. For Wealth is a Price whereby to value other Men. Therefore they
believe all things vendible to themselves. They are also voluptuous, and
profusely lavish. The first, to show their Riches, and make an Ostentation of
their Felicity. The latter, because men love to gratify their darling humors,
and please themselves with what themselves admire; believing that all other men
admire what they do. And in some respects it does 'em a kindness; in regard
there are many, who want what others have; and therefore Simonides being asked
by Hier^'s Queen, whether it were best to be a Rich or a Wiseman, replied, I
have seen Wise men wait at Rich men's doors. Another Reason is because they
think themselves worthy to govern. For they have that, for the sake of which
they believe themselves worthy to govern others. And indeed the humors of the
Rich, are the humors of the happy Madman. But there is a great difference
between the Customs of Persons newly enriched, and such as were born to Wealth.
For as they are more wicked, so are they more wickedly wicked. For the Wealth
of him that is newly enriched is wild and untamed. Nor do they do injuries
through Malice, but either through Contumely, or Intemperance.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Manners of the Potent and Fortunate.

IN like manner the Customs of men in Power are plain to be discovered: For
they are partly the same with Rich Men, partly better. For men in power are
more Ambitious, and more strenuous; because they covet to execute what their
Power authorizes them to act. Also they are more diligent; as being constrained
to take care of what belongs to their Authority. And more Majestic then morose;
for their Dignity begets 'em respect. And Majesty is a kind of composed and
decent Gravity: and if they do an Injury, it is not in slight matters, but in
things of Importance. Good Fortune also has a great share in the parts of these
manners. For the chiefest of Fortunes Prosperity's are referred to these
things. Good Fortune also is the cause that we are in a better Condition, both
in respect of our Offspring and other Corporeal Happinesses. Therefore they are
more proud and less considerate by reason of their Prosperity. But one
excellent custom attends good Fortune, that it makes 'em Religious, beleiving
those Goods of Fortune, to be the gift of the Deity. And thus much concerning
the customs and manners of Ages and Fortune: from whence the contraries may be
easily collected.

CHAP. XVIII.
That there are some things common to all kinds.

NOW because the use of persuasive Oratory relates to Judgment (for what we
know and have judged of needs no farther Explanation of Speeches) and because,
though it be but one alone whom the Oratorseeks to persuade or dissuade; as
they do who seek to admonish or exhort, yet that one Person is a Judge;
therefore of necessity care must be taken to subvert contraries, against which,
as against an Adversary the Speech is directed. And so likewise it is in
demonstratives. For the Oration is directed to the hearer as to the Judge, and
to speak in general Terms, he is a single Person; but to speak simply, he is a
Judge, who determines what is controverted in a civil contention. For in all
things about which disputes or consultations arise, the general Inquiry is how
the case stands. Now then to speak of things that are common, all men of
necessity must make Use of Possible and impossible in their Orations. Others
must endeavor to show that the thing will be; Others that it has been. Also
the magnitude of a thing is to be inquired into in all Orations. For all Men
make use of Diminution and Amplification, as well they who consult, as they who
dissuade or persuade: as well they who praise as they who dispraise; as well
they who sue, as they who defend.

CHAP. XIX.
Of things Possible and impossible.

FIRST then let us see what things are Possible, what Impossible. If therefore
the contrary may be, or be done, the contrary may also be possible. For if it
be possible that he may be cured, it is possible he may be sick: since that is
the Power of contraries, quatenus contraries. Also if like may be possible, so
also may be unlike. Also if what be more difficult be possible, in like manner
what is less difficult. For it is more difficult to make a stately House, then
a House. Also where the beginning is Possible the end is possible. For never
any Impossibility will ever be done, or be begun to be done; thus no man will
ever begin to make a diameter Simmetrical. Also where there may be an end there
was a beginning. For all things arise from the beginning. Moreover if what is
posterior in substance and original may be Possible, also that which is Prior.
Thus if it be possible for a Man to be, it is also possible for a Boy to be, or
if it be possible for a Boy to be, in like manner for a Man. As also such
things for which we have a natural love or desire. For, no man loves, or really
desires impossibilities. Also such things of which Arts and Siences take
cognizance; for all such things are possible. Also these things whose Principle
of so being, is in those things to which we can either constrain or persuade,
as Betters and Superiors, Lords and Masters, or Friends. Also where the whole
is possible, there the parts; if the Garment, then the Sleeves; If the kind,
then the form; if the form then the kind. For example, if a Ship then a
Fly-boat, or Galley; if a Fly-boat, then a Ship. Also if the one of two things
mutually agreeing between themselves, then the other; as if the whole, then the
half; and if the half, the double. Also if a thing may be done without Art and
care, much more by Art and Inudstry. Wherefore it was said by Agatho, Some
things there are which men by Fortune do;
And some by Art, by need constrained thereto.


And it if be possible for men every way infer or, and more Inconsiderate,
certainly their contraries will find it as possible: As Socrates said, it would
be a strange thing if he could not find out what Euthymius learnt. Thus much of
Possibility. What is Impossible, is manifest from the contraries to Possible.

Now from hence we are to consider whether the thing be done or no. For if that
was done which was less probable in nature, also that which is more. And if it
were wont to be done afterward, it was done before: as if a man has forgot,
that time was when he learnt what he forgot. Also if he had a will and could,
he did it. For all men act, if they can, when they have a will: at least there
is no impediment but that they may: and if he could and desired; and if he
could, and it was a pleasure to him. For all men act, if they can, according to
their Pleasures The debauched, as being pleased with their intemperance. Men of
Integrity, as desiring just. and honest things. Also if he went about it; for
it is probable he did what he went about. Or if those things are done which
precede the doing of any thing; as if it Thundered, it Lightened: or if he
endeavored, he did it.

Now of all these things, some are through necessity, others so in themselves.
As for what was not done, it appears by the contraries; nor is it less manifest
from thence, what will be: for what is in the Power and the Will to be, will
be: and what is in the desire, in Passion, and the consideration of profit,
where there is a Power. Also if a man be carried on with precipitation to do a
thing which an opportunity offers to act, it is probable that will be done: and
sometimes things that will be, happen sooner then things presently designed.
Also if those things were done before which nature orders to precede, as if it
be cloudy, 'twill rain. Or if that be done which is done for the sake of a
thing, as if the Foundation, then the House. As for Magnitude and smallness,
greater or less; as also great things and little things it is manifest what
they are, from what has been already said. Now because every Oration proposes
for it is end what is good, profitable and honest, Amplifications must therefore
be taken from all these Topics. For beside these things, to seek after any
thing in reference to Magnitude and excellency simply, would be a vain Dispute.
For singulars are more proper for use then Universals.

CHAP. XX.
Of Example.

HAving thus spoken of Proper Proof, it remains to speak of Common Proof. Which
is twofold, Example and Enthymeme. For a sentence is part of an Enthymeme. But
first of example; For example is like Induction, and Induction is a Principle.

Of Examples there are two sorts. The one, that speaks of things past; the
Other, that feignes the same thing; and of this the one part is Similitude, the
other Fables, like those of Aesop and I^bicus. Example therefore is, as if any
one should say, Forces ought to be raised against the King, and not to suffer
him to reduce Egypt into his Power, because Darius did not cross over the Sea
before he took Egypt, but when he had crosi'd the Sea he took Egypt; so he that
will take Egypt must cross over the Sea; and therefore he is not to be suffered
to cross the Seas.

A Socratic Similitude is as if a Man should say, that Magistrates chosen by
Lot ought not to govern. Also as if a man should choose Wrestlers by Lot, not
such as were fit for service; or as if a man should choose a Pilot to steer a
Ship by Lot, and not for his experience. A Fable is like that of Stesichorus to
Phalaris; and Esopus concerning the Popular Leader. For when the Imereans had
chose Phalaris for their Captain with full and absolute Authority, and were
about to give him a Guard for his Body, Stesichorus among other things told
'em, that there was a horse which held possession of a whole Meadow by himself,
at what time there coming a Heart and spoiling the Grass, the horse desirous to
be revenged of the Deer, came to a Man and asked whither he might not be able
with his Assistance to punish the Heart? The man answered him, Yes, upon
condition he would submit to be bridled and let him get upon his back. But when
the horse had accepted the condition, instead of punishing the Heart, he was
forced to be a Servant to his Rider. Wherefore said he, do you beware, least
while you are striving to be revenged of your Enemies, you come to suffer like
the horse. You have already accepted a Bridle in choosing a general with
absolute Power. But if you allow him a Guard, and permit him to get upon your
backs, you will certainly be Phalaris's slaves.

Esopus also in Samos, pleading for one of the Chief Leaders of the people
accused of High Treason, told the Assembly, That a certain Fox going to cross a
River, fell into a Ditch; where after he had layn in great Misery, not being
able to get out, many great Flies came and fixed their stings in his Skin; at
what time, a Hedgehog passing by, asked him whether he should pull out the
Flies: which when the Fox refused to let him do, in great admiration he
demanded the Reason; to whom then the Fox, If thou drive away these, there will
come others half fanish'd that will suck out all the remainder of my blood.
Thus, O men of Samos, this man now enriched will do you no more harm. But if
you put him to death, other Persons poorer then he will step into his room, and
suck away all the wealth of your City. Fables therefore of this nature are
appositely made use of in Popular Harangues; and they have this particular
Excellency, that when Real Examples are not to be found, it is an easy thing
to feign Parables; Though the examples of Real Transactions are more
profitable in deliberation and consultation. For, for the most part things to
come are like those that are past. And therefore when we want Arguments, we are
to make use of Examples by way of demonstration; but where Arguments are not
wanting, Examples are profitable after Arguments, by way of Peroration.

For when they are first made use of, they are like to Inductions; but
Induction is very improper for a Rhetorical Harangue, unless it be sometimes.
But being last made use of, they serve instead of Testimonies: and then one
single Example is sufficient: seeing that one Witness, if credible, is of great
use.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a Sentence.

A Sentence is an Enunciation, Apophthegm, or Maxim, not of singulars, as what
sort of Person Iphicrates was; but of Universals, as that straight is contrary
to crooked; or concerning which there are certain actions to be made choice of
or avoided. Wherefore because Enthymemes are Syllogisms concerning those
things, as well the Conclusions of Enthymemes, as the beginnings, the Syllogism
being set apart, are Sentences; as thus; It behooves a prudent Person not to
breed up his Children overmuch in wisdom. This therefore is a Sentence: to
which if the Cause and the Wherefore be added, it becomes a perfect Enthymem.
For besides that sloth to which men are otherwise inclined, Malevolent Envy on
themselves they draw.
And this other, In all things there is no man to be found
That does in perfect Happiness abound.
And again, There no man lives who is completely free.


This a Sentence, to which add that which follows, and it becomes an Enthymeme.

For either to his Wealth that Fortune gives,
Or else to Fortune's self a slave he lives.
Seeing then a Sentence is what we have described, of necessity there are four
sorts of Sentences. For either they are accompanied with a Reason to illustrate
'em, or not. They that have need of Demonstration, are accompanied with an
illustrating reason, as being a kind of Paradoxes: otherwise they need no
reason for illustration's sake. Of these, such as are known before, need no
demonstration. As thus.

To me of blessings Health does seem the best.
For this is apparent to all men. Others there are which being spok'n together
are manifest only to them that consider. As thus, -- No man was ere in Love,
But he will still a Lover prove.


Of Sentences with illustration, some are parts of an Enthymeme, As, Ill it
beseems the Person truly wise.


Others are Enthymematical, but not part of the Enthymem, which are most
approved. Of this sort are those wherein the Cause is apparent; as thus, Since
Mortal, in thy Mortal breast
Let not Immortal Anger rest
Like to which is that other, Let Mortals only Mortal matters mind,
And leave Immortal things to Heaven resigned.


Hence it is apparent how many sorts of Sentences there are, and how they are
to be accommodated: that is to say, either to things Ambiguous, or new, or
paradoxicall, or wanting illustration, where the Sentence is to be added to the
conclusion by way of illustration. As if a man should say, Because I would not
be subject to Envy, nor be accounted Idle, think learning unnecessary. Or else
the last may be first affirmed, and the first afterward. But such things as do
not seem to be Paradoxes, yet are uncertain, are to be uttered concisely with
the Wherefore. To which Laconic Brevity, and Riddles are properly accommodated;
as if a man should say, what Stesichorus said to the Locrians, That they should
not be contumelious, lest the Grasshoppers should Sing.

Now Sentences and Apophthegms are most proper for men strick'n in years,
concerning things of which they have particular Experience. For where a man
cannot pretend to Gravity, Sentences will ill become him. And he that speaks
without Experience, is a fool and illiterate. For which this is a very good
Testimony, for that your Husbandmen are the chief Proverb-mongers, and have
'em still at their Tongues end.

To speak Universally that which is not Universal, is proper chiefly for
Lamentation, or Amplification; and then either at the beginning or after
Demonstration. But vulgar and common Sentences are to be made choice of, if
they be needful. For because they are common, yet granted by all, they seem to
be true. As when we would exhort those that have not sacrificed, to run into
danger, It Is the best Omen of Success, that me,
Fight for our Country, and for Liberty.
And to those that are Inferior in number, The Chance of War is doubtful --


Or if we would exhort the Soldiers to slaughter our Enemies Children who have
done us no harm, It Is but mere folly, once the parent killed,
In tender pity then to spare the Child.


Also some Proverbs are Sentences and brought as testimonies, as that of an
Athenian stranger. On the other side, we ought to call those Sentences also
which are frequent in the Mouths of the Multitude: and I call these such as are
frequent in the mouths of the Multitude Know thy self; Nothing to excess; when
either our dispositions would appear better, or that the thing be spoken
Pathetically: and that is spoken pathetically, as when a man in his anger
should sav, That it is false that a man ought to know him self: for such a one,
if he knew himself, would never think himself worthy to govern.

The manners or disposition appear better in this manner; We ought not, as they
say, to love as one that intended to bear malice, but to hate as one that
intended to love. And by that saying We ought to make our choice apparent; if
not, then to declare the cause: as in saying thus, we ought to love, not as
they say commonly, but as one that always intended to love: Otherwise it is but
the love of a treacherous Person. Or thus, The saying does not please me; For a
true Friend, as a Lover ought to love always: nor does that saying please me,
of nothing to excess. For we ought to hate the wicked to excess. Now these
Sentences bring great assistance to Orations, partly because they take greatly
with the Auditors. For they are mightily pleased, when any one speaking
generally, falls into some particular Opinion of their own. Now what I say will
thus be manisest; as also which way to tick'le their fancies. For a Sentence,
as has been said, is a general Enunciation: and therefore they are pleased,
when a thing is spok'n generally, of which they have a good opinion in
particular. As if any one had bad neighbors or wicked Children, he would be
pleased with these Sentences.

Then Neighbors nothing more troublesome.
Nothing a greater sign of Madness then to beget Children.
Therefore we are to consider how they stand affected, and what were their
former thoughts, and then so to speak in general concerning those things. This
is one use of Sentences, and there is yet another, which is better: for they
fill the Oration with Morality: those Orations being Moral, where the will and
pre-election of the speaker is apparent. Which is the property of Sentences to
do; in regard that he who speaks a Sentence utters something in general
concerning those things that are to be made choice of. Wherefore if the
Sentences be good, they make the speaker to appear virtuous. And thus much
concerning Sentences and their use.

CHAP. XXII.
Of an Enthymems.

NOW let us discourse in general concerning Enthymemes; how we are to find 'em
out; and then the Places: for there is a different sort of both of these. Now
that an Enthymeme is a certain sort of Syllogism, has been already said; how it
comes to be a Syllogism, and how it differs from a Logical Syllogism. For
neither must we make a Collection from too great a distance, nor be too nice in
taking all things together. For the one creates obsurity by being too prolix:
the other mere Trifling, as speaking of things already known. This is the
reason that the illiterate are more prooper to persuade among the Multitude,
then the learned; as the Poets say, that the illiterate speak more adaptly to
the vulgar. For these speak things common and general; the other what they
know, and what are near at hand. Wherefore we are not to discourse of all
things that are probable, but from things that are certain and fixed; as either
to the Judges, or those whom they approve. And this because they by that means
appear perspicuous either to all or the most part: nor are we only to gather
from Necessaries, but from things that are most commonly and universally so.
First therefore we are to consider concerning what we are to speak, and to
conclude either by a Political Syllogism or any other, that it is necessary to
retain either all or at least some of those things that are contained therein:
for having nothing, no collection can be made from nothing. For examples sake,
as if we were to advise the Athenians whether to enter into a War or not, how
could it be done, unless it be known what their strength is by Sea or Land, or
both; what their Revenues, who their friends, and who their Enemies. Moreover
what Wars they have waged, and how they were carried on, and the like. How
could we commend 'em, unless we knew their victories at Salamine and Marathon,
or their famous Acts for the Offspring of Hercules? seeing that all men raise
their Applauses either from things that are, or which appear to be noble and
brave. In like manner they disprove and discommend from the contraries,
considering what there is in them that may be, or seem to be so. As that they
reduced the Greeks into Slavery, and subdued the Eginetans and Potideats, who
assisted them against the Barbarians, and behaved themselves with great
Courage; or whatever other errors they committed. In the same manner
Complainants and Defendants, while they consider what things are contained in
the Accusation or defense, produce their matter from those things. Neither is
it material whether we speak of the Athenians, or Lace^monians, of Men or of
the Gods. Therefore if a Man were to counsel Achilles; to praise, to
discommend, or defend him; those things are to be taken of either side which
are or seem to be, as in praising or dispraising, what is honorable, what
unworthy is to be assumed. In pleading for or against, what is just, or unjust:
In counselling, what is profitable, what pernicious. The same rule holds in
every thing else: as concerning Justice, whether good or not good, must be
discoursed from those things that are inherent in Justice and Goodness. So that
seeing all men seem to take this way of demonstration, whether they argue more
accurately or more remissly (for they do not take from all things, but from
those things that are included in the Subject) it is apparent that
demonstration can be made no other way. Whence it is necessary, as in the
Topic's, to select the most probable and proper out of every one: and as to
those things that happen of a sudden, to make the same inquiry, not regarding
things Indefinite, but really included in the matter, and comprehending the
most and the nearest. For the more things are included, the more easy will the
Demonstration be. And the nearer they are, the more proper and less Common. We
call those common things, as to praise Achilles, because a Man, because of the
Race of the Semigods, because he fought at the Siege of Troy. For these things
belong also to others: and the same Person praises Achilles no more then
Diomed. But Proper things are those things that never happened to any other
then to Achilles, as to kill Hector, the Stoutest of all the Trojoas; and
Cycnus, who being invulnerable, hindered all others from landing; and because
that being very young he fought uncompell'd as a volunteer. And therefore there
is but one Place of Election and that is topical. Now concerning the Elements
of Enthymemes.

I take the Place and the Element of an Enthymem to be all one: and of
Enthymemes there are two sorts.

The first is demonstrative, whether the thing is or is not. The next for
Confutation. And they differ as in Logic the Syllogism, and the Elenchus or the
Probation. The Demonstrative Enthymeme, collects together those things that are
not conceded. Therefore for the most part there are Places relating to every
one of these forms both profitable and necessary; out of every one of which the
propositions are Selected.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Places of Enthymemes.

THere is one place of Demonstrative Enthymemes from contraries. For we are to
consider whether the contrary be in the contrary. For if it be not, it refuses;
and confirms if it be. As when we say Temperance is a good thing because
Inntemperance is evil. Or as in the Messenia^s. If War were the occasion of
their present Miseries, they are to be recovered by Peace. Or like that of the
Poet,

If just it be not, Anger should chastise
Those that against their will do inquiries
Nor are they to be praised that nere do well
Unless necessity or force compe.
Or thus,

If falsehood among m^n such Credit gains
As often by soft persuasion to deceive;
On the other side me safely may maintain,
There are more Truths that men will not believe.
Another Place is taken from Similar Cases. For it must be included or not
included in the thing, as if we should say, That what is just is not alone
good: for then what is justly done would be done well; but to do justly is not
always desirable.

Another Place from those things that are relative one to another; as if it be
in the one to act and do justly, in the other it may be to suffer justly; and
if to have Commanded, to have submitted to Command. As Diomedon the Publican
said concerning the customs. If it be no shame for you to sell, it is no shame
for us to purchase. For if he that has suffered, has suffered justly and well,
therefore he that acted; and if he that acted, therefore he that suffered. But
here may a Cavil arise, for if a man be justly slain, he may have justly
suffered, but not at your hands. And therefore it must be seperately considered
whether he were worthy to suffer, who suffered, and to act, who acted; and then
to proceed as shall seem most convenient. For this sometimes differs, and
hinders nothing, as in Theodectes's Al^maeon.

Did never any Mortal hate thy Mother?
To which the Aswer is, Distinctly this must be considered.


Alshesiboea also demanding, Wherefore said she, have they doomed thee to dye,
me not to put to death?

Or like the Judgments pronounced upon Demosthenes and those that slew Nicanor.
For because they were adjudg'd to have slain him rightfully, he was adjudg'd to
be justly slain. Also as to the Person who was slain at Thebes, concerning whom
judgment was required, whether he were worthy to dye; as if it were contrary
to Law, to kill him that deserves to dye by the Law.

Another Place is taken from More or Less. As thus, If neither all the Gods
know, much less men. This shows that where the more is not, the less cannot be.
But this, he beats his neighbors, who beats his Father, proceeds from hence,
that if the Less, the Greater is included, and it is requisite to demonstrate
both ways, whether it be or be not.

Again, when neither the More nor the Less is included: As for example.

Thy Father is become
Compassion 's object for his Children lost.
But no man pities Oenus Loss, a Son
Who made all Hellas ring with his renown
Also if Thesus did no Inquiry, neither Alexander. And if neither the
Tyndaridae, neither Alexander. And if Hector equaled Patroclus, Alexander
equaled Achilles. And if other Artists are not evil, neither the Philosophers.
And if Commanders are not bad because often over come, neither Sophisters. And
if it behooves private Persons to have a care of their honor, you ought to be
careful of the Reputation of Greece.

Another Place is taken from Consideration of Time. As Iphicrates for
Harmodius. If before I acted I had desired a Statue, and you had granted my
request before I acted, will ye deny it me now I have acted: Never promise
therefore in expectation of a benefit, and deny when the benefit is received.
And again, as to that whether the Thebans shall permit Philip a passag into
Attica, for if he had demanded that Passage before he assisted against the
Phocians, they would have certainly granted it; and therefore it was absurd to
deny him when he had forgiven 'em and believed 'em.

Another Place is taken from things said and retorted upon the Spcaker, as
Iphi^rates against Aristophon, with whom he treated to betray the Ships for
money, which he denying to do; Therefore said He, thou being Aristophon would
not betray the Ships, and should I being Iphicrtes have betrayed 'em? For he
must be thought to have been more criminal, otherwise it will appear
ridiculous, as if any one should have said the same thing against Aristides
being the Accuser. But to detract from the Credit of the Accuser. For the
Accuser would always be better then the Person accused. Therefore this Place is
for absolute evincement, that it is a positive absurdity for any man to object
that against others which he does or would do himself; or to persuade another
to do that which he neither does or would do himself.

There is another Place from the Definition. As if a man should say Daemonium
is nothing else but God, or the work of God. Now whoever thinks there is a work
of God, the same Person must of necessity believe there is a God. And as
Iphicrates, said that he is the most generous, who is the best: for there was
nothing of Generous, that could be attributed either to Harmodius or
Aristogiton, till they had acted generously. And for that he is the nearest.
For my Actions are nearer to the Actions of Harmodius and Aristogiton then
thine. Andas in Alexander, we must certainly confess that the Fruition of one
Body does not content the Intemperate. Which was the reason that Socrates
denied to go to Archelaus, since he thought it a dishonor, that he who had
received a benefit could not retaliate it. For all these Persons when they have
defined and considered what the thing is, then they discourse of what they
propound. Another Place arises from the multiplicity of manners by which a
thing may be.

Another from Division. As if all the rest are injured for the sake of thee, or
this or that Man, or that thing. And for the sake of two it was impossible: and
for the sake of the third, they themselves confess he could not.

Another from Induction; as from Peparethia, That women every where make a true
distinction of Children Thus the Mother declared to M^^^ias questoning the
Legality of her Son at Athens. And at ^^ebes ^^menia and Stilbone having the
same Controversy, Dodonis confirmed the Boy to be the Son of ^^^eni^. And so he
was afterward reputed. Also by the Law of Theode^^es men never trust the^^ own
Horses to those that have ill used other men's: no^ to such as have cast away
other men's Vessels, does any man commit the charge of his own. Which holding
^rue in every thing else, no man trusts himself with one that neglects his own
safety. And as Al^a ^m^s argued, All men honor wise men; the P^rian's honor
Archilocus though abusive; The Chiot's honored Homor though no^^ of their
Countryman. The Mitylen^eans (...) Sappho though a Woman; and the (...) though
no great admirers of Philosophers, yet admitted Chilo into their Senate. The
Latins honored Pythagoras; and the Lam^^^cen^s buried Ana^agoras
magnificently, and honor him to this day. The Athenians also, so long as they
observed Solon's Laws were happy; and the Lacedem^nians so long as they obey^^
those of L^^u^gus. Th^bes also was governed by Philosophers, and then
flourished.

Another Place, is taken from a Judgment made o^ the same thing or some thing
like, or contrary to it; especially if by all and always; or the most and good
men: or if the Judges or their favorites: or Persons against whom there is no
Judgment to be given, as Princes: or such against whom it would be a shame to
give Judgment, as God, a Parent or a Teacher; as A^tocle, argued against
Mixi^emi^^s: If it were lawful for the Furies to give judgment in the
Areopagus, why not for Mixi^emides? Or as Sappho argued, that Death was an
Evil. For unless the Gods had so adjudg'd it, they themselves would dye. Or as
A^islippus replied to Plato, whom he looked upon as too dogmatical; but our
Companion, said he, affirms no such thing, meaning Socrates. Egesippus also
having first consulted the Oracle of Olympus, came to Delphos* and demanded of
Apollo, whether he were of the same judgment with his Father, deeming it
ignominious for the Gods to contradict each other. Or as Isocrates wrote, that
Helena excelled in virtue, if These^s so adjudg'd it. And Paris, whom the
Goddesses preferred. And that E^^goras excelled in virtue, as says Isocrates,
because that Conon in his Calamity, rejecting all others, went to him.

Another Place is taken from the Parts; as in the Topics what sort of motion
the Soul is? either this or that: of which there is an example in Socrates of
Theodec^es. What Temple did he violate? What Gods did he not worship among
those which the City so esteemed?

Another Place from Connection. Because in most things it so happens that they
are attended by good and bad, there it is proper to persuade or dissuade by the
Consequences; to praise or dispraise, to accuse or defend by the Consequences:
for example Envy attends learning, which is an evil: and wisdom, which is a
felicity. Therefore learning is not to be acquired: because Envy is not to be
contracted: Therefore learning is to ^ acquired, Because wisdom is to be
covered. This Place was the Invention of Callippus, which included Possibility,
and those other things, as has been said.

Another place arises from Opposites, when persuasion or disswasion lies
concerning two Opposites, and the (...) Place is to be made use of in both. The
difference is, that in the one, things that offer themselves by chance are
opposed; in the other, contraries. As when the Priest forbid his Son to speak
on Oration to the People. For if thou utterest things that are just, men will
hate thee, if things unjust, the Gods. On the other side it behooved him to
speak to the People. For, said he, if thou utterest things that are just, the
Gods will love thee; if what are unjust, Men will admire thee. This is the same
with the Proverb of having Oil and Salt.

Another from the twofold Opinion of men; when we do not openly and privately
praise the same things, but openly those things that are just and honest*
privately, those things that are more profitable. And this Place chiefly
prevails in Paradoxes.

Another place arises from Analogy, because it agrees with Porportion. As
Iphicrates said to the Magistrates that would compel his younger Son to public
Duties, because he was Big of Age, If they thought great Boys to be Men, they
were to decree little Men to be Boys. And The^d^^tes in the Law you have made
Citizens Strabaces and Charidemus, though Stipendiary and Pensioners, by reason
of their honesty, and will ye not exterminate from your City those that behaved
themselves amiss.

Another from Consequences, as Xenophanes said, they were equally Impious to
affirm the Gods to be born, as they who affirmed 'em to dye. For the
Consequence of both is, that the Gods at some times cease to be. And the
Consequence from both is always to be taken, as that which always follows. You
will judge not by Socrates, but by the studies which he professes, whether he
be a Philosopher or no. That to Give Earth and Water is to serve: and to
participate of Common Peace, is to obey commands. But we are to consider which
is most advantageous.

Another from this, that the same Persons do not always choose the same things,
after or before, but by Turns, as in this Enthymene; If being in Exile we
fought that we might return, now we are returned shall we go into Exile that we
may avoid fighting. For one while they chose to fight, that they might stay;
another while, not to be at home, least they should fight.

Another Place is to affirm a thing to be, or to be done for the sake of that
thing of which it might be the cause, though it be not. As if a Man should give
to another, that he might disoblige the same Person, by taking the same gift
away again. Whence that saying, To many Fortune, not in kindness giving,
On many large Prosperity bestows
That their Calamities, at last, their greater woes
May prove --
And that of Antiphon, out of Meleager,

Not coveting so much the Beast to slay
But that their Testimonies might display
Meleager's courage over wondering Greece,
And that of Ajax in Theodectes, That Dirm^de made choice of Ulysses, not for
the honor which he bare him, but that his Companion might be his Inferior:
For it might be, that he might do it for that Reason.

Another place is common to Pleaders and Counselors, to consider what is
diswasive, what persuasive, and those things for the sake of which men act or
avoid. As if possible, if profitable, if easy to himself or his Friends; if
hurtful to his Enemies; and whether the loss greater then the profit. These are
persuasive, their contrarys disswasive. Disswasives are used in Defenses;
Perswasives in Accusations; This place is wholly attributed to Pamphilus and
Callippus.

Another from those things which we see done, yet are incredible, because they
would not seem to be, unless they were nigh; for men believe those things that
are, or which are probable. Yet if credible nor probable, it shall neither be
true: for it does not therefore seem to be true, because probable, or credible,
as when Androcles of Pythia sound fault with the Law, and was exclam'd against,
when they heard him say, The Laws want a Law to correct 'em; he answered, just
as Fish want Salt. And yet it is neither credible nor true, that because they
live in the Salt Sea, that therefore they want Salt. And Olives may be said to
want Oil. And yet it is not credible that the fruit from which Oil is pressed
should want Oil.

Another Argumentative, concerning Repugnances either in time, fact or words,
as thus, He says he loves ye and yet conspired against ye with thirty men. This
separately as to the Adversarys. Then again separately as to the Person
himself. He calls me litigiou, yet cannot prove that ever I sued any man. Then
with reference tothe Adversary and himself. This man never lent any Money but I
have ransomed many of yours. Another, from men and things of which there is a
bad opinion conceived, which seems to speak the cause of the suspicion. For
there is something to be said why it ought to seem so. As when a certain Woman
was accused because she kis^'d her Son, she lay under a Suspicion of lying with
the young Man, but the cause being explained, the Accusation fell. And as in
Theodectes's Ajax, says Vlysles against Ajax I am Stouter then Ajax, yet it
does not appear.

Another from the cause which if it be, the thing is, if there be no cause,
there is no such thing. As Leodamas defending himself against the Accusation of
Trasibulus, that he was noted with Infamy when placed in the castle; but had
wiped it off among the thirty Tyrants; made answer that his Suspicion did not
hold, For then the thirty Tyrants would have put a greater Confidence in him in
regard of the hatred conceived against him by the People.

Another place arises from a consideration whether it were possible or best,
which the Son advises, does, or has done; for if they appear to be such, it is
apparent that he either advised or acted: since no man willingly and knowingly
advises or acts for the worst: only he may be mistaken; for many times it
appears that a thing might have been better done.

Another is to consider, something may be done contrary to what has been acted,
As Xenophanes answered the Tegeates, who desired to know of him whether they
should sacrifice to Leucothea and put on mourning, If, said he, you think her a
Goddess, never mourn; if a mortal, never sacrifice.

Another to accuse or defend from things ill done. As in the Medea of Carcinus.
These accuse Medea for killing her Childern, because they do not appear. For
Medea was mistaken about the sending away her Sons: but she defends her self,
that she had not killed her Sons, but slain Jason. For unless she had done
that, she had done amiss, since she had done the other.

Another from the Name, as Sophocles, Well may thou steel be called, thou
bear the Name


Thus Conon calls Thrasybulus, bold Adviser. Thus Herodicus speaking of
Thrasymachus, Thou art always Thrasymachus, says he, or Bold in fight. And of
Polos, thou art a true Polos or young Colt. And of Draco's Laws, that they were
not the Laws of a Man, but a Dragon, in regard of their severity. Or as Hecuba
in Euripdies speaking of Venus. Well does thy Name become thee
Goddess of madness as thou art.
And as Cheremon, was called Pentheus, or the Mourner form his future Calamity.

Now Argumentative Enthymemes are more approved then demonstrative. For a
convincing Enthymene is a short Collection of contraries; and those things
which are couched close together are most apparent to the Auditor. But of all
Syllogisms as well for convincement as demonstration, those are most
troublesome that do not appear conspicuous at the beginning.

For men are pleased to find themselves able to fore-judg what the Orator will
say, and that they can understand him as soon as he has spoken.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Places of seeming Enthymemes.

NOW because it happens, that this is a Syllogism and that is not, but only in
appearance, of necessity, sometimes this must be an Enthymem, and that not, but
only seemingly so.

Therefore the first Place of seeming Enthymemes is in utterance. And of this
one part is, when the Person does not conclude in a Syllogism, but ends in
something like it, as it is not this or that, therefore this or that. For what
is spok'n in Enthymemes collectively, and by way of Opposition, that appears to
be an Enthymem. And such an Enthymem seems to proceed from the Figure of
Speech. And therefore it is requisite to speak after a Syllogistical form, to
recite the heads of severly Syllogisms. These he has saved, others he has
offered to his revenge, but he has restored the Greeks to their Liberty. For
every one of these require a different demonstration; but being conjoined,
something appears to be made out of the whole.

The other part consists in the resemblance of names called Homonyma. As if we
would argue there is something of Excellency in (...), a Mous, from whence is
derived the most excellent of all Ceremonies: For Religious Mysteries are the
most venerable of all Ceremonies. Or if any one speaking in praise of a Dog,
should comprehend the Celestial Dog; or of Pan, because Pindarus thus speaks,
(...)
(...)


Or to aver Mercury to be the most sociable of all the Gods, because he is
called sociable Mercury.

Another in speaking things disjunctive, conjunctively; and things conjoined,
disjunctively. For because it seems to be the same thing which is not the same
thing, therefore which is most profitable that is to be done. And this is the
Argument of Euthydemus. As, to know that there is a Gally in the Pyreum, which
every one knows: and he that knows the Elements of Poetry, knows there is
verse: and because twice as much is sickly, therefore the single unsound. For
it is absurd to think that two things being good, one of them should be evil,
and this Argument is convincing, but thus demonstrative; For it is impossible
there should be two good things of which the one should be evil. But this place
is only for those that love Cavilling.

Again, what Polycrates said of Thrasybulus, that deposed the thirty Tyrants,
which is Conjunctive. But that of Orestes in Theodectes is disjunctive. It is
just that she should dye who killed her Mother: but it is as just that the Son
should revenge the Fathers death; which being conjunctively spoken, would
perhaps be unjust.

Another place, is to confirm or lessen by Aggravation: Which is done, when the
Person amplifies, before he has given any demonstration of the matter. For
thereby he makes it appear how either he has not done the fact, when he that
defends the cause amplifies; or how he has done it, when the Accuser is
incensed. Therefore it is no Enthymem. For the hearer falsely collects, that he
has, or has not done, the thing being demonstrated.

Another Place is from the Sign. Yet neither is this a Syllogism. As if a Man
should say, lovers are profitable to Cities. For the Friendship of Harmonius
and Aristogiton ruined the Tyrant Hipparchus. Or as if a man should affirm
Dionysius to be a Theif, because he was a wicked Person. For neither is this a
Syllogism, in regard every wicked Person is no Theif; but every Theif is a
wicked Person.

Another from the Accident: according to what Polycrates said of the Mice, that
they were assistant, in gnawing the Bowstrings. Or if a man should say, It was
a most honorable thing to be invited to supper. For that because Achilles was
not invited, he was enraged against the Greeks in Tenedos: but the true reason
was, because he was slighted: which happened, because he was not called.

Another from the consequence: As in Paris, that he was Magnanimous; for that
contemning the applause of the Multitude, he lived by himself in Idea: in
regard that such being Magnanimous, he was also Magnanimous. And because he
spruc'd up himself, and made his visits by night, therefore he was a
Whoremaster, in regard the custom of Whoremasters is such. In like manner also
because the Poor both sing and dance in the Temples; and because Exiles may
live where they please. Now then because these things are signs of being happy,
they who enjoy these privileges are happy. But there is a difference in the
manner, which makes the Argument defective.

Another from the Cause which is not, but as it were the cause; as when the
thing which was don together or afterward, is taken as if it fell out for that
reason: especially by them that manage Afairs of State. As Demades averred the
Management of Demosthenes to be the cause of all the Mischiefs, because the War
ensued.

Another, where there is a deficiency in the When and the How. For Paris did
not Ravish Helena wrongfully, in regard the choice was given her by her Father:
not always perhaps, but at first. For till then, she was in the Power of her
Father. Or if a man should say, it was ignominious for Freemen to be strick'n;
though not always: but when the one has not provoked the other. Moreover as
among Wranglers, there is a seeming Syllogism, from that which is simply, and
that which is not simply; as in Logic, That non Entitie, is Entitie, for non
Entitie, is Entitie not in Entitie: and what cannot be known, may be known; for
when a thing cannot be known, we may know that it cannot be known: Thus in
Rhetoric, there is a seeming Enthymeme from that which is not simply probable,
but a certain kind of Probability: And this not universally according to that
of Agatho Perhaps some one may think it probable,
That many things improbable to Mortals Happen*
For that happens, which is beside Probability* Wherefore that is probable
which is beside Probability. So that if that be true, that which is not
probable shall be probable, but not simply, but as in brangling, the Secundum
quid, or the ad Aliq^id, or the How, not being added, makes the Fallacy; thus
here the beside Probability is not simply Probability, but a certain kind of
Probability. And from this Place was Corax's Art composed. For whether the
person be not liable to the Crime; as he that is infirm has an easy plea
against a Battery: because it seems unlikely: or whether he be liable to the
Accusation, as being stout and strong, he has the same defense, unless the
Probability appear: and so in other things. For of necessity a man must be
either ob^oxious to the Crime or not: and both appear probable: and that is
probable, this not simply probable* but as has been said. And this is to make
the Inferior Reason Superior; which was the reason that men ill brook'd the
Reason of Protogoras, as being false and not true, but seemingly probable

CHAP. XXV.
Of Dissolutions.

ENthymemes are dissolved by opposing another Enthymeme, or bringing an
Objection. Therefore when we oppose another Enthymeme, it is apparent that we
may do it from the same Places. For Syllogisms are made out of Probables, and
there are many Probables that are contrary one to another.

Objections, as in the Topics, are brought four ways: either from the same, or
the like, or from the contrary, or from things adjudg'd. I call from the same;
as if the Enthymeme were concerning Love, as being to be applauded; the
objection is twofold. For you shall either say say Universally that all
Indigency is evil; or particularly, that the Proverb of Caunias Amor had never
been brought into Use, if Love were not sometimes Bestial and unlawful in some
Persons.

An Objection is brought from the Contrary, as if the Enthymeme were; that a
good man is kind to all his friends, the answer should be; That neither the
Wicked do ill to all men. From the like, as if the Enthymeme were that they who
receive an injury, always hate, the answer should be, That neither they who
receive kindnesses always love.

Things adjudg'd proceed from men of Fame and Reputation. As if the Emthymeme
were, That Drunkards are to be pardoned; for that they sin unwittingly. The
objection is, that then Pitt^cus is to be discommended, whose Laws are no less
severe against the drunken then the sober offender.

Now because Enthymemes which are deduced from four things; Probable, Example,
Demonstration and Sign, and for that those Enthymemes which are deduced from
those things which for the most part either are or seem to be, are deduced from
probables; And those from Example, which raciocination collects by Induction
from one or more things alike, when any assuming universally, concludes
particularly; Those from Argument which are inferred from one necessary
appearance: and those from signs, when we collect from what is Universal or
particular, whether it be or not be; and probable is that which not always, but
for the most part appears; such Enthymemes are to be dissolved by bringing an
Objection, and the Dissolution will be seeming, but not always true. For the
Objector does not always dissolve the Probability by denying it to be, but
denying it to be necessary. And there it happens that the Defendant is always
in a better Condition then the Accuser by reason of this deception. For because
the Acc^ser fetches his Proofs from Probabilities, and for that the Solution is
not the same, either that it is not probable, or that it is not necessary; as
also for that he is ready to object that which is for the most part, and that
it is not only probable but always and necessary, the Judge being so deceived,
believes, that either it is not probable, or not to be by him adjudg'd; for he
is not only to judge from Necessaries but from Probabilities, which is to judge
most judiciously. Therefore the dissolution is not to be made by proving it not
necessary, but by proving it not to be probable, which will be done, if it be
objected, that it frequently uses to be so. Which Objection may be twofold,
either as to the time, or to the things themselves: but then it is most
prevalent, if it hold good in both. For the more and the oftener the more
probable. Signs and Enthymems drawn from signs are dissolved as we have
already demonstrated in our Analysis. Enthymemes from Example are dissolved in
the same manner, as those from probabilities. For if we produce any thing which
has not so happened, it is dissolved as not being necessary; or because more
things have happened otherwise and oftener. If then more and oftener, then we are
to argue it is not the thing in controversy, that it is not like, or not in
like manner, or that there is some difference. But Demonstrations, and
Enthymemes drawn from Demonstration cannot be dissolved because they do not
collect Syllogistically; and therefore we are to prove that it is so as it is
said. Which if it appear to be so, and to be a Demonstration it is not to be
dissolved, since there is nothing more certain then Demonstration.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Aggravation and Extenuation.

BUT Aggravation and Extenuation are not the Elements of an Enthymeme. I call
an Element, and a Place the same; and an Element or place is that into which
many Enthymemes happen. But amplification and diminution are Enthymemes to
demonstrate that the thing is great or little, good or bad, just or unjust and
so of the rest. All which things are the Subjects of Enthymemes and Syllogisms.
So that if none of these be the Place of an Enthymeme, then neither Aggravation
nor Extenuation. Nor are those things that dissolve Enthymemes, any species of
an Enthymeme that avail to confirmation. For it is manifest that he who
demonstrates or brings an objection, dissolves. On the other side there is a
contrary demonstration of opposites, while the one proves it was not, the other
that it was done; so that here can be no difference, for they use both the same
Enthymemes, that it is, or is not. But an objection is no Enthymem, only a
certain opinion, whence it will become perspicuous, that the Person has either
not Syllogistically concluded, or assumed something that is false.

Aristotle's RHETORIC TO Theodectes.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
Of the Parts of Rhetoric.

WE are now to discourse of Elocution. For it is not enough to have in Stock
what we ought to speak, but to speak what we have as we ought; to which it much
conduces that the Oration should appear Garbate and Polite. And first we are to
enquire according to the order of nature, what those things are that are
capable to persuade. In the second place, to dispose these things for
utterance, The third thing which is of greatest efficacy, yet never hitherto
explained, concerns Action and delivery: as being but of modern use in
Tragedies and Comedies; in regard that formerly the Poets rehearsed their own
works themselves. And it is manifestly the same thing in Rhetoric as in Poetry;
of which others have discoursed especially Glauco the Teian.

Now Pronuntiation consists in the voic^, how to make use of it according to
every affection, as when lowed, when Soft, when between both: and what accents
to make use of, and what measures are proper. For there are three things to be
considered, magnitude, Harmony and number. And these are the things which
generally carry away the prises at the public Trials of Skill. And as the
Actors in the Poetical contests are more valued then the Poets themselves, so
likewise in the Civil, because of the Corruption of Common Weals. Nor is it yet
reduced into an Art, in regard that Elocution is but a Novelty and seems to be
but a slight thing, if rightly examined.

But in regard the Study and Practice of Rhetoric depends upon opinion, we must
not neglect it, as being a thing more necessary then useful: since there is
nothing to be desired in speaking, more then to avoid being troublesome and
unpleasant: for that when we contend about things and matters, all things else
except demonstrations are needless. And yet they greatly prevail upon depraved
Auditories. And that which concerns Elocution, has some little kind of
necessity to be observed in all kind of learning. For it is of use to manifest
whither the Person speak so or so? yet not so much; for indeed all these things
depend upon fancy, and are referred to the Auditory. And therefore no man
Teaches Geometry like an Orator; yet Pronunciation when it comes to be used
there will prove as Effectual as when it is heard upon the Stage. Some however
have attempted to say something concerning it, as T^r^symachus in his Treatises
entitled Ele^. Besides nature is more prone to action, as less addicted to Art;
But Elocution is altogether Artificial and therefore rewards are given to those
that prove themselves most excellent at that, as to Orators that excel in
gesture and Action. For Orations prevail more, being well spoken, then well
written. Therefore the Poets were the first that promoted Action. For names are
but Imitations; which ^as the season that Rhapsodeis and Stage treading became
Arts. Now because the Po^ts though speaking frivolous things, have seemed to
gain honor by their manner of Delivery, therefore Poetic Elocution was first
receiv d, as that of Gorgias. And now many illiterate Persons believe
themselves great Authors upon this Subject. But the Pronunciation of Prose and
Verse is quite different, as is manifest from the even. For the Tragedians now
no longer use that manner; but as they have left Tetrameters, b^^ake^
themselves to the Iambic as being (...) most proper among other measures for
speech, so they have lav'd aside all names not agreeable to custom, which
formerly and still in Hexameters the Poets made use of as Ornaments. And
therefore it is ridiculous to imitate 'em, in those thy gs which they have
laid aside, as disagreeable.

CHAP. II.
Of Elocution.

NOW then the virtue of Elocution is to be plain; which that it is so, this is
a sign, that if the Oration do not make plain and apparent, it does not do it is
work. Nor must the style be low, nor exceeding the dignity of the Person, but
according to decorum. For a Poetic style may not be low, yet not Proper for a
Prose Oration. Names also and words which are Proper render an Oration
prospicuous, yet not mean but polite and graceful. Variety of words renders the
Oration also more Majestic. For like the converse of men with strangers and
Forriegners, such is the pleasure we take in Novelty of words. Therefore words
the most unusual are to be made use of: For men admire Novelty, and what we
admire is pleasing. Therefore in meeter there are many words made use of to
this purpose, and there aptly enough in regard the things and the Persons are
there more lofty and great which are discoursed of. But fewer suffice in prose
where the Subject is of less concern. For there, if a Servant or a very young
Person should speak too politely of little things, it would be an Indecorum;
though in those meaner things there is a decent contraction and dilatation of
language. Therefore while we do that, we ought to lie close, that we may not
seem to speak fictitiously but naturally. For the one gains credit, the other
the contrary. For from one that lies upon the Watch men Guard themselves as
from mixed Wines. And as the voice of Theodorus in respect of the voices of the
other Actors; for his seemed to be the voice of the speaker; theirs the voices
of other men. And he is well concealed that in his composing, chooses out of
the common and customary dialect. Which Euripides does, and was the first that
showed the way. But seeing that an Oration consists of names and words, and
that there are as many sorts of words as we have set down in our Art of Poesy,
obsolete, reiterated and made words are seldom and in few places to be used:
for it makes a change in the Oration too misbecoming. But Proper, Domestic and
Metaphor only become the Elocution of Prose. Which is Apparent because that all
men make use of these only, since all men use Proper, Domestic words and
Metaphor. Whence it is manifest that if a man rightly observe these things, the
Oration will seem clear and unusual; and yet why unusual, shall not be
discovered. Which is the excellency of Rhetorical Oration. Homonymous words are
most useful for Sophisters: for by means thereof, they impose their fallacies.
Synonymous are most useful for Poets. I call Proper, and Synonymous, as to go,
and to walk, journey and Travel both these words being Proper and Synonymous
one with another.

Pros^iculity, pleasantness and what is unusual more especially appear in
Metaphor. Nor is Metaphor other where to be fetched. But both Epithites and
Metaphors ought to be congruous, which will proceed from proportion. If not,
the Indecorum will appear, in regard that contraries then most chiefly appear,
when put together. Therefore it is to be considered as Purple becomes a young
Man, what befits an old Man; for the same habit does not agree with both. And
he that will commend, must deduce his Metaphors from the best in their kind; he
that would dispraise, from the worst. Thus I say because there are contraries
in the same kind, that a Beggar, Prays; and he that Prays begs. For because
both are Petitions, it is expedient to do as we have said. As Iphicrates called
Callias Metragyrten, or Collector for the Goddess, not Daductius or Torch
Bearer, to which the other replied, that he was not initiated, and therefore he
ought to have called him Daduchus, and not Metragyrten: since both related to
the same Goddess: only the one was honorable, the other, not. Thus the
flatterers of Dionysius called themselves his Artists. Both which are
Metaphors, the one from what was sordid, the other from what was honorable.
Thus Robbers at this day call themselves Merchants. Therefore it is lawful to
say, that he who does wrong, commits a crime, and he that commits a crime does
wrong: and he that Steals, both takes and Robs. But there is an Indecorum in
that which Telephus in Euripides speaks, Reigning over the Oars, he landed in
Mysia. For the word to Reign exceeding the Dignity of the matter, rendered the
Metaphor vicious.

There is also an Error in Syllables if they are not pleasing. As Dionysius of
Chalcis in his Elogies calls Poesy the Clamor of Calliope; for both are
words; but the words not being significant, the Metaphor is frivolous.

Moreover a Metaphor is not to be far fetched, but from words as it were next
akin, agreeable; and words anonymous ought to be expressed by Metaphor, and
that being understood, they may appear to be the next in kind; as in that
celebrated Riddle.

A Man I saw Brass Sodering to a Man
With fire. --
The Act it self is anonymous: but both together infer a certain addition: So
that sodering intimates the application of the Cupping Glass. And indeed in
Riddles that are well composed we shall find many Proper Metaphors. For
Metaphors make Riddles. So that if the Riddles be true the Metaphors must be
well chosen. Now the grace of the word consists, as says Lycimnius, in the
sound and signification; as in like manner the Turpitude of the word. Add to
these a third that dissolves Sophistical Argumentation. For it is not, as
Bryson said, That no man speaks leudly, if the same things signific as well
this as that; which is false when another word is more Proper, more like, and
more fit to set the thing before our Eyes.

Therefore that which is alike does not signific both this and that, so that
even in this manner one word is to be esteemed more graceful, another more
despicable then the other. For both signify graceful and despicable; but not
quatenus graceful, nor quatenus despicable. Or else they signific the same, but
more or less.

Epithites also are to be derived from handsome things. But they differ; and it
is better to say the Rosy Morn, then the Purple Morn, worst of all to say the
Ru^dy Morn. Epithites also are to be drawn from things wicked and shameful:
therefore Matricide is worse then Parricide: and then again from the better, as
Revenger of his Parent. And Simonides, when the Victor with Mules had given him
a small reward, refused to compose a Copy of Verses in his praise, because he
did not think it became him to speak in the praise of Imperfect Creatures. But
when the Muleman had given him more, he cried.

Hail Daughters fair of whirlewind-footed steeds.
The same thing may be done by way of diminution; which extenuates good as well
as evil, as Aristophanes in his Babylonic, by way of Sarcasm, plays with the
diminutives of Gold, and Garment, and sickness, not to be express by us but by
some Epithet of contempt. But a man must be wary, and observe a Mediocrity in
both.

CHAP. III.
Of Frigids.

FRigid happen four ways. In compound words, as in Lyco^horn, the many faced
Heaven's, the Huge-neck'd Earth, the Narow-haven'd shore. Or as Gorgias calls
one Poor mused Flatterer. Or as Alcidamas, his soul was filled with Fury,
andhis face all fiery Choler: to end-brought Joy: the to end-brought force of
his Oration: and the Purple-coloured Pavement of Theslalus. For all these, as
being compounded seem Poetical. This is one failing. Another to use obsolete
sayings as in Lycophron, Xerxes, a Pelorian man: and Schiron a Vast man. In
Alcidamas, The Boys play of Poetry, The Stupidity of Nature; and exasperated
with the burning anger of his mind.

A third in Epithites either tedious, or unseasonable, or too frequently used.
For in Poetry to call Milk White, is allowable. But in Prose they are either
indecent, or if too frequent they turn the Prose into Verse. But because
Epithites are useful sometimes (for they render the style the more unusual)
there* is a Mediocrity to be observed otherwise the Mischief is wors then if
they were spoken in vain: for as the one sort of Elocution is not good, the
other is bad. Therefore the Writings of Alcidamas seem to be frigid. For he
does not make use of his Epithites as junkets, but as ordinary viands,
frequent, open, and greater then the subject requires. For he does not only say
Sweat, but moist sweat. Not by running, but by the Curribund violence of the
mind. Not the Laws, but Law the Queen of Citys. Not care, but sad care. He hid
him not with boughs, but with the boughs of the Wood: and Dispenser of pleasure
to the Auditory: and Desire, the Anti-Rival of the Soul. Which is both together
as well Compound as an Epithet. Therefore they that thus speak Poetically,
together with indecorum are subject to Frigidity and ridiculousness, besides
that their Loquacity renders 'em obscure. For he that crowds too much upon the
understanding of the Hearer, darkens the perspicuity which he designs.

We also use compound words, when the things anonymous, and the word apart for
Composition, as Time-wasting, which is if it be done too frequently is
altogether Poetical. Therefore compound words are most proper for Dithy-rambis;
as making a great noise: Obsolete words for Epic Poems, as being lofty and
Majestic. Metaphors for lambics.

There is also a fourth Frigidity in Metaphors. For some are ridiculous, which
the Comedians use; others too high flown and Tragical: Also they are obscure if
too far fetched. As that of Gorgias, Green and Bloodless things, which thou
have shameful sown and ill reaped. For it is two Poetical. And as Alcidamas,
Philosophy, the Bulwork of the Law. And Ulysses, the bright Looking-glass of
human life. These things little avail to persuasion, for the reasons already
alleged. But that of Gorgias upon a Swallow which muted as it flew toward him
was extremely Tragical, Impudently done, O Philomela. For if he spoke to a
Bird, it was no Impudence: if to a Virgin, it was a piece of Impudence.
Therefore he might have some reason to be angry, remembering some past accident
not the present.

CHAP. IV.
Of Representation.

REpresentation is a kind of Metaphor differing little from it. For when we
say, Achilles rushed in like a Lion, it is a Representation; but to say a Lion
rushed in, is only a Metaphor. For because they are both strong, he calls
Achilles a Lion by a Metaphor.

Now Representation is very useful in Oratory; but not frequently as being
Poetical. And they are drawn from the same things as Metaphors*
Representatations therefore are like that which Androtio makes of Idrieus, That
he was like a Dog let loose from his Chains: For they bite all they meet. Or as
Theodamas liken'd Archid^mus to Euxenus, who knew nothing of Geometry. And,
that of Plato, they who rob the Dead are like to Dogs that bite the Stones, but
never touch them that throw the Stone: and that of Demosthenes; That the People
are like a Steersman strong indeed, but very deaf; and speaking against the
verses of the Poets, that they were like fair women without Beauty. For neither
the one when their Beauty's faded, not the other when dissolved into Prose
appear alike: and that of Pericles upon the Samians, That they were like
Children, that take their Bread, crying, and upon the B^^otians, That they were
like Flints: for as Flints were broken one by another* so the Ba^otians by
fighting among themselves. And Democrates likened Orators to Nurses; who
swallowed the Meat and anointed the Children with the spittle. Or as
Antisthenes liken'd Ctephisodotus, being a Lean man, to Frankincense, which
delights while it consumes. Which may be said to be both Representations and
Metaphors. So that whatever are approved as Metaphors, certain it is, they will
be Representations; and Representations will be Metaphors without Reason. Note
also that the Metaphor must proportionably relate to the other part, and in
those things which are of the same kind. For if a Beaker may be called the
shield of Bacchus; a shield may be also called the Beaker of Mars. And of these
things it is that Oration Consists.

CHAP V.
Of Elegancy of Language.

NOW the Principle of Elocution, is property of Language, which consists in
five things. First in the conjunctions, if they be so assigned, as naturally to
precede and follow in their proper places as Indeed, and I indeed: but and But
He. Which are therefore so to be placed, that they may be easily retained in
memory, as to relate one to another not at too great a distance; nor must
another conjunction be set before another necessary conjunction: for the
conjunction is proper but in such and such places; as thus. But I, after it was
told me (for Cleo came begging and entreating) went, when I had taken those
along with me. Here are several conjunctions interposed, before the conjunction
conclusive. So that if the conjunctions had been at a farther distance between
I went, the Oration had been obscure. So that one thing is the orderly
disposition of the Conjunctions. The next thing is to speak in Proper Terms,
and not with circumlocution's. The third thing is not to speak ambiguously:
unless it be done for the nonce; as they do, who having nothing to say, yet
pretend to say something: for such men speak those things on purpose; like
Fmpedocles. For Circumlocution deceives, if it be much; and the Hearers are
affected, as many are by the Southsayers; who when they speak ambiguously,
please their admirers.

Craesus crossing Halys shall overturn a great Empire.
Therefore because the mistake is the less, the Southsayers speak of the thing
in general. For in the play at even or odd, a man shall sooner speak truth, by
saying even or odd, then How many: and that it will be, rather then when. And
therefore the Southsayers never determine the when: but all these things are a
like: and therefore they are to be avoided unless it be for some such purpose.

The Fourth, as Phythagoras divided the several forts of words into Masculine
and Feminine, and Instruments. For these things must be rightly distinguished
to the understanding. She coming and discoursing departed.

The f^ift in rightly naming many, few, and one. But they, when they came,
struck me. more especially what is written ought to be easily legible, and easy
for utterance. The same is that which has not many Conjunctions. Also where the
points are not easy to be distinguished, like the Writings of Heraclitus. For
it is a hard matter to guess at his Points. As in the beginning of his Book,
where he says, Of Reason existing always Men are Ignorant. Now it is a hard
matter to tell, whither to point always to existing, or to Men. Moreover it
causes a Soloecism, not to distinguish, unless there be joined to both that
which is agreeable.

As to Noise and Color, Seeing is not a common word. But perceiving is common
to both. So that there must be obscurity, from insertion of many things, unless
those things be set for most which ought to be for most: As for Example. My
design was, when I had discoursed to him these and these things, to go. But not
thus, I designed to go, and then to tell how he had these and these things to
say.

CHAP. VI.
Prolixity.

TO Prolixity these things conduce. To make use of the Reason of the thing,
instead of the Name. As, not to say, a Circle, but a Superficies equidistant
from the Center. The contrary conduces to conciseness, that is, to use the Name
instead of the thing. Also to demonstrate by Metaphors and Epithites, avoiding
what is Poetical. Also to multiply one thing into many, like the Poets. Who
when they intend but one Port, cry the Grecian Ports. Also not to conjoyn, but
to join one to one, another to another. This Woman, our Wife. Which might be
more concisely said, our Wife. Also to speak with a conjuction, I went and then
discoursed him, which might be more concise without the conjuction, Going, I
discoursed him. Also by speaking those things which are not necessary, like
Antimachus concerning Teumessus

There is a windy certain little Hillock.
Thus a man may enlarge ad insinitum, and that as well in good as bad things;
and it is convenient to distinguish in both how it is, or is not. Whence the
Poets deduce those words, stringless and harpless Harmony. Which is proved by
Metaphors taken from proportion, as if a man should say, The Trumpet is a
stringless Instrument.

CHAP. VII.
Of Decorum.

DEcor^m in Elocution is, if it be moving if Moral and Sententious, if
accommodated and proportionable to the business. For i^ will not be
porportionable, if it neither speak ext^^p^re and slightly of great things; nor
loftily of mean things, nor bestow too much Trimming upon an ordinary word: for
that will appear comical; as Cleophon does, who speaks many things, as if a man
should say, Most venerable Coll^slowre (in the worst sense.)

Pathetic consists in this, that the Injury be recited in the Language of the
angry Person. When things impious or ignominious are to be repeated to speak
with a modest detestation; when praise worthy acts are rehearsed, to speak with
admiration; when Lamentable accidents, to recite submissively and
affectonately: and so in other cases. For this proportionable Language renders
the thing Probable, For when the Auditors consider that those are the
affections of men in such conditions, they are deceived. So that although it be
not as the Orator says, yet they believe it to be so. And the Hearer is
affected with him that speaks passionately, though he speak nothing to the
purpose. So that many confound their Hearers by making a noise. Demonstration
from signs is also moral; for it is agreeably applicable to every Kind and
Habit. I mean by Kind, Age, Sex and Nation, as Boy, Man, Old Man, Woman,
Virgin, Lacedaemonian, Thessalian.

By Habit, according to what every man is in his life and conversation. For all
lives are not affected according to all habits. Therefore if a man give proper
names to every habit, he will be able express all sorts of manners.

For it is not for a Farmer and a learned man to speak after the same manner.
However the Hearers are affected with what Orators frequently make use of. Who
knows not this? why, all men know it. Therefore the Hearer out of mere shame
acknowledges, that he may be a partaker of what all others partake. Now when it
is seasonable, when not seasonable to make use of these things, is common to
all kinds: where the common Proverb is still a common cure for all
Hyperbole's. Therefore it is but requisite, that every Orator should correct
himself; For by that means it seems to be true, what he says, though the
speaker be not ignorant of what he does.

On the other side all things proportionable are not to be made use of at once:
for by that means the Auditor is also deceived. I mean, that if the words be
harsh, yet must not the voice or Countenonce, nor those other things convenient
be such as to express that harshness. Otherwise it will manifestly appear what
every of these is: but if this be observed, the other not, it can never be
discovered, though his Judgment may be the same. For if soft things be spoken
harshly, and harsh things gently, they will lose their probability of
persuasion. But Epithites and compound words the more, and the more unusual
they are, are the fittest to persuade. For we are apt to forgive one that is
enraged, when he talks of some Heaven-reaching, or Pelorian mischief; and then
especially when he has already moved the Auditors, and put 'em into a fury,
either by praising or dispraising, by hatred or by love. Which Isocrates does
in his Panegyric toward the end, making use of Fame, and memorials of what they
suffered. For things that are alike they generally bawle out, who are in a
heat; which they who are alike disposed are willing to hear. Wherefore they are
agreeable and Proper for Poetry. For Poetry is a kind of Enthusiasm. Therefore
this must be the way, or else with an Irony, as Gorgias did, or as we find done
in Phaedrus.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Number.

THat figure of speech is most approved, which is neither in measure, nor
without number. For the one is not apt to persuade, as seeming to be feigned,
and calls off the attention; while we are in expectation that the like will
return again.

That which is without measure is boundless. But it ought to be bounded, but
not with feet, which is unpleasant: and that which is boundless is difficult to
be understood: Yet all things are bounded with Number. And the Number of the
Figure of speech is Dimension, of which Measures are the Segments. Therefore
Oratory Prose ought to have Dimension, but not Feet; for then it will be a
Poem. Nor Number exactly, but after a manner. Now of Numbers, the Heroic is
majestic, adapted for reading, and void of Harmony. The Iambic is for the
reading of the Multitude. And therefore Iambics are naturally spoken extempore.
But Oratory Prose ought to be more lofty, and more inciting. The Trochaic is
more fit for Comical Dances. Which is manifest from the Tetrameters. For
Tetrameters are a voluble sort of Meter: The Paeanic remains, which came first
in use, beginning from Thrasymachus: yet they could not tell what it was. But
there is a third sort of Paeanic which is three to two; Whereas of the other
two, the one is one to one; the other two to one: of these proportions consists
the Sesquiterce; and this is the right Paeanic, which is to be made choice of,
in which alone of all the Numbers are uncertain; and therefore least to be
discovered. Now therefore they make use of one Paean at the beginning. But it
is requisite that the end should differ from the beginning. Since then there
are two sorts of Paeanic opposite one to another, of which the one is proper
for the beginning as they use it; This is one long and two short. (...).

Delogena, and Auricome O Hecate nate Jovis.
The other three short, and one long (...) And this is proper for the end. For
because the short syllables are impersect, they cause a lameness; from which
being separated by the long Syllable, the end appears: yet not by the Writer,
nor by the Paragraph, but by the dimension of Feet.

CHAP. IX.
Of Diffused Oration and it is contrary.

ELocution of necessity must either be diffused, and one in a Link; as the
Dilatations or extensions of the Dithyrambics, or turned, and like the
Antistrophs of the ancient Poets.

Diffused Oration is very ancient, first made known by Herodotus the Thurian:
Which at first all Writers; now not many make use of. I call it diffused,
because it has no end of it self, until the matter treated of be brought to a
conclusion; which is unpleasant, because tedious and boundless. For all men are
willing to see a conclusion; as^ being tired out of breath toward the end of
the Goal, or Stage, and are willing to turn again. But when they see the end,
they are not a weary, before they arrive at it.

Turned Oration is discerned by the Period. I mean by the Period, that Oration
which has a beginning and an end of it self, and a magnitude easily
discernable: and such a one is delightful and easy to be learnt. Delightful, as
being contrary to that which is boundless; and because it is always thought to
tickle the Ears of the Reader, when he still comes to a full stop. But where
nothing is foreseen, nor any thing illustrated, the hearer becomes tired, and
displeased. It is easy to be learnt, because easily retained in memory: and
that because there is Number in Periods. Which is the reason that Verses are
more easily remembered then Prose. Now the Period must be terminated by the
Sentence, and not left broken, as in the Iambic of Sophocles.

Calidon this is, the land where Pelops reigned.
The contrary would appear, should it be said, Calidon is in Peloponnesus.

Now of Periods one consists in the members, the other is simple and pure. In
the members there is a perfect and distinct Sentence, easily comprehended in
one breath, not divided, but entire, and the member is one part of it.

By simple I mean a Sentence but of one member. But neither the Periods nor the
members must be curtaild, nor tedious. For being curtaild they put the Hearer
to the stumble. For of necessity, when the Sentence stretches out in length,
and the Measure which is bounded comes to be drawn back, the Hearer must be put
to the stumble by the justling of the Sentence and the Measure together: and
they leave the Hearer, as those that get ground leave those that walked
together before. Whence that jest of Democritus the Chian upon Melampotides,
making excursions instead of Antisstrophs.

This Man frames mischief for himself, inframing mischief for another.
For long suspense is a mischief to him that causes it; which may be truly
applied to long member'd, and long winded Sentences. But Sentences that are too
short member'd, are no Periods, for they carry the Hearer headlong.

But of Elocution in members, the one sort is distinct, the other opposite.
Distinct, as thus; I have often admired those who summoned assemblies, and
instituted the Gymnic excercises.

Opposite is that wherein through both members, either contrary is composed
with contrary, or the same is joined to contraries. As for example, they were
profitable to both, as well those that stayed behind, as those that followed.
For the one purchased more then they had at home; and for the other they left
sufficient to support 'em at home. Here staying and following are contraries,
sufficient and more: and as to those that wanted Money, and were willing to
enjoy it, the will to enjoy is opposed to fruition. Moreover it often happens
that Wise Men are unfoortunate and Fools prosper. Presently they obtained the
rewards of stout men, and soon after they took upon 'em the command of the Sea.
Also, he Saild upon the Land, and traveled on foot by Sea: for he joined the
two Shores of the Hellespont, and dug through Mount Athos. Also, and they
who were by nature Citizens, by Law were deprived of their City, for some
miserably perished, others were shamefully exiled. Or, Privately to make use of
Barbarians in our families, but publicly to despise many of our Allies that
are in service. Either we will have 'em alive, or leave 'em Dead. Or what one
said against Pitolaus, and Lycophron in open Court, They sold you remaining at
home; but coming to us, they were bought.

For in every one of these is to be observed what we have said. But this sort
of Elocution is delightful, because contraries are most notorious, and being
paralleled together, are yet more easy to be taken notice of; as also because
they resemble Syllogisms; for an Argument is but a Collection of opposites:
such therefore is opposition. But, Adequation is when the members are equal:
Assimilation, if both the members have the same extremes. Which of necessity
must be either at the beginning or the end. In the beginning the Assimilation
consists in words. At the end, in the last^syllables of the word, or cases of
the same word, or the word it self. In the beginning thus.

Land it was, but Land untilled, which he received from him. Atton'd with
gifts, and mollify'd with good words, they departed. In the end thus, They did
not think he had brought forth a Boy, but they thought him to be the cause of
the birth. In great cares, but little hopos. In the case of the same word, as
thus; Can he be worthy of a brazen statue, who is not worthy of Brass? Thou in
his life time, spok'st 'ill of him, and now writest ill of him being dead. In
the Syllable thus; How terribly had thou suffered, had thou seen a slothful
Man preferred, Sometimes Opposition, Ad equation, Assimilation, and Ending a
like concur in the same. Nevertheless there are also false Oppositions, as in
that of Epicharmus; Sometimes I was with 'em, sometimes among 'em.

CHAP. X.
Of Festivity and Vrbanity.

TO learn readily is naturally delightful to all men: seeing then that words
signify something, whatever learning we attain to most easily from words, that
is the most pleasing. Therefore obsolete words are unknown, proper words we
know. Metaphor also more especially conduces. For when we compare old age to
stubble, we are taught learning and knowledge from the kind: For they are both
decayed.

The Respresentations of the Poets are also useful, which being rightly made
use of, will appear Urbane and Polite.

Also those Enthymemes and that Elocution must be urbane that imprint a quick
apprehension of things. And therefore Vulgar Enthymemes are to be rejected. I
mean by Vulgar, such as are obvious to every one, and have nothing that need
inquiry after. Nor such sayings as are altogether unknown; but such as of
which, when once pronounced, there is a quick knowledge, though not before, yet
after a short pause of the understanding. For thus there seems to be a kind of
instruction, the other way none. There such Enthymemes are approved according
to the understanding of the thing said, but according to Elocution, in the
Figure, if it be oppositely spoken, What to others they thought Common Peace,
to their own they look upon to be War. Where War and Peace are opposites.
Urbanity also in words consists in Metaphors, neither uncouth, which are
difficult to be understood; nor Vulgar, which affect little or nothing. Also if
they set things before the Eyes, as if they were acted at the same time. For we
more easily discern what is acted before our Eyes, then that which lies under a
future prospect.

Three things are moreover to be considered, the Metaphor, the Opposition, and
the Beginning. Now because there are four sorts of Metaphors, those are more
especially approved which are most proportionable. As when Pericles said, That
youth slain in War, was so taken from the City, as if we should take the Spring
out of the Year. And as Leptines said of the Lace^aemonians, That they would
not permit the other Eye of Greece to be pulled out. And ^ephisodotus, when
Chares labored to give an account of the Olynthiac War, That while he
endeavored to give the People an account, he kept 'em in an Oven. Or as when
Iphicrates reproved the Anthenians for making a League with the Epidaurians and
the Sea Coast, and told 'em, They had deprived themselves of the Food of War.
Thus Pitholaus called the Athenian Galley Paralos the People's Herculan Club:
and Sestos the Granary of the Pyraeum: And Pericles advising the destruction of
Agina, called it the Eye sore of the Piraeum. Thus Esion, They poured Greece
into Sicily. Thus Cephisodotus calls Men of War, so many Bridewells. All these
are Metaphors, and as it were in sight. Thus Isocrates in his furneral Oration,
It was but just, said he, that Greece should be shaved by the death of those
that were slain at Salamina, because that then together with the Grecian valor
their Liberty was also buried. Where Valor and Liberty has a certain kind of
opposition. Thus Iphicrates, The road of my Oration lies through the midst of
Chares's Actions. Which is a Metaphor from Analogy; and through the midst sets
the Metaphor before the Eye. And that saying, To exhort dangers to succor
dangers, is a Metaphor in sight. And as Leucoleon said upon Chabrias, Neither
reverencing his Suppliant Statue of Brass. Where Statue being said to
supplicate, an inanimate is brought as it were to life, by the remembrance of
the famous Acts which the City performed in his time.

No less proper, God kindled a sight of understanding in our Souls.

Thus Urbanity is drawn from Analogous Metaphor, and lively Elocution, that
sets the thing smartly before the Eye.

CHAP. XI.
What it is to set before the Eye.

THEY set before the Eyes, who significantly demonstrate the Action of a thing.
As to say, that a Good Man is a Tetragon; which is a Metaphor; yet true;
because both are persect Bodies. But this Metaphor shows nothing of Action.
That which follows demonstrates Action in a flourishing condition. The Grecians
now free, and shaking their Heels, which is both an action and a Metaphor; And
as it is frequent with Homer to enliven inanimate things, and then to show
something done to the life is highly commendable, as in the following Examples.

-- Then straight again.
The shameless Stone rolled back upon the ground.
-- Amay the Arrow slew
Eager to reach the breast. --
With Bodies fixed upon the Earth they stood,
Eager to gorge themselves with humane blood.
-- Thirsty of blood then through his breast
The pointed blade made way. --
In every one of these, inanimate things seem to act like things living. For
shameless, and to make may, and the rest, are Actions, all which the Poet has
applied by Analogous Metaphor. For as the stone is to Sisyphus, so is imprudent
to the stone which imprudently vex Sisyphus, The same does Homer also in
approved Representations of Inanimates.

Swelling and foaming the^ the Waves rolled on.
For he makes all things to move and live. For imitation is Action. For, as
already has been said, Metaphors must be taken from things familiar, yet not
too open. As in* Philosophy it is easy to discern similitude at a distance. As
Architos said, that the Court of Justice and the Altar were the same thing; for
that they who suffered Injuries fled to both for sanctuary.

There are also many Urbanities, by way of Metaphor through Prior deception.
For it appears the more that he has learnt, because he once thought otherwise,
while the mind seems to confess, It Is so, and I was in a Error.

Apophthegms also are urbane, because they do not mean what the words sound, as
in that of Stesichorus, The very Grashopper's your shame
Will singing in the Grass Proclaim.
And such sayings as are framed in the nature of Riddles are pleasing. For it
is an instruction, and is called a Metaphor; and as Theodorus calls it, a
producing of Noveltys, especially when it happens Paradox-like, and not
according to the common Opinion, but slightly transfigur'd. Which is also done
by Jests that are made by playing with words: for it is a deception, even in
Meter; For the Speaker does not intend what the Hearer expects, He walked
along, and on his Feet he more Chilblains --
not Shoes, as the other expected he would have said. Yet as soon as the word
is out, it is apparent what is meant by it.

Representations also set things most lively before the Eyes, if rightly
chosen, as Philamon contesting with Corycus, Like Parsley stalks his twisted
shanks appear.


Proverbs also which conduce to the same purpose, are Translations from Species
to Species. As when a man seeking to do himself good, does himself a mischief:
Like the Carpathian's who not having any Hares in their Island, sent for some:
which afterward multiplied so fast that they cat up their Corn, whence the
Proverb, As the Carpathian the Hare.

Hyperboles also conduce to the same effect. You would have thought it had been
a Basket of Mulberrys; spoken of a great siery Boil upon a man's Groyn. And
again, Though he would give more pieces of Gold then there are Sands in the Sea,

I would not Agamemnons daughter med,
Fa^rer then fairest Venus though she were,
Or then Minerva wiser --
But these things are most in use amongst Attic Rhetoricians; and therefore not
becoming the Gravity of old men.

CHAP. XII.
Of the several sorts of Elocution.

IN the next place it is requisite to know, that there are various ways of
Elocution which belong to every kind.

For neither ought the Language of the Historian, and the Dramatist to be the
same, nor of the Pleader at the Bar and the Popular Orator.

The Language of History is that which is most proper and Elaborate.

Of the Dramatical there are two sorts. The one regarding Manners, the other
the Aflections. Therefore Actors choose one sort of Subject, the Poets another.
Such therefore as are fit to be read, are ever to be had, as Charemon; for he
is an accurate Writer, and much like an Orator; and Lycimnius among the
Dvthyrambic's. And being compared together, the Historical Writers are very
little addicted to Contention. The Rhetoritians well read, seem so many
Clownish Squablers. The reason is, because wrangling is requisite in contests.
Wherefore those Writ ugs which consist of Action, not performing their Office,
the Action being taken away, appear insippid. As loose Sentences and frequent
Repetions are rejected in History: but much used by the Rhetoricians, who are a
kind of Actors; and therefore it is necessary for them to make frequent
Repetitions, though in the change of words. This is he that robbed ye; this is
he that deceived ye; this is he who endeavo^r'd to betray ye. As Philemon the
Actor did, in Anaxandrides's Geron^omania, where Rh^^amanthus and Palamedes
spoke. And in the Prologue of the Religious, I and I several times repeated.
Which things if they be not helped out by Action, the person becomes as
ridiculous as he that carrys the Truncheon before the Actors.

Next Disjunctives in like manner: when many things seem to be spoken in equal
time: for Conjunction makes many things one. Which if it be taken away,
manifestly on the other side; One will be many. Wherefore it enlarges. I came,
I declared, I supplicated, are many things. But he seemed to neglect whatever I
could say, whatever I could urge. This is that which Homer intends

Nireus from Simus,
Nireus the son of Aglaia,
Nireus the most fair.
For of whom many things are said, of necessity many things must be repeated;
which being often done, they seem many things. Wherefore he enlarged, that he
might once call him to mind, to avoid deception, never afterward making any
farther mention of him, believing the first remembrance enough.

Deliberative Elocution, is like to Picture and Shadowing in Painting. For the
more numerous the People are, at so much the greater distance is the Prospect.
Wherefore exquisiteness is superfluous, and appears worst in both.

But judicial Elocution is more Exquisite, especially if before one Judge. But
that is the least thing among Rhetoricians; For what is pertinent to the Matter
is short, and the Judge separates what is Foreign and contentious, that his
judgment may be right. For which reason the same Orators are not approved in
all these things: One observes this, that where there is most Action, there,
there is the least of Eloquent Elocution: and that is where a voice is
required, and a loud one too.

Demonstrative Elocution is most proper for writing: and the Duty of it is, to
make fit for reading: and the next is Judicial Pleading.

Now it will be needless to divide Elocution into delightful, and lofty; for
why not as well into liberal, and Temperate, or any other of the moral virtues.
For what has been already said will make it delightful, if the virtue of
Elocution be rightly defined. For why ought it to be perspicuous and not mean,
but decent? Because if it be loquacious, it cannot be clear; nor if it be too
concise. And therefore Mediocrity is convenient. What has been said will also
render it delightful; if Vulgar and unusual are well blended, and Number and
Probability, as they ought to be.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Parts of Oration.

HERE are two parts of Oration. For it is requisite to tell what the matter is
which is dicours'd of, and then to demonstrate it. Wherefore it is impossible
not to demonstrate where the Subject is propounded, or to demonstrate before
the thing is propounded. For he that demonstrates, demonstrates something; and
he that propounds, propounds that he may demonstrate.

Of these then, the one is the proposition, the other the Proof; as if one
should distinguish and say, the one is the problem, the other the
demonstration. Now adays they distinguish ridiculously; For Commemoration
belongs only to Juridical Oratory. But how can such a Narration be proper for
demonstrative and deliberative Oratory? Or what is to be pleaded against a
Planitiff, or the Enumeration of demonstration? But the Proem, the comparing
part, and the Repetition in Orations to the People, then are in force, when
there is a contradiction.

And many times there is Accusation and defense in such an Oration, but not as
it is deliberative. Nor does P^r^ra^ion belong altogether to Judicial Oratory,
as when the Oration is short, or the matter easy to be remembr'd. And
therefore the proposition and the Proof are the necessary parts: for these are
proper. The common parts, are Proem, Proposition, Proof, and Epilogue. What is
alleged against the Adversary, is for Proofs sake. The Comparative part, the
amplification of his own, so that it is a part of the Probation. For he that
compares, demonstrates something; which neither the Proem nor the Peroration
do, but only recollect for the memories sake. Wherefore if a man should divide
these things like the Scholars of Theodotus, Narration will be one thing,
Prenarration another, and Supernarration another, Refutation, and
Superrefutation. But he that gives form and difference to a thing, must also
give it a name; otherwise it is vain and Ridiculous.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Proem.

THE Proem is the Exordium of the Oration, as in Poesy the Prologue, and the
Overture in Music. For all these things are beginnings, and as it were
preparations of the way to what follows. And the demonstrative Exordium is like
the Overture in Music. For as Musicians come in with their most delectable and
charming composition, next after the Overture; Thus in demonstrative Oration,
after a short account given, the Orator presently produces and annexes what he
has to say. As in the Proem to Isocrates's Oration upon Helena. For Helena has
nothing to do with disputes and Controversies. Or if he make a digression at
the same time, it is requisite that the Oration should not be all of one sort.

Now the Proems of demonstrative Orations derive themselves from Commendation,
or Dispraise: As Gorgias in his Olympiac Oration, It is worthy Admiration,
among many, O Grecians. For he praises those who first instituted the so much
celebrated Solemnities. On the other side, Isocrates discommends 'em, because
they thought strength of Body worth Prises and Gift, but set no reward for
prudence.

In the next place from Counsel and advise; as if we should be advised to
honor virtuous men. And therefore Isocrates commends Aristides, or such, who
are neither approved, nor yet accomp^ed bad, but such as being virtuous, lie
concea 'd, as Paris the Son of Priam: for he is one that gives Counsel.

There are also judicial Proems, when the Oration is concerning any new
difficult thing, or concerning the common report of the People, to beg Pardon,
as Chaerilus says, But now that all things are publicly divided by lot.

Proems of demonstrative Orations are derived from praise and dispraise, from
persuasion and dissawasion of those things which are referred to the Auditory:
and of necessity they must be either foreign or proper which make way for an
Oration. As for judicial Proems, they have the same force as the Prologues of
Dramatic, and the Proems of Epic Poems; and as for Dithyrambic Proems, they are
like the Demonstrative.

For thy sake, and the sake of thy Gifts or Spoils.
But in Orations and Poetry, the Proems are demonstrations of what is coming,
that the Auditors may not be held in suspense, but know the subject before
hand. For what is unlimited leads to Error. He therefore that hands his subject
to the Auditory, detains the hearer to follow the Oration with his attention

The Fury sing, O Goddess.
Tell me the Man, beloved Muse.
Teach me in other Language, how from the
Asiatic shore, a bloody war infested Europaean fields.
The Tragedians declare the Subject, though not presently, as Euripides. But
Sophocles immediately in his prologue, Polybius was my father.


After the same manner Comic Poets. And indeed the most necessary and proper
Office of the Proem, is to clear the end for which the Oration was made.
Wherefore if the Matter be short and known, there needs no Prologue.

Those other Forms which they use are for the removing of Calumny, and are
Common; being derived either from him that speaks, from the Hearer, from the
Matter, or the Adversary. From him that speaks, and from the adversary, are
derived whatever avails to the removal of a Calumny, and to make Objections.
Yet not all in the same manner. For he who makes his defense, answers to the
Calumny at the beginning; he who accuses, inveighs in the Peroration. And the
reason is plain. For there is a necessity that the Defendant remove all
Impediments at the beginning: but for the Accuser to aggravate, in the
Epilogue: that the Hearers may the better remember. Now things are referred to
the Hearer on purpose to render him either kind or angry: to make him attentive
or negligent. For it is not always expedient to render him attentive, since the
Orator sometimes endeavors to excite him to laughter. Now they are rendered
attentive by great things, by proper things, by wonderful and pleasant things.
But to celerity of Apprehension, if the Orator design Integrity. For to
Integrity they attend most of all. Yet if we would not have the hearer to be
Attentive, then we must tell the Auditory, that the Matter is of little
concernment, that it is nothing to them, or that it is a troublesome business.
Nor must we be ignorant that all these things are foreign to the Oration. For
we speak to a partial Auditory, that gladly hears those things which are
foreign to the Matter. For if it be not such, there is no need of Prologue, but
only to sum up the heads of the Matter, that the Oration may not be like a Body
without a Head. Tho to make the Hearers attentive, is common to all the parts,
if there be occasion. Now if the Orator be any where smart, it is at the
beginning; so that it would be ridiculous to flag at the beginning at what time
all men are most attentive. But when People grow drowsy, there is a necessity
of raising 'em, with a Mark I beseech ye, This business concerns your selves as
well as me: I am now about to tell ye a thing that is wonderful, a strange and
unheard of Crime. Which Prodicus said, was like scattering Money among the
People.

The Exordiums of Popular Haranguing flow from the Prolognes of judicial
Oratory, as not having any proper to it self: for they know the subject before
hand, and therefore the Matter needs no Prolouge, but either in behalf of
himself, or in reference to the Adversary; or else if they do not apprehend
what he desires, but either more or less. In such cases Exordiums in Popular
Harangues are necessary: or else for ornaments sake, otherwise they will appear
to be huddled up extempore.

CHAP. XV.
Of Narration.

NArration is taken from demonstratives, not in a continued series, but in
parts. For it is expedient to repeat the Transactions of which the Oration
consists. Now the Oration is partly without art; (for the Orator is not the
cause of the Transactions) partly Artificial. This is to demonstrate, whether
credible, or how much, or of what sort, or altogether. Therefore it is
expedient not to relate sometimes in a continued series, in regard the memory
may not suffice to declare in that manner. For by the relation of some things a
Man shall appear to be stout; of other things, to be wise or just. And the one
Relation will be plain, the other more full of Variety. It is also expedient to
call to mind things and Persons notoriously eminent. Nor is it needful to make
use of many things in Narration. As if we would commend Achilles: since all men
know his most famous deeds, the most notorious are to be made use of. But if we
were to applau'd Critias, whose Actions are not many; there all are to be
recited. Now praise is an Oration declaring the Magnitude of Virtue: and
therefore the Actions are to be set forth in their full Magnitude: for an
Encomium belongs to Deeds. But things Extraneous, as Nobility and Education
serve for Proof. For it is probable that a Person descended of honest Parents
and well Educated will prove an honest Man. Therefore we praise those that do
well, and look upon the Actions as signs of the habit: and sometimes we praise
the Person that has not acted, if we believe him to be a deserving Person. But
now adays they say a Narration ought to be short, though ridiculously. As when
the Baker, was asked, whether he baked hard or soft? what said he, is it so
impossible to bake well. For a man must not be prolix either in his Relations,
nor Prologues, nor Proofs. Neither does the well-relating consist in swiftness
or conciseness, but in the Mediocrity. Which is done by relating the thing
significantly, so as to create a belief of the thing, or the injustice to be
done.

Somethings are also to be annexed to the Narration, as thy own virtues, and
the Vices of the Adversary, or what else will please the Auditory: as thus, But
I, for my part, still advised what was just and Religious, that he should not
forsake his Children; but he cried out, that wherever he was he could have
more Children; and other things of the same nature, which Herodotus tells ye,
the revolting Egypttians apologiz'd for themselves. The shorter Narration also
suffices the defendant: For the controversy lies only in this, whether not
done, whether not hurtful, whether not unjust, whether not so much. Wherefore
we must not insist upon a thing confessed, farther then is pertinent to the
business; as confessing the thing to be done, but then we are to make out that
it was not done unjustly. Also we are to relate as acted, those things, which
not being acted beget pity or common indignation. As in the Apology of Alcinous
which he makes to Penelope in sixty verses: and the Prologue to Olneus.

A Narration also must be well manner'd. Which is brought to pass, by knowing
what makes a moraliz'd Oration. One thing is, so to speak that the will and
Inclination of the Person may appear. For as the manners are, so is the will,
and the will appears in the end. The Mathematicians therefore never make use of
Sentences, because they have nothing to do with the will. But the Socratics
discourse of these things. There are other Narrations which are Ethical,
because they belong to every particular Manner or Inclination. As when we say,
He made a great Noise as he went: which sets forth the confidence, and
Rusticity of the Person's manners. Also when a man speaks not according to the
agitations of his thoughts, but from pre-election. As, I would, and I would
choose this: but if I forego my profit, it would be better. For a prudent man
pursues his profit; but a Good Man, Honesty.

If the Narration want Proof, a reason is to be given. As Antigone in
Sophocles, when she prefers her Brother before her Husband or her Children; A
Husband or Children being lost, others perhaps may be had; but a Brother or
Parents dying, can never be born again.

In the next place the Narration must be such as moves the Affections and
begets the Consequences, especially of things which the People know; or of such
signs, by which they cannot but know. As, After he had mocked me, he went his
ways. Or as Aeschines speaks concerning Cratilus, that he hissed, and shook his
fist at him. Many speeches of this nature we meet with in Homer.

Upon her Face the Old Woman claps her hands.
For they that begin to weep, clap their hands to their Eyes.

In deliberative Oratory there is no need of Relation, for no Body makes a
Relation of things to come. But if there be any Narration belongs to it, it
must be of things already Transacted, and called to mind to serve as examples
of what is to be done for the future, whether in praise or discommendation.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Confirmation

WHatever things are fit to prove, are also proper to demonstrate. For it is
necessary to demonstrate by bringing a demonstration concerning the thing in
Controversy, according to the four Questions, whether he did the thing,
whether he did any harm thereby; or whether so much, or whether deservedly?
Nor must we be ignorant that in this one Controversy, one of the Persons must
be bad. Wherefore if men quarrel about just or unjust, ignorance is no crime:
so that we must insist upon That, not upon other things. But in Demonstratives
Multitude will be an Amplification, because honest and profitable. For Actions
must be believed; therefore they seldom bring Demonstrations of those things,
if they be past relief, or if another has the cause.

In Popular Harangues some will question either how it will be, or how it will
not be, whatever he advises, but that they are either not just, or not
profitable, or so and so; and care must be taken, least he speak erroniously
beside the matter.

Examples threfore are most proper for Popular Harngues; Enthymemes for
judicial Oratory: for the one concerns the future; the other disputes of things
whether in being, or not in being; where Demonstration is most useful.

However Enthymemes are not to be spoken continually, but intermixed with other
things, left they injure one another. For there is a certain limit of quantity,
as Homer shows us.

O Friend --
Since thou have spoken as much, as the wisest man could do
Nor must we seek for Enthymemes for all things; otherwise we should do like
some of the Philosophers, who Syllogistically conclude things known and certain
fromthings unknown and uncertain.

Sentences may be also used as well in Proof as in Narration. For they move the
Affection and render the Oration well moraliz'd; as thus, I committed this to
him, though I knew he were not to be entrusted. And, though I received this
injury, it does not repent me, especially when I find that the Gain is his, but
the right is mine.

Now of Enthymemes, those that are most proper to refute, are more to be
approved, then those which are proper to demonstrate: in regard that whatever
enforce to convincement, are concluded more Syllogistically: for the contrarys
paralleled soonest appear. But Enthymemes urged against an Adversay, are no
more then Proofs, which dissolve the Accusation either by Objection, or
convincement. But as well in Consultations as in Judicial Proceedings, he that
begins must bring his own proofs first, and then meet his Adversary, loading
and aspersing him before hand. But if the Contradictions of the adversary be
manisold, the best way is to begin with the Contradictions; like Callistratus
in the Messeniac Assembly, where he first refuted what his Adversaries could
say, and then spoke his own.

But he that is to speak last, must first encounter his Adversaries reason, by
opposing Objections and Arguments; especially if his Adversary seem to have
spoken well. For as the mind does not fore-judge any man till condemned, no
more do they fore-judge an Oration if the Adversary have seemed well to
maintain his cause. And therefore it behooves a man to make way in the Ears of
the Hearers, for the speech which is to come; which he must do by removing the
Adversaries Arguments. And therefore he must oppose himself against all, or the
chiefest, or the most approved, or the most convincing; and then prove his own.

But first the Goddesses I will assist --
For Juno, etc.
Where he touches first upon what was most approved for honest. And thus much
for Confirmation.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the season for Interrogation.

IT is then seasonable to interrogate, when of two things, the Adversary
affirms the one, and seeks for an Absurdity to follow from a Question demanded
upon the other. As when Pericles asked Lampo concerning the Ceremonies of the
Goddess Sospita, who answered, That it was not for him that was not initiated,
to hear; then Pericles asked Lampo again, Whether he knew himself? To whom
Lampo, How can I not being initiated?

Secondly, When one thing is apparent, and it is manifest that the Adversary
will grant him the other upon his demand. As Socrates, when Melitus affirmed,
that he did not believe there were any Gods. But said he, I acknowledge there
are certain Demons. Which Socrates having granted, the other asked him whether
Demons were the Sons of the Gods, or at least any thing of divine Nature.
Which being granted, Melitus inferred that there was one who believed that
there were no Gods, but only Sons of the Gods.

Moreover, when the Opponent would show a Person speaking things contrary to
Reason, or at least Paradoxically.

Fourthly, When there is no way to answer the Question, but by Sophistical
evasion. As, that it is not so, but so; that it is partly, partly not; by which
means, they that put the Question are puzzled, for should the other refuse to
Answer, he would seem to be overcome. Nor must many Questions be put at once;
by reason of the infirmity of the Hearer. If the Questions be Ambiguous, we are
not to answer presently, but to distinguish by Ratiocination. When we answer to
Contraries, we must bring the Solution together with the Answer, before he ask
the rest, or conclude Syllogistically. And to him that concludes, if the
Question makes a Conclusion, by telling the cause. As when Pisander asked
Sophocles, whether he agreed with the rest of the Senators to set up the Forty,
He answered, Did not thou act these evil things? To whom the other, There
were no better to be done. In both which Answers there was an acknowledgment
before any Conclusion could be made. Or as the Lacaedemonian, giving an Account
of an Act of the Ephori; being asked, Whether it seemed just to him, that
another should perish? Made answer, And did not thou decree the same as they
did? To whom the other, Therefore will thou deservedly perish. No' replied the
former, For they were bribed to make the Decree, but what I did was according
to my judgment. Therefore it is not proper to ask after the Conclusion, nor to
demand the Conclusion, unless the greatest part of the Truth remain behind.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Peroration.

PEroration is composed of four things; First, of those things that prepare the
Hearer to have a good Opinion of us, an ill Opinion of our Adversary; of that
which amplifies or extenuates; of that which stirs up the Affections of the
Hearer, and of that which rubs up the Memory. For it is natural after
demonstration, to show that we are in the right, the Adversary in the wrong,
and accordingly to praise the one, and discommend the other, and despoil him of
all good opinion in the Court. For these two things are to be aimed at, to
render the one either honest as to the things of which he is accused, or simply
so; the other guilty as to the things proved against him, or entirely bad. Now
how to aggravate, how to extenuate, and how to gain upon the Affections, has
been already discoursed.

As to refreshing the memory, it is to be done as others improperly teach us to
do in Prologues, by often repeating the same thing. For in Prologues, things
are only briefly to be summed up, that the Hearers may not be ignorant of the
subject, But in Epilogues, all the Heads of the Proofs and Demonstrations are
to be repeated. And the beginn^ng must be, that he has performed what he
promised: as for what reason, and what things were spoken. And with this
Repetition is also joined a Comparison of those things which were alleged by
the adversary. Thus he concerning these things, but I thus, and for these
reasons. Or by way of Irony. What would he have done, if he had made out th se
things. Or by way of demonstration, What have we not made clear? Or on the
other side, What has he made appear? And at last disjunctives are most proper;
that it may look like a Peroration, and not like a set Speech; as thus, I have
said, you have heard me, you have it, and so I leave it to your Judgment.

The End of the Rhetoric to THEODECTES.
Aristotle's RHETORIC TO KING Alexander.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
Aristotle to Alevander wishes Health and happiness.

UNderstanding by thy Letters, thy great desire that we should send thee the
Precepts and Method of Political Arguments, it was not slothfulness that made
me thus long delay; but that I might make such enquiries, before I set Pen to
Paper, for my own Information, that I might write to thee more accurately then
ever any Person has yet done, who has labored upon this Subject. And I did
well in so doing. For as it is thy study to excel others in sumptuousness of
Royal Habit, and Magnificence, so is it our endeavor to furnish thee with the
most noble Efficacy and force both of Reason and Argument. Seeing it is much
more noble and King-like, to have a Soul endu'd with Virtue, then to behold a
habit of Body adorned with pompous Vestments. For it is absurd, that he, who
excels all others in renown for his great Atcheivements, should give place in
Eloquence to Persons of the meanest rank; especially not being ignorant, that
they who live under Democracies, refer all things to the People; but they who
live under the Dominion of a single Monarch, refer all things to Reason and
Judgment. For as the Common Law in free Cities always aims at the Noblest end;
so may thy Eloquence direct those that are subjected under thy Command, to what
is good and profitable. For the Law, as I may so say, is but a certain Speech,
limited by the consent of the City, commanding how every thing ought to be
done. Add to this, that it is not unknown to thee, how we have always made it
our business to excel those who make a right use of Reason, choosing to act
according to the Rules of it; but that we have always had in detestation those
who act without Reason, which produces nothing but Cruelty and Bestiality. Her
which reason we have chastis'd the wicked glorying in their Vices, and have
commended the generous, making their Virtues known, to Bliss, to admiration and
Imitation. Thus we have found out a way to divert future Calamities, and to
enjoy present felicity. By which means we have avoided imminent Distresses, and
acquired absent profit. For as a life not subject to pain is to be preferred,
so is right and sound Reason to be advanced above all things. Nor art thou to
be ignorant, that Examples govern most men, some the Law, others thy Life, and
Rational conduct. Therefore as thou surpassest all, both Greeks and Barbarians,
it is to be thy chief endeavor, that they who study these Examples may take
from thee the Fair Impression, and strive to be partakers of thy virtues.

Moreover, there is nothing in Man more approaching to Divinity, then to advise
and Consult. Therefore it behooves thee not to spend thy time in trivial and
superfluous things, but with all diligence to learn the Celestial Art of
Consultation. For what man in his Wits will deny, that to act unadvisedly is a
sign of Madness; but that to act according to Reason, is a mark of Prudence.
And therefore we see all the best Governments among the Greeks consulting
first, and long debating, before they fall to Action. Nay even they of most
esteem among the Barbarians observe the same Method, knowing that the
Consideration of useful and advantageous, arising from Reason, is the Bulwark
and preservation of Honorable Undertakings. But I fear being too prolix in
these matters least I should seem too much to boast my self, especially in
things that need no proof, but are so apparent to all Men.

Wherefore setting all these things aside, I shall only insist upon such as it
behooves us to discourse of as long as we live, as being that which makes the
grand difference between us and all other living Creatures; to which if we
attain, we shall also differ in Excellency from all other Mortals, as receiving
from Heaven the greatest Honor which the Gods bestow on Men. For if other
Creatures have the use of Desire, Anger, and other Affections, yet there is no
other Creature has the use of Reason except Man. Wherefore it would be the
absurdest thing in the World, if in this alone being the most happy of all
Creatures, we should through negligence forsake such a Guide to well-living.
Therefore I admonish thee, again and again, though of thy self sufficiently
thereto inclined, diligently to embrace the Philosophy of Eloquence. For as the
Body is preserved by Health, so is the Mind preserved by Discipline and sound
Learning. For so guided and conducted, thou can not err in the management of
thy grand Affairs, but shall be able to defend and preserve what thou has
purchased by thy virtue. Again, if it be so delightful to see with the Eye,
certainly it must be much more pleasing to discern with the sight of the Mind.
For as a General is the preserver of his Army, so Eloquence, being joined to
Wisdom, is the Pilot of humane Life.

I have received thy farther Commands, That no man living beside, shall take
this Book in band: well knowing, that as Parents bear a greater Affection to
Children begot upon their own bodies, then to such as are supposititious; in
like manner, they who apprehend some more then ordinary invention in
themselves, are carried on with a greater fervency, to perfect what they have
once begun. For some men will hazard death for their Inventions, as soon as for
their Children. Tho the Parian Sophisters, so called, because they do not bring
forth, through slothful negligence despise their low Inventions, and sell 'em
for money. For which reason I earnestly exhort thee, so to observe and defend
these Precepts of Eloquence, that as they grow in years they may not be
ravished from thee by any man's wealth, but may live with thee Virtuously and
Honorably; and when they come to full maturity, may obtain Immortal Honor.

CHAP. II.
Of Ratiocinations.

THere are three sorts of Political Ratiocinations, Deliberative,
Demonstrative, and Judicial. Of these there are seven Species, Persuasion,
Disswasion, Praise, Dispraise, Accusation, Defense, and Question, either as to
its self, or to something else. And we make use of these in Popular Harangues,
in Pleadings concerning Contracts, and in private discourse. Of all which we
may speak that which is most adapt and proper, if we enumerate their Efficacy,
their Use, and Practicability. First therefore let us discourse of Persuasion
and Disswasion (of which there is most use in Popular Harangues, and private
converse.)

Generally therefore, Persuasion, is an exhortation to elect, to speak, or act.
Disswasion is the Impeding from election, from speaking, or acting. Which being
thus defined, he that persuades must show those things, to which he exhorts, to
be either just, or legal, profitable, honest, delightful or easily practicable.
If not, he must make 'em appear to be possible, if he exhorts to difficult
things, and make it out that they are necessary. He that disswades must make
the contrary appear; as that they are unjust, illegal, useless, unpleasing,
dishonest, and impossible to be accomplished: if not, that they are difficult,
troublesome, and not necessary. For all actions participate of these things, so
that he who has neither of these Propositions, wants Arguments.

Now I shall endeavor to define every one of these, and to show, how we may be
sufficiently furnished with all these for Arguments. Therefore the unwritten
custom of All, or Most, is but just in the definition of what is honest, what
infamous; as to honor our Parents, to love our friends, and be greatful to our
Benefactors. For such precepts as these are not Commanded by the written Laws,
but by unwritten Custom and the Common Law of nature. These therefore are just
things.

The Law is the Common consent of a City, commanding in Writing, how we ought
to act in such and such particulars.

Profitable, is the Conservation of present benefits, the acquiring of absent
benefits, or the warding off present evils, or the prohibition of threating
Inconveniences. This must be divided, as to present Persons, into Body and
Soul, and things external. To the Body are profitable Strength, Beauty, Health.
To the Soul, Fortitude, Wisdom, Justice. External things are Friends, Money,
Lands. The contrary to which are unprofitable. Profitable to a Commonweal are
such things* as these, Concord, Warlike force, Money, Revenues, many and slout
Allies, and such like; the contrary to which are unprofitable. Honest things
are such, as from which some splendour or illustrious honor flows upon those
who have acted honorably. Delightful things are those which affect us with
gladness; easy things are those which are accomplished in a shore time, with
little labor and expense; possible things are those, which are to be done in
nature. Necessary things are those which are not at our disposal to do or let
alone; but are acted as it were by a certain divine or humane necessity. Of all
which we might draw Arguments in abundance, from what has been already said, or
from their like, or contraries, and from those things already adjudg'd either
by the Immortal Gods, or by famous and celebrated men, or by the Judges, or by
our Adversaries.

Thus we have shown what is just: and Like to just is much the same. For as we
esteem it just, to obey our Parents, it is also expedient, that Children should
imitate the noble acts of their Predecessors: and as it is but just to be
grateful to our benefactors, so it is like to just, not to injure those from
whom we have received no harm. Now it is requisite that we make the Example
perspicuous from the contraries. For as it is just to punish those who have
highly offended; so it but just to be grateful to our benefactors. Now what has
been adjudg'd just by celebrated Persons, is so to be deemed. For not only we
our selves prosecute our Enemies, and seek their mischief, but the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians adjudge it to be just. In this manner frequent use makes a
thing just. For where it is profitable, the Sentence a giver ought to recite
the Law, Then what is like the written Law: which may be much of the same
nature. For as the Lawgiver desires that Robbers should be severely punished,
for the same reason Impostors and Deceivers are also to be punished; for they
likewise rob the Understanding. And as the Lawgiver appoints the next of kin
to be Heirs to those that dye without Children, in like manner ought I to be
Master of the goods of the freed Servants. For being next of kin to the
deceased that set the Servant free, it is but just that I should be Master
likewise of all his goods. In this manner therefore is like to legal taken; but
the contrary thus. For if the Law forbids that what belongs to the Law should
be privately distributed, it is apparent that all they that make such a
partition do unjustly to all in whose behalf the Lawgiver made the Law. For if
the Law Commands us to honor those that faithfully and justly preserve and
manage the Common Treasury, the same Law deems worthy of punishment those that
wast and dissipate the public stock. Thus it is apparent what is legal from
Contraries: but from things adjudg'd in this manner. For I do not only say this
present Law was made upon these grounds by the Lawgiver; but former Judges, by
the report of Lyschidas, decreed several things like to those by me already
related.

What profitable is, we have already defined: but there is also like to
profitable; for as it is advantageous in War that the Stoutest and most
Magnanimous should be placed in the Front of the Battle, so is it of great
advantage to a Commonweal, that the most prudent and most just should govern
the Multitude; and as men that are in health ought to be wary to preserve
themselves from sickness, so is it requisite for Cities that are in Peace and
concord, to beware of Sedition.

From Contraries Profitable will be thus made manifest. For if it be profitable
to honor good and virtuous Citizens, it may be as much to advantage, to punish
bad Citizens. And if it be to our disadvantage to fight singly against the
Thebans, it may be for our advantage to associate our selves with the
Lacedaemonians, and so to make War upon the Thebans.

Profitable also may be thus taken from the judgment of celebrated Men. For the
Lacedaemonians, when they had vanquished the Athenians, thought it would be for
their advantage not to enslave their City. And the Athenians, when they could
have razed Lacedaemon to the ground, thought it would be more to their
advantage to let it stand.

CHAP. III.
What things are are to be consulted.

WE shall once more define how many, of what nature, and what things are to be
consulted, as well at Council Board, as in Public Assemblies. For if we
distinctly understand every one of these things, the things themselves will
afford us words for every Consultation. Briefly then, Consultation is to be had
concerning seven things; either about Religion, or Laws, or Political
Preparations, or of Leagues against other Cities, or of War or Peace, or of the
Public Revenue.

Now let us divide every one of these, and let us consider in what manner we
are to make use of Oration concerning any of these things. Of Ceremonies there
is not much to be said; for we either say they are to be continued as they are,
or that they ought to be more sumptuous, or else that some of the Pomp is
superfluous, If we say they are to be continued as they are, we are to find out
reasons from what is just, and then to allege how unjust it is to alter any
thing from the ancient and Established Customs of the Country. How all the
Prophesies command men to perform the Sacred Ceremonies according to ancient
Customs and Use. That that worship is chiefly to be observed which was
established by those that first built Citys, and erected Temples to the Gods.

From Profit we may argue, That it will be more for the distribution of Money,
both privately and publicly, that the ancient Sacrifices be continued; That it
creates a confidence in the Citizens one of another, and consequently makes 'em
more bold and daring. For the Citizens seeing the Soldiers feasting and
performing their Military Sacrifices, shake off their former fears, as being
Ambitious to be of the Number.

From honest, by alleging those Ceremonies to be the occasion of several
Friendly Meetings among virtuous Society.

From delightful, if there be any Variety in the Ceremonies. From possible, if
there be neither want nor excess.

Therefore when we consult about things that have been long established, we
must take into consideration what things have been already said and their
Resemblances, and then as the nature of the things will bear, to discourse upon
the several recited Subjects.

But when we advise to make the Sacrifices more pompous, then we bring proper
Arguments to prove that it may be lawful to change the Customs of our Country;
alleging, that to add to what is already, is not to abrogate, but to adorn
the settled constitution. Then, that it is probable the Gods will be the more
Propitious to us, when they see that we give 'em greater honor: then, that our
Fathers did not always observe the same Ceremonies, but varied according as
times and Seasons and their Prosperity admitted; and thereupon made particular
changes both in public and private worship. And again, that it is requisite so
to do, if any profit, splendour or pleasure will thence arive to the Common
weal; in regard we order our Cities, as we do our private Houses.

If the debate be about reducing the Sacrifices to a meaner Condition, then our
Oration must be adapted to the Season, by urging that the Condition of the City
is Lower then formerly: Then, that the Gods are better pleased with devotion
then Gaudy Pomp. Then, that both Gods and Men will condemn the Stupidity of
those that do any thing beyond their power. Then, that the public Expenses are
not at the disposal of men, but according to their Prosperity or Adversity. Now
then, that we may know how to propose and Establish those things that appertain
to the best way of Sacrificing, we are to consider, that that is the best
Sacrifice, which is made to the Gods piously and holily: Moderate, as to
Expenses; profitable, as to War; but splendid for show. Now thou shall behave
thy self piously toward the Gods, if the Customs and Constitutions of thy
Country be not infringed; moderately as to expenses, if all the presents that
are made be not consumed at once. Profitably for the War, if Infantry and
Cavalry feast and maintain their pastimes together in their Arms: splendidly
for show, if there be a magnificent use made of Gold and other precious
Ornaments which are not consumed and wasted. And thus from these things shall
we agree about the chiefest Ornaments that concern the Gods: and out of what we
have already said, we may plainly understand after what manner we are to
discourse concerning the several sorts Sacrifices.

In the same manner we may frame Arguments in reference to the Laws and civil
Constitutions. For the Laws, as we have already briefly hinted, are the public
consent of the Commonweal, which determines in writing, and commands how every
one is to act in such and such particulars. Now for making of Laws in
Democracies, the meaner Magistrates are many, and chosen by Lot, which prevents
Sedition: But the Superior Magistrates, by the suffrages of the People. For
thus the People having in their Power to confer Hononrs upon they please, will
never envy those that accept it: and they who are most eminent, will be most
diligent to exercise Probity and Sincerity, knowing they shall gain by being in
esteem with the People. And thus much concerning the Election of Magistrates in
Democracies.

As to what concerns the other part of Popular Administration, to speak
briefly, This must be observed, That the Laws prohibit the Multitude from
gaping after the substance of the Wealthy; and the rich to a willing
Munificence in public Offic's. Which may be done, by decreeing to the Rich
certain peculiar honors in lieu of their Expenses bestowed upon the Public: as
by preferring Husbandmen before poor Artists, and Masters of Ships before
Ordinary Watermen. Also there ought to be a severity in the Laws to prevent
neglect of Tillage, and the publishing the Estates of the deceased, with great
Penalties upon the Contemners of these Statutes. Also there ought to be allowed
some public place of Scpulture for those that are slain in the Wars, and their
Children ought to be brought up at the public charge, till they come of Age.
Such Laws as these become a Popular Government. In Oligarchies; the Laws ought
to distribute the Power equally to all that participate in the Government. Of
these Magistrates the most are chosen by lots, the chiefest privately by
Suffrage, with Oaths and a very great exactness. And in an Oligarchy there
ought to be the greatest punishments ordained upon those that go about to offer
injury to any of their fellow Citizens. For the Multitude is not so much
concerned for being deprived of the Magistracy as they are offended when abused
and injured. It is requisite also to be very diligent in composing the
differences of one Citizen with another, and never to suffer the Multitude to
meet together in any noted place; for such Assemblies cement the Multitude, and
dissolve the Oligarchy. And thus much as to what is to be observed and desired
in all Civil Constitutions.

Now he that would defend his cause by the Law, must show that it is equal
among the Citizens, that it is agreeable to the rest of the Laws, that it is
for the Peace of the City, for the advance of the Public Tributes, for the
honor of the City, and that it will increase the Power of the City; and
whatever else to this effect. And then the Opponent must consider first whether
the Law be common to all, whether agreeable or contrary to the rest of the
Laws, whether profitable as the other alleged, or hurtful. Now as concerning
Allies and Leagues against other Cities, Leagues must be made according to
public contracts. Allies are to be sought for, according to the Condition of
the times, when they that seek Assistance are weak of themselves, or that they
are threatened with some War, and therefore a League must be made with others
who they think will forsake their side in time of War. And these are the chief
reasons that induce men to make Leagues. Now he that would persuade the making
of a League uses these Arguments, That it is Seasonable, that the People are a
just and generous People, that they are already well affected toward us, that
they are our Neighbors and Powerful. But if all these things cannot be
alleged, then to urge as many as can be.

He that would dissuade the entering into a League, must show that it is
needless at this time, that the People are not to be trusted, and that they
have ever born us a grudge, that they live at a distance, and that they are in
no capacity to assist us in time.

If the Question be whether to make War or Peace, Arguments are deduced from
the Causes. Now the Causes of War are, For that now is the time to take our
Revenge upon those that injured us before; or being now provoked either in
reference to our selves or our Kindred, or our Benefactors; or to assist our
Allies unjustly invaded, or for the common benefit, for honor, or to enrich
our selves, or for any other cause of the same nature. Therefore when we would
exhort our Hearers to War, we ought to comprehend as many of these causes as we
can, and to show that the most of those things that render War successful,
auspiciously appear to favor the exhorted. For all men become Victorious by
the favor of the Gods, which we call Good Fortune, or through Multitude or
strength of Bodies, through Riches, prudence of the General, stout Associates,
and opportunity of strong holds. Therefore from these or Arguments like to
these, which are most congruons to the matter, we may 'exhort the undertaking a
War, extenuating the strength of our Adversaries, and extolling our own.

On the other side if we desire to prevent a War, first those reasons are to be
found out, by which we may demonstrate, that the Injuries are very slight, or
none at all that induce us to War, that the War cannot be advantagous, and then
the Calamities attending War are slightly to be run over. Then we are to show,
that all the Advantages which procure Victory are on the Enemies side.

If we would exhort the Surceasing a present War, then the first thing to be
urged is, That they who are in their wits, will never stay till a misfortune
happen, but will endeavor to make Peace while they are Victorious, and may
procure it upon the best Terms. Then, because it is the chance of War, that
they who win at first loose at last: but that it is the nature of Peace to
preserve the vanquished, and that thereby the Victor enjoys the fruits of the
War. Then repeat the many and various changes that are wont to happen in War.
Thus are they to be exhorted who have the better. But they who have miscarried
in the War are to be persuaded to give over another way: that is, by reasons
drawn from the chances themselves that have befallen 'cm; and the miseries they
endured before, when they refused Peace: and then, that it is better to part
with a small Portion, then to hazard the whole at one throw. Briefly we ought
to understand this, that men are wont then to give over War, when they believe
their Enemies desire what is just, or that any Quarrel happens between them and
their Allies, or that they are weary of the War, or that they are afraid of
their Adversaries, or that they begin to fall out among themselves.

As for what concerns the public Revenue, First we are to consider whether any
of the public Lands be neglected; which neither yields any Revenue, nor yet is
consecrated to the Gods. As there are some public Lands neglected which would
yield good profit, were they either sold or set out to private Persons. But if
there be no such thing, of necessity Taxes must be laid; and the Poor must pay
the Tribute of their Bodies, the Rich must find Money, the Tradsemen Arms. And
thus much for Propositions in deliberative Arguments.

CHAP. IV.
Of Arguments in the Encomiastic kind.

THE Encomiastic kind (to speak briefly) is an amplification of the
Pre-elections, Deeds, and Speeches of illustrious men, and a conciliation of
things absent. Dispraise on the other side is the obscuring of Men illustrious;
and the extolling men of no worth. Now those things deserve praise which are
just, which are legal, which are profitable, which are honest, which are
delightful, and which are not easily accomplished. Now he that applauds must
make out by reason, that there is something in that man, or in his Actions
which was done by him, or which proceeded from him; or which happen d from
this, or was done for the sake of this, or was not performed without this. And
he that would dispraise any Person must make out the contraries to be in that
Person.

Which happened from thence, as thus. Through diligent exercise of the Body
Victories happen; through sloth men fall into distempers. Again; by the study
of Philosophy men become more smart (...) prudence. But negligence brings 'em
to want necessaries.

(...) was done for the sake of this; as thus. Mortals endure many hard
labors, run through many dangers, that they may be immortalized by their
fellow Citizens; and others strive for nothing more, then to gratify those
they love. Or was not performed without this, as thus. Victories at Sea cannot
be won without Seamen; nor can men be drunk without drink.

If we go about to amplify or extenuate, we must show that many good or bad
things were acted by such a Person. In the next place something is to be
brought in by way of Metaphor, that has been so adjudg'd; if by way of Praise,
that which is good and laudable: if in discommendation, that which is bad. Then
produce what has been said by thy self, and compare together the best that has
been spok'n by thy self, with the worst that has been said by the Opponent; by
which means thou may show the thing adjudg'd to be great.

The third way is to counter-compare the greatest thing said by thy self, with
the least of those things that fall under the same Idea; for so shall the
greatest thing said by thy self appear. As men of middle Stature appear to be
taller, when measured together with those that are lower.

Or Amplification may be made in this manner. If this be adjudg'd a great good,
the contrary to it must be a great Evil. In like manner, if it be adjudg'd a
great Evil, the contrary to it must be a great good. We may also magnify good
or bad things in this manner, if we show by ratiocination, and riveting several
things together, as how he premeditated many things, how he designed to act
many things; how he acted a long time; how never any one undertook the like
before; how afterward he acted with those that never any did; how, willingly;
how of set purpose and by foresight; how if we should all do like this man, we
should be happy or miserable. And he that makes Similes must collect together,
and appropriating the one to the other must amplify in this manner. As if a
man be mindful of his friends, it is very probable that he honors his Parents.
And he that honors his Parents, it is as probable, that he is a lover of his
Country. In a word if we show the Person to be the Author of many things,
either good or bad; many things will appear to be great. Moreover the thing
will appear what it is, being either divided into parts, or spok'n generally;
and which way it will appear greatest, that way it is to be spok'n.
Extenuations are handled the quite contrary way, as when we demonstrate the
Person to be the Author of nothing at all, or at least of things very mean and
Paltry.

Amplifications are useful also upon other Occasions; but especially in
Applauses and Encomiums, and discommending and vilifying.

CHAP. V.
Of Accusation and defense.

ACcusation is the displaying of Injuries and Crimes.

Defense is the sreeing a Man's self from Injuries and Crimes of which he stands
either accused or suspected.

Now in regard both kinds have the same force and efficacy, of necessity the
accuser when he declaims against wickedness, must lay open the Actions of the
Defendant to be unjust and vile, and pernicious to the whole Body of his fellow
Citizens. But when he accuses of folly; then he must show the Actions of the
Criminal to be unprofitable even to himself, infamous, unpleasant, and which
were impossible to be accomplished. These and such like are the Arguments
against vain and wicked People. The Accuser is also to observe this, what
punishments are set upon every Crime, and what Acts of Injustice are finable by
the Judges. When the Law then has determined the punishment, this is first to
be considered by the Accuser, that he make out the fact to be perpetrated. And
when the Judges understand the Accusation, the Injuries and Crimes of the
Adversaries are to be aggravated, and it is chiefly to be made out, that he
Committed the Fact, willing, of malice fore thought, and not by chance, but
with great and premeditated Preparation. But if this be not possible to be
done, or that you rather think that the Adversary will acknowledge, that he was
in some fault, or that he did it by chance, or that he did it with a good
intent, then to incense the Auditory you must alledg, that it did not become
the guilty, after they had committed a Crime to Plead that they mistook through
Imprudence, but to have considered before he acted. Or that if he acted
Imprudently, or did it by chance, he ought to be fined so much the more,
because of his Chance and his Imprudence, then he who never pleaded any such
Plea. Besides that the Law does not acquit those who have acted Imprudently,
but leaves 'em to punishment, least they should do an Injury to others by
mistake. And he may farther urge that if such a Plea should be admitted, it
would prove an encouragement for others to play the Villains; for that then
they might take their opportuni^^ to do any mischief in regard they may escape
punishment by pleading mistake, or imprudence. And this is the way to prevent
compassion and forgiveness in the Hearers. And these are the forms of
Accusation according to it is several parts. Defense consists of three Methods.
For either he must deny the doing what he is accused of; or if he be compelled
to make his defense he must endeavor to prove the Fact lawful, honest and
profitable; or if he cannot do that; that it was done unadvisedly, or by
accident, or that the Injury was inconsiderable. Then distinguish between real
Injustice, Imprudence and Miscarriage. For to act premeditately is to do
Injustice; to act through ignorance is only a bare offense; what is committed
not willingly but by the Instigation of others, or by miscarriage, in regard
such things are not acted upon due consideration, they are only to be
attributed to misfortune: in regard that none act wickedly and advisedly, but
wicked men; but to offend and miscarry in Actions, was not only particular to
himself but common even to the Judges themselves and all other men.

The Defendant must also consider what crimes are punished by the Law, and what
Trespasses are finable. And when the Law determined the Punishment, he is to
show, that either he has committed no fact at all, or that he has done justly
and according to Law. And where the Trespass is only finable, he is to
extenuate the offense, as of little consequence, that the injury was small, and
unwillingly done.

CHAP. VI.
Of Questions.

A Question is the Exhibiting of Pre-election, Deeds, or Actions contrary one
to another, or to another manner of life. He then that asks a Question must
demand, whether the words or the actions, or the pre-elections differ one from
another. Now the method is this. To look back into the time past, and consider,
whether any one being formerly a Friend, afterward became his Enemy, and then
whether a friend again to the very same person; or has done any other
unfriendly act out of malice; or would do, if he had an Opportunity, contrary
to what were formerly done by him. Then observe, if speaking now, he speak
contrary to what he spoke before by himself, or contrary to what was reported
before, and now said: also, whether he speak contrary to what he had spoken
before, or would not, if he had an opportunity. Also we are to add to the other
honest Studies and diligences of the Querent, the contrarieties in the Life of
the Person to whom the Question is put. And whoever thus manages the
questioning part, shall not omit any manner of putting a Question. And thus all
the parts of questioning being divided, they are to be made use of severally as
occasion requires, or intermixing their force and abilities together, for they
contain great variety. Nevertheless they communicate one with another, as they
are made use of, and are of the same nature with the different forms of Men.
For they are partly alike, and partly unlike, as well in their Aspects as in
their Senses. Therefore having thus determined the several Species's, and what
they want, let us now enumerate how many ways they are to be made use of.

CHAP. VII.
FIrst therefore, Just and Legal, Profitable and Honest, as we divided 'em
before, are agreeable to all the Species. But in persuasion we chiefly make use
of these.

In the second place Extenuation and Aggravation are of necessity profitable
beyond all the the rest: but their chiefest use is in Encomiums and vilifying
Orations. In the third Place Probations, which we are constrained to use in all
Parts of Orations; but chiefly in accusations and defenses. For such things as
those are most controverted.

There are also Anticipations, Petitions, Repetitions and Tautologies,
Prolixity of Oration, Mediocrity of length, Brevity of speaking, and
Interpretation.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Probation.

TO begin therefore from Probations; of these there are two sorts. For some are
produced from the words themselves, some from these matter and some from the
men? others are fixed to the things said and done. For probables, Examples,
Conjectures, Enthymemes, Sentences, Signs, Arguments and Proofs are gathered
from the men themselves, from the words and from the matter. Additional Proofs
are Witnesses, Oaths and Questions.

Probable, which we call a Probable Proposition, is that which when we have
declared to the Hearers, they retain the Examples of the thing spok'n in their
minds: as if one should say, he wishes his Country may Flourish, his Friends
may prosper, and misfortune to his Enemies, they might collectively seem
Probable. For every one of the Hearers has the same Sentiments probably with
the Person that utters these wishes. And therefore we are to observe this
diligently always in our Orations, whether we have left the Auditors conscious
of the thing of which we discoursed to 'em. For it is most likely that they
give greatest credit to those things.

Probable is divided into three sorts. The one is when in our Orations we
comprehend the Passions or Affections generally incident to all men, as well
when we accuse as when we defend. As when any Person despises, or fears such a
one, or does the very same thing several times, or is again affected with
pleasure, grief or desire; or is void of desire; or is wealthy, or affected
with any other Passion to which out Souls or Bodies, or Senses are Subject. For
these and such like perturbations of the mind, are known to the Hearers. And
these are those things which being naturally Incident to men, must be
comprehended in our Oration.

The Second Part is the custom of Probabilities, which every one frames
according to the general Uses.

The third sort is Gain. For many times for the sake of Gain, forcing nature,
we bid adieu to our own Inclinations.

Which things being thus determined, both in persuading and dissuading, we are
to demonstrate upon the things required, that the thing to which we exhort, or
to which we are a verse, is according to what we have said. Or else that the
things which are like to this matter, were done as we said, either the most or
all. In reference to Things therefore, Probable is thus to be taken; in
reference to men especially in Accusations, if it may be done, you are to show
that the adverse Party has committed this Fact formerly or at least, such as
were like it. Endeavor also to show that it was for his advantage to do these
things. For most men adoring profit, imagine that other men do all things for
the sake of profit. If therefore you can wrest any Probabilities from the
adversaries themselves, make your Collection in that manner; which if it cannot
be done, then infer from things like to those which men are accustomed to do.
For Example, it is a young man whom you accuse, and therefore prove him to have
done those things which men of his Age are accustomed to do. For Similitude of
Actions will cause what you said against him to be credited. For by reason of
his familiarity with those young men of his own Age, he will be thought to
allow himself the same Indulgences with his friends, especially if any man
shall make his Comrades appear to be such as you say he is.

As for them that are upon the defensive part, it behooves them to show that
neither he, nor any of his friends ever acted formerly any of those things of
which they are accused, and that they could be no advantage to him. Or if it be
apparent, that he has done the same before, then let him lay the offense upon
his Age, or bring some other Arguments to lesson his miscarriage. Let him say
that it neither could be advantageous to him, nor now.

But if nothing of this nature were committed by him, but that some of his
friends did some such things, let him plead the Injustice of being accused for
the Facts of others; and then let him show that the rest of his Companians are
sober and moderate young men. For so the Accusation will become dubious.

If it shall be said, that some others like Him have committed the same Facts,
let him urge, that because certain others appear to have done the same thing,
it is no Argument he has committed those things of which he stands accused. And
thus he that denies himself to have done any of those things of which he is
accused must defend himself by Probabilities. For so shall he weaken the
Probability of the Accusation.

But if he is compelled to confess, let him them compare his own with the
customary practices of many, alleging that most or many, do as he happened to
do, but if that be not possible to do, let him fly to unfortunate miscarriage
or Imprudence for Refuge and beg for Pardon, making use for advocates of all
the Common perturbations of the mind, which put us beside our Reason, as Love,
Anger, Wine, Ambition and the like. And this is the most artful Method of
Probability.

CHAP IX.
Of Examples.

EXamples are like Actions other where done, and contrary to those of which we
now speak. And they are to be made use of when he that affirms a thing,
promises to make it out when it seems not to be very probable, at what time
reciting another Action, like to that recited by himself, so done as he affirms
it, that so the more credit may be given to his words.

Of Examples the^e are two sorts. Some are according to Reason, others beside
Reason. Examples according to Reason are easily believed; but such as are not
according to reason seldom or never gain credit. As if a man should say the
Rich are juster then the Poor, and brings for Example certain just Actions of
Rich men. These and such like Examples seem to be according to Reason, in
regard most men believe the Wealthy to be juster then the Poor. But if on the
other side, another Person brings Examples of Rich men doing Injury for love of
Money, bringing an Example that it is not so agreeable to Probability, he shall
lessen the Argument against the Rich. In like manner another Person brings
Example of a thing that seems according ing to Reason; That the Laced^emonians
or Athenians being reinforced with a great Multitude of Allies, vanquished
their Enemies, and thence will persuade the Auditors to court many Allies;
These Examples are according to Reason. For all men believe that Multitude very
much conduces to Victory. But if any one will undertake to show that Multitude
is not the cause of Victory, he must make use of such Examples as are beside
Reason, as when the Athenian Fugitives with fifty men, and one Tribe,
e^countring a much greater Multitude, assisted by the Lacedaemonians their
Allies, regained their own City. And again, But the Thebans, when the
Laced^emonians assisted by the whole force of the Peloponnesians, invaded
Baeotia, withstood their Enemies alone, and utterly defeated the
Laced^^monians. Again, But Dio Sailing to Syracuse with three thousand men,
vanquished Dionysius that had five times his Number. Also the Corinthians, when
they Sailed with nine Galleys to ay'd the Syracusans, drove the Carthaginians
out of the City, though they had possession of the Town and the Haven with a
hundred and fifty ships. Briefly, such Examples as these, that seem contrary to
Reason, are often objected in Consultation to those Examples that seem much
more rational.

This is therefore the nature of Examples, and they are to be used both ways.
When we speak of things that are done according to Reason, we show how such and
such things were accomplished in such a manner. But when we offer Examples that
seem contradictory to Reason, we show how such and such things, though rashly
undertaken had a prosperous Issue. But they that speak against these Examples,
ought to show how these successes happened, and then to urge, that they rately
fall out, but the other Examples frequently. And this is the use which is to be
made of Examples. But when we offer Examples contrary to reason, we are to
collect the most we can, and then to affirm, that the one as well as the other
frequently happen.

Now we may produce Examples not only from these things, but from their
Contraries; as if we were to show, that some through their covetousness toward
their Allies have lost their Friendship, and then proceeding, say, But we would
have been more equal and more liberal to our Allies, and so have preserved
their friendship a longer time. And again, as if after we had shown, that
others because they undertook the War, before they were well provided for it,
were vanquished, we should they say, But let us go well provided to War, for
then we may have more certain hopes of success. We may also take many Examples
as well from things past, as from the present affairs. For most things are
partly like, partly unlike one to another. Wherefore we need not fear to have
store of Examples to refute those that are offered by others.

CHAP. X.
Of Conjectures.

COnjectures are whatever are done contrary to those things concerning which
the Discourse is, and wherein the Discourse it self contradicts it self. For
the most Auditors, by those contrarieties which happen contrary to reason of
the Common course of Action, conjecture, that there is nothing of sound and
solid in those things which are said or done. And a man may make several
Conjectures, by observing whether the Opponents Oration contradict it self, or
whether the thing it self be contraty to the Discourse of the Speaker.

CHAP. XI.
Of Enthymemes.

ENthymemes are those things which are not only contrary to Reason and
Practice, but to all other things beside. And a man may make use of many,
handling them as in the Questioning Kind, observing whether the Discoure
contradict it self, or whether the things transacted be contrary to Justice, to
the Law, to what is profitable, to Probability, to the Genius of the Speaker,
or to the nature of the Transactions. Therefore such Enthymemes are to be
chosen according to the contraries. Now the contraries to these are such as we
ought to assume for our selves, showing that our Actions and our Words are
contrary to what is unjust, illegal, unprofitable, to the manners of wicked
men, and in a word to every thing that is evil. All which ought to be spoken
briefly and in few words. And in this manner we may frame many Enthymemes, and
make the best use of 'em.

CHAP. XII.
Of a Sentence.

A Sentence (to speak briefly) is the declaration of a man's proper opinion in
all things.

Of Sentences there are two sorts. The one Credible, the other Paradoxical.
When we speak a thing that deserves to be credited, there is no reason to be
given. For neither is what is said unknown, neither does any Person contradict
it. But when a Paradox is spoken, the reasons are in few words to be given, to
avoid Loquacity and the misfortune of not being believed. Now those Sentences
are always to be spoken that are most consentaneous to the present affairs,
lest what is uttered should seem forced and improper. And we may deduce many
Sentences, either naturally, or from Hyperboles, or by way of Paromoiosis.

Natural Sentences are these, No man, in my opinion, who is unkill'd in
Affairs, can be a shrewd Commander. And again, It is the duty of Prudent men,
to study the Examples of things past, that they may avoid inconsiderate Errors.

Sentences from Hyberboles are these. It is much more dangerous to admit of
Theives then Robbers, for the one take our money from us privately, the other
openly.

By way of Paromoiosis or Similitude, these; They that steal our Money, in my
opinion, do the same, as they who betray Cities. For both being trusted, they
'em, injure those that entrust. And again, They that are unjust, to me seem to
be like Tyrants. For they never think they deserve punishm nt for the Injuries
they do to others; but where they believe others to be offenders, they spare
for no Torments. And these, if they owe me any thing, never repay it; but if I
owe them any thing, they exact both the Principal and In-terest.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Signs.

A Sign is the other of the other, not every thing of every thing, nor all of
all, but what uses to be before the thing, or with the thing or after the
thing. And the sign is not only of the thing being, but not in being. In like
manner, that which never was done is the sign not only of the thing done, but
of that which was never done.

Now of these Signs some cause us to think, others to know, and in the next
place those that beget the most probable opinion. Nor can we want plenty of
these Signs, to speak summarily, taken singly and separately from every thing
said, d ne or seen, from the greatness or smallness of those things which
happen to us, either good or cvil; Also from the Testimonies, from the
favorers of us or our adversaries, from them themselves, from the
Prosecutions, from the times and seasons, and from many other things.

CHAP. XIV.
Of an Elenchus.

AN Elenchus or convincing Argument is that which cannot be otherwise then as
we say. And it is taken from things naturally necessary to be as we say; or
what the Opponent says* and from such things as are naturally possible or
impossible; which of therefore naturally of necessity must be. As that living
Creatures stand in need of Victuals; and the like. As we say, Of necessity
those that are whipped must confess what those that lay on command 'em. Also
naturally we say, it is impossible such a little C^^ld should steal so much
Money: as not being able to bear it, and go away with so much weight. Or if the
adversary should aver it to be impossible, if he should but tell us at what
time we signed the contract at Athens: For we are able to prove, that at that
time we were absent in some other City. In a word, we have already discoursed
of all manner of Proofs, and how they are to be taken from Speech, from
business, and from men themselves. Now let us consider how they differ one from
another.

CHAP. XV.
Of the difference between Probable and Example, etc.

PRobable differs from Example in this, that the Hearers themselves have a
notion of Probability; but Examples are brought from things as well contrary as
similar. Conjectures are composed of contraries both in Speech and Practice.
And Enthymemes differ from conjecture is a certain Repugnancy between the word
and the deed. But Enthymemes remove the contradictions concering other Ideas.
Or else because it is not for us to comprehend a Conjecture unless there be
some repugnancy between things and words: but an Enthymeme offers it self every
where and upon every thing.

Sentences differ from Enthymemes; for that Enthymemes consist of Repugnancies
only; but Sentences may be uttered as well with Repugnancies, as simply
themselves by themselves.

Signs differ from Sentences and all other things before mentioned in this, for
that all the other things create an opinion in the Hearers; but some Signs will
cause the Judges rightly to apprehend. Bes^^^s, it never happens to the rest,
that we can abound in many; But we may produce many Signs. An Elenchus differs
from a Sign in this, that some Signs only create an opinion in the Hearers; but
an Elenchus teaches and confirms 'em in the Truth.

Now let us see what may be opposed to these. The opinion of the speaker is the
declaration of his Sentiments touching such or such matters. And it is
requisite that he show himself experienced in those things concerning which he
discourses; and that he should demonstrate how much it concerns him to speak
the Truth concerning such matters. And then let him make out that the Oppoment
knows nothing of the matters which he undertakes to discourse of, and that his
opinion is as frivolous. Which if it may not be said, then let him urge, that
sometimes the most experienced may be in an Error; or that it is not for his
interest to speak the Truth concerning these matters.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Testimony.

A Testimony is a voluntary Confession of a known Thing. Now of necessity it
must be either probable or improbable or doubtful to be believed: and in like
manner the witness must be either credible, or not to be believed or of
doubtful Credit. Now when the Testimony seems probable and and the Witness
true, the Testimonies need no Epilogues, unless for Decorum's sake you would
make use of any Sentence or Enthymeme.

But if the Witness be suspected, then it must be urged that he has given his
Testimony neither out of Affection, for fear of Torment, nor for hopes of Gain,
and that it is no way advantageous to him to testify an untruth: For the
utmost he can expect can be but a small profit: but to be convicted of a
Perjury is a dangerous thing, considering the Punishments which the Law
inflicts upon Bribery and Perjury: and thus we shall render the Witnesses
Credible.

They that contradict the Witnesses are to detract from their Lives and
Conversations, and to enquire into the Testimony, whether it be credible, or to
contradict both at once, and to detect at once all the Vices and Enormities of
the Witness and his Procurers. It is also to be inquired into, whether the
Witness be a friend to him for whom he gives his Testimony, or if he haveany
dealings with him; or whether he be an Enemy to him against whom he gives his
Testimony, or whether he be a poor man. For such as these may be suspected to
swear false either for favor or fear, or in hopes of a Reward, for all which
the Law has provided punishment. And therefore we may add at the same time,
that it would be an absurd thing for the Judges who are bound to judge
according the Law, to believe such men as the Law will not believe.

Now there is a way of stealing a Testimony, which is this. Bear witness for
me, O Calliches: By the Immortal Gods not I: for do what I could, he would
needs do these Things. And therefore giving a false Testimony upon the
sentence, he shall not be liable to the Punishment inflicted upon a false
Witness. But if the Adversary do any such thing, we presently lay open his foul
Play, and order him to attest the Writings.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Rack.

THE Rack is the unwilling Confession of a guilty Person. And therefore when we
desire an ample and strong Confession, we may urge, that private Persons about
most serious matters, Cities in case of greatest Discoveries, draw and make out
proofs by the Torture of the Rack, and therefore the Torture of witnesses
procures the best Evidence. For sometimes it may be advantageous for a Witness
to tell an untruth, but it is less for the Advantage of those thatare tortured
to tell the truth. For then their pain will be the sooner over. But when we
would make proofs by Torture invalid, we must first allege, how they that are
Racked are Enemies to those by whom they are delivered up, and therefore many
speak false against their Masters: and then because many times they confess to
their Tormentors whatever comes uppermost, and any thing but the Truth, to be
out of their pain. Then it is to be made out, that some freemen, to be rid of
their Torments, have confessed untruths against themselves: and therefore it is
more likely that Servants should confess lies against their Masters, to avoid
the torture both of the Body and Mind, which they are never put to suffer that
can frame a cunning piece of falsehood.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Oaths.

AN Oath is an Asseveration uttered with divine Reverence, that wants proof.
And therefore when we would enlarge upon it, we are to say, That certainly no
man would forswear himself, either for fear of divine Vengeance, or of loosing
his Reputation among men.

But when the Adversary flies for Sanctuary to an Oath, we are to urge, that
they who will not stick to do as he has done, will not scruple a false Oath.
For he that impiously thinks he can deceive the Gods, believes he may easily
escape the punishment of Perjury among Men.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Anticipation.

ANticipation is that, by which, while we Anticipate the ill opinions of the
Hearers, and the Reasons of those that would Contradict us, we remove the
Difficulties that lie in our way. And thus we are to prevent the ill opinions
of the Hearers.

But you may perhaps admire, that a Person so young in years as my self should
undertake to speak concerning things of this High Nature. Or thus, Let no man
meet me with a Sour and Morose Countenance, because I undertake to advise ye
in those things, concerning which some others have been so free with ye in
their discourses.

And thus having prevented the ill will of the Hearers, we are then to bring
our Reasons to show, that we do well in speaking or advising; alleging the
want of Orators, the greatness of the Dangers, or the Public benefit, or any
other Seasonable Reason.

If Nevertheless the Hearers are uneasy, it behooves us to speak briefly,
either by way of Sentence or Enthymeme, That it is the absur lest thing in the
world to come here to debate what is best to be done; and now when you are
unwilling to hear the speaker, to think we can ever debate right. Again, That
there can be no better way, then either to stand up and consult together, or
else giving ear to those that advise, to put it afterward to the vote, when
every man has given his opinion.

This is the way to make use of Anticipacition in Popular Harangues. And the
same Method must be used in Pleadings at the Bar: as for Example, to prevent
the Disgust and Mutiny of the Auditors, we may begin our Oration thus. Is it
not assured, that when the Lawgiver has ordained every one of the adversaries
to have two Orations in his behalf, that you the Judges of the Law and by the
Law, should not be willing to hear so much as one Oration, and that such a one
as with all foresight has well study'^ so well for your Information, that
bearing it you cannot Judge amiss? And yet you to be so remiss, as not deigning
to hear the beginning, you believe you know the whole merits of the Cause
already. Or thus.

The Lawgiver ordaines the Victory to him that has by an equal Number of
Voices; how is it that you are so contrary in your Judgments, that you will
not hear the defenses of the accused? The Lawgiver, because those that fly are
in most danger, allows 'em this Prerogative of most Voices; but you cherish
those that accuse in Security, and astonish those that come from the Jaws of
fear and danger to make their defenses.

Thus if the Disturbance be at the beginning: if afterward in the middle of
the Oration, or if but few, they may be thus checked; That it is but just they
should be now a little attentive, lest they should hinder others from judging
truly, but when they have heard him out, then to do what they thought fit.

But if the whole Multitude seem discontented, then not to check the Judges,
but to find fault with himself, by confessing himself in an Error and beging
Pardon. Also we may beseech the Judges to hear us with a favorable Ear. In a
word, we are to reconcile our selves to the Auditory, by speaking briefly; with
short Sentences, and pithy Enthymemes; and by showing that their Disturbance is
Repugnant to Law, to Justice, and the Public benefit.

Now to Anticipate what may be said by the adversaty, these expressions may be
concenient according to the Information we have. As thus, And perhaps he will
bewail his own Penury, of which not I, but his own manner of Living is the
Occasion. And again, I know he had urged this or that, But, etc. And thus we
are to Anticipate what has been spok'n strenuously; for though the Reasons in
his preceding Oration were never so vailid, they will not so seem, when thus
lessened by him that comes after.

If we are to reply, and the adversary has already anticipated us, then are we
thus to counter-anticipate. But this man has not only uttered many falsehoods of
me before ye, but knowing he should by me be certainly refuted, he has
scandalized my Oration by Anticipation, to prevent your giving me that
attention which he so humbly begged of you: Or, Least I should have the Liberty
by speaking before ye, to wipe off those Aspersions which he has laid upon my
Oration. But I am apt believe, that it rather behooves ye to hear my Oration
from my self, then from my adversary. Or if the Accuser has hinted this before,
Which I say are shrewd Signs that he has spoken nothing of Truth or Solidity.
Thus Euripides of Philoctetes.

But I must tell ye, though you think that I
Have lost the Cause, by his suggesting still
That I have done the wrong; it is your part
To let me make my own Concerns appear,
And let him his own business only mind.
CHAP. XX.
Of Petitions.

APetition, is when the speaker begs something in his Orations from the
Hearers. And these Petitions are either just or unjust. Just, as when we beg
attention, or a favorable construction of our words. It is also just to beg to
be assisted according to the Law, or not to decree any thing against us
contrary to the Law, or to beg Pardon for any thing that is amiss. But if we
desire any thing that is contrary to the Law, then it is unjust: and we have
thus distinguished 'em, that when we understand which desires are just, and
which unjust, we may make a right use of 'em; and know when the adverfary
desires any thing of the Judges that is unlawful.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Repetition.

REpetition is a Concise Commemoration of what has been said. And this is to be
made use of either at the end of the Parts, or at the Conclusion of the whole
Oration. Now we sum up the matter in Heads either by way of Retiocination, or
by way of Election, or by way of Question, or Enumeration. By way of
Ratiocination thus; I should doubt what they did, were it not manifest that
they left us first. But it was proved that they came with an Army toward our
City, not doing any thing that they promised.

By way of Apology thus. I have showed how they were the first that brake the
League, and first set upon us, when we warred with the Lacedaemonians, designing
chiefly to enslave our City.

By way of preelection, thus, But we are to remember, that we never suffered
any harm since we made a League with these People: for frequently assisting us,
they hindered the Lacedaemonians from wasting our Territories, and now they
continue to bring us much Money.

By way of Question, thus. I would willingly ask 'em why they do not pay us our
Trihutes? For they cannot say, they want Money; who are known to receive so
much Money every year out of the Place. Nor can they say, they have spent much
Money upon the Administration of the Government; for manifestly they have
expended less then any of the Handers.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Irony.

AN Irony is, when we know one thing and dissemble another. We must not say,
that these men, who boast they have done us so much good, have been the People
that have done us all this mischief. But when we call things by contrary names,
then thus. The^e good men were they that did the mischief to (...)
Confederates; but we wicked People, they that did 'em all the kindness. And
thus by way of Commemoration we use these Repetitions either at the Conclusion
of the parts, or of the whole Oration.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Speaking Quaintly.

TO speak Quaintly, this is one Place: as when we speak Enthymemes either
entire or by halves; so that the Auditors may comprehend the half; to which
purpose we ought to include Sentences. And these pithy sayings we are to
disperse into all the parts of the Oration, never altering the words, and never
uttering the same in the same Sentence.

But he that would be prolix in his Orations, must divide the matter into
parts, and then teach the nature and use of every thing contained in each part,
both in private and in Common, and to declare at large his Colors and
Pretenses.

If yet we would spin out the Oration more in length, we must make use of many
words to express every particular, and make Repetitious in every part of the
Oration, only let every Repetition be Concise. But at the end of the Oration
rammass all the Particulars of which before you had discoursed particularly and
distinctly together into one heap: and thus may we prolong our Orations. But if
we study Conciseness* we must comprehend the whole matter in one word: some few
Copulatives may be used, but most things are to be joined into one: all
Repetitions taken out of the parts, and only repeated in the Conclusion.

If we study Mediocrity, then to cull out the chiefest of the Parts, and
discourse only upon that. We are also to make use of the middle sort of words,
neither the longest nor the shortest; not of many about one thing; but in the
middle between both. Nor must we wholly take away our Epilogues out of the
middle parts, nor use 'em in all the parts: but where we desire the Hearers to
take most notice, there to use 'em in the end.

But if we would write a facetious Oration, take care to observe and assimilate
the nature of the words to the nature of men. Which may be done, if we consider
which are the greatest, which the most accurate, which the intermediate both of
Natures and Customs.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Disposition of Words.

THE Figures of words are three, Simple, Compound, and Metaphorical. The one
terminates in a Vowel, and ends in a Vowel by Syllables. The second begins from
a Mute, and ends in a Mute. The third binds Mutes and Vowels together.

There are also four orders of words; the one places parallel, or else
separates like words: the second makes use of the same words, or changes 'em
into others: the other calls the thing by one or more words: the other names
Transactions in order, or else passes 'em by.

CAAP. XXV.
Of Interpretation.

INterpretation is first to be divided into two parts, and then to be made
perspicuous. We divide Interpretation into two parts thus. First, That he is
able to do both this and that other. Secondly, That this man can, the other
cannot Thirdly, That this man can do both this and that. Fourthly, That neither
he nor the other can. Fifthly, That he can, but the other cannot. Sixthly, That
one is able to do the other thing, but that the other is not able to do the
other thing.

First, He can do both this and the other thing* too; Thus. But I was not only
the Author of these things in your behalf, but hindered Timotheus, who was
ready to march against ye.

Secondly, This man cannot, the other can; as thus. Your Ambassadors cannot,
but this man, who is a friend to the Spartans, is able to do your business.

Thirdly, This man can do both this and that too: He has not only showed
himself most stout and valiant in War, but for Counsel and Advice he gives way
to none.

Fourthly, Neither he nor another can. Thus; Neither he nor any other of his
fellow Citizens with a small force can dislodge the Enemy.

Fifthly, But he can, the other cannot; As thus. He is vig^rous in his
strength, but I am weak in body.

Sixthly, He himself can do that other thing, but the other cannot do the other
thing; as thus. I that stand at the Helm am able, but he that has the Oar in
his hand will never be able.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Dilucidation.

IN the first place, give to all things their own Proper Names, avoiding
Ambiguities. Beware of placing the Articles in their right and Proper Places;
least the Composition be confused, nor disorderly, To the Conjunctions spoken
before, add the following Copulatives: as thus. I was present, where I
appointed; but he who said he would come, came not. Again, as when the same
Copulative follows, For thou were the cause of those things, and of these thou
also.

Confusion of words is thus. It Is a hard case for this man to strike this man;
for it is not clear which was the Person that struck.

How the Articles are to be properly placed from hence observe. This man this
man injures. This is clear in the Greek, where there is a distinction of
Nominative and accusative; but not in English, where the Verb must come between.

Sometimes one word has two significations; but that signification is to be
applv'd, which is most Proper to the sense^, and which the series of the
discourse requires.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Antitheta, Aequates.

ANtitheta are those things which both in name and Efficacy, are contrary to
their Opposites, or either the one orthe other.

Contrary both in name and words, thus; For it is not ^ust, that t^i^ m^^
en^o^ing my ^stat* should gro^ Rich; (...) that I b^i^g deprived of my own,
should ^e thus miserably Poor.

Contra^^ in name only, as thus. Let the Rich and ^^p^y give to the Poor and
Miserable: Contrary in Efficacy thus. I cured this man when he lay sick, but he
has done me the greatest injuries Imaginable. Here is a contrariety in the
deed, not in the words. So that the neatest Antithesis is both in name and
thing.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Equation.

EQuation is when two even clauses are pronounced: and thus many small clauses
may be equal to a few great ones, and equal in Bigness to equal in Number. And
this is the form of Equation, Either for want Money, or through the greatness
o^ the War. For these Clauses are neither like nor contrary, yet are they equal
one among another.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Paromoiosis, or like Caden^ies.

PAromoiosis is that which is bigger then Equation: For it does not only make
Clauses even, but a like, and of like words; as thus Bring a desire equal to
that Imitation of Oration which becomes thee: But chiefly the Conclusions of
the words are to be alike. Now those are like words, that confist of like
Syllables, wh^rein most Letters are the same as in (...); or as in the English
Warm, Harm, Charm, Arm. Or as if we should say, This clink the Close is now
left off by us in Prose, And so we pass again to Exordiums.

CHAP. XXX*
Of Exordiums.

THE Exordium, is a Preparation of the Auditors, and a Summary Declaration of
the Subject to those that know it not, that they may understand the subject of
the Discourse, and give Attention to it; and as far as we are able, to desire
their favorable Construction of our words.

In making our first proposition to the hearers, thus; I stood up, to advise,
how we should carry on the War against the Syracusans. Or, I stood up to show,
that it did not behove us to assist the Syracusans. And this a brief summing up
of the Matter.

Now how to persuade to attention, we shall best know from hence, if we
understand what words and subjects most provoke our attention. Now we are
generally most attentive when we consult either about great things, or terrible
things, or things familiar to us. Or when the Orator tell us they will
demonstrate to us, how just, how honest, how useful, how easy to be
accomplished those things are to which they exhort us: or request the Auditory
to hear 'em with Attention. Therefore as they themselves use to deal by others,
so likewise we choosing out of the premises, the most proper to the business in
hand, and making 'em clear to the Hearers, shall gain their Attention.

Then we shall acquire their favor and good Will, observing first how they
stand affected to our selves in particular, whether kindly or morosely, whether
well or ill. If they are benevolent, it will be needless to speak of
benevolence, but if we must needs take notice of their kindness, we ought to
speak briefly with an Ironie in this manner. How great has been my affection to
this City; and how often, by my persuasion, you have acted with great profit ad
advantage; and how just I have shown my self to r e Public, rather choosing to
expend of my own, then to be a Debtor to the Commonwealth, I d^em it ne^aless
to put ye in mind, who know it so well already; now therefore if you will be
ruled by me, I shall endeavor to show ye, how ye may do well.

But if the Hearers are neither opposite, nor well disposed, we may tell 'em,
That it is but just and useful, that they should be kind to such and such
Citizens, and discourage those who have as yet given no experiment of
themselves. Then we may stroke the Auditory with an Encomium, That they have
always been accustomed to pass their iudments gravely and justly.

Also Extenuations may be used; as thus: I stood up, not confiding so much in
my Eloquence, but believing I should offer that which would be for the benefit
of the Public.

But as for those that are obnoxious to Accusations, of necessity either
themselves, or the matter of which they discourse, or the Oration it self must
contain the Accusations. Now these Scandals are drawn either from the time past
or present. If any suspicion be had of any, from the time past, then make use
of Anticipation toward the Auditors. Nor am I ignorant, that I lie under some
kind of Scandal among ye: But I shall make all those appear to be false. Then
make a short Apology in the Exordium (if thou have any thing to say for thy
self, or in repeal of the Judgments) for if a man lie under any Scandal
privately or publicly, judgment will surely follow, or else has been already,
or else the Accusers will not take judgment; and we must then say that the
thing was unjustly adjudg'd; or that we were injured by our Enemies: or if this
be not so probable; that it ought to suffice for us, who had then the worst of
it, and that it is unjust, since the Matters are already decreed, to bring the
Accusations upon the Stage again.

But if the Sentence be likely to prove notorious, then allege thy self
prepared to answer all Accusations in this most honorable Assembly, and that
if thou have done the Commonwealth any injury knowingly and of set purpose,
thou art ready to suffer. If the Enemies do not insist violently, then bring
the Argument of conjecture, That because they believe they have accused us
falselv, therefore they desist from their Prosecution. For it is not probable
that they should refuse to have Judgment given, had they brought a real
Accusation. Also we ought at the same time to inveigh against Calumny, letting
the world know how venomous, how pernicious, and of how many mischiefs it is
the common Cause: and how many men have been ruined by false Accusations. We
may also declare how idle a thing it is for those that consult the common
safety not to hear what is said by all, and then to consider what they hear,
but to lie festring the Accusations of particular persons. And therefore for
thy part, thou art to declare and promise, that thou will offer nothing but
what is just, honorable, and profitable.

Accusations from the present time are brought against Orators, first for their
Age. For if they be either too young or too old, the Auditory is offended. Or
if the Orator speak without intermission, for them he seems to take too much
business upon him, though he never spoke before, and he seems to speak for some
private end, that harangues contrary to the common custom.

For these things, excuses and pretenses must be alleged by the younger
person, from want of Advisers, or that he has not chosen any Subject, but what
may become his Age, as the Gymnasium, Horses, Arms, Warlike preparations, all
which Subjects are proper for Youth to handle.

He may also insist, that if his years do not permit to be as yet so wise,
however, that he may have acquired it by study and diligence: and he may do
well to intimate, that by his failing no man suffers but himself, but if it be
profitable what he says, the whole Nation will receive the Benefit.

A Person superanunated, brings his excuses likewise from the want of Advisers,
and his own sufficiency; from the greatness and novelty of the dangers that
threaten. Or if he be one that has frequently advised, from his Experience; and
from the shame it would be, that he who had so often advised, should not now be
permitted to speak.

These are reproaches as to the Person; but there are other as to the Matter.
When the Orator persuades quiet to those who have done no injury, or those that
are Superior in Power, or to make an ignominious Peace, or persuades a
niggardly Parcimony as to the Sacrifices to the Gods.

Here Anticipation must be made use of toward the Auditors, and the Causes of
these things must be referred either to Necessity or Fortune, or the Times, or
some particular Advantage; and allege, that not the Advisers, but the things
themselveves are the occasion of the Accidents.

Now the Oration accuses in Popular Harangues, when it is either long, or too
Antique, or not over probable. If prolix, the reason must be ascribed to
prolixity of the Subjects. If ancient, yet that it is at this time seasonable;
if not probable, promise to make it appear true in the progress of the Oration.

And thus we are to constitute our Popular Harangues; but how shall we order
'em? If there be no exception against the Matter nor the Orations, expose the
Proposition presently at the beginning: then request attention and benevolent
Audience. But if there be any Exceptions, we are to anticipate the Auditory,
bringing first our Apologies, and Excuses as briefly as we can, and requesting
the favor of the Hearers.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Narration.

AFter all this, there is a necessity that either we relate or call to mind
past Transactions, or that we declare present Actions, or that we foretell such
as are to come to pass hereafter. If then we were to repeat the Transctions of
an Embassy, it would behove us to relate all things that were said
perspicuously, that first the Grandeur of the Oration might appear. For this
would be only a bare Narrative, where no other Figure of speech would
interfere. So that if any miscarriage happened, the Hearers may believe that it
did not fall out through any negligence of ours, but for some other Cause. But
if it fell out according to our expectation, they may not believe it happened
by Chance, but by means of Industry and Sedulity. And this they will the more
easily believe, seeing that if they were not present at the Transaction of
Affairs, they may observe by our Alacrity in the delivery of our Relation, that
we have not left out any thing, but that we accurately give an account of every
thing. But in a Popular Harangue, when we either call to mind things past, or
make a relation of the present Affair, or foretell what is to come, we are to
do these things, briefly, perspicuously, and not with probability.
Perspicuously, that the Hearers may understand what is said; Briefly, that they
may remember what is spoken; faithfully, lest before we haveconfirm'd our
Oration by proofs and legality of Proceedings, the Hearers should reject our
Relation. We shall perspicuously make appear either from words, or from the
business it self. From the business it self, if we do not relate the Matters
confusedly and out of order, but such as were first done or to be done, in the
first Place: and the rest afterward in their Order; and not forsaking the
Order which we have proposed to our selves, to fall upon another thing.

In Words we shall be perspicuous, when we relate the Transactions in words
proper to the Matter; and if we place our words according to the common custom,
and not confusedly or prefunctorily; but always observing a Coherency.

In Brevity we shall be perspicuous, if both from things and words we cut off
those things which are not necessary to be spoken; leaving only those things,
which if they should be taken away, the Oration would be obscure and difficult
to be understood. We shall be thought faithful, and to be credited, if we bring
Reasons, by which the things that are said to be done may seem to be probable.
And as for those things that are like to fall under too great a Censure of
Improbability, to lay 'em quite aside. But if of necessity they must be spoken,
the Orator must relate the things upon his own knowledge, and reserving 'em to
the Proper place of refutation, where he intends to handle other things that
are intermixed, must promise in the Progress of his Oration to make 'em out to
be true, pretending first to make out other things more difficult; which being,
done, there is no Question but they will believe the rest. Which is the way to
cure the Incredulity of the Hearers.

CHAP. XXXII.
AN no w we shall order these Narrations, Manifestations and Predictions after
a threefold manner. For if the Actions of which we discourse be few, and
notorious to the Hearers, we must join the Relation to the Exordium, least that
part being placed separately should seem too short.

But when the affairs are very many and unknown, it is requesite that Relations
be joined to every one, and that we make 'em out to be just, profitable and
honest, by which means we may not only make a bare Relation without any
Variety, but take the Ears of the Hearers. But if they be Actions but of a
middle concernment, then the Relation, or the Manifestation, or the Prediction
must be placed in the Exordium, as part of the Body of it; which may be done,
if we Prosecute the Relation from the beginning of it without intermission, not
taking in any thing, but barely and nakedly relating the things themselves.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Confirmation.

OF necessity, Confirmation must follow next, to confirm the Relations
foregoing by just and profitable Proofs, as^ we promised before to do. Seeing
then we are to make our Relations closely connex'd together, the most proper
Proof for Popular Harangues are to be drawn from the Custom of things, from
Example, from Commemoration, and from the Opinion which all men conceive of the
Orator. And if we happen upon any other Proofs, they are to be made use of.

Now these Proofs are thus to ranked. First, the opinion concerning the
Speaker. Which if it cannot be done, then first the usual Custom of things;
where we must show, That the things by us related, and the like to them,
usually were wont to be done in this manner; and then we must bring Examples:
and if there be any thing of Similitude with those things which we have spok'n,
we must not omit it. Those Examples also are to be made choice of, which are
both agreeable to the matter and to the Auditory; and next in place or time.
But if there be none such, then from such other things as are of greatest
importance and most notoriously kown. After this, we must make use of Sentence.
For we are to terminate these parts where Probabilities and Examples were
handled, with Enthymemes and Sentences. And this is to be done for the
confirmation of matters.

But if credit be immediately given to the Relation, we may omit the Proofs
themselves, and deduce the Confirmation of the Actions before rehearsed from
assertions of just, legal, useful, pleasant, easy, possible and necessary. And
if it be so, just is to be placed in Front; proceeding with what is like to
just, what contrary to just, and what has been adjudg'd to be just.

Examples are also to be brought like to those things by thee averred to be
just. And you will have many things to say from those things by every one in
particular supposed to be just, and from those things so deemed in the same
City where the Oration is delivered, as also in several other Cities,
concluding in the end with Sentences, and midling Enthymemes, differing one
among another, if the part be prolix; and if we design to recollect, making use
of a concise Repetition. But if it be of a moderate length, with a
Recapitulation, putting an end to that part, we may begin another. As for
Example;

That it is just for us to assist the Siracusans, I believe to be sufficiently
made out by what we have said. Now that it will be also for our advantage, I
shall endeavor to show ye. And then again, as to Profit and Advantage, the
same Method is to be observed, as has been taught in reference to Just, adding
to the end of the part either a Repetition or a Conclusion, and then beginning
again with what remains behind: And this is the way to join one part to
another, and so finish the whole contexture of the Oration. At last having by
Proofs sufficiently confirmed the thing which thou would persuade, then
Summarily with Enthymemes, Sentences, and Flourishes, it behooves thee to show,
that it is unjust, disadvantagious, infamous, and unpleasant to act otherwise;
adding a brief Antithesis, that it is both just, profitable, honorable and
delightful to follow thy Counsel and Advice, closing up the whole with certain
grave and pithy Sentences.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Anticipation.

ANticipation is when we endeavor to vilify the objections that have been
made against what has been said by us. Therefore it behooves us to lessen the
objections of the adversary, and extol our own Assertions; to which purpose it
will be requisite to compare one with one, if thine be the greater, or more
with more, or one with many, or many with one: and when we have done this, we
must conclude with Repetitions, and the fore mentioned Colors and Flourishes
of Ratiocination, Enumeration, Election, Interrogation and Irony.

CHAP. XXXV.
Several manners of Persuasion.

BUT now, if we were to persuade the giving assistance either to private
Persons or to Cities; Brevity will be most convenient: and if any acts of
Friendship, Favor, or Pity have formerly past between them and the Auditors,
it will be well remembered. For men are apt to assist those who have been
formerly so affected toward 'em: and have a kindness for those from whom, or
from whose friends, either themselves or their Relations have received any
kindness, or so believe. Now if we find that any thing of this has been done,
it is to be urged to excite Compassion. It is also to be made out, that they
either do or may or are like to suffer unjustly* unless they are assisted by
the Auditory.

If these Places are wanting, we are to prove 'em destitute of all those
Felicities that other men enjoy, and that they never can be able to arrive at
any thing of a happy Condition, unless the Auditory take pity upon 'em. And
thus we incite to Compassion.

But we divert from pity by alleging the contraries, laying open the whole
business, and by Proofs demonstrating to the Auditory, that what they go about
to do is unjust, illegal, pernicious, infamous, etc.

But he that would contradict the Persuasions of others, must lay down in his
Exordium the Assertions of his adversary, which he designs to oppose; what else
he has to say must be done in several Prologues by themselves. After the
Prologues, he is to prove every one of the said Assertions to be either false,
or unjust, or illegal, or pernicious, nor consentanous to what the adversary
exhorts. Which he must do by proving his Allegations of Falsehood, Injustice,
Illegality, Perniciousness, etc. And this is the chiefest way of Disswasion.

But if this be not to be done, then make use of what remains: as if the
adversary Demonstrate the thing to be just, endeavor thou to prove it
infamous, or unprofitable, or irksome, or impossible, or whatever else may be
proper to thy purpose*

If the adversary demonstrates the thing to be profitable, do thou prove it to
be unjust, or bring whatever other objection may stand thee in stead:
magnifying thy own, and clouding the Arguments of thy adversary. Nor will it be
amiss to make use of Enthymemes and Sentences, and at length to sum up all in a
Recapitulation, having first refuted the Anticipations of the Adversary.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Praise and Dispraise.

IN praising and dispraising we are to order our Proems after the same manner
as in the Deliberative kind. After the Proem we are to divide the benefits
external to virtue, and the benefits internal in virtue. The benefits external
to virtue are Health, Strength, Beauty, Wealth. Internal virtues are Wisdom,
Justice, Fortitude, and the more noble Sciences. Now we praise those things
that are scated and inherent in virtue. But as for the Strong, the Healthy, the
Rich, the Beautiful and the High born, we do not applaud them, but we say that
they are happy. Which things being diligently considered, we order the
Genealogy in the first place: for that, both as to men, and all other Creatures
is in the first place either noble or ignoble. And therefore we rightly begin
the praises either of men or of any other Creature from their descent. But when
we design to extol any affection, or thing, any Oration, or Estate, we praise
what is most worthy Commendation in them.

From the Stock we derive our Encomiums thus. If his Progenitors were famous,
we are to enumerate every one from the first of the race to the Person living,
and of every one make some remarkable Observation. If the first were persons of
Industry, and men of Renown, and that the rest were Persons never noted for any
worthy Acts, we are to extol the first, and pass by the rest, pretending that
by reason of the great number of his Ancestors, thou will not be tedious in
ennumerating the whole Line besides that it cannot be unknown to all men, that
they who are born of generous Parents, generally tread the footsteps of their
Forefathers. But if the first Progenitors were men of ill Fame, and the Father
and Grandfather Persons of Renown, the first are to be omitted under pretense
of Prolixity: and the last are to be applauded, not doubting but the
Progenitors of such Persons were equal in value to them. But if there were
nothing of Splendid Ancestry, praise the Person himself for his own Generosity
and Bravery, adding, that all men are well born who are born to Virtue; and
that they are to be preferred before all others, who are born to be the
Ornaments of their own Parentage, and give luster to their Ancestry; for that
many times Persons born of Noble Parentage, degenerate.

The same Method is to be used in vilifying the Parentage of any Person.

When we come to the Actions of the Person whom we applaud, we are first to
begin with his Justice, then commend him for his Prudence, next for his
Fortitude; and in every Encomium, it will not be amiss to use many words, to
render the Oration Splendid and Magnificent.

In villyfying, Ironies are of great use, and to deride the Adversary in those
things for which he chiefly magnifies himself.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the sorts of Questions.

INterrogation is chiefly useful against Contradictions. And they that
Interrogate must begin in the same manner with those that are accused. Where
when we have brought proper pretenses at the beginning for so doing, we are
then to proceed to Interrogate. Now the Proper pretenses in Civil Assemblies
are, that we do not do it for contentions sake, but to make the matter plain to
the Auditory; and because the Adversary first began with us. Now in private
Disputes we are to allege the Enmities, or the ill manners of the Persons
interrogated, or their Affection to the Adverse party. In public Disputes we
must allege Legality, Justice and Public profit.

The Proem thus framed out of these, and things like these, after we have
propounded in order every one of the things done, said, or thought, we must
make our Interrogations, and show how they are contrary to Justice, to Law, to
public and private Profit; and then we must consider all together, whether
they are contrary to themselves, to the Manners of good men, or such as seem to
be so.

But to avoid prolixity in ennumerating every one particularly one by one, how
much the more we prove the Persons interrogated to be averse to ingenious
Studies, to good Actions, or good Manners, by so much the more shall we render
'em obnoxious to the Auditors. Nor must we interrogate with a severe and morose
Countenance; but a mild and winning Aspect. By which means the Orators will
avoid all pretense of Scandal, and their Orations will be the more acceptable
to the People.

When we have diligently interrogated as much as is needful, and enlarged upon
the Questions, then it will be requisite to sum up all at the conclusion, for
the satisfaction of the Auditory.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Peroration.

NOW then it behooves those that speak and write, to deliver their Orations
according to the Actions, and to accustom our selves to make use of all these
things promptly and readily. How then to speak Artificially both in private and
public Disputes, and in Converse with others, we have here the most, and the
most Artificial assistances. But an Orator must not only be careful of his
Words, but of his Life, to adorn it with the Idea's before mentioned. For the
care of a man's Life and Conversation avails as well to persuasion, as to the
gaining of Esteem and Reputation. First then, we are to divide things according
to the division of true Discipline, what is to be handled in the first, and
what in the second, what in the third, and what in the fourth place. Then we
are to make those preparations which are necessary for the Auditors, as in the
Chapter of Exordiums. For we may win favor to our Persons if we keept constant
to our Professions, and preserve the same friends while we live; not wavering
in our Studies, but still following the same course. We shall render the
Auditors attentive, if our Subjects be always Important, Honorable and
Profitable. Now having made the Auditory both kind and attentive, when we come
to propose our Matter, whatever contains the diswasion from Evil, and the
persuasion to Good, they will readily and easily admit, as being for their
advantage, or else reject the contrary. Now to render thy Oration brief,
perspicuous and profitable, this is to be done. Thou shall quickly conclude if
thou do not design to act all together, but the first, first of all, and the
next in order. Thou will be perspicuous, if thou make an end of one thing
before thou passest to another.

Thy Oration will be probable, if thou do not act any thing contrary to thy
own Genius, and the good opinion had of thee; and if thou do not pretend the
same Persons to be both thy Friends and Enemies.

Of Proofs, we are to make choice of those which we know to be so proper to
accomplish our business, that we are able to explain 'em to others: but as for
such as we have not real knowledge of, to take those as they most frequently
happen. For thou shall act most securely in things of this nature, if thou art
guided by custom.

In Disputes with the Adversary, if we contend by way Oration, we must make out
our Proofs out of those things that are spoken.

But if the Dispute be about Contracts, we are to proceed according to the Laws
both written and unwritten, with the choicest witnesses, and at a time perfix'd.

And in the Conclusion we shall the better imprint into the Memory of the
Auditors, what has been spoken, if we make a brief and summary Repetition.

Of our Actions we shall put 'em in mind, when we handle the same again, or
like the former.

We shall win the good will of the Auditory, if we act those things by which
they have received, or do or are like to receive any Benefit. And we shall act
great things if we undertake Actions that are the Causes of many and honorable
events. And these are the Preparations we must make toward a virtuous Life: the
former Treatises concerned the Exercises of Eloquence.

FINIS.
THE TABLE
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. THat Rhetoric and Logic treat of the same Subject. That they who
treated of Rhetoric before, did not rightly understand it, and of the Benefit
of Rhetoric. Page 1. CHAP. II. What Rhetoric is? what its Subject? how it
relates to Logic? and of what Things Oration chiefly consists. 7. CHAP. III. Of
the three kinds of Causes, and their Ends. 16. CHAP. IV. Of what things Men
usually Deliberate? 19. CHAP. V. Of the Felicity and End of Deliberation. 23.
CHAP. VI. Of Probable and Good. 29. CHAP. VII. Of the greater and lesser. 47.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Number and Forms of Common-weals 54. CHAP. IX. Of Honest and
Laudable, which belong to the Demonstrative kind. 44. CHAP. X. Of Accusation,
and Defense. 52. CHAP. XI. Of things delightful. 57. CHAP. XII. How Men believe
themselves capacitated to do Injustice, and by what means they do it. 64. CHAP.
XIII. Of Injury, and things done justly. 69. CHAP. XIV. Of the greater or less
Injury. 74. CHAP. XV. Of Vnartificial Proofs. 76.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. That the Affections of the Auditors are to be moved. 84. CHAP. II. Of
Anger. 86. CHAP. III. Of Mildness. 92. CHAP. IV. Of Friendship and Love, and
their Contrarys. 96. CHAP. V. Of Fear and it is Contraries. 100. CHAP. VI. Of
Shame and want of Shame. 104 CHAP. VII. Of Favor and Charity. 109. CHAP. VIII.
Of Pity and Compassion. 111. CHAP. IX. Of Indignation. 114. CHAP. X. Of Envy.
118. CHAP. XI. Of Emulation. 120. CHAP. XII. Of the Affections and Habits of
Youth. 122 CHAP. XIII. Of the Affections and Habits of Old Men. 124. CHAP. XIV.
Of the Dispositions of middle Age. 126. CHAP. XV. Of the Humors of Noble Men.
127. CHAP. XVI. Of the Humors of the Rich. 128. CHAP. XVII. Of the Manner of
the Potent and Fortunate. 129. CHAP. XVIII. That there are some things common
to all kinds. 130. CHAP. XIX. Of things Possible and Impossible. 131. CHAP. XX.
Of Example. 134: CHAP. XXI. Of a Sentence. 137. CHAP. XXII. Of an Enthymeme.
142. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Places of Enthymemes. 145. CHAP. XXIV. Of the Places
of seeming Enthymemes. 157. CHAP. XXV. Of Dissolutions. 162.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the Parts of Rhetoric. 166. CHAP. II. Of Elocution. 169. CHAP.
III. Of Frigids. 173. CHAP. IV. Of Representation. 176. CHAP. V. Of Elegancy of
Language. 177. CHAP. VI. Of Prolixity. 179. CHAP. VII. Of Decorum. 180. CHAP.
VIII. Of Number. 183 CHAP. IX. Of Diffused Oration and it is contrary. 185.
CHAP. X. Of Festivity and Vrbanity. 189. CHAP. XI. What it is to set before the
Eye. 191. CHAP. XII. Of the several sorts of Elocution. 194. CHAP. XIII. Of the
Parts of Oration. 197. CHAP. XIV. Of the Proem. 199. CHAP. XV. Of Narration.
203. CHAP. XVI. Of Confirmation. 206. CHAP. XVII. Of the season for
Interrogation. 209. CHAP. XVIII. Of Peroration. 211
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. Aristotle to Alexander wishes Health and happiness. 213. CHAP. II. Of
Ratiocination. 217. CHAP. III. What things are to be consulted. 221. CHAP. IV.
Of Arguments in the Encomiastic kind. 229. CHAP. V. Of Accusation and Defense.
232. CHAP. VI. Of Questions. 234. CHAP. VII. 236. CHAP. VIII. Of Probation.
Ibid. CHAP. IX. Of Examples. 240. CHAP. X. Of Conjectures. 243. CHAP. XI. Of
Enthymemes. 243. CHAP. XII. Of a Sentence. 244. CHAP. XIII. Of Signs. 245.
CHAP. XIV. Of an Elenchus. 246. CHAP. XV. Of the difference between Probable
and Example, etc. 247. CHAP. XVI. Of Testimony. 248. CHAP. XVII. Of the Rack.
250. CHAP. XVIII. Of Oaths. 251. CHAP. XIX. Of Anticipation. 252. CHAP. XX. Of
Petitions. 255. CHAP. XXI. Of Repetition. 256 CHAP. XXII. Of Irony. 257 CHAP.
XXIII. Of Speaking Quaintly. 257 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Disposition of Words. 259
CHAP. XXV. Of Interpretation. 259 CHAP. XXVI. Of Dilucidation. 261 CHAP. XXVII.
Of Antitheta, Aequates. 261 CHAP. XXVIII. Of Equation. 262 CHAP. XXIX. Of
Paramoiosis, or like Cadencies. 262 CHAP. XXX. Of Exordiums. 263 CHAP. XXXI. Of
Narration. 268 CHAP. XXXII. Of Manifestations and Predictions. 270 CHAP.
XXXIII. Of Confirmation. 271 CHAP. XXXIV. Of Anicipation. 273 CHAP. XXXV.
Several manners of persuasion. 273 CHAP. XXXVI. Of Praises and Dispraises. 275
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the sorts of Questions. 277 CHAP. XXXVIII. The Peroration. 258
FINIS.


