Licensed and Entered According to Act of Parliament.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE REASONS OF THE Nobility and Gentry's Invitation Of His
HIGHNESS the PRINCE of ORANGE INTO ENGLAND. Being a MEMORIAL from the English
Protestants Concerning their GRIEVANCES.

With a Large Account of the Birth of the Prince of WALES. Presented to their
HIGHNESSES The PRINCE and PRINCESS of ORANGE.

LONDON; Printed for Nathanael Ranew, and Jonathan Robinson, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1688.

A MEMORIAL FROM THE ENGLISH PROTESTANTS, FOR THEIR HIGHNESSES THE PRINCE AND
PRINCESS OF ORANGE.
IT cannot be unknown to Your Highness, that the Protestants of England, that
are Faithful to the Principles and Doctrines of their Religion, and to the
just, Established, legal Government, are in diverse kinds most intollerably
vexed and oppressed by the Popish Contrivances and Practices, covered with the
pretenses and name of Authority.

That The Instances hereof are too many to be recited, but some thereof are
these, viz.

1. Most of the Protestants are pressed to declare for a Repeal of all the Laws
made for the Reformation of our Religion and its settlement.

2. All the Subjects are forced to submit to Serve and Obey those that are no
lawful Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Lords Lieutenants, and
other Commanders, and all are Threatened, Vexed and Prosecuted, (as the Lord
Lovelace now is) that dare but say that such have no lawful Authority.

3. All the Subjects are commanded to suffer all the Actions and Offenses of
their Lives, and the secrets of their Hearts to be searched into, and their
chief Interests and many of their Free-holds to be judged by the discretion of
a few of the Kings Creatures, called, his Commissioners for Ecclesiastical
Affairs, whose Commission is, to proceed without and against the Rules of our
Laws, with a non obstante to all other Laws, and every Man is required to
assist their Arbitrary Powers on peril of their Censures, which extend to
imprisonment for Life. 4. All our Ministers are required under grievous menaced
Penalties to be the Kings Cryers, to Proclaim in the Churches the Kings Power
to suspend at once the force and use of all our Penal Laws made in 400 Years
past to secure the Rights of the Crown, the freedoms and properties of the
Realm, and the profession of the Protestant Religion. 5. All the Protestants
are forced by fear of the Kings Wrath, to suffer the Rights of the Crown and
the freedom of the Realm against Foreign Powers and Laws, to be publicly
denied, and the force of Foreign Laws over them to be maintained; they are
injoined by the King to neglect their sworn duties to God, to the Crown and
Kingdom, of prosecuting at Law those Treasons which they know and see to be
daily committed, for which no excuse can be made by pretense of Liberty of
Conscien^e in Christ's Religion. 6. The Constables and other Officers,
throughout the Realm are forced to quarter Irish and Scots and other mercenary
Soldiers in their Neighbors Houses against their Wills, in contempt of the
Ancient Laws and the express Words of the late Statutes. 7. All the Gentlemen
and Freeholders are pressed to renounce their native and legal freedom in
their choice of Members for Parliament. 8. The Freemen of the Cities and Towns
are urged to yield up to the Kings Will the Tenure of their Magistracies, and
all their free Customs and Privileges. 9. All the People are forced by fear of
Punishments, to suffer a Child to be declared Heir apparent of the Crown, which
ought not by the known Laws of the Kingdom to have been acknowledged until
lawful Witnesses of his Birth of the Queen had been duly published to the
Kingdom, as was necessary in this case, wherein public fame makes him a
Counterfeit. Yet to their shame and grief, the People are forced to seem in
their public Prayers to present him to God as their Prince, and dare not ask
who are the Witnesses of his Birth. 10. Many of their Juries are pressed to
Find their Neighbors Criminals, though in their Consciences they think them
innocent, as is notorious (amongst many other Instances) in the case of those
that made innocent expressions of their joy for the Justice that was done to
the 7 Bishops: and many are forced to submit to be tried in matters about the
loss of their Estates, by Fines and their Lives also, by Juries returned, by
secret Contrivances and Nominations contrary to the direction of our Laws,
being neither of the most sufficient nor most indifferent of the nearest
Neighbors to the Facts in question, nor by Sheriffs sworn as the Laws require,
whereby the course of the Kingdoms Justice is perverted, and the legal
Government subverted.

All these Instances are too well known to be denied by our Adversaries.


Illegal things are daily imposed upon them, in their several Stations and
Places, which they are convinced in their Consciences, can never be justified
unto God or the Kingdom, and yet they are pressed upon them (without regard to
their Consciences) by loss of their Offices and Employments, and many other
threatened Effects of the Kings displeasure.

That many of their legal Liberties, Benefits, and Means of subsistence in
their Churches and Colleges, are taken from them by mere Will and Pleasure,
Viz. (A) The case of the Lord Bishop of London suspended. Of Doctor Peachel,
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge and Master of Pembroke-Hall deprived. Of Doctor
Hough and 26 Fellows of Magdalen College Oxford, besides the Demres outed from
their freehold and livelihood, and Decreed incapable of any other Preferment,
only for keeping to the Law, the Statute of their College and Oaths. The
Suspension of near 200 Ministers in the County of Durham, for refusing to read
to their People the Kings Declaration for dispensing with our Laws, etc.
and Processes and Prosecution by arbitrary Commissioners Viz. The Summons of
the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs to the Chancellors, Commmissaries
and Archdeacons of the Diocesses, of most of the Bishops, to return the Names
of all the Ministers that did not read the Kings Declaration, wherein they
transgressed no Law Ecclesiastical or Civil.
are threatened and begun against great numbers of them without their guilt of
the least Offense or Transgression against any of the Laws of this Realm

That they are debarred and spoiled of the due free The City of London and all
the Cities and Towns Corporate of the Kingdom are sad instances of this, the
King alone setting up whom he pleases to have the Names, and use the Powers of
their formerly chosen Magistrates.
Election of their Magistrates and Officers in their Cities and Towns; and
pretended Officers and Magistrates are imposed upon them and turned out and put
in at the Kings absolute Will, as they are found ready to comply with, and
serve the Popish Design either ignorantly or corruptly.

That several of the Bodies Politic of their Cities and Towns are declared to
be dissolved at the Kings Pleasure (to terrify and subjugate the minds of all
the rest) and the Citizens and Burgesses are thereby Disfranchised, So the King
has done to the ancient Cities of Oxford, Winchester, and the Borough of
Totness; now threatens to do the same to the great City of Norwich, or
something tantamount, whereby he assumes to dispose of the Subjects legal
Interests at his Will, as if the Subjects had no Property.
and Divested of all their good Customs, Freedoms and Privileges, if they
cannot in Conscience comply with Illegal Commands, and will not treacherously
surrender their legal Rights and Privileges unto the Kings Will.

That the legal securities provided by the Kings and Kingdom in Parliament
against the dangers of their Religion and Liberties, are by the Kings absolute
Command thrown aside, and made The late Statutes of 25 and 30 of Car. 2. were
made expressly for the Protestants Security, so were those of 5 El 1. 13. El. 2.
23. El. 1. 27. El. 2. 1 Jac. 1. and the Stat. 25 H. 8.19, 20, 21. and many
ancient Stat. of Ed. 1. Ed. 2. Ed. 3. Ri. 2. and many other Kings, were made to
secure the People from the apprehensions of the Church of Rome; and the King
has declared that none of them shall at any time hereafter be put in execution.
useless, by pretense of his Power to dispense with those penal Laws
notwithstanding the Subjects Right in them, for the protection and safety of
their Religion, Liberties, and Lives, whereby the very Foundation of all the
Subjects Rights and Properties is undermined and shaken, and a New Claim is set
up and maintained; that the Subjects have no Right, Property, or security
against the Will and Pleasure of their Kings.

That by color of such a d^spensing Power the trust of the Kingdoms Defense
and Safety by military Powers, is put into such hands as are made It Is known
all the professed Papists are by the Stat. of El. Jac. 1. and Car. 2. made
incapable of holding any Trust or Powers in the Kingdom, and that the King has
placed the most of them in their hands.
incapable of them by many express Laws of the Kings and Kingdoms in
Parliament, which justly give the Protestants sad apprehensions of imminent
dangers, seeing themselves put into the Power of those that publicly profess
to be in Union and Communion with the Church of Rome, that openly declare
themselves to be the mortal Enemies to all Protestants, and that they are bound
upon peril of their Salvation, to seek their Destruction, if they shall
continue constant to the Protestant Profession.

That contrary to the express Laws of the Sea the Pet. of Right 3. Car. and the
late Statutes Car. 2. that declare the dispersing of Soldiers into the
Country, and the quartering them in the Subjects Houses, to be against the Laws
and Customs of the Realm, and it is Demanded and Enacted as the Peoples Right
that they shall never be so burdened by Soldiers.
Realm lately declared in Parliament, an Army of Papists and Mercenaries is
maintained, and dispersed through the Kingdom in full Peace, to the great
disquiet and terror of the Pretestants, and they are in diverse ways constrained
to receive these Soldiers into their Houses, to sojourne there against their
Wills, whereby they are deprived of their Peace and Security in their Families,
and of their Converse with their Neighbors and Friends, and of the advantages
they might make in their ways of living.

That the King has barred and forbidden the execution of the Ancient Laws of
the Realm, against diverse sorts of Treasons and other most heinous Crimes; and
all the Statutes now known to have been made from age to age for 500 Years
past, in relation to the Popes and Romish Priests See the King's Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience, that suspends the Execution of all the Penal Laws
whatsoever in matters Ecclesiastical, those that make it Treason to maintain
the Popes Powers and Canons to be above our Laws, or to take his Dispensation
of Obedience to them.
Powers and Practices are suspended; though the Experience of the Papists in all
those Ages showed those Powers and Practices to be so mischievous and
dangerous, that they often complained in Parliament, they feared the Sea the
Statutes 35 Ed. 1. 25 Ed. 3. 72 Ed. 3. 16 Ri. 2.5.
Destruction of the Kingdom by them.

His Majesty also so Controuls the Courts of Law in the Course wherein Justice
ought to be administered, that the Judges (though they have highly served the
Popish Designs,) are turned out of their Places, Honors and Pensions, if they
dare but suffer the Laws justly to acquit those whom the King would have
condemned, as appears (amongst diverse other Instances) by his late displacing
Judge Holloway and Judge Powell, upon the legal acquittal of the seven Bishops.

We need not show to your Highness more particular Instances of our Oppression,
since it is notorious that there is a public attempt authorized by the King, to
subvert the very Foundation of the whole Civil legal Government of the Kingdom,
that is, the Peoples free Election (in the Customary Established Course by
Counties, Cities and Boroughs,) of their Deputies to Act and Consent for them
in Parliament unto all Laws to be made and repealed.

The truly Noble Monarchy was founded on equal Freedom; and the Civil
Government of England, was always of right truly free, See 24 H. 8.12. 25 H.
21. It Is declared, that the Realm is free and subject to no Laws but by their
own consent, and that the King and Parliament, representing the whole State of
the Realm, have the Power to Dispense with the Laws as they shall see occasion.
because no Laws or Authorities ever bound the Persons and Properties of the
Kingdom save only those, wherein the Kings and all the Subjects freely agreed,
every Subjects free See the Statutes 1 Jac. 1.1.
consent being deemed by our Laws to be given personally, as by his Deputies to
the Enacting and Repealing of every Law.

Therefore the Statutes of old in affirmance of the common Custom of England,
declared that Elections should be free See Stat. Westminster. 1. 3 Ed. 7. The common
Law is there declared, and the King binds himself not to disturb any Electors
to make free Elections. See Car. 2. Parl. See 7 H. 4.15. 6 H. 6.4. 9 H. 4.8.
from all interruptions and interpositions by the King or the Pope, and the
Kings have bound themselves by the Statutes, no way to disturb any Electors in
making their free Elections.

No Commands, Promises, or Threats, no Prayers nor Solicitations ought to be
made unto the Electors by the King or Pope, or any others: the Peoples Deputies
(say the Laws) are to be chosen Freely, and Indifferently, without
pre-ingagement of the Electors, or fear of displeasing the King, and without
promises of Favor or Rewards to them. They are to be indifferent at the Time
and Place of Election, and in such manner to proceed, notwithstanding any
Request or Command to the contrary; otherwise the Elections are void and null.

But we are not able to number the various kinds of Attempts and Practices to
overturn this Foundation of our Government.

There have been infinite Endeavors and Artifices openly used, to destroy the
Customs, Privileges, Charters and Governments of all the Cities and Boroughs,
by whom Four parts in Five of the Members of the Commons in Parliament are to
be chosen by the Custom of England; and to bring all these Bodies Politic, and
all their Magistrates and Officers to be dependant on the Kings Will, and to be
obliged as His Creatures (not the Cities and Towns Trustees) to serve his
Popish and Arbitrary Designs, or to be turned out of their Places at His
Pleasure; and such as are either Papists, or more Ignorant and Corrupt, put
into their Places.

It Is known to all, that for this purpose, to destroy our Government under
color of Law, there have been causless Writs of Quo warranto's brought by the
King against most of the Cities and Boroughs of the Kingdom; those were
seconded by Instruments appointed to terrify the Magistrates of the Cities and
Towns with the Kings severe Displeasure, if they dared to insist upon their
legal Right, and contest with the King at Law; to fright them with the
intolerable charge, that their legal Defense would cost them more than they
could bear; and boldly affirming, that they could not hope to maintain their
Customs, Privileges and Charters against the King, since he was resolved to
have them at His Command; then they tempted them with Promises of new Charters,
if they would comply and surrender their Old Liberties into the Kings Hands,
and pretended that the Names of all that refused it must be returned to the
Kings Attorney General.

It Is no less known, that Judges were prepared to damn the Pleas of all such
Cities and Towns as would stand upon their Right, and Plead to the Quo
warranto's, as the Magistrates of London resolved to do, their Common Council
refusing to surrender their Liberties, notwithstanding all Commands, Terrors,
and Entreaties that were used to them; they knew it was not in their Power to
betray their City, nor in the Kings Power to receive unto himself those
Customs, Powers and Privileges which the Great Charter and the Common Law had
given them. But such Judges as would not judge that Ancient Body Politic (that
had holden their Customs above 1000 Years) to be dissolved, were turned out;
and all the Freedoms and Privileges due to the Citizens and their Heirs, and to
the City and their Successors, were declared by the Judges to be Forfeited; His
now Majesty's Instruments thereby preparing His Way (under the shadow of the
late King) to destroy the Government of all other Cities and Towns, by
frightning them into surrenders, or making a President for Judgment against
them; and it has taken such Effect, that the Tenure of almost all those Bodies
Politic is illegally changed, and the Cities and Towns brought to such a
forlorn Estate, that they have no Magistrates or Officers but at the Kings
Will, and during His Pleasure.

As there is an actual subversion of the Freedom of the Government of the
Cities and Towns, the Tenure of their Magistrates, and their free Customs being
utterly destroyed, and those that now Exercise the Magistracies therein being
incapable to choose freely, and indifferently, and to return legally Members for
Parliament, so there are continual attempts upon the personal Freedom and
Indifferency of all the Electors for Parliament throughout the Kingdom.

His Majesty has personally solicited, and attached so many of them by His
smiles and frowns in secret, to accept of such for their Deputies in Parliament
as will comply with His Designs, that His Closeting Note that the Kings
Practice of Closeting Members of Parliament, was the same as it is now for
Electors.
Electors, is become a Byword amongst the People: He has made them consent to
be barred of their Freedom in Electing for Parliament, and in Voting therein,
if they be chosen, to be a Test of their Fitness to hold their Offices and
Employments of Profit and Trust, and to have place in the Magistracy.

The Three Questions to that purpose, are known to all, which His Majesty's
Ministers required to be answered by the Justices of the Peace and all other
Officers.

The Lord Lieutenants of all the Counties by the Kings special Command, have
Summoned the chief Officers and Gentlemen in His Majesty's Name, to flatter or
terrify them out of the use of their Freedom in Electing for Parliament, and
Marks of the Kings Displeasure have been put upon those that resolved to keep
their Freedom and indifferency to Elect worthy and fit Deputies according to
their Judgments and Consciences.

An unheard-of-sort of Commissioners as to their Qualities and Instructions,
are lately sent from His Majesty throughout England, to Delude or Affright the
Electors into a Choice of such Members for a Convention (to be called a
Parliament) as will engage to serve His Designs of abolishing all those Ancient
Laws and Tests that are the only Humane Securities of the free Profession of
our Religion, and the clearest Authoritative Declarations of the Rights of the
Crown and the Liberties of the People.

There need not be plainer Proofs, that the Ax is laid to the Root of our
Civil Government, as the most certain way to introduce the Laws and Religion of
Rome. Yet to convince the whole World in this matter, His Majesty has published
a Second See the King's Second Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, April 27.
1688.
Declaration, wherein He has positively declared His Mind, that none ought to
be employed under Him in the Kingdom, who will not contribute to these His
Designs, and choose such Members of Parliament as may do their part to finish
what He has begun. He has pronounced all that shall refuse it, to be neither
Good Christians nor Lovers of their Countries Wealth and Power; and He
Declares, that He has begun His intended form of Government suitable to those
Principles, having turned out by His Absolute Will many Civil and Military
Officers throughout the Kingdom in pursuance of this great Work.

This puts it out of dispute, that His Majesty thinks He ought not to suffer
any Free Election for Parliament, whilst there are such numbers of Faithful
Protestants to Contest for the Elections, who cannot in Conscience contribute
to the Work He has begun; That is, upon pretense of Liberty of Conscience to
allow His Majesty to surrender unto the Pope the Rights and Freedom of the
Crown and the Kingdom, or to acknowledge, that the People of England ought by
the Laws of GOD and CHRIST to be subjected to the Church of Rome's Laws and
Jurisdictions in their Persons, and great part of their Estates; That the Pope
and His Priests and Canonists should judge them by their Canons, in the
lawfulness of their Marriages and Contracts, and legitimate or bastard their
Heirs as they please, that the disposal of their Goods and Chattels by their
Last Wills, their Debts about Tithes, and their Good Names and Bodies on
pretense of penances, should be in their Power and Will.

This is the Work begun by His Majesty, which Dishonours and Debases the
English Imperial Crown, and subverts the Native Freedom and the Civil
Properties and Interests of English Men.

Those are the proper Matters and Occasions of most of our Penal Laws in
matters Ecclesiastical, to prevent the Fraud and Danger of Holy Pretenses for
such Unrighteous Attempts against our natural and civil Properties.

Our Penal Laws are to punish Offenses against the Civil Government and Humane
Society; and tho they be about matters Ecclesiastical, the Subjects of England
cannot pretend to be exempted from them, because of their Consciences, any
otherwise than they may wickedly claim to be free from the Penal Laws against
Felonies and Murders, if they shall plead that they Robbed or Killed according
to the^r Consciences.

His Majesty's avowed Intent and Endeavors are to free the Emissaries of Romes
Priests and Papists from the punishments and dangers of those our Penal Laws,
against such manifest Attempts upon the Freedom, Rights, and Properties of the
Realm, that His new Erected Popish Colleges, His Convents of Monks, His Four
Provincial Bishops, and His numerous Priests, may be authorized by Him without
force of Laws, to maintain the Church of Romes Canons to be of greater
Authority than the Laws of the Realm, to Declare all the Power of Magistracy in
Protestants Hands to be Unlawful, and all Rights and Titles to their Estates
forfeited to the Papists, by their being Protestants, to own and justify
Dispensations from Rome, with their Obedience to all such Laws of the Realm, as
the Pope and His Priests dislike, and professedly to hold Communion with the
Church of Rome, the French King, and all Foreign Papists, that declare
themselves Mortal Enemies to the Religion and Power of the Protestants, to
contrive with them the Suppression or Extirpation of them out of the Realm.

This work, his Majesty has so far begun, that he has suspended and stopped
the Execution of the Penal Laws against all the High Crimes, some whereof the
ancient Papists of this Kingdom made Capital; and he declares all such
Protestants as will not help to finish it, not to be qualified as Christians or
Englishmen for any Employment in the Kingdom, and therefore least of all to be
Members of Parliament. Hereby his Majesty attempts to Confine the Electors in
their Choice to so small a party, that he allows them not the choice of one of
forty whom our Laws make capable of being Elected for Parliament, the Number is
so small (professed Papists excepted,) out of which his will is to have Members
of Parliament chosen, that our Laws will judge it no choice if he can impose
his will upon the Kingdom as he has declared it.

Hereby your Highnesses may be satisfied, that our case is deplorable; it seems
not sufficient for our Popish Enemies to seek the abolition of all our ancient
Penal Laws that are not agreeable to those new invented Doctrines and
pernicious Practices of the present Church of Rome, which the Penal Statutes
show to have been abhorred by our ancient English See the grievous complaints
of the Commons in 25 Ed. 3.4. provisos, and 6 Ric. 2.5. 27 Ed. 3.
Papists, but their design is to destroy the Constitution and form of the free
Government of the Kingdom, from whence arose all those Penal Laws against their
Churches proud Domination and their Usurpation of the Rights of the Crown and
the whole Realm.

They know by our Histories and Records, that the free Parliament always made
the Complaints from age to age against their pernicious claims of power over
our Kings, our Laws, our Courts of Judicature, and their Judgments, and against
their Exactions, Impositions, Frauds, and Delusions of the People, with their
Superstitious folly, whereby they gained a See the Parliament Roll 4 H. 4. 1 H.
5.
third of the revenues of England, and drew so much Money to Rome that they
impoverished and almost ruined the Kingdom.

They are sensible that they have been able to inslave to the Pope and Priests
several of the greatest English Kings, that they could prevail with the King
for Licenses and Pardons to them to transgress the Laws that the Parliament
made to preserve the Subjects Rights and properties, and that the Parliament
only caused new Laws to be made for declaring such See the St. 3 H. 5. St. 4.7
H. 4.8.
Licenses, Dispensations and Pardons of the Kings void and null.

They know that they have persuaded several of the Kings that the Pope could
absolve their Conscience from all obligation by the Laws, and from Agreements,
Promises, and Oaths to their Kingdom, So the Pope absolved H. 3. and Ed. 1.
from their Oath to keep the great Charter.
to maintain their great Charters and all their Laws and Liberties: and that
they prevailed upon one of them to resign the King John made.
Kingdom entirely to the Pope, and to hold it of him by rent; and they
understand that the People in free Parliament only made and declared all such
Dispensations and resignations void and null, and justly required those Kings to
renew their Oaths to the Kingdom to preserve their Liberties; and scorned with
(indignation) the Popes demands See the Roll. part, 40 Ed. 3. number. 8. Rot.
Claus. 3. Ed. 1. cala. K. John's Charter and Grant to the Pope a most unjust and
forceless Charter; since burnt.
of his pretended rent for the Kingdom, declaring that their Kings had no such
Patrimonial right in the Kingdom to subject it to any powers on Earth.

They cannot hope that a freely chosen Representative of this Kingdom can
suffer such a delusion to be put upon them to be persuaded that due Christian
Liberty of Conscience requires them either to allow the foreign Romish Laws or
Canons to contest for power and place with the Laws of England, or to suffer
any of the Subjects of England openly to profess themselves, their Persons,
Marriages, or Estates to be subject to any Foreigners Jurisdiction, and to
depend of their Authority, Offices, and Sanctions, and the exercise of them for
their Eternal Salvation (which is in truth to renounce their subjection to
England) or to own and avow to have the nearest Union and Communion with
Foreigners, that openly profess themselves Mortal Enemies, to more then a
hundred to one of the whole Realm, and to be bound in Conscience to seek their
suppression or destruction.

They cannot think that a free English Parliament should not always know that
no Doctrines of Jesus Christ ever destroyed or changed the Natural and Civil
right of any person or Nation, or allowed that any part of the People of a free
Country should correspond with or depend upon the declared Enemy of the far
greatest part of it; they have therefore resolved to over-turn the very
foundation of our Civil Government, the Peoples free choice of their Deputies
for Parliament, that there may never be a free Parliament more in the Kingdom,
which is a Plot much worse than their Gunpowder Treason.

It seems they think it safest to keep a shadow of Elections for their intended
Convention, by forming Bodies Politic of Cities and Towns to name or return
whom the King pleases, and by the specious name of Liberty of Conscience, with
promises of Favor and threats of Displeasure, to deceive or affright the other
Electors to accept of those for their Deputies that the King shall offer: but
if this attempt upon the Prime Fundamental of our whole Civil Government shall
be suffered, the King may hereafter with as much Justice, Law, and Reason, call
whom he pleases from any parts of the Kingdom to Consult with, and in the Name
and under Pretense of their Advise, change our Laws and Customs, impose Taxes,
and Alter at his pleasure the Note that Cromwell took upon him such a power to
send for men by his Letters without Election, and called them a Parliament, and
made Acts, and intended to have changed the Succession of the Crown to his own
family, if those his Creatures could have agreed with him.
Succession of the Crown.

We must with sorrow show your Hss. that they have so far prosecuted this their
Design against our Government, that they have rendered it impossible to have a
Legal Free Parliament Elected and returned in the present State of the Cities
and Boroughs, the Sherifs and Officers, and the Condition of the Electors,
great Numbers of them are quite barred of their Freedom and indifferency to
elect, which our Law requires, by the declared Displeasure of the King, and the
threatened and certain loss of their Offices and Employments and Benefits, if
they accept not of such for their Trustees as have unworthily resolved or
promised to Vote against our Established Laws as the King will have them,
without hearing the Reasons about them by the Kingdom in Parliament, and as we
believe, without knowing the Intent and Purpose of the Laws they promise to
abrogate.

It Is not now practicable to have the Legal Free Consent of the Kingdom, unto
the making or repealing of any Laws (without which they cannot be obligatory)
until there be a just Restoration of the Customs and Liberties of the Cities
and Boroughs, which have been illegally and treacherously surrendered, or unduly
wrested from them, and legal Magistrates shall be duly chosen to execute Writs
for Elections and make Returns, until there be a Revocation of the Kings
terrifying Declaration of the unfitness for Parliament, and public Employments
of all that will not help to finish his great Work begun, of destroying all our
Penal Laws for preventing the Popish Practices against the Rights of the Crown,
and the Realm.

Nor until there be an absolute Renunciation of all the Promises, Engagements
and Subscriptions of the Electors for Parliament taken by His Majesty's Orders
and Ministers to restrain their Freedom, and Indifferency in their Elections.
Thus the cunning and Malice of our Popish Adversaries have cut off all our
Legal Means of relief by the Free Common Councils of the Kingdom, whilst they
lay close siege to take our Bodies and Souls captive.

We need not remember your Highnesses, that these Attempts and Endeavors to
subvert our Liberty in our Religion and Government, is a part of that general
Design that was formed and concluded on many years since in the most Seccret
Councils of the Popish Princes, chiefly managed by the Jesuits, to root out of
all Europe the profession of the Protestant Reformed Religion and the Peoples
Liberties.

We will not mention the notorious actual Prosecutions of that Popish
Resolution in several Kingdoms and That is in France, the Dukedom of Savoy, the
Kingdom of Poland, and many others.
Dominions, nor the treacherous Falseness of those Princes in their Treaties,
Agreements and Oaths, nor the Oppressions and Bloodshed, and all kinds of
Unrighteousness that have been practiced by them in Order to that general great
Design

The instance alone of the French King is enough to be named instead of all,
because he has owned and published to the whole World his part in that Design,
and by comparing the Violences, Banishments, and Murders done upon the
Protestants at the same time by other Popish Princes (as they were able) with
his public Confessions of his long laid Design, we may make a true judgment of
the whole.

The French King by his Edict That Edict of 1685. is worthy to be read by every
true Protestant.
of 1685. has declared, that he entered into that Design from his coming to the
Crown; and it appears by the Edict It Is fit to see in that Edict, prepared as
its published, the opinion they have of Protestants, That they are deemed
incapable of having any right to claim the benefit of the Treaties, Promises or
Oaths made to them by the Papists.
then prepared, and agreed by his Council of Conscience (that all his renewed
Edicts in the Protestants Favor, his acknowledging and registring in
Parliament their great Services for him, and his Advancement of many of them to
the highest Dignities Military and Civil in his Kingdom, were done to flatter
and deceive them; he calls God to be Wi^ness of his Designs and Resolutions at
that time to abolish their Religion by degrees, and that he only attended his
fit opportunity for that great Work, as its called by our King and by that
Edict.

In that interim of his seeming kindness to the Protestants, and solemn
professions to them and some of the Protestant Princes, for their observing
faithfully the Law and Edict of Nants, that was like the French Protestants
great Charter, there were all possible secret Contrivances and Practices to
prepare for that great Work, especially in England, that has long been the
head of the Reformed Religion, and the Chief terror of the French King and the
Popish World; he showed his fear of the People of England when he barbarously
banished his now Majesty, and the late King in their distress, rather then
displease Cromwell; he therefore applied his principal Councils and Endeavors
to distract and weaken the Protestants of England, and to persuade and assist
the late King covertly to increase and strengthen the Popish Party; for that
end his dearest Confessor the Jesuit le Chaiz was ordered to correspond with
Mr. Coleman, that was then Secretary to his now Majesty, and the Sea in
Coleman's Letters, in print published by the Parliaments command.
Letters Confessed by him before thousands, showed that the Matter proposed,
was to root out of the World the Protestant Religion under the name of the
Northern Heresy; and ten times more of the particulars of that wretched design
had appeared, if all Mr. Colemans latest Letters for two years and a half that
were brought to Whitehal, and many culled out of the rest, had not been there
supressed and kept from the sight of the Parliament; yet Mr. Coleman on his
Trial confidently avowed before all the People that design, of Subverting the
Protestant Religion, and that he was only a subordinate Minister in it.

It appears by those Letters, that the French Kings Money was to manage that
Work, and the Letters brought into Parliament by the now Lord Mountage,
acknowledged by the late King to be written by his order, prove to the world
that the late King was content to become the French Kings Pensioner for five
hundred thousand pound per annum to keep off the meeting of Parliaments; we had
then discovered the increase of Popery, and the danger of the Protestant
Religion, and had thereupon formed the Parliaments Test, and were preparing
other Laws for security against the Popish Designs.

It has also been manifest to the world, that all kind of Devices and
Artifices that the Jesuits Councils could invent were about the same years used
to pervert the Faith and Religion of the United Provinces, or to betray them
into the French Kings Power, or at least a dependence upon him.

It Is now notorious to the world, that an agreement was made between the French
King and his late Majesty of England to subdue and divide those Provinces, that
they might no more be either a Support, or refuge for the Protestants. We crave
pardon for our boldness, that we humbly appeal to your Highness whether your
Integrity and Constancy in the Protestant Religion, and your Fidelity to your
Countries Freedom, were not about those years vainly attached by those two
Kings, or at least by one of them, and whether the Piety, Generosity and brave
scorn and indignation expressed at their proposals, did not fix an Enmity in
their hearts against you, the effects whereof you have suffered ever since.

The world has also seen the Effects of the French Kings prosecution of the
same design to take away the support of the Protestant Interest by his Pensions
to the Chief Men of the Kingdom of Sweden, and to such as he could prevail with
in the Court of Brandenburgh, and all other Princes-Courts that adhere to the
Protestant interest.

Yet the Chief of his Expense was upon our late King and his Ministers and
Counselors, who concurred in all the secret Practices and Contrivances to
weaken the Power of the Protestants, and to suffer the Greatness, Glory, and
Terror of the French King to be advanced; but he durst never openly and
avowedly join with him in the great Work against the Protestant Religion for
fear of his Protestant Subjects, he having deluded them with so many solemn
Protestations of his Faithfulness to their Religion and their Liberty.

The French King found by experience, that the Parliaments had prevailed with
our King, to break all the measures that they had taken together for the
destruction of the United Provinces, by obliging him to a Separate Peace with
them, which had forced him to let fall his then spreading Plumes, and in crafty
ways to seek and solicit a Truce, and therefore he durst not during our King's
life put in Execution his great Work, that he declares had been so long in his
heart, that by Torments, Murders, and all sort of barbarous Cruelties to
suppress the Professors and Profession of the Reformed Religion, and entirely
to race and expunge the Memory of it, as his Edicts and his Practices now
declare to be his intentions.

That French King durst not throw off his disguise, and show himself to be like
a ravening Wolf to his Protestant Subjects, until our now King had publicly
espoused the Popish Design, which he had together with him long prosecuted in
the dark, and until he had begun to invade the Protestant Liberties and
Securities, his putting the Military Powers in Popish hands, and to demand the
Parliaments Consent to a Law (which they refused) to authorize him, to make his
Papists the Guardians of the Protestants Religion and Lives.

The French King then knew that the People of England were in no capacity to
interpose in behalf of his Protestant Subjects, however he should destroy them,
and as his Edict says, being by the Truce without fear of disturbance, he
entirely applied himself to the great Design, he sent his Dragoons to destroy
the Poor Protestants Goods, and to torment their Bodies with more cruelty and
inhumanity than was ever practiced since the Creation; he resolved for his
glory (as his Clergy told him) to show himself the first and most illustrious
of the Churches Children, and the Extirpator of the Protestant Heresy, which
they told him was a more solid and immortal title then he acquired by all his
Tryumphs.

He then presented that work of Extirpation as Saul did to strange Countries,
breathing out threatenings and slaughter, he sent to the Duke of Savoy, and as
that Court complains, persuaded and frighted that Prince into a most
Unchristian and Bloody Decree, to compel the most ancient Protestants in the
Valleys of Piedmont to turn Papists forthwith; and they being faithful to their
Religion, that Edict was persued by the help of ^is Dragoons, and the harmless
Protestants tormented and murdered more cruelly than the worst of See the
relation of it printed.
Vermin or Serpents, until they were utterly destroyed, and their Country
given to the Papists. That Court of Savoy seems still See Dr. Burnets Letter
from his personal inquiry.
Ashamed of that horrid wickedness, and says for their Excuse, That the French
King declared he would root out those Protestants by his own force, and possess
the Country, if the Duke would not have assisted therein.

The suppression of the Protestants of England has been always esteemed the
principal part of the Popish design to Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and
therefore all the Romish Councils, Policies and Industries, their Conspiracies,
Poisoning, and Massacres, have been long employed about it, and have perfectly
gained our now King to serve their design; they have united him with the French
King, that their Conjoined Councils, Treasures and Strength, may finish their
work of bringing England to the Obedience of their Church. Its many ways
Evident, that both the Kings are under the like conduct, and our King proceeds
in the same methods against us, wherein the French King has been successful to
destroy the Protestants of his Kingdom. His first attempt is to subvert our
Civil Government and Laws, and the Freedom, and being of our Parliaments, just
as the French King first invaded the Supreme Legal Authority of France, which
was vested in the Assembly of Estates, from whom alone he now derives his
Crown. Our King in imitation of his Brother of France, strives to bring all the
Offices and Magistracy of the Kingdom, that were legally of the Peoples choice,
to be solely and immediately depending on his Absolute Will for their being,
whether they arise by our Common Law or be instituted by Statutes or Charters.
He endeavors by various Artifices to bring the disposal of all the Properties
and Estates of the People, and their Lives and Liberties to be at his mere will
by a perversion of the instituted course of our Juries, and by Judges and a
Chancellor fit for that purpose, and every moment dependant on his Will; he
seeks to make his Proclamations and Declarations to have as much Power over our
Laws, as the French Kings Edicts. And after his Example he establishes a
mercenary Army to master and subdue the People to his Will.

If he can prevail in these things to overturn the Civil Government, then the
Liberty of the Protestant Profession and of Conscience in all Forms, however
seemingly settled by him, will be precarious, and he may as easily destroy it as
the French King has abolished the irrevocable Edicts, Treaties or Laws of his
Kingdom, Confirmed by his Oath, which were as good security to those
Protestants as any Magna Charta that our King can make for us, or any Act of a
Convention with the name of a Parliament, which is possible for him to hold in
the State unto which he has reduced the Kingdom.

Our King has the same French Copy, by which he writ assuring the Protestants
of Grace and Clemency, giving them Promises of Equal Liberty of Conscience with
his Papists, in preferring unto Offices and Employments those whom he resolves
to suppress and ruin, preventing the Execution of Laws, and in allowing Liberty
of Conscience in some notions, and the outward forms of worship in the
Christian Religion, provided always that they have no regard or Conscience for
the substance of Christ's Religion in Justice and righteousness, nor stumble at
complying with him, or assisting him, in the highest Crimes against Jesus
Christ, by invading the Rights and Liberty of the Kingdom, and assuming a
forcible Domination to oppress whom he please, which is a subversion of the
very foundation of Justice and Love amongst men, and by Consequence of the
Religion preached and established by Christ.

These matters of fact are self-evidences, and clearly show that our Grievous
Oppressions by our King are the effects of the united Councils of the Popish
Interest, whereof the French King is the Chief. That the Conspiracy against
true Religion and Liberties that now appears in England, Comprizes all the
Protestant Princes and States in Europe; England is only first attacked as the
principal Fortress of the Protestant Profession, if the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland can be reduced into the pattern of the French
King in Government and Religion, and the strength of them be united against any
single Protestant State or Prince they shall think fit to assault, if they can
by Artifices keep the rest divided, which will not be hard for them; for there
is little hope of any long defense of such a State.

The French King seems not unwilling to have it known that the Popish design is
General against all Profession of the Protestant Religion, tho especially
against England, he has allowed the Bishop of Cosnaes speech to him at
Versailes in 1685. to be published, who was authorized to be the Mouth of the
Clergy of that Kingdom; he magnifies the King for suppressing the Protestants
of his own Kingdom, and asks what they may not yet expect: England, says he,
is just offering to your Majesty one of the most glorious occasions that you
can desire; the King of England by the need which he will have of succor and
of the support of your Arms, to maintain him in the Catholic Faith, will make
you quickly find occasion to give a protection wholly of your self. We know
very well before the French Clergy declared it by that Bishop, that the same
head that contrived the pervertion of destruction of so many millions of the
Protestants in that Kingdom, designed the ruin of the English Religion and
Liberty: but it surprised us, to see that speech published by the French Kings
Authority, and that our King should suffer the Translation of it to pass freely
in England and through the World. We thought it beneath the Majesty of a King of
England to be content that his subjects should be told, that he was to come
under the protection of a King of France, over whose Kings, and Kingdom, his
Ancestors had so often triumphed; but it seems nothing is to be esteemed
inglorious that may serve the General Popish design of Extirpating the
Protestant Profession.

We need not put your Hss. in mind that the same speech acknowledges that the
Popish Councils, and Conspiracy against England intend the like ruin to the
Religion and Freedom of the United Provinces; that Bishop tells the King, that
he has undertook the Conquest of new Countries there to re-establish the
Prelacy, the Religious worship and the Altars, that Holland and Germany have
been the Theater of his Victories only that Christ might triumph there, that
is, that the Papists might trample upon the Protestants and their Religion, and
this he speaks, (as he says) in the very Spirit of the Church, and signifies
their hopes of succ^ss against the poor Protestants to be unbounded, saying,
what may we not yet Expect.

We must freely Confess we were too slow to believe this desperate Popish Plot
against the whole Protestant Profession, and in our particular Case we have
been deluded with our Kings promises to protect and maintain our Religion, our
Laws and Government, until we see them all undermined, and the train laid to
blow them up by a packed Convention of men preingaged, perverted or corrupted
to serve the Kings will and designs, that shall assume the name of Parliament:
we were not utterly insensible of the danger of our Liberty in our Religion,
and our Government from the time his now Majesty declared his late Majesty to
have been a Papist; but who saw that by their secret Conjoined Councils they
had not been able to prevent the making some Laws to secure the Protestants by
Excluding Papists from our Parliaments, and all Offices and Employments, and we
hoped that our Kings life would not be sufficient to overturn by degrees (as
they had begun to proceed,) the Excellent foundations of our Civil Government,
nor to Extinguish the clear light of the truths of Christ Professed in our
Religion; and we were assured that your Hss. minds were clearly enlightened in
the Doctrines of the Protestant Religion, and adorned and accomplished with all
Christian and Royal Virtues fit to possess the highest throne.

Thereupon we encouraged each other to suffer with patience his Majesty's
attempts against our Laws and Liberties, presuming that your Hss. would ere
long be our joyful deliverers to the Everlasting Confusion of the Popish
designs against our Government and Religion, and to the Vindication of the
Innocence of the Protestant Martyrs in all the Kingdoms of Europe.

But as your Hss. were the greatest objects of our earthly hopes, so the
thoughts of her Royal Highnesses succession to the Crown in Conjunction with
your Highnesses Virtues and Military prowess and magnaninity were matters of
the greatest horror and dread to all the Popish Councils of Europe. They have
therefore applied themselves to various consultations; sometimes it has been
proposed, by his Majesty's Power with a Parliament by the deluding Names of
Liberty of Conscience and a Magna Charta therein, to Fetter Your Highness in
Your accession to the Crown with such Conditions as were obtained in Parliament
in the cases of Queen Mary and Elizabeth, which they hoped to strengthen by his
Majesty's putting the Papists into possession of all the strength and Authority
of the Kingdom, united with all the power of the French King, that your quiet
Admission to the Throne might not be possible, unless you should submit unto,
and depend upon the Papists, and the Conditions that they should impose. But
they found it of greater difficulty than they at first imagined, to get a
Parliament that would join with his Majesty in such a project against your
Highnesses. Therefore some of the more cautious Papists, of considerable
fortunes, stumbled at the absolute force of a mercenary Army, and the French
Power, to put a force upon the Heiress of the Crown; they propounded, that his
Majesty should rather try the force of his Paternal Power with her Royal
Highness, and use all the arguments of interest to induce her either to change
her sentiments in her Religion, or at least to moderate her thoughts concerning
them, and incline her to concur in their full Liberty.

If such Endeavors should be hopeless, that then Your Highnesses should be at
least prevailed with to declare your Consents to his Majesty's Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, and your concurrence in his desires to a Parliament for
the repeal of all the Penal Laws in matters Ecclesiastical, and the Test.

It was presumed, That Your Highnesses might have been persuaded, that the Laws
suspended and dispensed with by his Majesty were only two or three Laws against
the Protestant Dissenters holding their Conventicles, and some Laws made since
the Reformation, only to Compel Papists by great penalties to come to Church,
and to keep their Priests out of the Kingdom, and it was hoped that Your
Highnesses Compassion to all Christians, and a tenderness of the Liberty of
Consciences, would have moved you, without further Examination, to have
complied with his Majesty's Request.

It was believed Your Highnesses would never have inquired after the Penal Laws
in Matters Ecclesiastical, made by the Ancient Papists many hundred years
since, against the horrid Invasions by the Romish Church on the Rights of the
Crown and the Realm, whereby they had impoverished, inslaved, and almost ruined
the Kingdom; nor that your Highnesses would have understood that the King has
opened a return to all those wicked practices of that Popish Church, and that
the repeal of those Laws would settle them.

It was supposed that Your Highnesses had not known that the Penal Laws in
matters Ecclesiastical contain most of the clearest authoritative Declarations
that are extant in any Records of the rights of the English Crown, of the Form
and Constitution of our Government, and of the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject; the Church of Rome's claims, Usurpation and intolerable abuses and
oppressions having put a necessity upon the Kings and Parliaments to make those
Declarations of Law that are now ancient Evidences of the Inheritances of the
Kings and People, of inestimable value.

It was imagined, That Your Highnesses would not have discerned the
consequences of a General repeal of the Penal Laws in matters Ecclesiastical;
that enacting only his Majesty's Declaration, (as he propounds there) would be
the most absolute and complete Establishment of Popery that the Romish Church
can wish. All the Canons or Laws of the Church of Rome shall then have greater
legal force in England than they have had in five hundred years past, and all
her Authorities and Jurisdictions over our Persons and Estates will be in the
same manner legal by ancient usage, and approved by Parliament, as ever they
were heretofore in England; part of Magna Charta it self will be repealed, that
makes it Penal to such as the Priest shall delude to give their Lands to
Religious Houses.

There was such a Confidence of deceiving your Highnesses, and obtaining your
Consent to the repeal of the Penal Laws, that the Priests spread a rumor, that
you had agreed, and that his Majesty understood you well therein; a false
Jesuit had the impudence to whisper it as a secret, that their general design
could not miscarry, seeing they were secretly assured that the Prince of Orange
would Concur in it when it was seasonable to declare himself.

We were certain of the falsness of those rumors, some of us knowing of
applications that were contrived by his Majesty's order to your Highness in
that matter; and we were much surprised when a friend of ours at Whitehall told
one of us about the end of August last, that the rumors of Your Highnesses
concurring with his Majesty, were suddenly hushed, and that he heard a whisper
that it was said with much anger, that Your Highnesses were obstinate in your
Errors, and thought to make your selves popular with the Church of England, and
he would trouble himself no more with you, but you should repent it.

Some few of us, who had often Conferences, concluded that the King had changed
his measures, but could not imagine what was designed to offer to a Parliament
in lieu of a Protestant Successors consent, to oblige them to repeal the Penal
Laws desired by his Majesty. It was not long before we heard it muttered, that
the Queen was with Child; and then the Papists began to Triumph, and the
Priests gave out boldly, that it would set aside her Royal Highnesses right to
the Succession, tho it were a Daughter; and ignorantly and impudently Affirmed,
that if the Queen had a Daughter Born after the King came to the Crown, it
ought to Succeed before a Daughter Born when he was but a Duke. But none but
the Papists gave any Credit to the reports that she was with Child; and the
Fable of the Duchess of Modena's request in Heaven or Purgatory, and the Lady
of Loretto's helping her to Conceive a Son for the sake of a fine present, made
all but the Papists believe it a mere invention of the Priests, whatever should
ensue.

The story of it showed it to be of the lineage of the Popish Legends, and was
a matter of laughter and derision amongst the People, and a subject for Poets
lampoons, which were so common that they were in Whitehall it self, and no
doubt they came to the knowledge of his Majesty and most of his Court. The more
serious Protestants presently apprehended, that a supposititious Son was
designed to abate Your Highnesses growing Reputation and Power, all the
Protestants of Europe then justly looking upon her Royal Highness as Heiress
apparent to the English Crown, and Your Highnesses in all respects to be the
fittest head for the Protestant Interest against the General Popish Design.

They knew this device to be necessary for supporting the Glory and Terror of
the French King, against the greatning reputation of Your Highnesses by the
Expectancy of the English Crown; it is known that he dreads Your Highnesses
Vindication and recovery of your own rights from his manifest violence and
rapine, and your Patronage of the Protestant Interest in all Europe, against
his Arbitrary and Bloody Designs.

He knows that if her Royal Highness succeeds to the Crown of England, he will
be quickly incapable of prosecuting his cruel Intentions against the
Protestants of other Countries, and, it may be scarce capable of supporting his
grandeur and triumph over his miserable Subjects.

The very Expectation for 8 or 9 Months, that the Queen might bring sorth a
Son, was greatly for the Popish advantage, if the trick should have failed in
the Issue by any unlucky accident; it made a stand for a time of the
Protestants of all Countries in the great Expectations from Your Highnesses; it
raised Triumphant hopes in all Popish Countries; it strengthened the English
Papists hands and hearts to prosecute their design Vigorously; it encouraged
Corrupt and Time-serving Protestants in Profession to fall in with their Party,
and prevailed with many weak Dissenters to make them believe a Succession of
Popish Princes, and that their Liberty of Conscience is only to be expected
from them, and that therefore they ought to serve in their employments.

When we saw the Incredulity and Mockery of the multitude at the story of the
Queens great Belly, and the sad apprehensions of the more Considerate, that for
the politic support of the Popish design a Counterfeit Son of the King's might
be imposed on the Kingdom, we resolved to observe and keep memorials of the
rise, progress and issue of the whole matter (as far as we could get
intelligence). We presently perceived that the Popish Priests were the prime
reporters and most Confident Asserters of the undoubted truth of the matter;
and they boldly took upon them to presage, that the Queen was with Child of a
Boy, that was to finish the settlement of their Church in England, as Certainly
as if they had seen the Foetus perfectly formed in her Womb, or rather as if
they had been privy to the Plot of a Supposititious Boy, and had their Cue in
the Management of it.

Their manner of talk and boasting increased the general suspicion; we knew
that sort of Priests maintained the vilest wickednesses to be lawful for their
Church's service, and that they have been notorious for impostures and
Forgeries of all sorts; they once Forged an Eternal Gospel, (as they called it)
to support the Orders of the Mendicant Friars; and if we may believe some of
themselves, they have a Father Titler in some rich Convents to forge titles to
any man's land adjoying to theirs when the Convents have a mind to them: those
Priests contrived Queen Marys great belly for a counterfeit Heir to the Crown,
to have Carried on their Catholic cause; and as great public Triumph and
solemn Prayers for her Belly were made at Rome, and in all Popish Countries, as
have been made in our Queens Case; but their design was unluckily crossed when
her Deliverance was Expected, and their Joys and Prayers vanished in smoke.

Some of those Priests were the Agents for the Bloody and unnatural Usurpation
of our King Richard the third. A Priest Preached at Paul's Cross to make the
People believe that King Edward 4. his elder Brother, whose Sons King Richard
had Murdered, was a Bastard, not the lawful Son of Rich. D. of York, and that
Richard was the true Legitimate Son, and had been a long time wronged of the
Crown belonging to him.

It was a Priest's invention and management, to set up Lambert Symnel, a Bakers
Son, against King H. 7. Counterfeiting him to be Earl of Warwick, and laying
claim to the Crown, and was Proclaimed King in Ireland, and marched into
England with a good Army to maintain his Pretense: and by the like advice
Perkin Warbeck, another Counterfeit, was set up against the same H. 7. by
Margaret Duchess of Burgundy, to be Richard the younger Son of Ed. 4. and made
such a considerable party in Ireland, and was so received and assisted in
Scotland, that he bid fair for the Crown: and we could not forget what a
cheating trick the Jesuits invented and practiced of later years about
procuring an Heir to a Crown that is become their chief support in Europe.

The Remembrance of these, and many other wicked frauds of the Romish Priests
of the like import, to change the Successions of Crowns to serve their Church,
and seeing them so busy and industrious to prepossess the Peoples minds with
an opinion that the Queen had a great belly, and that it was a Son, when it was
impossible in Nature to be known, if she had been then really pregnant; these
things, we say, put together, confirmed our suspicions that they acted a part
as they were influenced, and that a Counterfeit Son might be resolved on to be
set up for Prince of Wales, as common same confidently reported.

The Collections and Observations we have since made of the things that
occurred during the Queens supposed pregnancy, and about her pretended Delivery
of this Son, have made the truth of the matter so plain in our apprehensions,
that now we no more suspect, but conclude and believe this pretended Prince of
Wales to be a mere Counterfeit, and we hold it our Duty to Your Highnesses, to
our Country, and to the whole Protestant Interest (this Child being set up
against all these) to set before you all the Memorials we have taken in the
whole matter, several of us at least having been very near the Court during the
whole Transaction.

We crave leave to put Your Highnesses in mind, that before we can convincingly
set forth the special, and particular Facts and Circumstances that we have
remarked in this matter, it is necessary that we first remember and evince the
truth of some general Conclusions about the Proofs and Evidences whereby a true
Judgment ought to be made of this supposed Prince; and if your Highnesses shall
be clearly satisfied in the truth of those Conclusions, whereof we cannot
doubt, you may be fully convinced by them alone, without further hesitation or
Inquiry, that this supposed Prince of Wales cannot be justly judged by any kind
of Rules of Justice or Law whatsoever to be in truth born of the Queen.

The first certain Conclusion to be remembered is this, That by the Universal
Rules of Justice and Equity, any Child of our Queens (that was expected or
hoped to be the Heir of the Crown of three Kingdoms, and to postpone or set
aside an undoubted Heiress apparent, and also the right Expectance of a warlike
Prince, and diverse Princesses of the Blood) we say, such a Child ought to have
been attested to be born of the Body of the Queen, of the personal certain
knowledge of proper Witnesses suitable to the case and concern, in so great a
number, and of such unspotted fame, undoubted Authority, and perfect
indifferency, that the Proofs of its Birth could never have been reasonably
drawn into doubt or question, either in England or any other Christian Kingdoms
or States.

A Son of the Queens Body had naturally and really made an entry in the moment
of his Birth, upon the apparent right of her Royal Highness: She had thereby
rightfully ceased to be Heiress apparent to the Crown, and no Rules of natural
Civil Justice, nor the Law of any Civil Government, will allow or suffer
entries to be made, and persons to be outed of the Rights they apparently had
in Judgment of Law, without sufficient proof either of right Paramount to the
others, or a determination of those former Rights apparent.

Our English Laws, and special Statutes for that purpose, abhor any Entry upon
the apparent legal Right of another, either of the Will of the King, or of any
Subject; the Admission of such a Practice is absolutely destructive of Property
and all Civil Justice and Government; it dissolves the whole Civil Government,
and turns all into the confused course of natural Right; wheresoever a Civil
Government and Property is established on Entry of Will upon the Legally
apparent Right of others, without sufficient Manifestation of their own greater
or better Rights, is directly contrary to Gods Eternal Law, and that of all
Righteousness amongst men.

Upon these certain infallible Foundations we build our Conclusion, That this
supposed Prince of Wales, Born of the Body of the Queen, ought by the Laws of
England, the Fundamental Rules of all Civil Justice and Government, and by the
unalterable Laws of God, to be manifestly proved by them that pretend it,
beyond all possible Contradiction, in such manner as is described and specified
in the preceding Conclusion, and such proofs ought to have been publicly
divulged and made known to England, and the World, before his Patrons ought to
have entered in his name upon her Royal Highnesses Right, in the Judgment of our
Laws to be styled and reputed the Heiress apparent to the Crown of England, and
to assume to him that Honor and Glory, which her Highness justly had in
England, and all the Kingdoms and States of Europe, to be apparently the next
Successor to the Crown of England.

Questionless all the Civilized Kingdoms in the World, that are Hereditary,
have pursued these principles of Justice and Reason in their common Custom, to
have their Princes born in the presence of the Princes of the Blood, the
chiefest Men of Religion, and the greatest Nobles and Officers in the highest
Trusts for the Kingdom, and the Ambassadors and Ministers of foreign Kingdoms
and States: That the Heirs o those great Inheritances might be so known and
manifest, that it might not be possible for any Controversies to arise about
their Births, and their being the Lineal Heirs of the Respective Kingdoms.
Whenever Rights of any kind are obtained merely by virtue of Birth, those
that claim them are bound to prove by Witnesses suitable to the Respective
Circumstances of every Case, the reality of their pretended Birth at their
Peril of being justly excluded from the Rights they demand; yet Justice does
not always require the like Witnesses and clearness of Testimony about the
Birth of all common Persons; the Circumstances of their cases being so
different, that Witnesses of such qualities and in such a number as may be
sufficient proof for the birth of one Heir, may justly be judged insufficient
for the birth of another.

But the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales was attended with such
Circumstances, that Justice required that his Birth of the Queen should have
been testified by a plenty of such Witnesses as their proof might have amounted
to the highest degree of Certainty that is possible to be built upon humane
Testimony; doubtless the Circumstances of his pretended Birth were very
extraordinary.

It was generally reputed and believed, that the Queen's sicknesses and
infirmities had disabled her to bring forth a living Child. The famous
Physician Dr. Willis showed that opinion to his Brethren, of one of her
Children, when her Majesty was much stronger, saying, there were mala stamina
vitae; and the popular opinion therein was confirmed by several years
experience.

It was notorious that two hundred to one throughout the Kingdom did not
believe the report that her Majesty was with Child, notwithstanding all that
was said of it by the King and the Queen, and the Prayers enjoined thereupon.

That her Majestys pregnancy was as little believed in foreign Protestant
Countries, as in England; and Pamphlets were published in several Countries as
well as in England, that declared the Report of the Queens being with Child, to
be nothing more than an Artifice of the Jesuits, by those hopes of a Popish
Successor to the Crown, to encourage their Catholics in their Designs, and to
gain Proselytes.

It was publicly known, that there was a jealousy in the greatest part of the
Kingdom, that the Popish Councils had designed to impose upon them a
counterfeit Prince of Wales.

There were also Circumstances about the Birth of this supposed Prince, of
another sort, and no less important. It was the general opinion, that the
Security or Danger of the Profession of the Protestant Religion, not only in
England, but in all the Kingdoms and States of Europe, would be the certain
consequence of her Majesty's bearing or not bearing a Prince of Wales.

The Birth of such a Prince was to be a great diminution of many Princes and
Princesses in their Expectancy and Right to the Succession to the three Crowns,
and threatened England with the Danger and Misery of falling under an Infant
Prince in name, and in truth under the Domination of Rome.

All these special Circumstances attending the birth of this supposed Prince of
Wales, being of such nature, import and number, as the like never met together
before in the Expectations of the birth of any Prince in the world. In this
Case Natural Justice, common to all Nations, and the practical reason of the
special Customary Law of England in the proof of Matters of fact, we say, both
universal Justice and the Peculiar Law of England required indispensibly, that
there should have been such proper proof that this supposed Prince was born of
the Queen, as was answerable unto all the special Circumstances in the case,
such proof as had comprehended the objections that might arise from every of
them, as fully as was possible in the nature of the things, that the testimony
of his birth might have been sufficient to have satisfied the most jealous and
distrustful about it in our own and foreign Countries, and to have removed all
the prejudices against it that were known to have been spread far and near by
Common fame.

It was absolutely necessary in Justice, Law and Prudence, to have had such
proof of his birth as our precedent conclusion has asserted: that is,

That there had been Testimony of it, of personal and absolutely certain
knowledge. Women to have testified their Personal sight and perception of that
very individual Child coming naturally out of the Queens womb, and men to have
witnessed their immediate free and full sight and inspection of that very Child
by the women's assistance in his pure natural nakedness, with all the known
marks and tokens of his being just separated from the womb, and from those
other things that are natural to the birth of a Child, the effects of such
separation being there visible, and impossible to be hidden; such Testimony is
always provided for in the birth of every Prince of the blood in France, tho
never so remote from the Crown.

That the witnesses of those matters had been fit and proper witnesses,
suitable to the greatness of the Persons and things that might be in question,
and to the vast Extensive Consequence that may ensue thereupon. Nature or the
first light from God Created in the minds of mankind, dictated the equity of
those Roman imperial Laws that appointed those which asserted filiation or
marriage, to prove them by fit or proper and most unquestionable witnesses;
most of the Writers about those Laws serve themselves therein of these Words
severally, which we will for shortness put together; Matrimonium and
filiationem qui asserunt, debent probare per testes idoneos omni Exceptione
majores, they that alledg a marriage or a Child being, by virtue whereof they
claim, ought to prove it by witnesses that are above or beyond all possible
Exception; in this case there ought to have been such fit witnesses that
nothing could have been objected against them in any respect either by
Englishmen or Foreigners.

That the witnesses that Law and Prudence required of both sexes, had been fit
and proper in respect of their years, or age; that the women had been Matrons,
whose gravity and sobriety were fit to attract some decent reverence from the
men of like quality, in their Exposing to them nakedly the works of nature as
was unavoidably necessary.

That they had been fit and proper in regard of their sufficiency of knowledge
and understanding in the matters of Childbearing, such as knew by Experience
all those works of Nature, in what manner the Mothers ought to be and are
Customarily treated in their real travel and Childbearing, and immediately
after it, and what are the natural Symptoms in the Mother, that Accompany the
real bringing forth of a Child before it has been its natural time of nine
Months in the womb, and at its due natural time, and also the signs of a Child
perfectly grown in the womb, or brought to light before its time of perfection:
it was of necessity that the witnesses had been of such knowledge and experience
in all these Matters, or so sufficiently informed about them by others of skill
and faithfulness, that it might have been Evident to the Kingdom that such
witnesses could not be imposed upon, deluded, or deceived by any Cunning
Artifices to believe this pretended Prince to have been born of the Queen, if
he were in truth supposititious and Counterfeit.

The General Rules of our Canon Law required, that the Witnesses had been
publicly known to the Kingdom by their Persons or their Names, their
Interests, Concerns or Employments; our Fundamental Laws have taken care that
all matters of Fact should be decided by Juries of the Neighborhood where the
Facts are done, that the Witnesses that testify them, may be known to the
Jurors; and Fraud is always suspected, if persons unknown to the Neighborhood
of the Facts be produced to witness them, unless there be manifest reason for
their knowledge of the Fact better than those that were near to the place, and
known to the Jurors.

The reason of our Law is of impregnable force in the case of the supposed
Prince, that the Witnesses of his Birth should be persons publicly known, on
whose knowledge, truth and credit, the whole Kingdom and the Christian World
should rely in a matter of such vast consequence. Obscure unknown persons never
publicly named or heard of in this or any foreign Kingdom, and above all
obscure foreigners, French or Italians, or others, ought not to be deemed fit
or competent Witnesses to satisfy the Kingdom in this Fact: indeed when
Circumstances are considered, it will be evident that their pretended Testimony
ought to be rejected; and if it be offered, it justly puts a prejudice upon
their pretenses, in regard there was a whole Kingdom, besides all the Eminent
Ministers of Foreign Princes and States, out of which Witnesses might have been
selected that were publicly known and heard of by all the People; and the
necessity of it was never so manifest in any case, it being known to his
Majesty and his whole Court, that the Queens being with Child, was not
generally believed either in England or Foreign Countries.

Common Justice required that the Witnesses had been fit and proper, in respect
of their high distinguishing Quality; either that they had been dignified with
some of the highest Ecclesiastical Dignities, as Archbishops, or Bishops; or
had been by Birth or Creation of the degree of the greatest Nobility of the
Kingdom; or that their extraordinary Worth had raised their Reputation, and had
been honored with the great and eminent Offices of Trust in the Realm.

Our Laws are impartial to High and Low in hearing the Testimonies of Witnesses
in every Case; and therefore they duly consider both the Circumstances of every
Fact to be proved, and of every Witness, and his Capacity to prove it. Our Laws
indeed judge not Truth and Integrity to be annexed and intailed to Dignity,
Nobility or Greatness; yet they justly claim the Testimonies of persons of
great Dignity in the Church, or of Noble Birth, and raised Knowledge and
Fortunes, and independent upon others, as more free from exception (which this
Case requires) than those that are of weak understandings, without the
advantage of excellent Breeding and Instruction, or indigent, and bound to
depend upon Favor of others for their support, like Nurses and Midwives, and
other Servants.

Therefore ( Caeteris paribus) (the Capacity and Probability of knowing the
Facts and the Indifferency of Witnesses of High and Low degree being equal) our
Laws justly allow most Weight and Credit to the Testimony of dignified and
noble Witnesses, and they are therefore required to prove the Fact of a
Prince's Birth, whereupon depends the Right and Title to Kingdoms to exclude
the apparent Right of one, and to put another into possession of the same.

Our Laws presume Persons of such high degree to have greater sense and regard
to Conscience, more generosity and contempt of Falsehood, and more tenderness of
their Honor than those of Low Condition, and upon that presumption, Noblemens
Affirmations, upon their Honor, are in many Cases accepted by our Laws in lieu
of their Oaths, unto which all others are obliged in the same or like Cases;
and for that reason their Declarations of the Birth of a Prince, without their
making Oath thereof judicially, have been as certainly relied upon by the
Kingdom in the Descent of the Inheritance without Dispute, as if they had sworn
their knowledge in the forms of Justice.

There are also other circumstantial Reasons (unto which our Laws have regard)
for the greatest value to be put upon the Testimony of the Nobility of both
Sexes about the Birth of a Prince; they are most accustomed to the presence and
conversation of the King and Queen.

Such Ladies are justly presumed to be free from too great awful Distances,
Common to those of lower Quality; and to have more Audacity and Confidence to
make such near Approaches to the Queen in her Travel and bringing forth, as are
necessary, that they may be ocular Witnesses that they have seen the Child in
its very Birth; and such Nobles are more bold and free to take such a searching
view of the Child in its naked Naturals as may make them knowing Witnesses of
its Birth and absolutely certain that they are not deluded with a
Supposititious Child.

Such Noble Witnesses are also known to have greater Obligations upon them than
others, to prevent all possible Questions and Disputes that may arise by any
uncertainties about the Succession to the Crown, which may divide and destroy
the Kingdom, and their great Interest and Posterities; their Conditions are
Fortunes are supposed, by our Laws, to be above temptations by Bribes of
Wealth, or Honor, to connive at falsehood, or to stoop to serve a Counterfeit
Prince.

Upon all these Considerations, the Witnesses of the Birth of every English
Prince ought to be of such High and Noble Quality; and it was known to have
been infinitely more necessary, that the reason of our Law had been exactly
observed in the case of this Supposed Prince, than ever it was since the
foundation of the Kingdom; there never was any such occasion to have stopped
the mouth of Public fame, or to have showed the justly jealous Subjects, that
there were such fit and proper Witnesses, that a Prince was now born of the
Queen, as were unquestionable, without any possible exception, whose truth and
faithfulness might be relied upon securely. Justice also required, for full
security, that there had been competent and sufficient numbers of those fit and
proper Witnesses; at least that there had been so many of them as were able to
obviate all ways and practices of deceit, that it could not have been supposed
to be possible that a Fraud had been put upon them.

This sort of Caution is always just and necessary in the Birth of our Princes;
but in the present case there could have been no honest end, intention, or
pretense to have confined themselves to a small number of Witnesses of a fact,
wherein a Kingdom, known to be filled with just suspicions of an Imposture to
be put upon them, were to be satisfied merely by the Witnesses averrment, and a
Noble Princess also to be excluded from being Heiress apparent to the Crown.

Our Laws require Witnesses of Facts answerable to the Nature and Circumstances
of them, and always require ample Testimonies, when the Parties that are
obliged to prove them, had it in their powers and choice, without charge or
burden to themselves, to have multiplied their Witnesses to what number they
had pleased, and could not be ignorant of the usefulness or necessity of it;
and yet more especially if the fact were such, whereby Great Benefit was to
accrue to them, and Answerable Loss unto others; in such a Case it would much
abate the strength of the proof in the course of the Law, if there were such a
small number of Witnesses as might leave room for any objection, or the least
doubt of the fact.

The ancient Roman Imperial Laws in the Cases of Subjects, when there was a
Posthumus to be born that might exclude another Heir apparent, We say, those
Laws in common natural Equity to prevent a supposititious Child, appointed
thirty days notice to be given to the apparent Heir, and all others whose Right
was concerned, of the Expected time of her Travel, and delivery, that on the
behalf of the Heir apparent, Women might be sent to be present to see the Birth
of the Child that might become the Heir; that Law confined the number to five
free Women to be sent, allowing her that was to be delivered to have also five
Women of her own choosing, and no more; so that the number to be present at her
delivery should not exceed Ten, besides two Midwives, and six Maid Servants
that were no Witnesses.

This Rule was set down positively in the Empire, as the Dictate of natural
Equity and Prudence; and although England has no positive written Law, that
prescribes any set number of Friends to be sent in such a case by the Heir
apparent, to see the Birth of such a Child, yet the Custom and Practice is in
every such case (though no Fraud be suspected) to give notice to the next Heir,
and that some of their Friends are customarily sent (to what number they
please) to be present at the Birth of the Child, that may be an Heir to the
Exclusion of another.

That practice with us is not of Favor, but of Legal Right; our Common Law
generally Binds all that set up a claim to any thing that another has, to give
such Notice of his pretense as is needful to make his just defense if he can,
and to prove the Fact whereby he claims, by such a number of Witnesses as may
put the Truth of it out of doubt to the Court of Judicature; but that number in
the Course of our Law is greater or smaller, according to the Cause that
appears of jealousy or distrust of the Truth of the Fact pretended.

These Rules of our Law, and the Reasons of them fully include the case of a
Pretense of a Child to be born to exclude an Heir apparent; and if there were
many known grounds of suspicion in any such case, that it was designed to set
up a supposititious Child, and a notorious Common fame of it, and no notice
were given of the time expected of the Child's Birth, hoped to be Heir, to the
then Heir apparent, or to any that had expectances of the Inheritances; We say,
in such a case, by the Rules and Practices of our Laws, a small number of
Witnesses of the Birth of a Child ought not to be believed, since they that
should claim for such a Child, might by due notice to the Parties concerned
have had such Witnesses as had put the Child's Birth beyond all question.

Certainly by the reason of our Common Law, there ought to be a much greater
number of Witnesses of the Birth of every of our Princes, than of the Birth of
the Subjects Heirs; but our Law requires that the Birth of this pretended
Prince of Wales should have been proved by a greater number of Witnesses than
was ever needful heretofore, in the case of a Prince; there ought to have been
so many fit and proper Persons present at his pretended Birth, that it might
have been manifest to all that had heard it, that the Eyes of so many Witnesses
of such Condition, Knowledge and Judgment, could not have been deceived in what
they had testified to have known, and seen; the number ought to have been so
considerable, that there could have been no reasonable Suspicion, that so many
of both Sexes, and of various Dignities, Honors and Interests (and some of
them of Consanguinity with the former Heiress apparent) had made a Confederacy
amongst themselves to abuse the Kingdom with a Counterfeit Prince, and that so
many had kept each others Counsel in a Fraud and Falsehood so odious and
injurious.

It had been common Prudence as well as Justice to the Realm, that the
Witnesses of the Birth had been very many, that amongst such a Number some of
them might have been known in one part of the Kingdom, and others in another
Part, and that some of their Names and Qualities might have been known in
Foreign Countries, and for that Reason the Ministers of Foreign Princes
(according to Custom) ought to have been some of the Witnesses; the Peoples
knowledge of the Names, Qualities, or Persons of the Witnesses, had much
conduced to their fuller assurance of the Truth; it would have appeared to them
incredible and almost impossible that the Integrity of such, and so many
Witnesses, could have been attacked either separately or jointly.

But on the contrary, seeing Custom and Law required a good number of fit and
proper Witnesses to have made up a Testimony of the Birth of a Prince, that
might have been truly said to have been omni Exceptione majus, above all
possible Objections against it; and seeing the wit of Man cannot invent a
reason why the King and the Patrons of this pretended Prince of Wales did not
provide such ample and unquestionable Testimonies, that he was born of the
Queen, when they could not be ignorant that it was the voice of common Fame in
England and Foreign Countries, that her Majesty's Conception of a Child was
merely Fictitious, and that a supposititious Prince was designed; and seeing no
Excuse or Pretense is published for the neglect or failure of such a Testimony
of his birth, we say (the Circumstances of the Case being considered) it is most
unjust to expect, or demand of Your Highnesses, or of the People of England, or
of Foreigners, a belief and acknowledgment that this pretended Prince of Wales
was born of the Queen.

As our Common Law informs us, who are fit and proper Witnesses, whose
Testimonies ought to be received in this Case, and in the proof of all Matters
of Fact respectively; so the same declares who are deemed to be unfit, and
disabled to be Witnesses in all the various and respective Questions of Fact;
it shows whose Testimonies ought not to be heard, and much less believed in
diverse sorts of Facts that come into question. If your Highness and the Kingdom
be told of the presence of such persons to have been at the Birth of this
pretended Prince, as ought not by our Laws to be accounted Witnesses, nor their
averrments in the case to be heard by your Hss. or the Kingdom, and much less
to be allowed to be of any Validity in the Common course of out Courts of
Judicature; if parties concerned to prove a Fact do knowingly offer for
Witnesses such as our Laws reject in the Facts in question, it turns to the
prejudice of their other proof; we are therefore obliged to acquaint your
Highnesses with the Actions, Qualities, Respects and Circumstances that have
disabled many by force of our Common Law to be heard as Witnesses of the Birth
of this pretended Prince of Wales.

First, Our Laws utterly disable all those to be heard in the Case, that have
received either gifts of Money, or Honors, or any other Reward, or Benefits
whatsoever for their pretended Assistance about his Birth, or by reason or
occasion of that pretense; it is the Common Practice of our Law, that when a
Witness is produced, the adverse Party may examine him upon his Oath whether he
has had Money or other Reward or Gift, directly or indirectly, for or by
reason of the matter in question, or from the Party in whose behalf he is
produced to testify, or from any of his Friends; if he cannot acquit himself
thereof by his Oath, though it cannot be proved against him, our Impartial Law
deems such a person not only to be partial in the Case, but corrupted, and
bribed, and unworthy to be heard.

Our Law will not admit those to be Witnesses for the Birth of this supposed
Prince of Wales, that have any Promise, Expectation or Hopes of any
Advancement, Office, Place, or Benefit by or under him, if he shall be received
and allowed by the Kingdom to be Prince of Wales; they that cannot purge
themselves by their Oaths from all such Promises, Expectations and Hopes, are
not in the Judgment of our Law persons indifferent and unconcerned in the Event
of the Matter in question, nor fit to be heard as Witnesses, their Testimonies
being partly for themselves, and their own Benefit; and the allowance of such
Testimonies in Judicature would in consequence subvert all Civil Justice and
Government. Our Law excludes all from being Witnesses to support the pretense
of the supposed Prince of Wales, as have such dependence on the Patrons and
Maintainers of him, that they are in danger of damage and loss by them of any
kind, if they should displease them in their Testimony. Our Laws judge all such
not to be free and of their own Right in the Case, but bound to serve and
please the Patrons of the Cause, and therefore presume that they may be
corrupted by fear of losing the Advantages they love, if they should
impartially declare the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth of the matter.

Our Laws seek to know the naked and entire Truth of all Facts that come into
legal question or Contest, and will not admit of any to be Witnesses of them,
unless they appear to be free from Fears of any Prejudice to themselves by
speaking the Truth impartially. We are enforced by the Concern of all the
Protestants, to speak more plainly than we would; we must say, that all that
hold Offices of Profit and Honor during the Kings Will, are by the Laws of
England excluded out of the Number of fit and competent Witnesses about the
Birth of this Child, whom His Majesty has proclaimed and maintains to be
Prince of Wales; our good Laws have regard to humane infirmities, and will not
put a temptation upon men to suffer them to be Witnesses in matters, wherein
they may damnifie themselves in the loss of their Offices, if they happen to
displease their Master in his concern in the case, by testifying clearly the
whole Truth of it; they are not free in the Judgment of our Laws, to speak the
Truth without fear, and for that reason are not to be received by the Kingdom
as Witnesses in this Case.

Our Laws will never allow or suffer any to be Witnesses in this Case, who are
known, or may be proved to have Enmity or Prejudice of any kind upon any
account whatsoever to Her Royal Highness, against whom most immediately this
supposed Prince contends; she having been most unquestionably the Heir apparent
of the Crown, and justly so remaining until the Kingdom shall be satisfied by a
sufficient Number of lawful Witnesses, that there is a Prince born, whereby her
claim to the next Succession shall be postponed. The question of Fact to be
decided by Witnesses is apparently between her Royal Highness and this supposed
Prince; and it is a legal unanswerable and conclusive Exception against any to
be received for Witnesses against her in his behalf, that they are declared
Enemies to her, and the Professed Protestant Religion, the destruction whereof
they are bound in Conscience to endeavor; and for that reason such known
Enemies to her right of Succession to the Crown, that their Church have decreed
and declared her Right, and the Right of all Protestants to any Authorities, to
be absolutely forfeited to the Papists for Protestant Heresy.

It cannot be denied, that all that are sincerely Roman Catholics, and believe
their own Church, do judge Her Royal Highness to be an Excommunicated Heretic
by their Church, and that all Her Rights in possession and reversion are
thereby confiscated, and that they are all obliged by the Law of their Church,
in Conscience of their Religion, and by the hope of Pardon of their sins, to
defeat and destroy by all ways and means in their Power, all Her Pretensions to
the Descent of the Crown upon her, and to assist to the investing the Right to
the Succession in a Roman Catholic. We might here add, that our English
Papists are all in Union and Communion with the Pope, as appears by his Nuntio
in London; and he is by the ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm declared
the Public or Common Enemy of the Kingdom near two hundred years before Henry
the Eighth.

It Is manifest that the English Papists are declared Enemies to Her Royal
Highnesses Right in this Case between her and the pretended Prince of Wales,
and therefore by the Laws of England they cannot be Witnesses of the Fact in
question, neither ought their Testimonies therein to be offered to the Kingdom
to Delude the People.

The Civil Law so fully concurs with our Common Law in rejecting Enemies to be
Witnesses in the cause of their Enemy, that it denies to give credit to what
they may testify in the cause of their Enemy with their dying Breath after
they have received the Eucharist; that is the General Conclusion of the Doctors
of that Civil Law, Inimicus etiamsi in articulo mortis constitutus, and
accepisset Eucharistiam, repellitur a testimonio causae sui inimici. We mention
this chiefly to show, that it is not only by our English Laws that our Papists
are rejected from being Witnesses of the Birth of this pretended Prince against
Her Royal Highness, but by the ancient approved Rules of the Civil Law which
they generally acknowledge, and by the Judgment of their own Doctors.

Herein are only set forth to Your Highnesses the Laws of England, that you may
justly insist upon as your Right to prevent the Church of Rome's Conspiracies
against you: we reflect not on the credit or truth of any Roman Catholic
Lords, or others, in giving their Testimonies in Matters of private Interests,
wherein the cause of their Church is not in question, and the Laws of their
Church bind them not to either party; but since they are bound in this case to
be Enemies to Her Royal Highness, our Law will not allow them to be believed to
her prejudice; and they must openly renounce that common Honesty to which they
pretend, if they offer themselves to the Kingdom to be competent Witnesses
against Her in behalf of this pretended Prince, when they are conscious to
themselves, that not only our Laws but Natural Justice and Equity abhors such a
practice.

We must say with all due reverence, and most humble submission, that Our Laws
will not allow that the Declaration, or Testimony of His Majesty, or the Queen,
should be accepted, and believed in this case as lawful proof, that this
pretended Prince was born of the Queen; it is sufficient for us, that our Laws
will not suffer our Kings to descend into the Place of Witnesses, they will not
admit them to testify their own knowledge of the Facts in any case whatsoever,
Criminal or Civil; but there is abundant reason also from Natural Equity and
Civil Justice, that the Kingdom should not receive and rely upon the King's
Affirmation about the Birth of this supposed Prince; their Majesty's have
publicly Espoused his Cause for their own in all respects; and none on Earth,
Kings or Subjects, may justly expect, or be suffered to supply the Place of
Witnesses in their own case, since Civil Government is established; if they
might lawfully be their own proof for their cause, they might as justly be
Judges of their own proofs, which in Consequence would turn up the Foundations
of Civil Government; one of its chiefest original intentions being to introduce
a course of Justice, that none might be their own Judges.

We would not speak thus plainly, if it were justly avoidable; we cast no
Scandal hereby upon His Majesty, nor any way come near the crime of detraction;
we barely relate the Law of England in this case of His Majesty's Affirmation
of the Birth of this pretended Prince, that it has not the force of legal
proof, or of the Testimony of one Legal Witness, and His Majesty is obliged in
Justice and Honor by his Office and Oath not to impose upon his Subjects to
believe, and rely upon his Affirmation, or Word, in this case (nor on the
Queen's, that is necessarily included in his) he cannot desire the People
diffusively to change their ancient customs and Laws to substitute their King's
Words or Assertions in the room of sworn Legal Witnesses to prove the Matters
of the Highest moment about the Government.

If the Kingdom should allow the Affirmation of their Kings to be sufficient to
make a Lawful Prince of Wales, without such Witnesses of his Birth as our Law
requires, they should consent to Change the ancient Constitution of the English
Monarchy, and so destroy the established Legal Security of their Freedom and
Estates. The Laws of England in this case are not dissonant from the Laws of
other Kingdoms, and the most absolute Empires; the Civil Law now received in
most Christian Kingdoms, that was so adapted to absolute Government that it was
one of its principles, That Principis verbum pro lege habendum est, the word of
the Prince was to be taken for a Law; we say, that Law never ascribed absolute
credit to the Prince's Affirmations of Matters of Fact wherein the Subjects
Rights were concerned; it passes for a Rule of that Law in such cases,
Princeps indistincte non creditur; the Emperor is not to be believed entirely
without limitations and restrictions, in his affirming Matters of Fact relating
to his Subjects Legal Interest and Securities.

The Learned Doctors in that Law determine, that the Emperor's Affirmation that
a Subject has committed Treason, or Rebellion against him, ought nor to be
believed, or taken for a proof; they say expressly, Regi fides non adhibetur si
attestatur talem fuisse proditorem; likewise if he pretends and declares a
cause why he deprives any Subject, or Feudatory of his Interest, he is not to
be believed, there must be proof, and the parties intended to be prejudiced
must be cited and heard in their defense.

They generally resolve, that when a King asserts or attests any thing to the
prejudice of another, he is not to be therein believed, especially when his
Affirmation is for his own advantage, and to the Subjects damage, or
inconvenience: These are their words, Quando ex assertione Principis, ipse
Principaliter sentiret commodum and subditi incommodum, tum ipsi Principi non
creditur.

The Emperor Henry the 6. of Germany, had a due sense of the Justice and Reason
of the Law herein about the year 1200. he did not Expect that the People should
believe the Affirmations of himself, and his Empress Constantia, about the
Birth of a Prince, when there was a rumor and suspicion that Constantia was
past her age of Childbearing, and feigned a Great Belly; he gave the People
plentiful proof by Witnesses, more than Reason required; he prepared a most
public Place, wherein she remained expecting her time of Delivery, Ventre
Custodito, with public Watchers, or Keepers, that no Supposititious Child
might possibly be Conveyed to her, and there in the sight of the People of the
City, and all the Matrons, that would and could possibly approach her (none
being Excluded) she brought forth a Prince, that was afterward chosen Emperor,
Frederic the 2 d.

If it were needful we could show Your Highness that the Honor and Security of
our Royal Family of England, with the peace and safety of the Kingdom, were
intended in the Constitution of our Legal Monarchy in such manner, that the
Kings should not have Power at their will to Change the Succession, or by any
means prevent the Descent of the Crown to the next in Blood. But if the Kingdom
should believe his Majesty's Affirmation of this supposed Princes Birth,
without proof thereof, according to the Laws and Customs of England, the next
Succession were really and actually thereby put out of the Legal Course, and
referred to the will of the King, which is in effect to make the Crown
Patrimonial, whereas by the Laws and Customs of England, the Right to the Crown
descends to the next of Blood, and the Successor is most properly to be styled
the Heir of the Kingdoms, by force of the Kingdoms Laws, and cannot be defeated
of the Succession by any Act of the Predecessor; if therefore the King should
gain so vast a power by imposing on the People to believe his Attestation of
this supposed Princes Birth, it is manifest that natural Justice, as well as the
Law of England makes it of no force or effect to the prejudice of her Royal
Highness in her Esteem of being the Heiress apparent to the Crown.

We believe the Jesuits and other maintainers of this supposed Prince will
claim (as is their common practice) against these our Laws, whose force detects
and defeats their Impostures, they will pretend that it is unreasonable to
expect a Testimony of his Birth from such Witnesses, and in such manner as are
herein described exclusive of all Roman Catholics, but the reason and wisdom
of these Laws are irresistible, and its a great Circumstance, showing their
guilt that they are displeased with the Laws that prevent Falsehood and
Impostures, and require proofs of Facts as clear as the Sun.

The just and innocent are never offended at any Law, that provide for Truth
and Righteousness, they cannot but be conscious to themselves, that it was more
easy to have provided such Witnesses as our Laws requires of a Princes Birth
then to have had such as they provided, that would Counterfeit to be
Spectators, and be content (as it is now said they were) to see nothing of the
Fact of which they were to be published to the Kingdom to have been the knowing
Eye Witnesses.

It Is notorious that the presence of ten of the Protestant Nobility of either
Sex and other persons of Eminent Quality might have been as easily procured as
one of the Catholics, if it had been intended to deal justly and fairly with
the Kingdom, and they know that the Protestants throwout Europe (not the
Papists) wanted and desired satisfaction about the Queens great Belly and her
delivery, the suspicions of a Counterfeit Prince were strong amongst them, and
decryed by all the Papists, they knew the Friends and those of Consanguinity
with her Royal Hss. were as ready to attend if they had been called as any
Catholic whatsoever; and they were not ignorant that Custom, Law and Natural
Justice required, that Convenient notice should have been given to her Royal
Highness above all others of the Expected time of the Queens Delivery, that
such Noble Matrons as she had thought Necessary might have been sent to have
Continually attended near her Majesty, and to have been impartial Witnesses of
the Birth beyond Exception: they understood the custom of calling Ambassadors
to be present at the Queen Delivery, and that a Common fame of a designed
Imposture was spread in foreign Protestant Countries, and that there were,
Envoys and Public Ministers from some of them, Especially that the Dutch had
an Ambassador there, and Expected to have been called: they know that those
Provisions for legal, unquestionable proof of the Birth that was pretended,
have been no hindrance of the presence, or assistance of as many Papists of
each Sex as Her Majesty had desired, and she might have as entirely depended
upon their only help, if it had been her pleasure, as if those lawful Witnesses
had not been present.

The Popish Councils delude his Majesty, if they persuade him that any pleas of
Inadvertency, Neglect, or Ignorance can satisfy the Kingdom instead of the
proofs in the Case that the Custom and Laws of England require; it is a Rule of
our Law that none shall make advantage of their own lachez, that is their
Failers or neglects of what they ought to have done; less evidence is never to
be accepted in our course of Judicature, because the Party concerned was
negligent in seeking it, or ignorant, when he might have known his duty.

We presume Your Highness in reading this may be satisfied in the Truth of our
first Preliminary Conclusion, which is necessary to be always remembered in
order to a just Judgment to be made of this supposed Prince of Wales, and of
the things proper to be done by Your Highness, by reason or occasion of his
pretenses; we doubt not Your Highness will clearly perceive what you may in
justice demand of his Majesty in the Case, preserving nevertheless a most pious
sense of a fillial Duty.

We may more remember Your Highness, that as the case now appears, no
acknowledgment of that pretended Prince can justly be required of Your Highness
by his Majesty. Its contrary to Justice and our Laws, that her Royal Highness
should depart from her place and claim of Heiress apparent to the Crown and
resign it to a Child, who is not yet lawfully witnessed to have been born of
the Queen. We therefore put your Highness in remembrance of a second
Conclusion fit to be premised in this Case as an absolute certainty to be
insisted on; that is,

That neither the Laws of England, nor any natural or Civil Justice do require
of your Highness any kind of Testimonies or proofs, that the pretenses of this
supposed Prince of Wales are false and feigned, or that he was not born of the
Queen.

Whosoever claims to be the natural and legitimate Son of any Family, its
wholly and solely incumbent on him, to prove it by the Laws and Customs of all
Civil Governments, and by the manifest Light of Nature; those two Rules of the
Civil Law are adopted by all Countries into their courses of Judicature, Qualem
quis se facit, pro fundamento intentionis suae talem se debet probare; and,
Filius qui petit haereditatem tanquam filius debet probare filiationem; if
Sonship or other quality or relation be the ground of a demand, that Foundation
must be always proved by the demandant; if he that pretends to be Heir by his
Birth to any inheritance, fails of such sufficient Witnesses as the respective
Laws of Countries require to prove his proximity of Blood, there needs no
Testimony on the part of those that deny his Linal Descent. The Course of the
Law of England is known to most Englishman in the Trial of all claims by Birth;
the claimant is always put to prove all that he sets forth of his Descent in
his Declaration, and the least defect of proof is fatal to his process if the
Defendant perceives the piantiff to want sufficient legal Testimony of his
Descent and Birth, he never troubles the Court with proofs on his behalf, it is
enough for him that denies the Descent pretended, to show the insufficiency of
the Witnesses and their Testimony produced to prove it.

Your Highness is not obliged either by our Laws or Natural Justice, to have
VVitnesses to prove the pretended Prince of Wales to be an Impocture, Her
Royal Highness having been the legal acknowledged Heiress apparent of the
Crown. Unless such Lawful Witnesses that he was born of the Queen, were known
and published as did satisfy the Kingdom, neither your Highness nor any
Princes or States may in Justice acknowledge his pretenses, her Royal Highness
ought to remain in the esteem of the Kingdom, and of all Princes ann States as
the Heiress apparent of the Crown, at least until a Prince shall be legally
known and declared; and it is a manifest wrong to your Highness, to the Kingdom,
and to all the Protestants Interest, to suffer this supposed Prince silently
and submissively without public Complaint of the wrong, to assume the Name of
Prince and Heir apparent to the Crown.

When the Popish League endeavored to set aside the claim of your Highness's
Ancestor Henry 4. to the Crown of France, and proclaimed the Cardinal of
Bulloign to be King, he sent Agents to the Pope (though he was then a
Protestant) and to all the Princes and States of Christendom, to manifest
himself to be the right lawful Heir of that Crown, and the Venetian State (to
his vast advantage) contested it with the Popes Nuncio that they ought so to
acknowledge him because it appeared that he was the right Heir.

His Right indeed was to be King in possession, but there is the like reason
and justice to support her Royal Highness Title to the Crown in reversion,
since another is set up, and declared throughout the World to be the right Heir
of it, immediately after his now Majesty. It Is undoubtedly just and reasonable
for her to demand, and expect, that the pretenders Birth (so much and so justly
suspected) should be made manifest to the Kingdom by Witnesses, without
exception according to the Law and Custom of England and to natural Equity.

It may be of dangerous consequence, to suffer a false Opinion of him in the
Kingdom, and the world to gain strength by time, and neglect: yet neither Law
nor Equity puts any burden of proof in the Case upon your Highness: it is only
incumbent upon your Highness, to declare the wrong to your selves and the
Kingdom by the pretended Prince, and to take care that no illegal imperfect or
fallacious Testimony in the Case be invented or obtruded upon your selves and
the Kingdom to support his pretenses, her Royal Highness claim and right to be
the next in reversion after his now Majesty in the legal descent of the Crown,
ought to stand unshaken, and unquestionable in the Judgment of our Law and the
Kingdom, notwithstanding any thing to the contrary, that has been hitherto
lawfully published or declared.

We cannot doubt, but it is here made manifest that your Highness public
refusal to acknowledge this pretended Prince of Wales may be built upon such
sure Foundations of Law and Justice as can never be overturned; we would not
therefore trouble your Highness, with all the Circumstances of the Case which
we have remarked in our Observations, that make it to us not only improbable,
but incredible, that he was born of the Queen. Since it is not possible for us
to send Witnesses personally to prove to your Highness every circumstance that
we have noted, and it is not just that Your Highness should take them up upon
unknown Authority, since we cannot in prudence subscribe our Names to this
Memorial, nor so much as the Names of our Witnesses to the Facts, since the
Proof of the Circumstances can never be a Foundation of positive unquestionable
certainty, but can only serve to make the Falsehood and Jesuitical contrivance
in this imposture more infamous and odious: since it is undoubtedly Your
Highness Interest never to depart from the manifest Principle of Law and
Justice, which put it wholly and entirely upon the Maintainers of the supposed
Prince to prove him to be such as they pretend with the highest human certainty
that can be acquired by Witnesses, and to the Kingdoms full Satisfaction.

And since it is notoriously know that above all others of the Roman Church, the
Jesuits (which in this matter will most earnestly contend against Your
Highness) have the greatest effronted Confidence to deny and forswear Matters
of Fact however certainly proved and known, and they would be glad to have any
thing offered in this Case that might give them room, or a possibility for
dispute and seeming doubtfulness of Fact* that they might obscure the Truth,
and deceive some of the People with their Equivocal Affirmation and impertinent
Cavils at Your Highness Witnesses, or their Testimonies and their bold
Asseverations of Falsehoods.

Upon all these Considerations we shall restrain from the relation of many very
pregnant Circumstances that we had collected, which if they were taken jointly
in their natural Order and due Connection, would by their united force strongly
induce impartial Judges to conclude, that the Queen could not be the Mother of
the supposed Prince.

We could give very great circumstantial assurances to Your Highness, that
there never was or appeared to be any reasonable natural grounds for a belief
that her Majesty had Conceived a Child. She never had the first most natural,
known, and common sign of Conception; her menses profluvium, or Terms,
continued their usual uncertain Course as formerly during the whole time of her
pretended great helly; She did not conceal that it was with her after that
manner of Women in her journey to Bath, nor that they continued some days after
the King left her there; and all the industry used afterward to hide them in
their Seasons, proved in-effectual, because those things come to the knowledge
of more then were made privy to the whole Imposture designed.

Her Majesty having not that natural Sign of her Terms stopping, whereby Women
usually conclude themselves to have conceived, from whence she could make a
reckoning, it seems by the Kings Speech in Council, that their Majestys had
both thought fit to publish her Conception to have been at the time of the
Present made to the Lady's Image at Loretta, upon the Kings return to the Queen
at Bath.

It was then too soon for them to be provided of a supposititus Child, and so
might name any time they pleased of her Conception, and then seek for a Child
that might agree with it, and it appeared pious and great to make her
Conception one of the Miracles of the Lady's Image, tho it happened Unluckily
afterward, that they could not make the times of her Conception and supposed
delivery to agree with natures most constant time of Nine Months.

The Confidents and Advisors about the Imposture hearing the voice of Common
^ame upon the King's Declaring when the supposed now born Child was shown, that
he had now a Son a strong and lively Prince, the meanest child bearing Woman
that were disintered, saying thereupon in mockery, that such a child of about
Eight Months was as great a Miracle as the Queens Conception has been
reported; we say, the Confidents fearing it might make the whole story less
credible and help to detect the fraud, they have persuaded her Majesty to
declare that she had miscounted the time of her Conceiving the Child, and that
she knew very well, that she was with Child before her use of the Bath, by this
new reckoning they thought that it might be affirmed, that the Child was born
at his due time, and might be strong, and lively, as his Majesty had said, and
they thought, it an easy sham to say Women misreckoned very often.

But, it was unhappily forgotten that her Majesty had continued and expressly
affirmed her first reckoning several weeks after her pretended delivery; it was
forgotten that it was known sufficiently that her Majesty had her Terms in her
Journey to Bath, and four days after the Kings going from thence, which was a
manifest proof that there was then no Conception; it was not considered that if
it be truth that the Queen knew her self to have then conceived as she has
lately declared; then it cannot be a misreckoning, and the meanest Physician
she had at Bath would have told her, that if she had imagined a conception as
she now says, Bathing would probably destroy the Embryo.

It was not well remembered how the King had declared with her Majestys privity
the miracle of the time of her conceiving quite inconsistent with her now
account, neither was it thought of in the now Council, how her Majesty's Truth
and Honor should be saved in her contrary Stories, of the time of her
conceiving even since her supposed delivery; but we need not mention that,
since the World knows how little regard the Jesuit Confessors have to truth.

Her Majesty showed no grounds to believe her pregnancy by natures progress
there in the Common natural Signs, that in four Months follow in every Woman,
that has a Child in her Womb, were wholly wanting in her Majesty, there was no
swelling, or increase of the usual proportion of her Breasts, nor was there any
milk ever seen to be in them (tho one Lady took the Confidence once to affirm
it) the proportion of them was visibly the same to the Eyes of all that can be
lawfully Witnesses, and were usually in her presence, and none of those Ladies
proper to be VVitnesses could ever obtain the satisfaction to see a drop of
milk from her breasts, tho it had been her Majesty's Honor, Interest, and
Pleasure, to have showed it if there had been any reality in the pretense of
her pregnancy.

We put this Circumstance into our memorial not without some Mirth in our
meeting, because one of our company said, he was now sure that neither her
Mujesties Physicians nor the Jesuits were natural Philosophers, they might,
(said he) with very little arts have caused the Queens Breasts at her age to
have swelled with milk so plentifully that she might have easily milked it
forth in quantity in the sight of the Princess of Denmark and all the
Protestant Ladies of the Court, it may be done (said he) in rational, or animal
Creatures, and he gave us instances of undoubted credit wherein it had been
done to his knowledge and a Child suckled, and to divert us he offered to show
it in an animal, ^e having also tried that Experiment, and thereby milked out
the milk from a young Creatures Udder that had never been with young; another
of the Company said merrily, if that were so easy an artifice, he wondered that
the Romish Priests had not learned it, since its known to the World that they
have long had the Art of keeping the Virgin Marys milk above 1600 Years, and of
multiplying the quantity of it from Horse Loads to Cart Loads to disperse among
their credulous vulgar.

We humbly pray your Highnesses Pardon that we seem herein less serious then so
great a matter requires, we speak only the words of truth and soberness, but
the comical tricks of the Romish Priests (that commonly ends in Tragedy) force
us to represent them as they deserve.

There Is another known sign and testimony of a Woman's pregnancy, that is, the
sensible stirring of the Child in the womb, that was expected her Majesty
should have shown to the Ladies with Joy, especially to those Protestant Ladies
of her bed Chamber, that doubted (with the Protestant Dr. her then Physician)
her being with Child, as far as they durst (when the quickening of a Child in
her womb was pretended, and published throughout the Kingdom; it had been a
Pleasure to her Majesty, and no trouble (if it had been real without deceit)
to have shown the motion of a Child in her womb to honorable Matrons of her
Bedchamber, that might have been in all respects lawful VVitnesses of that
truth to the Justly Jealous Kingdom; these might have touched her belly, and
had been proper Judges from their Experience of the true motions of an infant
in the womb, and some of Consanguinity to the Heyress apparent might have been
admitted to that favor as our Laws and common prudence directed for removing
the causes of Jeasie; but however industriously her Majesty's quicking with
Child was spread abroad, yet the feeling of its motions was never vouchsafed to
any competent VVitnesses of it, to give the suspicious Kingdom a ground to
believe, that she was with Child.

The next visible and manifest sign of the true natural progress of a great
belly, is the distension of all the parts of the Body, that incircles and
incompasseth the womb, such is the place and manner wherein nature has
prepared the lodging of the growing Child in the womb, that according to its
growth, and increase, and the quantity of liquors, that are there naturally and
necessarily congested there, so are all the Circumambient parts gradually
extended, and enlarged to make room; there never was nor naturally can be an
Extention only of the Peritoneum the Rim of the belly to give room to the
Child, all Naturalists and Anatomists know that if in that manner no Child
could keep its natural sight in the womb, nor be born alive.

All men and Women, that ever observed Women great with Child, know that all
the parts that enclose the Cavity swell until the time of their delivery
approach, but this natural necessary sign of pregnancy so entirely failed in
her Majesty, that skilful spectators of both sexes wondered, that better arts
were not used to make that vissible sign, and appearance of the growth of a
Child in her womb; we were satisfied by skilful Matrons of great Experience,
that attended on purpose to observe her Majesty Exactly, that all the outward
parts of her Body, that incompass the womb were of the same proportion that
they were at other times, save only her belly which was exceedingly copped up,
and high, that showed like a great bellied Woman to them that looked upon her
Majesty before; but said they, when we saw her Majesty walking, and looked upon
her behind, and on each side, we saw not the least appearance in her of a great
bellied Woman, we took care to have the fashion of her Majestys Body observed
by skilful Women at several periods of time during her supposed pregnancy, and
once a very short time before her pretended Delivery, and we had always the
same account, we have here faithfully given Your Highness.

We compared this Circumstance with another that we had marked, whereof we had
from time to time full assurance during all the four last Months time of her
Majesty's supposed being with Child, those being the Months wherein usually all
the circumambient parts of the Womb swell most, we were very well informed that
in all these Months Her Majesty, contrary to her former usual course, always
withdrew from her Chamber, and retired into her Cabinet or some other private
room, with two or three Italians, when she changed her Linen, and would never
permit any one of the Protestant Ladies of the Bedchamber to see her change her
Linen, as they had constantly done.

Those two circumstances explained each other, and plainly showed that the
natural naked and true shape of her Majesty's Body, as it was then, was not to
be seen by those that were not of the Confederacy in the intended Imposture;
those that were only capable of being lawful VVitnesses for her Majesty against
common Fame (if Fame had belyed her) those were all excluded from a possibility
of seeing whether her belly was truly and naturally great, and a few foreigners
of no Quality were only to keep the Secret of what Her Majesty was to make the
copling belly.

Nothing can be more manifest then it is by all these Circumstances taken as
they ought in connection each with other, that there has nothing appeared of
the natural plainness and simplicity that always accompany truth in the whole
Demeanor of her Majesty from the time of her pretended Conceiving a Child to
the very time of her feigned delivery of this supposed Prince of Wales; all
that has been acted in the matter, has plainly imported Trick and Design to
hide and smother Natures Works, that ought to have been most freely exposed to
the whole World, if there had been any truth in the pretenses that could have
born the Light, we may securely affirm to your Highness, that in all the eight
Months and four Days first reckoned to have been the time of her Majesty's
Pregnancy, or from the time of her going to Bath in the new Reckoning, there
never has been any of these constant natural signs in her Majesty that could
afford to any understanding Man or Women a ground to believe that she conceived
a Child.

The Progress toward finishing the intended Imposture of this Prince of Wales
has been answerable to its beginning. In the preparation for her Majesty's
supposed Delivery there has been no regard to the rules of natural Equity or
Law, or common (...), nor any appearance of that open freedom and naturally
plain proceeding that ought to have shown that they did not fear the Kingdom,
or the World knowing the truth of all that should be done in that pretended
natural work of Bearing a Child, wherein the whole Kingdom, and so much of the
World was concerned; if the Customs and Laws of England, or natural Equity had
been consulted in the Circumstances of the Case about the preparations needful
for her Majesty's expected deliverance of a Prince, the first of all Advises
had certainly been to give early notice to your Highness and to others in the
nearest possibility or expectance of succeeding to the Crown of the time of her
expected travel and deliverance of a Prince and of the place of her residence
at such time. That proper Noble Matrons, and others, might have prepared
themselves, and attended there, and have been present in their behalf, which
might have suppressed and silenced for ever by their Testimonies, all
Suspicions of Fraud or Imposture.

But it is not only undeniable, that no such notice was given either to her
Royal Highness or to any of Consanguinity with her, nor to any other of the
Noble Matrons of England, but such Artificers were used as might most conceal
the time and intended Place of her pretended Travel, such feigned time of her
supposed Conception was published by the King and Queen, that neither her Royal
Highness nor any of the Nobility could possibly foresee the time when the
Comedy that is now said to have been acted was to begin.

The Place where her Majesty was intended to lie in was kept in such
uncertainty, and often published so variously, sometimes that it should be at
Richmond, sometimes at Windsor, another time at Hampton Court, that none of the
Nobles of either Sex, that were of the Kindred and Friends of the Heir
Apparent, nor of the Protestant Nobility, could know how to prepare themselves
for attendance on her Majesty, as was their duty to Their Majesty's, Her Royal
Highness, and the Kingdom.

As the Publication of the place was often changed, as if a surprise in the
place was designed, so at last such a sudden and seeming hasty Resolution was
taken a day or two before her pretended Delivery, that her lying in should be
at St. James's, tho none expected the time to be near by above three Weeks,
that Commands were given for preparing her Lodgings there so hastily, that when
her Majesty said on the Friday, She would lie there on Saturday, and it was
told her it was not possible her Lodgings should be ready, She then said, She
would lie there on the floor.

It was hoped by all the Protestants that the Princess of Denmark, would have
been a faithful watcher for her own sake, when the time of her Majestys
deliverance of her great belly should come; tho she had not been able, or she
durst not give them advice of the occurrences in the time of her Majestys
supposed pregnancy, it was thought that she could not be avoided but she would
be present to see what was brought forth, whether any thing or nothing; but
care was taken, that advise should be given her when she wanted astringent
Medecines to go to the loosening Waters of the Bath, to keep her fourscore
Miles distant till the pretended Prince should be born.

At the first Notice we had of her Majesty's passionate Declaration, that She
would lie at St. James's on the Saturday Night, we could not conjecture that
there was to be a pretended Prince brought forth on the Sunday, nor was there
any Whispers of it, or the least natural, Feigned or Counterfeit sign of
fore-running Pains of a Woman, whose time of Travel approaches. Her Majesty
was late in the Night at Cards, and no appearance of an indisposition then, nor
is any pretended to have been in the Night; but we learned by the Event on the
Sunday the reason of Her Majestys fixed and immovable Resolution to lie at
Saint James's on the Saturday Night, she was to seem to bring forth a Prince on
the Sunday.

There was a cunning contrivance to choose a fit time of that day; it was to be
between the hours of nine and ten in the Morning, that all or most of the
Protestant Ladies might be at Church, and the Trick be over before their
return, and that the Midwife Mrs. Labady, and the Favorite Mrs. Tourain, might
have Freedom and Secrecy, as they had, to act their Parts in the bringing forth
of a supposititious Prince.

The Room also that was chosen, wherein the Trick was to be acted, was fit for
the purpose, and contrary to the Rules of Common Prudence in a Case suspected
for setting up a supposititious Child and ought to have been avoided, if their
meaning had been just and good; there was a private Door within the Rail of the
Bed into a Room, from whence a Child might be secretly brought and put into the
Bed, unseen by any that should attend in the Queen's Room, tho at the feet of
the Bed (none of them coming into the Rail) and by that Door the three
Confidents, the Midwife, Mrs. Labady, and Mrs. Tourain brought into her
Majesty's Bed what they pleased unseen.

If they had wanted no secret conveyance by that Door, common Prudence required
that they had nailed or sealed it up to avoid confirming and increasing the
Kingdoms just and known Jealousies, of imposing upon them a Counterfeit Prince,
when it should be known, that there were such secret ways as made it so easy to
be done by Confederation, undiscerned by others that were in the Room; but it
appeared by the Event that the privy Door was so necessary for the designed
Imposture, that all the Transactions of it were managed by that Door, as is
well known to all those Lords of the Council that were brought for a show, not
to see any thing that was done, but only to be seen in the Bedchamber with His
Majesty, that their Names might be published to the People, as if they had been
Witnesses of the Queens being delivered of this pretended Prince.

The Civil Law provided as a Rule of common natural Equity, that when a Woman
was to be delivered of a Posthume Child, that might defeat another appearing
Heir, that the Chamber wherein she was to be delivered should have but one
Door, and if there were more, that they should be sealed up with the Seals of
both Parties, and that Keepers should be set at the single Door, and no Woman
suffered to enter until she was searched in all kinds, that no Child might be
conveyed to the Woman in her real or supposed Travel; and though we have no
express Statute that gives direction in such Cases, yet our Common Law abhors
all appearance of Fraud about Inheritances, and (...)pointed (...) of the most
able Neighbors to judge of all the Signs and Appearances of Fraud, an(...)
Heirs, who may also judge upon presumptive Evidence, and reject any pretended
Hell, where they see signs of Fraud and Imposture whereupon to ground their
Judgment; and every one must at his peril take care that there be no grounds of
suspicion given of a supposititious Heir.

We have faithfully showed Your Highness what were the Preparations for her
Majesty's supposed time of Travel, wherein there appeared no Marks of an
Intiention to deal uprightly and openly with her Royal Highness as Heiress
apparent of the Crown, and with the Subjects of the Kingdom; nor were there any
natural signs that Her Majesty really feared or expected the common Sorrows,
Pains and Danger of a Woman in Travel, or made any suitable Provisions.

We cannot learn, that there were in readiness so much as the usual Instruments
of Midwives, whereupon they commonly place all Women of Quality in their time
of Travel, that such Assistance may be given them by the Matrons and Midwives,
as is not possible to be given on their Knees, which is the common Posture of
meaner Women; and least of all, as they lie in their Bed, which is seldom used
until the length of the Travel, and Failures of Strength enforce it: There
being many natural Reasons for the Posture of the Women's Bodies helping them in
their Travel.

Amongst other suitable Provisions, it had been certainly fit that a College of
Physicians had been called to attend somewhere near to Her Majesty, if She had
not known there could be no need of them, and had not been sure there could be
no hour of danger to her self in a feigned Travel, nor any sudden need of
Physicians Advice or help to a strong lively supposed Prince, that was intended
then to be brought forth.

As all the Preparations for her Majesty's supposed time of Travel, discovered
to knowing and observing People that there was no reality in her pretenses made
of a great Belly, so the Fiction and Fraud was made more manifest when the
Trick came to be acted.

Her Majesty lying in Bed with all the Curtains round close drawn, all that was
provided belonging naturally to a Child, and intended to be used by them, in
their bringing forth the supposititious Prince, being prepared and ready within
the inner Chamber, then Her Majesty's feigned Travel began; and all these
things were, by the help of the Midwife, Mrs. Labady, and Mrs. Tourain, the
Confederates, brought through the Door in the Wall by the Queen Bed, and put
between her Sheets, that is, a Child, and all that naturally attends a Birth.
Then the Midwife and the Confidents seemed very busy about Her Majesty in the
Dark, none seeing what they did, and being afraid, as appeared by the Midwife's
Words that the Child, which was prepared to sleep, to prevent its crying before
it was got into the Bed, should be stifled by the Closeness of the Bed, they
were forced to hasten the Queen's pretended Delivery even beyond what was
reasonably to be believed, notwithstanding all that could be said of the Lady
of Loretto, or any other Saints Assistance; therefore the Queens supposed
Deliverance was in very short time.

But nothing appeared in Her Majesty like the real natural Travel of a Woman in
Childbearing; there were none of the usual natural Signs in Her Majesty of
being in real Travel, which cannot be hidden; there was no appearance of an
approaching Travel by various intermitting Pangs usually very great by the
Infants struggling to free it self of the Womb; no show of the Pains naturally
and gradually increasing, as more of the Ligatures came to be broken, or rent,
whereby every Infant is safely retained in the Womb, until its full growth and
appointed time; there were no Signs of Her Majesty's known Weakness in bearing
such Pangs in her State of Body, debilitated with long lingering Infirmities;
there were no Signs of a violent Eruption of an untimely Birth from the Womb of
eight Months and four days, as Her Majesty then reported it to have been.

All that was to be feigned was suddenly dispatched, and the Midwife delivered
something close covered to Mrs. Labady, which could be nothing but the Child
they had put in, and went with is together through the privy Door in the Rail
of the Bed into the next Room in so great haste, that it was not considered how
plainly it might discover that it was a mere feigned counterfeit Travel of the
Queens, if the Midwife durst quit her attending and assisting Her Majesty in
those moments, when there was the greatest Necessity of her Skill and
Assistance in her Office, and the most extreme danger of her Majesty's Life by
any neglect of her if she had really brought forth any Child, as they were
obliged to pretend.

Instead of fair open freedom in showing that the Queen was really delivered of
a Prince, which our Customs, and Laws, and natural Equity required, that all
those works of Nature might have been seen, and testified by noble Matrons;
their pretended Birth of a Prince, and all that they did about it, was done in
the dark, with the Curtains close drawn round about the Bed, and under the
Coverings of it, and none of either Sex permitted to see any thing done about
Her Majesty, or her supposed Child save only the Confederates; no others of
those in the Bedchamber, that drew as near as they might, were suffered to see
what was taken out of the Bed, being something wholly covered, and immediately
carried away by the private Door.

All hearkened after the common and most constant natural Sign of the Birth of a
living Child, that is, its crying; but we are fully assured from diverse Lords
of the Council, and others that were in the Bedchamber, that the crying of a
Child was heard by none there when the pretense was that a Child was born, though
the Midwife would not at first say it was a Prince.

We have related to Your Highnesses no Circumstances but such as are
notoriously known, or could be judicially proved before any impartial Court of
Judicature; and therefore we will not offer to Your Hss. those Conjectures (tho
we have them from good hands) of what was acted about the pretended Prince in
the Room from whence he was brought, and to which he was carried, before the
Lords of the Council, or any others were told that there was a Prince born; but
we have it of certainty from those that were present, that during the whole
(...) Travel of the Queens, and a considerable time after it, his Majesty kept
those Lords of the Cou(...) far from the feet of her Majesty's Bed, that were
close shut up, and they neither saw nor heard any thing about the Birth of the
supposed Prince whereof they can be lawful Witnesses to the Kingdom; yet the
Actors of this whole Imposture had the Confidence to publish forthwith to the
Kingdom by Authority, that those Lords and many Ladies of Quality were present
at the Queen's Delivery of a Prince, equivocating therein like the Jesuits, and
falsely insinuating to the People, that those Lords, and many Matrons of the
Nobility had been such ocular Witnesses as our Laws require of the Queens being
delivered of a Prince, whereas in truth all that were not of the Confederacy
waited to no more purpose than if they had been ten Miles off her Bedchamber.

After long waiting His Majesty left them, and retired into the inner Room
where was Mrs. Labady and the Confidents with the supposed Prince, and it was
soon after said to the Lords, that a Prince being born there was no more need
of them, whereupon several of them went away, and whatsoever was done in
showing a Child to those that staid, was not worthy of our Inquiry, since it
could be of no use to Your Highnesses or the Kingdom.

Yet we carefully observed and inquired after the Queens supposed Deliverance
of a Prince, whether there were any natural demonstrable signs in her Majesty
that she had newly born a Child that had broke its way by Violence into the
World before Natures time, as she then affirmed. Some of us know well the usual
and necessary Consequences of such force upon Nature in Women of such
tenderness, and weakness as her Majesty; we expected to have heard of her great
Weakness, and danger of her Life by a Fever that commonly attends such
untimely Births; we inquired after the danger of her Majesty's Breasts by the
usual redundancy of Milk, because one had reported so long before that she had
plenty of it in her Breasts; we employed proper Persons to ask what Woman had
the Honor to draw her Breasts, or whether any applications were made to her
Breasts to repel, or dry the Milk; and also to ask after the good progress of
her Majesty in the natural Cleansings that follow Childbearing; and of her
strength in bearing these unavoidable Consequences, whereby all Women of her
Majesty's Tenderness and Weakness are greatly debilitated; but we could never
learn by our most diligent inquiry that there was any appearance of these
natural Effects of Childbearing, tho a good Doctors skill might have easily
feigned all those to the delusion of all about her Majesty's Court.

We have now given Your Highness an abstract of many of the Circumstances which
we had collected in this Affair, and must freely affirm, that we cannot observe
from the beginning to the end of it one footstep of sincere plainness; all that
has been done therein from the Queens pretended Conception to her supposed
Delivery of a Prince, has showed desires, and intentions to hide the truth of
those natural things which they were obliged by the Laws of England, by natural
Justice, and by their own Honor and Interest to have made demonstrable or
proveable by sufficient Witnesses to all the Kingdom, if there had been truth
in their pretenses.

There has been such a total neglect, slighting and disregard of all the
necessary Rules of Law and Justice about needful Witnesses of the Birth of a
Prince and Heir to the Crown (when they knew that most of the Kingdom suspected
their setting up a Counterfeit) that it looks like a contempt of Your
Highnesses and the whole Kingdom, as if no Satisfaction were due to her R.
Highness in her admission of an Heir to the Crown before her, nor to the
Kingdom in their acknowledgment of a Prince to be the next Successor to the
Crown.

The most modest Judgment we can make of it, is to think that a blind Zeal
(always nourished by the Romish Church) to settle a Popish Successor, has made
them break through all the Rules of Righteousness, and stifle and extinguish
all the natural Affections of a Father to a Child, to do a Service to their
Church, which is by their Doctrine so meritorious.

Your Highnesses will the better consider all these Circumstances mentioned, if
you will please to call to mind the Occasion and Time when this Design was
first resolved on to set up a Prince to bar her R. H's of the immediate
Succession to the Crown.

Be pleased to remember, that it is before observed, that the going to the Bath,
and the visit to St. Winifreds Well, and the Present made to the Lady, were
preparations for a Report of the Queen's being with Child, and were all
concluded upon about the end of August and beginning of September 1687, and
then was your Highnesses compliance with the Popish Design despaired of.

The abstract of Mr. Steward's Letters to Mijn Here Fagel, which we just now
find printed, confirms all our Memorials in that Matter. He was Pardoned and
chosen by the King to have persuaded your Highnesses to a consent, that the
Penal Laws and Test should be repealed, which had been a full establishment of
Popery; in his two first Letters of July, he seeks to persuade your Hss. that
the King was resolved to preserve, and observe the true right of Succession to
the Crown, and was very desirous of your Hss consent and concurrence in his
Design, and troubled to find them so averse from it: in his next Letters of the
same July he pressed, that your Highnesses should have been disposed to hearken
to a well-chosen Informer to be sent by his Majesty to persuade your
concurrence with him; and he presses extremely for a hasty Answer; the new
Councils for setting up a Supposititious Prince seem then to have been begun.

That Letter seems to threaten what we now see if your Highnesses refused; he
doubled his assurance to him that was to solicit your Highnesses, that if you
were obstinate (as they call it) it will be fatal to the Dissenters, and he
feared productive of Ills yet unheard of: And his Letter of August 5. seems to
give your Highneesss your last time to choose the Settlement of Popery or to
resolve to be true to the Protestant Religion.

He says, if your Highness did what was (...)he best Service to the
Protestants, the highest Obligation on his Majesty, and the gre(...) of your
own Interest, that you could think on; but if not, then all is contrary. There
can be no other meaning in saying, if your Highnesses refused, all is contrary,
save only this, that the Protestants should then have no Mercy from the
Papists; His Majesty would be so offended that he would become your Highnesses
Enemy; and it would be the loss of your Highnesses greatest Interest that you
can think on, which certainly could be no other than the just Expectancy of the
three Kingdoms.

As these Letters threaten that the King would destroy your Highnesses greatest
Interest if you refused, so the attempt of it soon after appeared.

It Is now known, that in September and October the Resolutions were taken to
publish that the Queen was with Child; but before it was publicly declared,
that is October 8. Mr. Steward says, he would use no more Arguments to your
Highnesses, but he then laments your Highnesses loss of the time of compliance:
Alas, said he, that Providence should not be understood. Then in November. he
speaks more plainly (notwithstanding your Hss. moderation toward the Papists,
and their Liberty was shown by Mijn Here Fagel's Letter, he says, that all hope
of your Hss. concurrence in the King's Design was quite given over, and Men
were become as cold in it here, as your Hss. were positive there: And upon his
new Conference with the King, he not only shows the King's dislike of that
Letter, but says expressly, That your Hss. Answer was too long delayed, and that
the King was quite over that matter. There can be no other reasonable
construction of this, than that the King had then resolved of another way to
prosecute the Popish Design, and time has now shown and proved to the World
that the way resolved on was to set up this Supposititious Prince for a Popish
Successor.

These Letters, by the help of time, show the Design when it was in Embrio, and
help to make a Judgment upon all the other Circumstances that we have
mentioned; and no doubt if an Evidence made up of all the Circumstances we have
mentioned, in their order and connection, were given to any impartial Judges, it
would be judged as strong a presumptive Evidence as ever was given; and in the
proceedings of our Laws against Criminals, Judgment has passed against the
Lives of many upon far less Evidence, this being as full as the nature of the
thing can possibly suffer in your Hss. and the Kingdom's Case.

But notwithstanding this sort of Circumstantial Evidence be sufficiently
forcible and convincing to disinterested Persons, to prove this supposed Prince
to be an Impostor, and it may be more Circumstances of the same nature are
known to your Highness, yet we most humbly pray your Highness to wave insisting
upon any of them, as entirely, as if you could neither prove nor knew more
about this pretended Prince than common Fame has proclaimed without
contradiction.

It no ways belongs to your Highnesses, nor to the Kingdom, to prove the
Falsehood of his Pretenses, or any Circumstance about his Birth; and it would be
very prejudicial for your Highnesses to take upon you the burden of producing
Witnesses and Proofs, and admitting your Highnesses Adversaries to dispute
their force and sufficiency, when it belongs to them wholly and only, to bring
forth such lawful Witnesses in due numbers, as may satisfy your Highnesses and
the Kingdom of the Truth of their Pretenses; and it is an infinite wrong to your
Highnesses and the Kingdom, that they have not done it long since, if there had
been a true Prince born of the Queen.

Since it is the Kingdoms great concern as well as your Highnesses, we are the
bolder to propose, that the Method of Defense against the public Injury be
made according to the known Laws and Customs of England; that is, That an open
free demand be made in the name of her R. Hss. as Heiress apparent of the
Crown, and in behalf of all the People of the Realm, that there be forthwith
declared and published to the Kingdom a sufficient Number for this Case, of
lawful Witnesses of either Sex, such as the Laws of England and Natural Justice
require in the Case, who do testify, that according to the usual practice of
their respective Sexes at the Birth of Princes, Heirs to Crowns, they were
Eyewitnesses that the Child now called the Prince of Wales was naturally born
of the Queen's Body.

It Is but just, regular, and modest for your Hss. to make that Demand, and your
insisting upon it to be done immediately, without the least delay, is no more
than the Right of your Hss and the Kingdom, as must be confessed by all that
either know the Rules of natural Justice, or the Laws of England. Our Laws
require and demand an entry to be made upon all Intruders into the Rights or
Inheritances of another; there ought to be legal Interruptions made of all
wrongful Possessions however obtained. A long permission of an illegitimate
Child to pass for a legitimate Heir, is of dangerous consequence to the true
Heir of an Inheritance; it is a known Rule both in our English Laws, and the
Civil Laws, Tacens longo tempore praesumitur consentire, he that remains long
without answering any thing to an Intruders claim, seems to allow it.

We crave pardon that we must freely tell your Hss, that it has been our
astonishment that your Hss have been so long silent, and have deferred to make
your just demand, and that you have so long suffered her R. Hss. Chaplains to
pray publicly for this supposed Prince of Wales.

Your Hss. Heart cannot desire the God of Truth and Righteousness to prosper
such an Invasion of your own and the Kingdoms Rights, nor to bless the Impostor
as such, being set up (tho an Innocent Child) to be a Tool in the hands of
others to destroy the Protestant Profession, your Hss. claims to the greatest
Inheritance, and the best Civil Government known in the World. We believe your
Hss. to be true Christians, that tremble in the Worship and Prayers before the
Eternal Majesty, and therefore hope such a show of owning him will not be
longer suffered to be acted before the great God that searches all the hearts
of Princes and Subjects.

If your Hss. shall first make this (...) and Satisfaction therein be not given
by the maintainers of the supposed Prince (...)al Justice and our Laws dictate,
that your Hss. demand a retraction by the (...) all Christian Kingdoms and
States, of the false News they have published of the Birth of a Prince of
Wales, and their Vindication of her R. Hss. Right apparent to the next
Succession of the Crown.

When a wrongful Claimer to be Heir of any Inheritance cannot prove his true
Descent, the Court wherein he sues his Claim, not only rejects and damns his
false Pretenses, but openly declares the Counterfeit Tricks or Forgeries that
they observe to have been attempted to support the false Claim, and our Laws
enable the Heir that has been disturbed, to demand by his Action against the
false Pretender, Satisfaction for the Scandal of his lawful Title; and our Laws
further require his prosecution for Justice against all the known Confederates
in that intended Wrong and Fraud, for their several Crimes therein committed.

We are sensible, that most Catholic Princes have a prejudice to us in the
Rights we claim as English Protestants, not knowing our Laws and Liberties, and
we have therefore proposed these two Demands to be first in order made by your
Hss. in the behalf of her R. Hss. and the Kingdom, that we might convince them
that we have Reason and Justice, according to their own Laws and Rules of
Right, to seek your Hss. Protection against the King's Practices (as they yet
appear) in forcing us to stoop to a Counterfeit Prince, and to change the
Succession of the Crown and the whole Government; your Hss. having therein a
joint Concern with us, and our Laws, and Nature it self, call upon you to
defend your own and the Kingdom's Right; to preserve the Succession of the
Crown as it is by the Laws established, which the King had no pretense of Power
to Change.

But we must also humbly fly to your Hss. to protect us against the horrible
destruction made by the King of all our Laws for the Reformation of our
Christian Religion, and our Security against the open professed and mortal
Enemies of our Liberties therein, the King having declared to the World, that
those Laws shall never hereafter be put in Execution; and to make our Case
therein desperate, has caused his Judges to justify him in what he has done.

We must also pray your Hss. help against his Invasion of all our Civil Rights
and Fundamental Liberties, and his utter subversion of the Free Government of
England by its ancient Customs and Laws.

We cannot doubt but your Hss. will be convinced by this Memorial, that we have
not complained of our Oppressions until they are become intolerable; nor sought
any Relief (save from God alone) until your Highnesses justly expected
inheritance, and the very being of our Civil Government are in the most extreme
danger of utter ruin.

We are and have been truly Loyal to the King, and never refused obedience to
any of his legal Commands, or any whatsoever that could consist with all our
other Duties to God and our fellow Subjects. We have been content to suffer
personal wrongs and manifest Injustice, and considered the Corruption of Men,
that abuses and particular wrongs will happen in all Governments, and ought
patiently to be born, whilst the Fundamentals of Civil Government and Justice
are sacredly preserved. Our Christian Charity taught us, that it is better that
a few suffer wrongs, than to hazard for their just Relief more effusion of
Blood, or other Mischiefs than can be recompensed by their obtaining Right. We
know the Jesuits crafts might have clouded the Justice that might have been
demanded in particular Cases; and we have therefore staid until the Justice of
what we pray, is become demonstrable unto all that are not corruptly and
wilfully blind, or led blindfold by the Jesuits, or Romish Priests.

We are sensible that the King has used the Name of the Royal Authority and
Prerogative in all the lawless powers that he has exercised, and we durst not
pray your Hss. aid against his doings, if there could be reasonably any doubt
or question, whether the things he has done and daily does, might be
authorized by the Royal Powers and high Prerogatives which belong to the Kings
of England.

It Is most unquestionable, that the Noble English Monarchy and Government had a
legal Foundation, and was and is established upon Customs, Franchises and Laws
peculiar to the English Nation. It was always free and independent upon all the
Powers and Potentates on Earth; the Kings and the People are, and of right were
always free and absolute to bind themselves by their own Laws, made by their
joint consent, and not otherwise; they could never be bound by any others than
themselves, save only by the Laws of the most high God.

A King of England cease to act by the English Kingly Authority, or as a King
of England, if he yield up himself or his Subjects to be bound or subjected to
any other Laws, Canons or Jurisdictions, than such as are made or freely
received by the mutual agreement of the King and the representative Body of the
Realm in Parliament.

It Is declared in the St. 16 R. 2.5. that the Crown of England had been so free
at all times, that it has been in Subjection to no Realm, and that the same
ought not in any thing touching the Regality to be submitted to the Bishop of
Rome, nor the Laws and Statutes of the Realm to be by him frustrated or
defeated at his Will, to the perpetual destruction of the Kings Sovereignty,
Crown and Regality, and of all the Realm. The Commons then prayed the King, and
him required by way of Justice, to examine all the States of the Realm how they
would stand to defend the Rights of the Crown and the Realm against the Pope;
and it was thereupon ordained, that all that should pursue or bring any Bulls
or Instruments from Rome against the Kings Regality or his Realm, should be put
out of the Kings Protection, and incur a Praemunire, which, as the Law then was,
made it lawful for any man to kill them.

Likewise the Stat. of 24 H. 8.12. and 25 H. 8.21. say, that the Realm has
been, and is free from Subjection to Man's Laws, but only to such as have been
devised and made within the same for its own welfare, or of their free Liberty
received by their consent to them.

The King and Parliament near four hundred years since were so resolute to
defend the Rights and Freedoms of the Crown and the Realm against the Imp(...)
Jurisdictions and Powers which he attempted to exercise, that notwith(...) they
by the Stat. of 18 Ed. 3. St. 1. Rot. Parliament. number. 38. declared th(...)
Enemy to the King and the Realm, and so he stands now declared; and to the
(...)e purpose is the Roll Parliament 17 Ed. 3. number. 59. Tho these Stat(...)s
are not printed, their force is the same to make them to fall into the
Condition of Enemies to the Kingd(...) (...)at correspond with him or his
Nuntio.

It never was in the Power of any King of England to yield up or submit the
Rights of the Crown and the Realm, and its Laws, Powers or Jurisdictions of any
sort, against the Will of the Realm in Parliament; so it was confessed 500
years since K. H. 6. in his Letters to Pope Paschal, Notum habeat sanctitas
vestra, quod me vivente [auxiliante Deo] dignitates and usus regni nostri
Angliae non imminuentur; and si ego (quod absit) in tanta me dejectione
ponerem, Magnates mei and totus Angliae populus nullo modo pateretur. Be it
known (said he) to your Holiness, that whilst I live (by Gods assistance) the
Authorities and Vsages of the Kingdom of England shall never be diminished; but
if I would so debase my self (which God forbid) my Nobles and the whole People
of England would by no means suffer it.

King John indeed unworthily surrendered the Crown and Regalities to Pope
Innocent the 3d, and his Successors, and the Priests falsely put into that
Charter that it was by the consent of his Council of Barons, he submitted to
hold the Kingdom of the Pope, and that by yearly rent again; but when Pope
Gregory the tenth in the third of Ed. 1. sent for that pretended Rent, that
Noble Prince justly answered, See Roll. Clar. 3. Ed. number. 9. Shed.
that he was bound by his Oath in his Coronation, to preserve the rights of the
Kingdom untouched, and that he could do nothing that concerned the Crown
without the advice of the People in Parliament, which are there called
Proceres. See Cooks Inst. fol. 13.


In the 40 of Edward the Third, the Pope demanded the same Rents, and the King
proposed it in Parliament, but they declared, that neither King John nor any
other King had any power to put himself or the Realm and People into subjection
to the Pope without their consent in Parliament; and that if it were done by
King John, it was done contrary to his Oath in his Coronation; and if the Pope
attempted any thing thereupon against the King or his Subjects, they would
resist him to their utmost power.

The same King Edward the third had only negligently suffered the Popes power
to be too much used in the Kingdom, contrary to the Statute of Carlisle 35 Ed.
1. as appears by the Parliament Roll 17. Ed. 3. number. 59. and the Commons in
Parliament complained that the Treasure of the Realm was transported to Rome,
and the Secrets of the Realm discovered by the Foreign Priests sent hither, and
they required of the King some Mercy for that they neither could nor would any
longer bear those strong Oppressions, or else that he would help them to expel
out of this Realm the Popes Power by Force, and thereupon were enacted against
many of the Popes Powers in this Realm those severe Penal Laws of 25 Ed. 3.27
Ed. 3.1.38 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. chapter 1. all which our King has now declared shall
never hereafter be put in Execution.

That Victorious Prince Edw. 3. tho a Papist, yet pretended to no Regal
Prerogative of suspending the Laws made by the Kings and Parliaments against
the Pope, he confesses in that Statute of 35 Edw. 1. against the Pope's Power,
that it held its Force being not annulled by Parliament, and therefore he was
bound by his Oath to see the same kept as a Law of the Realm, tho by Sufferance
and Negligence it had been attempted to the Contrary.

If the Effects of the Romish Jurisdictions in the Realm were looked upon as
they are related in that 38 Edw. 3.1. It would be manifest that the King that
would put the Kingdom into such a state, lays aside thereby his Kingly Office
and Dignity whilst he pursues these Intentions; that Statute says, that by the
Powers exercised by the Pope and Court of Rome, and the Dependants thereof, the
good ancient Laws, Customs, and Franchises of the Realm were greatly impeached,
blemished, and confounded, the Crown abated, the Treasure and Riches of the
Realm carried away, the Inhabitants and Subjects of the Realm impoverished and
troubled, and the great Men and Commons in Bodies and Goods damnified; surely
there can be no doubt whether the King has any Royal Prerogative to enable him
either to stop the Execution of these Penal Laws that prevent the Kingdom from
falling back into such a forlorn Estate, or to attempt by pretense of Liberty
of Conscience for the Romish Priests and Emissaries, and their Practices, to
enable them to work all the mischief they can against those that would save the
Kingdom from such Miseries.

Your Highnesses may be absolutely certain, that the King acts not by virtue of
the English Regal Office or Prerogatives, in his authorizing Treasons to be
daily committed against the Realm. By the Statute of 13 Eliz. 2. they that give
or receive any Absolution or Reconciliation to Rome by the Popes Authority, or
any of his Priests, which the King licenseth and authorizeth to be done
continually, those are declared high Traitors to the King and the Realm; and no
doubt Treasons declared by a Statute against the Realm are common Nusances of
the highest Nature and Mischief; it is the trust of the Regal Office to prevent
and punish them, and it is directly Contrary to the Kingly Office to assume
Power to authorize or license such Crimes.

It Is unquestionable that no King of England ever had power to grant Offices to
persons disabled to bear them by positive and direct Acts of Parliament made
for that very purpose, and declared to be for the peoples security;
nevertheless the King has put most of the Offices of the Kingdom in the hands
of those that are so disabled.

Its as certain it never was in the power of our Kings to dispossess at their
Wills any of the subjects of those interests and profits which they had for
their lives; nor to Commission any to judge his Subjects finally in matters
criminal or civil by their discretion without any regard to the Laws, Customs
and privileges of the Realm.

These and many other powers (...)ight name to your Hss. are not the actings of
and English legal Monarch; but an a(...) Persons, the Liberties and Interests
of the Subjects, as if he alone had at least the Property paramount in all
(...)ir persons and their Interests, which in all civil Governments belongs
only to the Lawful Legislators; and as if the people of England w(...) Tenant
of his mere will to what they have, and had no right nor Interest in their
Laws, Customs or Franchises, nor (...) Justice to demand the benefit of them.

Nothing can complete his Majestys renuntiation of the Trusts and Obligation of
the English Regal Office, save only that he assume (as he now does actually) to
take from the Citys and Boroughs entirely all their Customs and Privileges and
free Election of their Magistrates, confirmed to them expressly by the great
Charter, and many other Laws; and that he deprive all the rest of the people of
their Liberty to choose such persons as they please according to the Statutes to
Consent for them to the Laws that shall bind them their Estates and Lives, as
he has declared he will, and intends, and is every day doing; and then the
ancient rightful and Free English Government will be manifestly and entirely
dissolved, and Englishmen shall have no Legal right to their Estates, their
Wives and Children, or their Lives.

There will be then no legal English Monarchy in England, trusted by the Laws
with high Royal Prerogatives for the joint safety and benefit of the King and
the subjects, acknowledging themselves to be bound by an Oath to maintain the
Customs, Laws and Franchises of the Realm; and to take continual care for the
Execution of the Laws impartially for that purpose; every man shall then have
equal and eternal right to every hing as this King will, and his Popish forces
shall dispose of it, and so long only as he shall please to continue in the
same mind with the same force.

It Is with bleeding hearts that in this manifest extreme oppression and danger
we beg your Highnesses aid to defend the rights of the Crown and the Realm.

There can be no question of your Hss. right to defend the same, the Legal
Monarchy and Government by our ancient Customs, Laws and Franchises, to save
the ancient Penal Laws against the Popes Usurpations, and the latter Laws for
the Reformation of our Religion from Popery, and to preserve the special
Customs, and Privileges of the Cities and Boroughs, as well as the General
Customs of the Kingdom, which our Customs and Laws only have vested in your
Hss. the next right Expectant of the English Crown, and (if no Prince shall be
born,) Rege etiam renitente, tho the King shall do all that is possible for him
to hinder you.

If you suffer them to be destroyed, or to be disused and deemed to be of no
force, but as the King shall please by his Judges and Courts, and by all that
he shall possess of the Power of the Kingdom, Your Highnesses claym and rights
as Expectant of the Crown is in like manner destroyed, and set aside; and the
whole arbitrary Magistracy serving his Will, and all his Popish forces,
Foraigners and Natives, will be engaged in Interest and misguided Conscience to
oppose your Highnesses claim; by the Laws and Customs of England there will be
indeed in the State to which the King has brought the Kingdom, no legal
Magistrates nor Government in being and use unto which her Royal Highness can
immediately succeed according to the Customs and Laws of England; the Kingdom
must be a confused Multitude, and the strongest may subdue the rest to their
Will.

As your Highnesses have a right to save the Government by reason of your great
Interest in it, so all the People have an unquestionable right to seek your
Highnesses Aid therein; and it is one of the principal Duties of the Christian
Religion, and will be one of the best outward Expressions of their Love to God
and Jesus Christ, to assist your Highness in all your righteous ways, defending
their Just Civil Government, being instituted by God for preserving Justice
among humane Societies.

The People that love their Neighbors, and Countries, as Christian Religion
commands, ought not carelessly nor irreligiously to suffer their Civil
Government, their Laws, and all their Rights and Interest that their Country
hold by them for themselves and Posterities, to be destroyed by any Man's Will,
Superstition or Ambition.

He that was at first a Legal Supreme Magistrate, and ought to have been obeyed
if he would have so continued, tho he had done many Injustices to particular
Persons, he may cast off the Quality and Use of the Power of a Legal Supreme
Magistrate, and use and exercise Power destructive to all the Legal Trusts and
Office; and then he devests himself of that Office and Trust of a lawful
Magistracy unto which the Laws of God and the Kingdom require Obedience.

The ancient Kings of England, acknowledged the Peoples Right to save their
Free Government if any of the Kings themselves would have dishonorably parted
with the Rights of the Crown and the Realm. We mentioned the Letter of H. I. to
the Pope, and that great Prince Ed. I. on the like occasion of Power claymed by
the Pope, not only writ to the Pope to the same Effect as H. I. did, but by his
consent Letters were written to Pope Boniface by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, wherein they told the Pope, that they were bound by Oath to the
Observation and Defense of their Liberty, Customs and ancient Laws, and would
maintain them with all their Power and Force, and that they neither did nor
ever would, could or ought to suffer the King tho he would, to do, or any ways
attempt what the Pope desired contrary to their Customs, since it would be to
the Destruction of the Rights of the Crown of England and the Kingly Dignity
and the Subversion of the Statutes of the Kingdom, and Prejudice of their
ancient Liberties, Customs, and Laws.

Since then your Hss. have an undoubted right to interpose between the King and
us in your own and the Kingdoms behalf, to save our ancient legal Government,
Rot Parliament 28 Ed. 1. see Cooks instituti 2. fol. 98.
and in special our Laws for the Reformation of our Christian Religion, we
humbly offer, that besides the former Demands about the supposed Prince, your
Hss. will please to demand and insist immovably:

That the ancient free Government of England by its (...) and Law (...)nly,
made, or approved in Parliament, be immediately restore(...) all th(...)at is
that the Rights of the Crown and Freedom of the Realm be forth (...)
Submissions publicly made to the Pope by the King that now is, to the
Disho(...) English Crown, and Realm; and from all the Claims made by the Romish
Church (...) any Powers and Jurisdictions whatsoever over the Christians,
o(...) England.

(...)t all the Laws now in force against the Admission of the Canons, and
Jurisdiction of Rome, contrary to our Customs and Laws, and against the
maintainers of them, be forthwith declared to be put in due Execution, and all
Suspensions of them, or Dispensations with them without the Authority of
Parliament, be declared null and void.

That the Ancient Customs, Liberties and Privileges of the City of London, and
the whole form and course of its Government, be forthwith restored, the Customs
thereof being part of the Common Law of England, and its Liberties being
established by the great Charter, and many Acts of Parliament; that the
Customs, Free Election of their Magistrates, and all the Privileges of all the
Cities and Boroughs of England confirmed by the great Charter, and other Laws,
be duly restored.

That Legal Officers both Civil and Military, be settled in all the Places of
Magistracy, and all the Commands throughout the Kingdom.

That all Commissions whatsoever be forthwith revoked and declared null and
void, whereby are granted any Powers of Discretion over the Persons, or
Interest of the Subject, contrary to the Laws and Customs of England,
especially the Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs, with its monstrous non
obstante to all our Laws.

That the Freedom of Elections, which is the Foundation of the Government, be
duly vindicated, and all the most unworthy Preingagements revoked, and
renounced; to elect and vote as the King would have them.

That the Kingdom may be restored as soon as possible to a Capacity of holding
a Legal Parliament, in such Form and Manner as the Laws require, by whose help
the Civil Government may be reestablished, and force and arbitrary Powers
therein utterly abolished.

We crave your Highnesses Pardon, that we further humbly offer to your
Hignesses, that time and accident always made Changes in the Usefulness of
Laws, and that it has so happened in our Penal Laws made for Uniformity in the
Profession of Faith, and in the outward Worship of God; four of our succeeding
Parliaments perceived the abuse of these Laws, and the Mischief thereby to
conscientious Christians and declared their Intention of relieving them if the
King would have permitted them; and they endeavored to stop the Execution of
them, and desired a Settlement of Liberty of Conscience as is due to Christians.

In these Regards, and the Subversion of the whole Government since made,
Necessity and Charity may have the force of Laws to enforce the stay of the
Execution of some of those Laws for Conformity until those Matters may be
settled in Parliament.

We therefore humbly pray your Highness to procure, as a case of Necessity,
that none be disturbed until a Legal Parliament shall have resolved the case
for the Profession of their Faith in Matters merely supernatural, or the
outward Expression of their Worship, so as both terminate only in God, and
neither wrong nor hurt any Man on Earth in Body, Goods, and good Name, but
their own Souls only if they be mistaken therein.

We now most humbly submit our selves, and all herein contained, to your
Highnesses Wisdom Candor and Charity, (...) shall pray the just and great God
to fill your noble Souls with perfect Love and Wisdom, and all the most
resplendent Virtues that are fit to shine in the highest Thrones and Power that
ever the Sun beheld.

Sr, The Character we have had of your Worth, makes us confident of your
Faithfulness to deliver the enclosed forthwith to his Highness the Prince of
Orange, or in his Absence to her Royal Hss. the Princess; we could not trust it
by the Post, and therefore have sent it by an Express, which may perhaps make
it longer in coming; the Messengers only Order is to deliver it to one of your
Servants, and we confide in your Integrity, and remain.

To Monsieur, M(...) at the Hague. SIR, Your most humble Servants, whom you may
hereafter know.


