THE Armies Proposalls TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold in Fleet Street, 1659.

TO THE Supreme Authority OF THESE NATIONS, THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth
of England.
The Humble Petitions and Proposals of the Officers under the Command of the
Right Honorable the Lord Lambert, in the late Northern expedition.
Humbly shows,
THAT whereas we with others, who desire to fear the Lord in these Nations
(though by our provocations we are ripe for destruction) have been again saved
by the Lord, and have had a late view of his appearances as of old, in the
beholding of whose gracious footsteps as we cannot but rejoice, so our souls
tremble least the fruit and birth of all (which the Lord may expect, and his
people long earnestly for) become abortive now in the day of our deliverance;
we do therefore present unto your Honors consideration, these ensuing Proposals
which we do humbly lay before you.

I. That the Humble Petition and Address of the General Counsel of Officers at
Wallingford-house to the Parliament, which was so unanimously and cheerfully
agreed unto, and approved of in a day of our greatest confusions, may not be
laid asleep, but may have fresh life given unto it; It being (upon further and
cleerer grounds) still upon our hearts as the best and only expedient, yet
offered (notwithstanding many assayes) to a happy and durable settlement being
a fixed and firm fence and boundary (under God) for the securing of the Civil
and Spiritual Liberties, which the Spirit of the Nation is unwearied in travil,
not only to invade, but upon every opportunity (as we we have often seen, and
lately had a clear evidence of) is ready to attempt the ruin and destruction of
the same.

II. That whereas God having given a Spirit to the Army sixed and faithful to
the interest of his people, and our good old cause, when many who had been
friends, were either Apostates, Malignants or Newters, joining with the old
Enemy, leaving the Parliament and Army, and their few active friends singly to
conflict with their late difficulties, and having now no such hopeful way, like
to prevail, and ruin, and frustrate what we have so long contended for, as by
working divisions in the Army, making breaches, begetting misunderstandings,
and dissolving its Union (wherein, under God, it is strength lies) We do
therefore as the most effectual means, for the maintaining of the Discipline
and conduct thereof, and preserving its Union inviolable, humbly Propose, That
his Excellency the Lord Fleetwood may be settled Commander in chief of the
Armies, his Commission expiring within a few months; That the Lord Lambert be
the General Officer, and chief Commander of the Army next under him: Also that
General Desbrough be the chief Officer of the horse under them, and that
General Monck be the chief Officer of the Infantry, they being persons, under
whose conduct, courage, and fidelity, we have had eminent success, victories
and deliverances in the days of great straits, and have been signally blessed and
owned by the Lord, to whom, and not to man be the honor of all.

III. That having had very sad experiences of a grand Apostatizing and Newteral
Spirit gone through the Nations, and amongst many of those who were entrusted
for the safety thereof, very few acting or appearing in several Counties, for
the preventing the Plots, and suppressing the powers of the enemy in their late
Rebellious design; and many others not only faultering, but falling in with
them, were by a total ruin, was threatened, and had been effected, had not the
Lord in mercy prevented it. We therefore humbly Propose, that there may be a
diligent inquiry in all parts by faithful men, employed to that purpose, what
entrusted Persons have been guilty of any contrivance, or acted against the
Commonwealths interest, and that they may be proceeded against accordingly; and
likewise what persons upon wicked purposes have been Newteral in such a
distracted day, when their assistance according to their employments and trust,
would have been no less useful then seasonable; and that all such may be
removed from their places and employments, Civil and Military, and that such
who on the contrary have in this juncture of your discomposed affairs, declared
their owning of this interest, either in the County Troops, Militia,
Volanteers, or otherways, may be looked upon as friends, encouraged, satisfied,
their Arrears protected from injuries, countenanced by you, and as they are
capacitated, invested with authority in their several Countries.

IV. That in the late Insurrections, some considerable Corporations have not
only added, abetted, and countenanced the enemies designs, but also have made
use of the Arms lodged with them, and themselves appeared in the rebellion,
willingly receiving the numerous affections of all engaged therein: Therefore
we humbly propose, That such Corporations may be discountinanced, and that you
would be pleased to give your signal mark of disfavor against them; as also for
the future, so to regulate Corporations, that such persons well qualified
according to the Government of a well constituted Commonwealth may be invested
with the authority of Magistracy in every Town, that so the footsteps of
Monarchy may be rased out.

V. We humbly offer, that all persons whatsoever, Magistrates, Ministers, or
others, who have openly, or secretly stirred up, or provoked the inhabitants of
these Nations to war and commotion against the Parliament, and particular to
the late Insurrections, which is too visibly apparent, many of them having not
only been abetters, but in their persons appeared with instruments and weapons
of war (as some of us know) may be proceeded against, as you in your judgments
think fit.

FINIS.

