THE ARRAIGNMENT, TRIAL and EXAMINATION OF Mary Moders, Otherwise STEDMAN, now
CARLETON, (Styled, The German Princess) At the Sessions House in the Old Bailey,
being brought Prisoner from the Gatehouse Westminster, for having two Husbands;
viz. THO. STEDMAN of Canterbury Shooemaker, AND John Carleton of London, Gent.
Who upon a full Hearing was acquitted by the Jury on Thursday, June 4. 1663.

LONDON: Printed for N. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange, 1663.

THE Arraignment, Trial and Examination OF MARY MODERS, alias STEDMAN, STYLED,
The GERMAN PRINCESS, At the Sessions in the Old-Bayly, Wednesday the third of
June, 1663.
At Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly.
THe Court being sat, a Bill of Indictment was drawn up against Mary Moders,
alias Stedman, for having two Husbands now alive, viz. Tho. Stedman and John
Carleton. The Grand Jury found the Bill, and was to the effect following: Viz.

That she the said Mary Moders late of London Spinster, otherwise Mary Stedman,
the wife of Tho. Stedman late of the City of Canterbury in the County of Kent
Shepemaker, 1^ May, in the Reign of his now Majesty the sixth, at the Parish of
St. Mildreds in the City of Cant, in the County aforesaid, did take to husband
the aforesaid Thomas Stedman, and him the said Thomas Stedman then and there
had to husband. And that she the said Mary Moders, alias Stedman, 21 April, in
the 15 year of his said Majesty's Reign, at London, in the Parish of Great St.
Bartholomews, in the Ward of Farringdon without, feloniously did take to
husband one John Carleton, and to him was married, the said Tho. Stedman her
former husband then being alive, and in full life: against the form of the
Statute in that case provided, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

Afterward the said Mary Moders, alias Stedman, was called to the Bar; and
appearing, was commanded to hold up her hand: which she accordingly did; and
her Indictment was read to her as follows.

Clerk of the Peace. Mary Moders, alias Stedman, Thou stand indicted in
London by the name of Mary Moders late of London Spinster, otherwise Mary
Stedman, the wife of, etc. And here the Indictment was read as above: How say
thou, Art thou guilty of the Felony whereof thou stand indicted, or Not
guilty?


Mary Moders. Not guilty, my Lord.


Clerk of the Peace. How will thou be tried?


Prisoner. By God and the Country.


Clerk of the Peace. God send thee a good deliverance.


And afterward she being set to the Bar in order to her Trial, she prayed time
till the morrow for her Trial: which was granted; and all persons concerned
were ordered to attend them at Nine of the Clock in the Fore-noon.

The Reader is desired to take notice of the following Passage.

After she was Arraigned, and going back to the Gaol, her Husband the young
Lord told her, He must now bid her Adieu for ever. To which she replied: Nay,
(My Lord) it is not amiss
Before we part to have a Kiss.


And so saluted him, and said, What a quarter and noise here is of a Cheat! You
cheated me, and I you: You told me you were a Lord, and I told you I was a
Princess; and I think I fitted you. And so saluting each other, they parted.

June 4. 63.
Clerk of the Peace. The Court was sat, Proclamation was made: O Yes, all
manner of persons that have any thing more to do, etc. Set Mary Moders to the
Bar: where she accordingly stood.


Clerk of the Peace. Mary Moders, alias Stedman, hold up thy hand: which she
did. Those men that you shall hear called, and personally appear, are to pass
between our Sovereign Lord the King and you for your life: if you will
challenge them, or any of them, you must do it when they come to the Book to
besworn, before they are sworn.


And then were called, William Rutland, Arthur Vigers, Arthur Capel, Tho.
Smith, Fran. Chaplin, Robert Harvey, Simon Driver, Robert Kerkham, Hugh Masson,
Tho. Wes^ley, Richard Glutterbuck, and Randolph Pooke.


And she challenged none, but were severally sworn by the Oath following:

Look upon the Prisoner: You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance
make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at the Bar, whom you
shall have in charge, according to your evidence. So help you God.

Clerk of the Peace. Crier, make Proclamation: O Yes, If any one can inform my
Lords, the Kings Justices, the Kings Sergeant, or the Kings Attorney before
this Inquest be taken between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at
the Bar, let them come forth, and they shall be heard; for now the Prisoner
stands at the Bar upon her deliverance: and all others that are bound by
Recognizance to give evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar, come forth, and
give evidence, or else you will forfeit your Recognizance.


The Witnesses being called several times, and not appearing, young Carleton
came into the Court in a rich Garb trimmed with Scarlet Ribbands, and prayed,
that in respect his Father and the rest of the Witnesses were not all ready,
the Trial might be deferred for half an hour; and he going back, and passing
the Prisoner his Princess, who stood there in a black Velvet Wastcoat, dressed
in her hair, trimmed also with Scarlet Ribbands, she (veiling her face with her
fan) laughed at him, to the great observation of the Court: and so the young
Lord left the Court, (by advice of his friends) and betook himself to an
adjoining house, where he stood the whole Trial.

After some stay, the VVitnesses came into the Court, and the Prisoner set to
the Bar, and silence being commanded, the Indictment was again read.

Clerk of the Peace. Upon this Indictment she has pleaded Not guilty, and for
her Trial has put her self upon God and the Country; which Country you are.
Your charge is to enquire whether she be guilty of the said Felony or not
guilty: if you find her guilty, you shall enquire what Goods and Chattels she
had at the time of the Felony committed, or at any time sithence: if you find
her not guilty, you shall enquire whether she did flee for it: if you find that
she fled for it, you shall enquire of her Goods, etc. as if she had been
guilty: if you find she be not guilty, nor that she did flee for it, say so,
and no more, and hear your evidence.


Several VVitnesses were sworn by the Oath following:

The evidence that you shall swear between our Sovereign Lord the King and the
Prisoner at the Bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth. So help you God.

James Knot. My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, I gave this woman in marriage
to one Thomas Stedman, which is now alive in Dover, and I see him last week.


Court. Where was she married?


Knot. In Canterbury.


Court. Where there?


Knot. In St. Mildreds, by one Parson Man, who is now dead.


Court. How long since were they married?


Rnot. About nine years ago.


Court. Did they live together afterward?


Knot. Yes, about four years, and had two Children.


Court. You gave her in marriage, but did the Minister give her to her husband
then?


Knot. Yes, and they lived together.


Jury. Friend, did you give this very Woman?


Knot. Yes.


Court. What company was there?


Knot. There was the married Couple, her sister, my self, the Parson and the
Sexton.


Court. Where is that Sexton?


Knot. I know not, my Lord.


Court. You are sure they were married in the Church, and this is the woman?


Knot. Yes, I am sure of it.


Court. How long ago?


Knot. About nine years ago.


Court. Did you know this woman before the Marriage, and how long?


Knot. Yes, I knew her a long time, I was an Apprentice seven years near her
Mothers house in Canterbury.


Court. Then she is no Foreign Princess? Of what Parentage was she?


Knot. I did not know her own Father (and in that he might be believed) but her
Father-in-law was a Musician there.


Court. You see her married: what words were used at her marriage, and in what
manner?


Knot. They were married according to the order of the Land, a little before
the Act came forth touching marriages by Justices of the Peace.


Court. Was it by the Form of Common Prayer, any thing read of that Form?


Knot. I did not take notice of that, I was but a young man, and was desired to
go along with them.


William Clark being sworn, said,

My Lord, I was last week in Dover in company with this James Knot and Thomas
Stedman, and he the said Stedman did own that he did marry one Mary Moders, a
daughter of one in Canterbury, and that Knot gave her, and that he had two
Children by her, and declared his willingness to come up to give evidence
against her, but wanted money for his journey: And I have understood that a
person here in Court was of a Jury at Canterbury, at a Trial between Day and
Mary Stedman at the Bar for having two Husbands.


Court. Was she cleared?


Clark. I cannot tell.


Young Carletons father sworn.

My Lord, I was at Dover the last week on Wednesday; I saw the husband of this
woman, and the man acknowledged himself to be so; and did say that James Knot
was the man that gave her in marriage to him.


Court. Where is this man her husband? Hear says must condemn no man: what do
you know of your own knowledge?


Carleton the Elder. I know the man is alive.


Court. Do you know he was married to her?


Carleton. Not I, my Lord.


Sarah Williams. My Lord, This Woman was bound for Barbados, to go along with
my Husband, and she desired to lodge at our house for some time, and did so;
and when the ship was ready to go, she went into Kent to receive her means, and
said she would meet the ship in the Downs: and missing the ship, took boat and
went to the ship. After several days remaining there, there came her Husband
with an Order and setched her ashore, and carried her to D^ver Castle.


Court. What was his name that had an Order to bring her on shore again?


Sarah Williams. His name was Thomas S^edman.


Court. Have you any more to prove the first marriage?


Charlton the Elder. No, none but Knot; there was none but three, the Minister
dead, the Sexton not to be found, and this Knot who has given Evidence.


Court. What became of the two Children, Knot?


Knot. They both died.


Charlton the Elder. Stedman said in my hearing, that he had lived four years
together, had two Children by her, and both dead; five years ago last Easter
since she left him.


Court. Mr. Charlton, What have you heard this Woman say?


Charlton. My Lord, she will confess nothing that pleases him.


Court. Mr. Charlton, Did you look in the Church Register for the first
marriage.


Charlton. I did look in the Book, and he that is now Clerk, was then Sexton
(just now not to be found,) he told me, that Marriages being then very
numerous, preceding the Act beforementioned, the then Clerk had neglected the
Registry of this Marriage. If she intended this Trade, she likewise knew how to
make the Clerk mistake Registring the Marriage.


Young Charlton's Brother sworn, who said.

My Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury, I was present at the Marriage of my Brother
with this Gentlewoman, which was on or about 21 April, 1663. They were married
at Gre^^ St. Bartholomews, by one Mr. Smith a Minister here in Court by License.


Mr. Smith the Parson sworn.

My Lord, all that I can say, is this, That Mr. Charlton the younger told me of
such a business, and desired me to marry them; they came to Church, and I did
marry them by the Book of Common Prayer.


Court. Mr. Smith, are you sure that is the Woman?


Parson. Yes, my Lord, it is; I believe she will not deny it.


Prisoner. Yes, my Lord, I confess I am the Woman.


Court. Have you any more witnesses.


Charlton. We can get no more but Knot to prove the first Marriage, the last is
clear.


Judge Howel. Where is Knot? Remember your self well what you said before. You
say, you know that Woman at the Bar; that you had known her a great while; that
she was born near you in Canterbury; that you were present at her marriage;
that Parson Man married them; that none were present but your self, the married
couple, Parson, Sexton, and her sister.


Knot. Some others came into the Church, but none that I knew; I am sure none
went with her, but those I named.


Court. Who gave her in marriage?


Knot. I did.


Court: How came you to do it?


Knot. I was Stedmans shopmate, and he desired me to go along with him.


Court. Were her Parents then living, or no?


Knot. Her Mother was.


Jury. How old are you?


Knot. Two or Three and thirty years.


Jury. How long ago was this marriage?


Knot. About 9 years since.


Court. Then he was Twenty three, and might do it: What is your Trade of life?


Knot. I am a Cordweyner, otherwise a Shoemaker. Stedman was so too; we wrought
both together.


Jury. We desire to know whether she had a Father and Mother then ^iving?


Knot. She had a Father-in-law.


Court. Did you know her Mother?


Knot. Ye^.


Court. How long before that Marriage did her own Father die?


Knot. I did not know him; he said so before indeed.


Court. What age was she when married?


Knot. I suppose about Nineteen or twenty.


Prisoner. May it please your Honors, and Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard
the several Witnesses, and I think this whole Country cannot but plainly see
the malice of my Husbands Father against me* how he causlesly hunts after my
life, when his Son, my Husband, came and addressed himself to me, pretending
himself a person of honor, and upon first sight pressed me to marriage: I told
him, Sir said I, I am a stranger, have no acquaintance here, and desire you to
desist your suit^; I could not speak my mind, but he (having borrowed some
thredbare Complements) replied. Madam, your seeming virtues, your amiable
person, and noble deportment, renders you so excellent, That were I in the
least interested in you, I cannot doubt of happiness; and so with many words to
the like purpose, courted me, I told him, and indeed could not but much wonder,
that at so small a glance he could be so presumptuous with a stranger, to hint
this to me; but all I could say, would not beat him off: And presently
afterward he having intercepted my Letter, by which he understood how my
affairs stood, and how considerable my means were, he still urged me to marry
him; and immediately by the contrivance of his friends, gaping at my fortune, I
was hurried to Church to be married, which the Parson at first did without
License, to secure me to my Husband, and sometime after had a License.

And my Husbands Father afterward considering I had a considerable fortune,
pressed me, that in respect I had no relations here, and because, says he, we
are mortal, you would do well to make over your Estate to my Son your Husband;
it will be much for your honor, satisfaction of the world, and for which you
will be Chronicled for a rare woman: and perceiving he had not baited his hook
sufficient (with some fair pretenses) to catch me then, he and his Son, who
were both willing to make up some of their former losses in circumventing me of
what I had, they robbed me of my Jewels, and Cloths of great value, and
afterward pretended they were counterfeit Jewels, and declared that I had
formerly been married to one at Canterbury, which place I know not; and this
grounded on a Letter (of their own framing) sent from Dover, with a description
of me; that I was a young fat woman; full brested; that I spoke several
languages; and therefore they imagined me the person; and so violently carried
me from my lodging before a Justice of Peace, only to affright me, that I might
make my Estate over to them. The Justice having heard their several
allegations, could not commit me, unless they would be bound to prosecute me;
which my Husband being unwilling to, the Justice demanded of his Father whether
he would prosecute me, saying, they must not make a fool of him; and so after
some whisperings, the Father and his Son were both bound to prosecute, and
thereupon I was committed to prison: And since that, these people have been up
and down the Country, and finding none there that could justify any thing of
this matter, they get here an unknown fellow, unless in a prison, and from
thence borrowed, you cannot but all judge to swear against me. My Lord, were
there any such marriage as this fellow pretends, methinks there might be a
Certificate from the Minister, or place; certainly if married, it must be
registered: but there is no Registry of it and so can be no Certificate no
Minister nor Clerk to be found: and if I should own a marriage, then you see
that great witness cannot t^ll you whether I was lawfully married, or how ^ but
it is enough for him (if such a paultry fellow may be believed) to say, I was
married. I was never yet married to any but John Charlton, the late pretended
Lord: But these persons have sought always to take away my life, bring persons
to swear against me, one hired with Five pounds, and another old fellow
persuaded to own me for his Wife; who came to the prison, and seeing another
woman, owned her, and afterward my self, and indeed any body. If such an old
inconsiderable fellow had heretofore woed me, it must have been for want of
discretion, as Charleton did for want of money; but I know of no such thing:
Several scandals have been laid upon me, but no mortal flesh can truly touch
the least hair of my head for any such like offense; they have framed this of
themselves. My Lord, I am a stranger, and a forreigner; and being informed
there is matter of Law in this trial for my life, my Innocence shall be my
Counselor, and your Lordsh^ps my Judges, to whom I wholly refer my Cause:
Since I have been in prison, several from Canterbury have been to see me,
pretending themselves (if I were the person as was related) to be my school
mates; and when they came to me, the Keeper can justify, they all declared
they did not know me.


Court. Knot, You said she lived near you at Canterbury; What woman or man
there have you to prove she lived there? have you none in that whole City,
neither for love of Justice nor Right, will come to say she lived there?


Knot. I believe I could fe^ch one.


Court. Well said, are they to fetch still?


Prisoner. My Lord, I desire some Witnesses may be heard in my behalf.


Elizabeth Collier examined.

My Lord, my Husband being a Prisoner in the Gatehouse, I came there to see my
Husband, and did work there a days; and where came in an old man, his name was
Billing, he said he had a wife there; says Mr. Baley go in and find her out;
and he said I was his Wife, turned my hood, and put on his spectacles, looks
upon me, and said I was the same woman his wife; and afterward said I was not,
and so to others: I can say no more.


Jane Finch ex^mined.

My Lord, there came a man and woman one night, and knocked at my door; I came
down, they asked to speak with one Jane Finch; I am the person, said I; We
understand, said they, you know Mrs Charleton now in prison; Not I, said I, I
only went to see her there; said they, be not scrupulous, if you will go and
justify any thing against her, we will give you 5 l.


Court. Who are those two?


Finch. I do not know them, My Lord.


Mr. Baley examined.

My Lord, there has been at least 500. people have viewed her; several from
Canterbury, 40 at least that said they lived there; and when they went up to
her, she h^d not her face at all, but not one of them knew her.


Court. What Country woman are you?


Prisoner. I was born in Cullen in Germany.


Court. Mr. Charlton, How came you to understand she was married formerly?


Charlton elder. I received a Letter from the Recorder of Canterbury to that
purpose.


Prisoner. They that can offer 5 l. to swear against me, can also frame a
Letter against me: They say I was 19 years of age about 9 years ago, and am now
but 21.


Court. Mr. Charlton, you heard what Knot said; he said she lived near him 4.
years a wife, why did not you get some body else from thence to testify this?


Charleton, Here was one Davis that was at her Fathers house, and spoke with
him --


Court. Where is he?


Charlton. I know not; he was here.


Court. You were telling the Court of a former Indictment against her, what was
that for?


Charlton. She was indicted for having two husbands, Stedman of Canterbury her
first Husband, and Day of D^ver Surgeon, her second Husband. The Indictment
was Traversed the year before His Majesty came to England, she was found not
guilty.


Court. Who was at that trial?


Charlton. One here in Court was of the Jury; but that party said there was
such a trial, but knows not that this is the Woman.


Judge Howel. Gentlemen of the Jury, you see this Indictment is against Mary
Moders, otherwise Stedman, and it is for having two husbands, both at one time
alive; the first Stedman, afterward married to Charlton, her former husband
being alive. You have heard the proof of the first marriage, and the proof does
depend upon one witness, that is Knot; and he indeed does say, he was at the
marriage, gave her, and he names one Man the Parson that married her, that he
is dead; none present there but the married couple that must needs be there,
the Parson, this witness, her sister, and the Sexton; that he knows not what is
become of the Sexton. All the Evidence given on that side to prove her guilty
of this Indictment, depends upon his single testimony. It is true, he says she
was married at Canterbury, but the particulars or the manner of the marriage he
does not so well remember; whether by the Book of Common Prayer, or otherwise,
but they lived together for four years, had two Children. If she were born
there, married there, had two Children there, and lived there so long, it were
easy to have brought some body to prove this; that is all that is material for
the first marriage.

For the second, there is little proof necessary, she confesses her self
married to Charlton, and owns him; the question is, Whether she was married to
Stedman, or not?

You have heard what defense she has made for her self, some Witnesses on her
behalf; if you believe that Knot, the single witness, speaks the truth so far
forth to satisfy your Conscience, That that was a marriage, she is guilty. You
see what the Circumstances are, it is penal, if guilty, she must die; a Woman
has no Clergy, she is to die by the Law, if guilty. You heard she was Indicted
at Dover for having two Husbands, Stedman the first, and Day the second. There
it seems by that which they have said, she was acquitted; none can say this was
the Woman, that there was a trial, may be believed; but whether this be the
woman tried or acquitted, does not appear? One here that was of that Jury,
says, there was a trial, but knows not that this is the Woman. So that upon the
whole. It is left to you to consider of the Evidence you have heard, and so to
give your Evidence.


The Jury went forth, and after some short Consultation, returned to their
places.

Their names were called, and all answered.

Clerk of the Peace. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Clerk. Who shall say for you?


Jury. The Foreman.


Clerk. Mary Moders alias Stedman hold up thy hand; look upon her Gentlemen,
what say you. Is she guilty of the Felony whereof she stands indicted, or not
guilty?


Foreman. Not guilty.


And thereupon a great number of people being in and about the Court, hissed
and clapped their hands.

Clerk. Did she fly for it?


Foreman. Not that we know.


Afterward she desired, that her Jewels and Clothes taken from her, might be
restored to her: The Court acquainted her, that they were her Husbands, and
that if any detained them from her, he might have his remedy at Law: She
charging old Mr. Charlton with them, he declared they were already in the
custody of his Son her Husband.

FINIS.

