June the 8th. 1696.
I Do appoint Samuel Heyrick, and Isaac Cleave, to Print the Trials of Charles
Cranburne, and Robert Lowick, and that no other person presume to Print the
same.

I. Holt.

THe Trials of Charnock, King, and Keys, as likewise of Sir John Friend, and
Sir William Parkyns, and Ambrose Rookwood, are all Printed and Sold by Samuel
Heyrick, and Isaac Cleave.

THE ARRAIGNMENTS, TRIALS AND CONDEMNATIONS OF Charles Cranburne, and Robert
Lowick, FOR THE Horrid and Execrable Conspiracy to Assassinate His Sacred
Majesty King WILLIAM, in order to a French Invasion of this Kingdom. Who upon
full Evidence were found Guilty of HIGH TREASON, BEFORE His Majesty's Justices
of Oyer and Terminer at Westminster, and Received Sentence the 22d. of April,
1696. And were Executed at Tyburn the 29th. of the said Month. In which Trials
are contained All the Learned Arguments of the King's Council, and likewise the
Council for the Prisoners, upon the New Act of Parliament for Regulating Trials
in Cases of Treason.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Heyrick at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, and Isaac
Cleave at the Star, next to Sergeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, M. DC. XCVI.

Die Martis Vicesimo primo Die Aprilis, Anno Domini, 1696. Annoque Regni Regis
Gulielmi Tertii, Octavo.
At the Session of Oyer and Terminer for the County of Middlesex, Sitting in
the Court of King's Bench at Westminster.
AFTER the Trial of Ambrose Rookwood was over, while the Jury were withdrawn to
Consider of their Verdict, the Court proceeded in this manner.

L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Attorney Who will you have tried next?


Mr. At. Genesis Cranburne. if your Lordship pleases.


Cl. of Arr. Then, Keeper of Newgate, set Charles Cranburne to the Bar.


L. C. J* Holt. You, Gentlemen, that are of Council for the Prisoner, if you
have any thing to move for your Clyent, you may move it; but first let the
Prisoner be here.


Then Charles Cranburne was brought to the Bar in Irons.

L. C. J. Holt. Look you, Keeper. You should take off the Prisoners Irons when
they are at the Bar, for they should stand at their ease when they are Tried.


Keeper. My Lord, We have no Instruments here to do it just now.


Cl. of Arr. You may send to the Gate House and borrow Instruments.


Mr. J. Powel. It should be done indeed; they ought to plead at ease.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, go on Sir Bartholomew Shower.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, before Sir Bartholomew Shower enter upon his
Exceptions, unless those Exceptions of his are some of the particulars
mentioned in this Act, he must not do it now, after Plea pleaded, before the
Trial; but he must do it in Arrest of Judgment.


L. C. J. Treby. It is true, Regularly; but let him use his own Judgment.


L. C. J. Holt. It is very true; the course has not been to allow them to move
to Quash an Indictment for Treason, or Felony; but it may be done.


Mr. At. Genesis Sure it must be only for such things as they cannot take
advantage of in Arrest of Judgment after the Verdict.


L. C. J. Holt. It has not been the course, but it may be done.


Mr. At. Genesis Not where there is an Issue joined, and a Jury returned to Try
that Issue; I believe that never was done, nor attempted.


L. C. J. Treby. If there were any prejudice to the King by it, it were not fit
for us to alter the course; but let us hear what his Exceptions are.


Sir B. Shower I have several Exceptions; Five at least; one of them is within
the very words of the Act, that is, improper Latin; I am sure some of it is so.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, let us hear what that is.


Sir B Showers. It says, Anno Regni dicti Domini Regis nunc Septimo, and Lewis
is the last King mentioned before; and so here is no year of the King of
England mentioned. It is a certain Rule, that Relatives must refer to the last
Antecedent, and that Rule holds always, unl^ss there be words that accompany
the Relative, which undeniably show to what it refers.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay; but do we call the French King Dominus Rex?


L. C. J. Treby. He would have been so, if he had succeeded in his Invasion,
and this Ass^ssination.


Sir B. Shower. In every Indictment, if there be occasion to mention a former
King, it is always nuper Rex, and such a one, naming the name of the King,
where the present King's name does intervene, to prevent Confusion; and so in
Civil Actions it is the same; and so it should have been here.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay; but I tell you, it is Dominus Rex nunc, which is Our King.


Mr. Phipps. It is not said Angliae.


L. C. J. Holt. But wherever it is Dominus Rex, we understand it of the King
of England, and no body else. Read the Indictment.


Cl. of Arr. Necnon eundem Dominum Regem ad Mortem and finalem Destructionem
ponere and adducere, ac subditos suos fideles, and Liberos Homines Hujus Regni
Angliae in servitutem intolerabilem, and miserrimam Ludovico Regi Gallico
subjugare, and Mancipare, Decimo Die Februarij, Anno Regni Dicti Domini Regis,
nunc Septimo, and Diversis aliis Diebus, etc.


L. C. J. Holt. Can any man imagine this to be the French King?


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, Your Lordship is not to imagine one way or other.


Mr. Cowper. In the strictest Sense and Grammar in the World, it must mean King
William, and no other. We do not need any imagination, when in the strictest
Construction, it is plain who it refers to.


Sir B. Shower. I am sure no Grammar can make it good; nothing but a
supposition can help it.


Mr. Cowper. When it is said, Dictus Dominus Rex, if Sir Bartholomew Shower can
find out another Dominus Rex in the Indictment, then he may make something of
his Objection; but the Dominus is only applied to our own King throughout.


L. C. J. Treby. Besides, as to the Rule that Sir Bartholomew Shower mentions,
it is that ad proximum Antecedens fiat Relatio nisi impediat Sententia. That Is
the Restriction of the Rule, it must relate to the next Antecedent, unless the
sense would be prejudiced; but here if this Construction should be, it would
make this Clause to be no better than nonsense, viz. That the Subjects and
Freemen of this Realm were to be brought into intolerable Slavery to Lewis the
French King, such a Day in the Seventh year of the Reign of our Lord the French
King.


Sir B. Shower. We say it is little better then Nonsense, I am sure it is
loose, and uncertain, and not Grammar, but carries a new Form with it.


L. C. J. Holt. No, It is as well as it can be.


Sir B. Shower. Then, My Lord, there is another Exception; it is said, Diversis
Diebus and Vicibus tam antea quam postea; and then afterward it says, postea
scilicet eodem Decimo Die Februarij; that is repugnant; it is as much as to
say, That upon the Tenth of February, and two days afterward (to wit) the said
Tenth day of February; that is, after two days after the Tenth of February,
viz. upon the same Tenth day.


Mr. At. Genesis That Postea is another Sentence, and relates to other matters.


Sir B. Shower. It cannot in propriety of Speech be said to be afterward the
same day.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If Sir Bartholomew Shower remembers the Evidence that we have
given this day, he will find it was in Fact so; they met on the Saturday
Morning, and afterward met again the Night of the same Day.


L. C. J. Holt. There is nothing in that Objection sure, it is a Common Form,
when they tell of Different matters.


Sir B. Shower. Well then, if you will hear the rest which are not of the same
nature, we shall come to what we think a fatal Exception; we say this
Indictment of High Treason being against a Subject born, ought to have had the
words in it, Contra Supremum naturalem Ligeuni Dominum suum; according to
Calvin's Case in the 7th Report. Fol* Septimo.


L. C. J. Holt. It is Contra Ligeantiae suae Debitum, is it not?


Sir B. Shower. That will not help it, My Lord, for all that is applicable to an
Alien Born: And so is the Case in my Lord Dyer, 144. where it is said, That if
an Indictment of Treason be against an Alien, you must not put in the word
naturalem, if you do, it will be faulty, because he owes but a Local Allegiance
to the King of England; and not a natural one. Now we say, there are none of
these Prisoners but are Subjects born, and the constant Form in Queen
Elizabeth's Time, and Queen Mary's, was to put in the word Naturalem Dominum,
and they cannot show me any of those Presidents. without it. There was occasion
in Tucker's Case to look into this matter, and search all the Presidents. I
have looked into my Lord Coke's Entries, and all the Presidents; I have seen my
Lord of Essex's Indictment, and all the others in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and
those of the Traitors in the Powder Plot, and those of the Regicides, and
Tuckers own Indictment it self; all along it is Naturalem Dominum suum; and the
reason for it is, he that is Alien born, you never put in naturalem Dominum
suum, because he owes a double Allegiance; one Natural, to his own King under
whose Dominion he was born, and the other Local, to the King in whose Dominions
he resides, for he is bound to observe the Laws of the place where he lives:
And if he violate them, he does break the Allegiance that he owes to the
Government where he lives, upon account of the Protection he enjoys under it.
But if he be born a Subject of the King of England, he has but one natural
Liege-Lord; and he being an Englishman born, the King stands in that Relation
to him, as he does to all his Native Subjects, but not to Foreigners; and
therefore it was thought requisite to be, and has always been inserted into
Indictments of Treason against Subjects born. And my Lord, we think the very
Resolution of the Court, afterward affirmed in the House of Lords that
Reversed Tucker's Attainder, went upon this Opinion, That the Law required
naturalem Ligeum Dominum to be put in. There the Exception was, that Contra
Debitum Legeanciae suae was omitted; To which it was Objected, that there was
Dominum Supremum Naturalem, which was Equivalent: No, it was answered, both
were requisite, because every act charged in the Indictment ought to be laid
against the Duty of his Allegian^e. Now in Indictments of Treason, there are
certain words that are essential, because of their Relation between the King
and his People. There are certain Forms of words, which if the constant
practice has been to make use of them, the omission is an Error. Those usual
Forms ought to be observed, and the want of them will be a fatal Exception; so
we think it would be in this Case, as much as if the word proditorie had been
left out; or as if in a Case of Felony and Burglary, the words Felonice, and
Burglariter had been left out.


Mr. Phipps. My Lord, we take the Practice, and Presidents to be the Rule of
Law in the Case; and I have looked over a great many Presidents, besides those
that Sir Bartholomew Shower has Cited; and I never saw any one President of an
Indictment of Treason against a Subject born without the word naturalem; and
all the Cases cited by Sir Bartholomew Shower are full in the point. Courteer's
Case in my Lord Hobbart, 271. where it is said, that if there be an Indictment
against a Subject born, it must be Contra naturalem Dominum; if against an
Alien, naturalem must be left out. To say Contra Legiantiae suae Debuum will
not do, it is not enough, for that may be said against an Alien, because he
owes a Local Allegiance, though not a Natural one. And I take it, upon this
difference, this Indictment is not good.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I do not know how far you will think it proper to enter
into this matter before the Trial.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Attorney. I think you had as good speak to it now as at
another time; though I must confess it is not so proper in point of practice.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, My Lord, then we will speak to it now. The Objection is,
That the word naturalem Dominum is not in the Indictment; which they say is
contrary to the usual Form: As to the Presidents, there are a great many where
it has been, and I am sure a great many where it has not been; and I am sure
for this Six, Seven or Eight Years last past, it has always been omitted: And,
with Submission to your Lordship, it is not at all necessary: If there be words
in the indictment which show, that what he did was against the Duty of his
Allegiance to his Lawful and Undoubted Lord (which are the words in this
Indictment). It is true, if he be not a Subject born, naturalem cannot be in,
because that is contradictory to the Obedience which he owes, for it is not a
Natural Obedience that he owes, but a Local; but if a Man be a Subject born,
and commits Treason against the Allegiance that he ows, that is against his
natural Allegiance; for whatsoever he does against his Allegiance, he does
against his natural Allegiance, and so there is no need to put in the word
naturalem; because he owes no other Allegiance but that; it is sufficient if
that be put in which shows its being against his Allegiance. If they could show
that a Subject born has two Allegiances, one that is natural, and the other
that is not natural; then if you would prosecute him you must show, whether it
was against his Natural, or against his other Allegiance. But when he has none
but a natural Allegiance, certainly against his Allegiance, without putting in
natural, will be well enough. It is true where there is no natural Allegiance,
it must be wrong if you put it in, because you put in that Allegiance which he
does not owe; but where he is a Subject born, to put in natural Liege-Lord
there is no ground at all for it; there are words enough that show it was against
his Allegiance to his Lawful and Undoubted Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Look you, Sir Bartholomew Shower, how does it appear, that
these Men are Subjects born? The matter you go upon does not appear upon the
Indictment, and you are not to go off from that.


Sir B. Shower. Every man is presumed to be so, unless the contrary appears.


L. C. J. Holt. You quote Calvin's Case, and the other Cases that are there
put; those are all Cases of Aliens; there is Dr. Lopez's Case; He being an
Alien comes into England, and commits High Treason: Why, say they, how shall we
Indict this man? We cannot say it is Contra Naturalem Dominam suam; for he owes
no Natural Allegiance to the Queen of England; How shall we do to frame a good
Indictment against this man? They considered of this; and they said it will be
a good Indictment, to charge him with High Treason, or any one else, leaving
out the word Naturalem: For if it appear he has committed an Offense against
the Laws of the Kingdom, and against the Duty of his Allegiance, which is
High Treason, that is enough. Now as to Tucker's Case, it was Reversed for want
of the Conclusion, contra Debitum Ligeantiae suae. Those words are material;
for let the Offense be never so much against the Person of the King, as to
Assassinate him, or Levy War against him, yet still if it be not against the
Duty of his Allegiance, as it cannot be if he owes him none, it is not
High Treason. And therefore if it be against his Allegiance, whether that
Allegiance be Natural, or Local, it is all one, it is enough to make it
High Treason.


Mr. Soll. Genesis In that Case in Dyer, they show where it was a fault to put the
word in, but they can show no Case where it has been adjudged to be a fault to
leave the word out.


L. C. J. Holt. No doubt it would be a fault to have that in, Contra Naturalem
Dominum suum, where there is only a Local Allegiance due.


Mr. Phipps. How does it appear whether it is the one or the other that is due?


L. C. J. Holt. It is no matter whether the one or the other do appear, it is
High Treason be it the one or the other, if it be against the Duty of his
Allegiance.


Mr. Phipps. Suppose an Indictment against an Alien were, Contra Naturalem
Dominum.


L. C. J. Holt. That would be ill, because then you had laid it more specially,
and otherwise than really it is, and restrained it where you ought not to do it.


Mr. Phipps. How then, my Lord, shall it appear that he only owed a Local
Obedience?


L. C. J. Holt. It may be given in Evidence, That he is an Alien born.


Mr. Soll. Genesis He may plead it in abatement to the Indictment.


L. C. J. Holt. He ought to be acquitted, for you have Indicted him of a Crime
against his Natural Allegiance, when he owes no such. But Allegiance generally
comprehends all sorts of Allegiance, Natural, and Local.


Sir. B. Shower. How then, my Lord, come all the Lawyers of all Ages to put in
those words in Indictments of High Treason against Subjects born?


L. C. J. H. No, I have seen Abundance of Precidents, that have only Crontra
Legiaentiae suae Debitum Generally, and for the most part are; for Allegiance
is the Genus, and if that be suggested, all the species are contained under
that.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, have they any more.


Sir B. Shower. Yes, we have more.


Sir B. Shower. Well, you shall have them all in time. My Lord, here is another
Objection, and that is this; here is one fact that they have laid, and that is
the Second Overt Act in this Indictment, that they Consented and Agreed that
Forty Men (Whereof these Four were to be Four) but do not lay it to be done
Traitorously. They say Consenserunt Agreaverunt and Assenserunt, but not
proditorie; and I never saw an Indictment that laid an express Overt Act,
without Repeating the Word again. If your Lordship pleases, the Words in the
Indictment are thus; as to the first Overt Act, it is laid in this manner, Et
ad execrabilem Assassinationem illam exequend. at such a time and such a place
proditorie tractaverunt proposuerunt and Consultaverunt devijs modis and medijs
et etc, and then comes this which we except against; and Consenserunt
Agreaverunt and Assencerunt quod Quadraginta Homines etc. Now this is a plain
Distinct Act, and there is no proditorie to it; and if ever they can show me
any Indictment, in which an Overt Act was laid, of which they gave any
Evidence, and it had not the Word proditorie in it I am very much mistaken. I
am sure, I never saw any such. And it is not enough to say, that the nature of
the thing is such, as that it cannot but be a Treasonable Act; but they must
alledg it to be so, by the express use of that Word, which the Law has
appointed to express this Crime by. In the Case of an Indictment for Felony, if
it be not said Felony, it is not good. They are not to Discribe that by
Circumlocution, which is a particular Crime fixed by Law, they must use the
Verba Artis, the terms of Art, and no other: If your Lordship pleases it may be
read.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Let it be red if you please; but take it in English, and it is
no more then this, they Did Traitorously Compass the Death of the King, and for
that purposs they Did Traitorously meet, and Consult about the ways and means,
and did Consent and agree that Forty Men, etc.


Cl. of Arr. Reads, Et ad exrcrabilem Horrendam and Detestabilem
Assassinationem Anglice Assassination and Interfectionem illam Citus exequendum
and anno ac Diversis alijs Diebus and Vicibus apud parochiam predictam in
Comitatu predicto proditorie tractaverunt, proposuerunt and Consultaverunt de
vijs modis and medijs ac Tempore and Loco ubi quando qualiter and quomodo
Dictum Dominum Regem sic ex Incidijs facilius Interficerent.


Sir B. Shower. There is an end of that, now go on.


Mr. At. Genesis No, Sir Bartholomew, you mistake there is no end of it, that is
done at the same time with that which follows.


Sir B. Shower. No it it is not the same Overt Act; but let him go on.


Cl. of Arr. Et Consenserunt Agreaverunt and Essenserunt quod quadraginta
Homines Equestres.


Sir B. Shower. Well, you need read no further for our Objection. We say, there
wants the Word Proditorie: For there are two Overt Acts, the one is, that they
Trayerously did Consult of the ways and means, how to Kill the King, and that
Overt Act we agree to be well laid: But then it says they Consented, and agreed
that there should be Forty Men, whereof these Four should be Four, but does not
say they Traitorously agreed are not these Distinct Acts?


Mr. Phillips. Surely, My Lord, they are distinct Acts, for this part of the
Indictment upon which Sir Bartholomew grounds his Objection, is that Overt Act
of which the List in Mr. Rookwood's case was urged by the Kings Council, and
agreed by the Court to be an Evidence.


Then the Jury against Mr. Rookwood came in, and delivered in their Verdict, as
it is in his Trial, then afterward the Court went on thus.

Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, the Objection is, that proditorie is not in Incerted
into that Particular Clause of the Indictment, which shows there Particular
agreement that there should be Forty Men, whereof the Four named in the
Indictment were to be Four. Now your Lordship Observes how the Indictment Runs,
it is for Compassing and Imagining the Death and Destruction of the King; and
it setsforth for this purpose, that to effect this Compassing and Imagination,
they Proditorie tractaverunt and Consultaverunt de vijs medijs and Modis, how
they should Kill the King. Now that which Imediatley follows after is, the
particular method, and means that were agreed upon, that is, that there should
be Forty Men. Now this is the strangest suggestion that ever was, when we have
set forth, that Traitorously they Did so agree of the ways and means, and then
set forth the particular means that here must be proditorie again to that. This
is such a Construction as I cannot but admire how it could come into any ones
head. It is part of the sentence; for the other part, as we have laid it, is
not Complete before: It may be it might be sufficient without setting forth the
particular way, and means, but when it is set forth, it is part of the
sentence, and Refers to the first beginning.


L. C. J. Holt. Aye sure so it does.


Mr. At. Genesis I cannot tell what they would have unless they would have us
repeat the Word proditorie in every line.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Or before every Verb.


Sir B. Shower. No, but I think it ought to be repeated at every Overt Act.


Mr. Conyers. If your Lordship pleases, after that they have set forth that
this was the particular method and way agreed upon at their Consultation, that
Forty Horsemen or thereabouts should go about it, of which the Persons Indicted
were to be Four, it goes on, and Quilibet eorum proditorie super se Suscepit
esse unum there it is put in, and it appears to be as particular as possible
can be.


Mr. Cowper. Sir Bartholomew Shower says, that when we have Alleged that they
did Traitorously treat, propose, and Consult of the means and ways of Killing
the King, there we have done the sentence and made that one Overt Act. Now how
is the sentence done? The next Word is a Conjunction Copulative, and
Consenserunt, etc. And what is the use of a Conjunction Copulative? But to
Convey the Force of the Words in a Former sentence to the sentence following,
and to prevent the Repetition of every Word in the subsequent sentence that was
in the precedent: But it is plain, they are both one and the same Overt Act,
and these subsequent Words are only an Explanation, more particularly of the
Overt Act setforth in the precedent Words.


Sir B. Shower. In answer to that, that has been said, if they show me any
precedent, where an Indictment has been for High Treason, setting forth several
Overt Acts, and not the Word proditorie set to every Overt Act, then they
answer my Objection. If the Word Quod had come in, that would have made them
distinct to be sure; and I think they are as distinct Acts now; suppose they
had Concluded at the end of the word Interficerent that had been a good Overt
Act, I am sure they will agree that: And if it be so, then the other is a good
Overt Act too. For it is a distinct thing from that which was a perfect
sentence before; and it either requires a likewise or the Word Proditorie must
be repeated. They have not so much as said similiter Consenterunt or simili
modo there is an (and) indeed, but that does not so Couple the sentences
together, as not to make them distinct Acts. There are several ets thorough the
whole Indictment, but that does not, as Mr. Cowper would have it, Couple
altogether to make one Overt Act.


Mr. Phipps. My Lord, if what Mr. Cowper says be allowed, (viz.) that the and
makes it one entire Sentence, then there is no Overt Act at all, for after the
Treason alleged and the Clause is coupled to another by an Et, and
consequently by Mr. Cowper's way of arguing the whole Indictment is but one
entire Sentence.


L. C. J. Holt. I do not understand your meaning as to that, they tell you
Preditore it is alleged to the Consulting, Contriving and Agreeing, then they
tell you what was the subject Matter of that Contrivance and Agreement to
Assassinate the King, and in order to that they agreed there should be 40 Men,
is not that good enough, without Proditore to every line.


Sir B. Shower. No it is not said in Ordine ad, there is no such thing; but
only they did Consult of the Ways and Means, and did Agree that 40 Horsemen
should do it, and afterward did agree to provide Horses and Instruments of
War. Now that being with a Qoud que, they say makes a new Overt Act; but I
cannot understand why Qoud que is not as much a Copulative as Et, and the one
should not have the same effect as the other.


L. C. J. Holt. First it tells you there was a Consult and Agreement to
Assassinate the King, and for the Accomplishing of the said Assassination,
afterward eisdem die and Anno Proditorie Tractaverunt and Consultaverunt de
vijs and modis, how they should Kill the King.


Sir B. Shower. That is one Overt Act, say we, and there you should stop.


L. C. J. Holt. Et Consenserunt and Agreaverunt quod quadraginta Homines, etc.
it is all at the same time, and must be Intended the same Consult and
Contrivance; that they Consulted of the ways and means, and then agreed so many
Men should be provided.


Mr. Phipps. No, My Lord, we say that is another Overt Act.


L. C. J. Treby. It seems to me to be a specifying, and particularising the way
and means, that they had Consulted of, and Concluded on.


Sir B. Shower, If it had been a specifying, it had been much better to put in
either then and there, or that this was the Result of the Consultation.


L. C. J. Treby. It does seem to me so, that it was the Result of the
Consultation, and it is well enough.


Sir B. Shower. If this be well enough, I do not know, what will not be well
enough.


L. C. J. Holt. You had better have saved these kind of Exceptions 'till the
Trial was over.


Sir B. Shower. But, my Lord, if there be one Overt Act ill laid, I submit it
whether they can give any Evidence of that Overt Act.


L. C. J. Treby. No doubt of that they cannot; but we think it is as well laid
as it could be laid.


L. C. J. Holt. Truly I am not well satified, that it is necessary after you
have laid the Proditorie, as to the particular Treason, to lay it again to the
Overt Act. For the Overt Act is but Evidence of the Treason: The Treason it
self lies in the Compassing which is an Act of the mind.


L. C. J. Treby. You cannot Indict a Man of Treason for Assassinating or
Killing the King; but you must in every such Case frame the Indictment upon the
Article for Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King; which must be laid
to be done Traitorously. Then when afterward you say the Person accused did
Wound him, or Imprison him, or Consult and agree to Assassinate Him, or did
actually Assassinate Him, these are but so many Overt Acts of Compassing the
Death, and you having first said that he did Proditorie compass and imagine the
King's Death, you have thereby shown that you charge him with a greater Offense
then Felony (which my Lord Coke says is the use of the word Proditorie,) and
that being thus done, I do not apprehend it to be necessary that you should ad
Proditorie to all the rest of the following particulars* for they are only
external Discoveries of the inward Treason; and more properly deemed to be
lividence of the Treason, than to be the Treason it self.


L. C. J. Holt. The Treason is consummate in the Intention, besides the words
of the Statute make that the Treason, not the Overt Act, that is but Evidence,
and so it was held, (not upon this Exception, but upon the reason that my Lord
Speaks off) in Case of the Regecides of King Charles the First, That the
Indictment should not be for Killing the King, but for Compassing and Imagining
his Death; and the Killing was alleged as an Overt Act.


Sir B. Shower. It must be so if it were for levying of War.


L. C. J. Holt. Most true, for levying the War is the Treason, but in this Case
we think it is no exception.


Mr. At. Genesis Thent let us have the Fifth.


Sir B. Shower. Then, my Lord, here is another Thing. It is a Question whether
there be any Overt Act presented by the Jury at all. The Indictment says,
Juratores pro Domino Rege presentant, that they as false Traitors did Compass
the Death of the King, and the Slaughter of his Subjects, and they did Meet,
and Consult, and Agree how to do it, Et ijdem Christopherus Knightley and the
rest, to fulfill their said Traiterous Intentions and Imaginations did.
Afterward the tenth of February Buy Arms and Horses. Now our Objection is,
that it does not appear, that any one of these Overt Acts are the presentment
of the Jury; With Submission they ought to have begun it again, either with a
Quodque, or something that should have referred it to the first, Juratores
presentant, or else they must have begun quite again, with a Juratores Ulterius
presentant, and not have coupled them as this is with an ulterius presentant,
and not have Coupled them as this is with an Et. The most forms begin with an
Ulterius presentant, but here we find no Overt Act is so Introduced. They might
present part, and not present the other part, for any thing that does appear.
Every Thing ought to be laid positively, as the Jury's. Dictum, it may be only
the Clerks saying, and not the Juries, for any thing that does appear. Your
Lordship remembers the Case of the King and Trobridge: Trobridge upon a Writ of
Error to Reverse a Judgment for Erecting and Continuing a Cottage against the
form of the Statute, now Contra formam Statuti was in the beginning of the
Indictment; but not in the Conclusion; to the Erecting, but not to the
Continuing. And tho there was there Juratores, Ulterius dicunt, it was not
super Sacramentum suum, and they did not say, he did continue it against the
Statute, and there being no formal, presentment that he maintained the Cottage
notwithstanding the Act, Et did no so Couple it to the first part, as to make
it a good presentment. So we say in this Case, this is a fault, and different
from all the Common Forms; there ought to be a Direct presentment of each Overt
Act, and not Coupled by an Et. For Et will not do it; for it is a Distinct
Overt Act every one, and should have been Et Quod Consultaverunt, quodque
Agreaverunt, that a certain number should do so and so, and to be sure, it
should have been so at the last Overt Act, which is only, Et ijdem
Christophorus Knightley did Buy Arms and Horses. Now this last Et, being a
loose Conjunction Copulative, in common Sense ought to Refer to that which they
had agreed upon, for that is last mentioned there, and the natural Sense leads
thither, and not to the beginning of the Bill Juratores presentant quod.


Mr. Phipps. I shall not trouble your Lordship further, they ought to have put
in a Quodque, or an Ulterius presentant.


Mr. At. Genesis Where would you have the Quodque, or the Vlterius presentant?


Mr. Phipps. Either to every Overt Act, or at least to that last.


Mr. At. Ge. The Indictment setsforth, that they Committed such, and such
Treason; Their objection is that Quodque is not put in to every overt Act, and
our Answer is, That the first Quod governs all that relates to that Treason. It
may be if there were two distinct Treasons in the Indictment, when you come to
set forth the Second Treason, you should say Juratores ulterius presentant the
Second Treason; but the Overt Acts to prove the same Treason, are all parts of
that Treason, and make but one Species of Treason, which is the imagining the
Death of the King. There Is the Treason; and to bring it to pass, they did so,
and so: This, my Lord, must be part of the finding of the Jury as well as the
Treason it self, of which these are the Overt Acts. But then if you will lay
the levying of War in the same Indictment, then it may be you must say
Juratores ulterius presentant quod, etc. But it had been a strange Absurdity to
say, Juratores ulterius presentant such and such Overt Acts: For the Overt Act
is not a further Indictment, but only a setting forth that which is Evidence,
upon which they found the Indictment for Treason.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What the Indictment says, is a direct Affirmation as can be all
along in the Presentment of the Jury, that the Prisoner and others did compass
and imagine the Death of the King, and to bring it about, they did consult
together, and did agree to make use of such and such Means, and were to have a
Party of 40 Men, and they bought Arms and Horses. Now it does not repeat
quodque, or ulterius presentant quod, to every one of those Sentences, that
they did so and so, and that they did so and so. Now I would feign know the
Difference between saying, and they did such a thing, and saying, and that they
did such a thing. That Is all the Difference that they think to overturn this
Indictment for. The omitting of a Juratores ulterius presentant, certainly is
nothing; for the first Presentment runs through the whole Indictment, and there
does not need an Vlterius.


Sir B. Shower. Certainly there should have been a Quodque at least.


L. C. J. Holt. No indeed, I think it is better as it is, than as you would
have had it; because the first Quod goes through the whole, That in Order
thereunto he did so and so, would you have it said and quod in Order thereunto
he did so and so, but that may be good Sense, I think it is not so good as the
other. This Indictment is for one sort of Treason, and that is, for compassing
the Death of the King; and it is, I think, more proper to have but one Quod,
than to have more; for it makes the whole Indictment more entire. As to the
Juratores ulterius presentant, that is never proper, where the Species of
Treason is the same: For indeed if there had been two distinct Treasons, the
one for compassing the Death of the King, and the other for levying of War, in
that Case you must bring it in by ulterius presentant: because they are two
several Offenses, though comprisd in one Bill, and they are in Law as two
Indictments. And so it is in the Case that you mentioned of Cottages: It is one
Offense to erect a Cottage, and another Offense to continue a Cottage, and they
are to have several Punishments; and because they were jumbled them both
together in one Indictment, that Indictment was held to be naught: For by Law,
the Indictment for erecting a Cottage, ought to conclude contra formam Statuti,
and then the Jury must begin again, and ulterius presentant quod the Cottage
was continued against the Form of the Statute; because they are several
Offenses. But here the High Treason is but one, and the same Offense, and the
other things are but Overt Acts to manifest this Treason, the compassing the
Death of the King; and truly I think it is better as it is.


Mr. Phipps. I have seen several Precedents of Indictments, where the several
Overt Acts were to the same High Treason, but still they had each an ulterius
presentant.


Mr. At. Genesis I believe it is hard to find many Indictments in the same Words:
I am sure all are not.


L. C. Baron. Is it not as great an Affirmation to say, and they did such a
thing, as to say, and that they did such a thing.


L. C. J. Holt. I cannot reconcile it to my Reason, but it should be as good
Sense without that as with.


L. C. J. Treby. In a long Deed it begins, This Indenture witnesses, that the
Party granted so and so, and the Party Covenants thus and thus; and so it goes
on commonly, without renewing the Word That to the subsequent Clauses: But yet
the first Expression [This Indenture witnesses, that] governs the whole Deed,
though it be many Skins of Parchment.


L. C. J. Holt. If you begin with an Indenture, you begin, That it witnesses
so, and so, without Renewing, unless it be a very distinct Thing.


S. B. Shower. My Lord, we think that Similitude makes for us. A. B. Covenants
so and so in a Conveyance, and then further, that so and so.


L. C. J. Holt. But there you restrain that in the Beginning of the Covenant to
every Particular in that Covenant.


Mr. At. Genesis Will your Lordship please to call the Jury now?


L. C. J. Holt. Have you a Mind to go on with the Trial, or to go to Dinner?


Mr. At. Genesis I believe your Lordship can try but one more to Night, and that
may be as well after Dinner as before.


L. C. J. Holt. Well then, adjourn till 5 a Clock, and in the mean time, you
Keeper, knock off the Prisoners Fetters.


Keeper. They shall, my Lord.


Then the Court adjourned till 5 a Clock in the Afternoon, it being then about
3.

Post Meridiem, the 21st of April, 96. The Court returned, and was resumed
about 6 in the Evening.

Cl. of Ar. Keeper of Newgate, bring Charles Cranburne to the Bar (which was
done) Charles Cranburne, hold up thy Hand. (which he did) Those good Men that
you shall hear called and personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign
Lord the King and you, upon Trial of your Life and Death; and therefore if you
will challenge them or any of them, your time is to speak unto them as they
come to the Book to be sworn, and before they be sworn.


Cranburne. My Lord, I humbly desire I may have Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Court. Aye, Aye. He had them.


Cl. of Ar. Where is George Ford?


Crier. Vouz Avez.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Underhill.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Withers.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Mr. Phipps. If your Lordship pleases, those that were of the last Jury I hope
shall not be called of this Jury: This Prisoner being tried upon the same
Indictment the last was.


L. C. J. Holt. If they be not, it shall be in Ease to them, but it is not in
favor of you.


Mr. Phipps. We humbly conceive, having given their Verdict upon the same
Indictment, they are not such indifferent Persons, as the Law intends they
should be, and think it is good reason they should not serve upon this Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. What though it be upon the same Indictment, the Evidence is not
the same; for they are distinct Offenses.


Mr. Phipps. I do not know whether it be a good Cause of Challenge, but submit
it to your Lordship.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, you may doubt of it if you please, and try the Exception.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Trench.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Wolf.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. James Bodington.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Jonathan Andrews. (He did not appear.) John Raymond.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. George Hawes.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Francis Barry.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Arthur Bailey.


Cranburne. I challenge him; he was upon the last Jury.


L. C. J. Holt. That is no reason; Will you challenge him peremptorily?


Cranburne. I do challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Caine.


Cranburne. I don't except against him.


Cl. of Ar. Hold Mr. Caine the Book, Crier.


Crier. Look upon the Prisoner, Sir. You shall well and truly try, and true
Deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at the
Bar, whom you shall have in Charge, and a true Verdict give, according to your
Evidence, so help you God.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Glover.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Dormer Sheppard. (He did not appear) George Tredway. (He did not
appear) Matthew Bateman, (He did not appear) Timothy Thornbury.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. James Partherich,


Cranburne. I challenge him:


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Freeman. (He did not appear) Robert Bredon.


Cranburne. I do not Except against him.

(he was Sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Joseph Blisset.


Crunburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Timothy Lannoy. (He did not appear) John Harris. (He did not
appear) John Billiers.


Cranburne. I have nothing to say against him.

(he was sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Richard Bourn.


Cranburne. I do not Except against him.

(he was sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. George Carter. (He did not appear.) Francis Chapman.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Alexander Forth.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Nicholas Roberts.


Cranburne. I have nothing to say against him

(he was Sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Thomas Playstead.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Atlee.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Marsh. (He did not appear) Andrew Cook.


Cranburne. I do not Except against him.

(he was sworn)
Cl. of Ar. John Hall.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Partridge.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Peter Levigne.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Moody.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Richard Bealinge.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Evans.


Cranburne I do not Except against him.

(He was sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Thomas Ramage.


Cranburne. I have nothing to say against him.

(he was sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Edward Townsend.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Gunson.


Cranburne. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Philip Wightman.


Cranburne. I say nothing against him.

(he was sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. John Wyborne.


Sir B. Shower. I hope you take an Account of the Challenges, Mr. Hardistey.


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, you should take care of the Challenges, who are his
Council; if he had no Council we would take care of him.


Crier. Here is Mr. Wyborne, What say you to him?


Cranburne. I have nothing to say.

(he was sworn.)
Sir B. Shower. I hope your Lordship will also be of Council for him.


L. C. J. Holt. We are to be equal and indifferent between the King and the
Prisoner: But you that are now his Council by Law, ought to take care that he
lose no Advantage.


Cl. of Ar. William Strode.


Cranburne. I have nothing to say against him.

(he was Sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Daniel Byfield. (He did not appear.) Benjamin Noble. (He did not
appear.) Thomas White.


Cranburne. I do not Except against him.

(he was sworn.)
Cl. of Ar. Crier Countez. John Caine.


Crier. One, etc.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas White:


Crier. Twelve good Men and true, stand together, and hear your Evidence.


The Names of the Twelve Sworn were these, John Caine, Esquire Jur. Robert Bredon,
Esquire Jur. John Billers, Esquire Jur. Richard Bourn, Esquire Jur. Nicholas Roberts, Gent.
Jur. Andrew Cook, Gent. Jur. Thomas Evans, Gent. Jur. Thomas Ramage, Gent. Jur.
Philip Wightman, Gent. Jur. John Wyborn, Gent. Jur. William Strode, Gent. Jur.
and Thomas White, Gent. Jur.


Cl. of Ar. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. Oyez. If any one can inform my Lords the King's Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, the King's Sergeant, or the King's Attorney General, before this
Inquest be taken of the High Treason, whereof the Prisoner at the Bar stands
indicted, let them come forth and they shall be heard; for now the Prisoner
stands at the Bar upon his Deliverance: And als others that are bound by
Recognizance to give Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come
forth, and give their Evidence, or else they forfeit their Recognizance.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Attorney, Do you think we shall be able to try the other to
Night.


Mr. At. Genesis That is according as this holds, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. I speak it for the Ease of the Jury, that they might be
dispatched, and not attend another Day.


Mr. At. Genesis I doubt we cannot try any more than this to Night.


L. C. J. Holt. Well it is no great Matter, it will be but a Morning* Work; it
may be too great a Stress and a Hurry to do any more to Night; and therefore we
will discharge the Jury for to Night, those of them that are not sworn; but we
will be here to Morrow-Morning by seven a Clock; and therefore pray Gentlemen
attend early.


Cl. of Ar. Charles Cranburne, Hold up thy Hand, (which he did) You that are
sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause: He stands indicted by
the Name of Charles Cranburne, late of the Parish of St. Paul Covent Garden, in
the County of Middlesex, Yeoman, for that he with Christopher Knightly, late of
the same Parish and County, Gentleman, Robert Lowick, late of the same Parish
and County, Gentleman, and Ambrose Rookwood, late of the same Parish and County
Gentleman, the Fear of God in their Hearts not having, nor weighing the Duty of
their Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil,
against the most Serene, most Illustrious, most Clement, and most Excellent
Prince, our Sovereign Lord, William the third, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. their supreme,
true, rightful, lawful, and undoubted Lord, the Cordial Love, and the true and
due Obedience, Fidelity and Allegiance which every faithful Subject of our said
Lord the King that now is, toward him our said Lord the King should bear, and
of Right ought to bear, withdrawing and wholly to extinguish intending and
contriving, and with all their Strength, purposing, designing and conspiring
the Government of this Kingdom of England, under him our said Lord the King
that now is, of Right, duly, happily, and very well established, altogether to
subvert, change and alter; as also our said Lord the King to Death and final
Destruction to put and bring, and his faithful Subjects, and the Freemen of
this Kingdom of England into intolerable and most miserable Slavery to Lewis
the French King to subjugate and enthral, the 10th day of Feb. in the 7th year
of the Reign of our said Lord the King that now is, and diverse other days and
times, as well before as after, at the Parish of St. Paul Covent Garden
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously, Devilishly, and
Traitorously did compass, imagine and contrive, purpose, design and intend our
said Lord the King that now is, to slay, kill and murder, and a miserable
Slaughter among the faithful Subjects of him our said Lord the King, throughout
this whole Kingdom of England to make and cause, and their said most Wicked,
Impious, and Devilish Treasons, and Traiterous Compassings, Contrivances and
Purposes aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect, they the said
Christopher Knightley, Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburne,
and very many other false Traitors, to the Jurors unknown. Afterward, to wit
the same Tenth Day of February, in the Year abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid,
in the County aforesaid, and diverse other Days and Times, as well before as
after, there and elsewhere in the same County, falsely, maliciously, advisedly,
secretly, traitorously, and with Force and Arms, did meet, propose, treat,
consult, consent, and agree, him our said Lord the King that now is, by lying
in wait and wile, to Assassinate, Kill and Murder: And that execrable, horrid,
and detestable Assassination and Killing the sooner to execute and perpetrate.
Afterward, to wit, the same Day and Year, and diverse other Days and Times, at
the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, traitorously did treat, propose,
and consult of the Ways, Manner, and Means, and the Time and Place where, when,
how, and in what manner our said Lord the King so by lying in wait the more
easily they might kill: And did consent, agree, and assent, that Forty
Horsemen, or thereabouts (of whom they the said Christopher Knightley, Robert
Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburne, should be four, and every one
of them traitorously took upon himself to be one) with Guns, Muskets, and
Pistols, charged with Gunpowder and Leaden-Bullets, and with Swords, Rapiers,
and other Weapons, armed, should lie in wait, and be in ambush our said Lord
the King, in his Coach being, when he should go abroad, to set upon; and that a
certain and competent Number of those Men so armed, upon the Guards of our said
Lord the King, then attending him, and being with him, should set upon, and
them should fight with, and overcome; whilst others of the same Men so armed,
him our said Lord the King should Assassinate, Slay, Kill and Murder. And they
the said Christopher Knightley, Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles
Cranburne, the Treasons, and all their treasonable Intentions, Purposes and
Contrivances aforesaid to execute, perform, fulfill, and bring to effect.
Afterward, (to wit) the aforesaid Tenth Day of February, in the Seventh Year
abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, diverse Horses, and
very many Arms, Guns, Pistols, Swords and Rapiers, and other Weapons,
Ammunition, and Warlike things, and Military Instruments, falsely, maliciously,
secretly and traitorously did obtain, buy, gather together, and procure; and to
be bought, obtained, gathered together, and procured, did cause with that
intent them in and about the detestable, horrid, and execrable Assassination,
Killing, and Murder of our said Lord the King that now is, as aforesaid, to be
used, employed, and bestowed: And the same Premises the more safely and
certainly to execute, do, and perpetrate, the aforesaid Christopher Knightley,
with one Edward King (late of High Treason in contriving and conspiring the
Death of our said Lord the King that now is, duly convicted and attainted) by
the Consent and Assent of diverse of the Traitors and Conspirators aforesaid,
the aforesaid Tenth Day of February, in the Seventh Year abovesaid,
traitorously did go, and came unto the place proposed, where such intended
Assassination, Killing, and Murder of our said Lord the King, by lying in wait,
should be done, perpetrated and committed, to view, see, and observe the
convenience and fitness of the same place for such lying in Wair,
Assassination, and Killing, there to be done, perpetrated, and committed; and
that place so being seen and observed. Afterward, to wit, the same Day and
Year, his Observations thereof to several of the said Traitors and Conspirators
did relate and impart, to wit, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid; and the said Charles Cranburne the same Day and Year there, in order
the same execrable, horrid, and detestable Assassination and Killing of our
said Lord the King, by the Traitors and Conspirators aforesaid, the more
readily and boldly to execute, perpetrate, and commit, advisedly, knowingly,
and traitorously did bear and carry among diverse of those Traitors and
Conspirators forward and backward from some to others of them, a List of the
Names of diverse Men of them who were designed and appointed our said Lord the
King, so as aforesaid, by lying in wait, to Kill and Murder, against the Duty
of his Allegiance, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King
that now is, his Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in that
Case made and provided. Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and
thereunto has pleaded Not guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon God
and the Country, which Country you are; your Charge is to inquire whether he
be guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty: If you
find him guilty, you are to inquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements,
he had at the time of the High Treason committed, or at any time since: If you
find him not guilty, you are to enquire whether he fled for it: If you find
that he fled for it, you are to inquire of his Goods and Chattels as if you
find him guilty: If you find him not guilty, nor that he did fly for it, you
are to say so and no more; and hear your Evidence.


Mr. Montague. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; This
is an Indictment of High Treason that is found against four Persons; but the
particular Treason against the Prisoner at the Bar is for compassing and
imagining the Death of the King, and endeavoring to subvert the Government,
and enslave the Nation to Lewis the French King: And the Indictment sets forth,
that the Prisoner at the Bar did for this purpose meet and consult with several
false Traitors to the King and Government, of the way, manner, and means how,
and the time and place when and where to Assassinate the King; and at length
they agreed that forty Horsemen should go together, and set upon the King in
his Coach, as he returned from Hunting; some to attack the Coach, while others
set upon the Guards. The Indictment does further charge him with getting Horses
and Arms, and particularly with carrying a List of the Assassinators from one
to another. These are the particular things charged in the Indictment, and to
this Indictment he has pleaded Not guilty; if we prove the Fact, Gentlemen, we
don't doubt your Justice.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; The
Prisoner at the Bar, Charles Cranburne, is indicted for High Treason, in
compassing and imagining the Death of the King. Gentlemen, the Overt Acts laid
in the Indictment to prove the Prisoner guilty are, That he was at several
Meetings and Consultations about the manner of putting this Design in
Execution; at which Meetings it was agreed, That there should be about forty
Horsemen in Number prepare'd, and armed for that purpose, and they did provide
Horses and Arms for that very thing, and did agree to put it in execution.

Gentlemen, the Evidence that you will hear produced against the Prisoner at
the Bar will be of this Nature. You will hear from the Witnesses, that about
Christmas last, or the Beginning of January, Sir George Barclay did come over
from France from the late King James, to whom he was an Officer in his Guards,
with a Commission for attacking the Prince of Orange, or levying War upon his
Person. He came over about that time, and several Troopers of the late King
James's Guards, to assist him in that barbarous Conspiracy. When Sir George
Barclay came over, he did acquaint with this Design several Persons in England,
that he thought proper to be Accomplices with him in it, particularly Capt.
Porter, Mr. Chernock, Sir William Parkyns, and several others whose Names you
will hear of, and they had several Meetings about it the Beginning of February,
at Capt. Porter's Lodgings, at the Nagg's Head in Covent Garden, at the Sun
Tavern in the Strand, at the Globe Tavern in Hatton-Garden, and several other
Places where they consulted in what manner they might attempt and accomplish
this Bloody Design.

Gentlemen, you will hear, that at these Meetings it was proposed, that they
should do it by Ambuscade as the King came from Richmond a Hunting, whither he
used to go upon Saturdays: Others were for doing it on this side the Water. And
so their Opinions being divided, it was thought necessary to find out and
settle which was the best Place; and in order thereunto they employed Capt.
Porter, Mr. Knightly, and Mr. King (who was executed) to view the Ground, and
accordingly they went, and pitched upon the Lane between Brentford and Turnam
Green for this purpose, as the most convenient Place: And having so done, they
came back and gave an Account to those that had appointed to meet 'em, to hear
the Success of their Expedition, to the Nagg's Head in Covent Garden, and in
that Place you will find by the Evidence, that those Persons, who were the
Heads of the Conspiracy, undertook to find their several Proportions of Men,
for whom they would undertake that would go with them, and be concerned in this
Design. Sir George Barclay was to furnish about 20. He had the Command of the
Troopers that came from France, and those other Officers that came thence, were
under him. Capt. Porter was to furnish 7, Chernock was to furnish 8, Sir
William Parkyns was to furnish 5 Horses and 3 Men, and, I think, Lowick was to
furnish some more: In the whole Number they reckoned there should be about 40.

It will appear, Gentlemen, that the Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Cranburn was one
of the Men that Capt. Porter undertook to get, and engage in this Design; and
accordingly Capt. Porter did acquaint Mr. Cranburn with it; and he did
undertake to be one, and to be ready to go with him, and be concerned in this
Assassination. You will find he was acquainted with it about the 14th of
February, the Day before the first time that they intended to assault the King:
Then he did undertake and agree to prepare himself against the next Day. The
next Day which was the 15th of February, they had several Meetings, and they
were making Preparation in order to go out. It happened by great Providence his
Majesty did not go abroad that Day, and thereupon they dispersed themselves;
but they had Meetings afterward, at which Meetings the Prisoner was present,
with Capt. Porter, Mr. Pendergrass, La Rue, and several others that were
concerned in the Conspiracy, particularly the 21st of February, the Day before
the second time they were to have put this in Execution. Capt. Porter being at
the Sun-Tavern, with several other Gentlemen, and they resolving to have it
executed the next Day, if the King went abroad. Capt. Porter sent for Cranburn,
and Keys that was executed, and Kendrick and Sherborn, four of those that he
had undertaken for, (of whom, I say, Cranburne, the Prifoner at the Bar, was
one) and then he acquainted 'em that they were resolved to go on with it the
next Day. And then they agreed to be in a readiness accordingly. The next Day
the Prisoner with some others met at Mr. Porter's, where they were preparing to
go out and attack the King, and they had several Discourses about the Ways and
and Means of doing it; and particularly Capt. Porter at that time said, that he
had a very good Gun that held about 6 or 8 Bullets, and that Mr. Pendergrass
was to have, who was to attack the Coach, and shoot into the Coach: Mr.
Cranburne was there present at that time, and Mr. Cranburne was employed
particularly by Capt. Porter to carry a List that Porter writ of the Names of
several Men that were to act in it under him, and this he was to carry to
Chernock. Porter writ it and gave it him, and he carried it with Directions to
bring it back with the List of the Names of Mr. Chernock's Men. Cranburne did
accordingly at that time carry the List of the Names to Capt. Chernock, and
brought it back with an additional List, from Capt. Chernock, of his Men.

At that time you will hear farther, when Cranburne brought the List, he
brought an Account that he heard the King did certainly go abroad: for Mr.
Chernock had Intelligence so from Chambers, who lay at Kensington to get
Intelligence: At which there was very great rejoicing among all that were
present at that time, hoping they should have an Opportunity to put this
execrable Design in Execution; and so they prepared all of 'em to go out. There
were several Inns in Turnam Green and Brentford, and thereabouts, and they were
to be placed, two or three in an Inn, that they might be ready to get together
when time should serve. It happened the King did not go abroad that Day
neither, there being some Discovery of this Design, and so they did disperse
themselves, as apprehending it was discovered.

Gentlemen, it will appear by several Witnesses, that the Prisoner at the Bar
was engaged in this Horrid Treasonable Design, and was to have acted a Part in
it. We will call our Witnesses that will make the Particulars out to you, and
we do not question but you will do what is right. First, call Capt. Porter, (who
was sworn.)


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, if you please, Capt. Porter, give the Court and the Jury
an Account what you know of this wicked intended Assassination, and what share
the Prisoner at the Bar had in it.


Capt. Porter. My Lord, before this wicked Assassination was on foot, the
Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Cranburne, was employed by me to buy Arms. I used to
give him Money to go to the Brokers to buy Arms at secondhand, and he brought a
Sword-Cutler to me, of whom I bought about 20 Swords. And when Sir George
Barclay came into England, and this business was resolved upon, I acquainted
him with the Design, and promised to mount him. He never was at any of the
Meetings with Capt. Chernock, Sir George Barclay, or Sir William Parkyns; but
he went to look for a Horse, and was ready both Saturdays to go along with me.
On Saturday the 22d I sent him with a Message to Sir William Parkyns, for the
Note for the two Horses, which he had promised me to furnish me with, out of
his five that he was to furnish; he came back again, and told me that there was
a Messenger came and said that the King did go out, and he knew where to have
the two Horses; that Mr. Charnock was afraid we should not have the full
number of Men, and desired me to send him the Names of my Men; I did write a
List of the Names of my Men, and I went afterward to the Blew-Posts in
Spring-Garden, whither he was to come to me; he did so, and he brought back the
List of my Men, with the List of Mr. Charnocks Men written underneath it, and
at the same time News was brought that the King did not go abroad that day.


L. C. J. Holt. You say, that before the Assassination was set on foot, you
employed him to buy Arms and Horses.


Cap. Porter. My Lord, I acquainted him with it the Friday before the first
Saturday.


L. C. J. Holt. You said before the Assassination you employed him to buy Arms:
When was that?


Capt. Porter. I said before the Assassination was on foot I employed him to
buy Arms. I told him I was to be a Captain in Colonel Parker's Regiment, and
promised to make him my Quartermaster.


L. C. J. Holt. How long a go was this? was it a week before the Assassination
was on foot?


Capt. Porter. He has known of my being a Captain in Colonel Parker's Regiment
this two years.


Mr. At. Genesis I do doubt my Lord, he does not distinguish the times when he
bought the Arms, and when the Assassination was.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, yes, he does now; I misapprehended him at first, and
thought he said he had employed him to buy Arms a week before the Assassination
was on foot; but he says it was a longer time.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire my Lord, he may be asked what time he bought Arms before
this Assassination: When was the last time he bought Arms?


Capt. Porter. It was several Month before the Assassination.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it within a year before it.


Capt. Porter. Yes I believe it was within a year. I gave him several times
Money for that purpose, in all above Ten pounds, and he told me one with
another, he had bought ten Case of Pistols, and kept them in the House till
there were occasion.


Mr. At. Genesis How long ago is it?


Capt. Porter. I believe about a year; within a year.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you first acquaint him with the Assassination?


Capt. Porter. Presently after Sir George Barclay acquainted me with it, I sent
to him, to desire him to get the Pistols clean and ready.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you tell him of the Design?


Capt. Porter. I told him there was a Design on foot, and I would tell him more
when I saw him next; and I desired him to get the Swords from the
Sword-Cutlers, and the Pistols clean and ready. And I met him afterward, and
told him of the Design, and that we intended to do it on Saturday the
fifteenth; and he engaged to be ready and make one. On the Friday before the
twenty second he went with me to the Cockpit, and there we met with one Mr.
Gun, and I asked him if he knew where any good Hackney-Horses might be had? He
said he believed he did; and I sent Cranburn with him, and he came back, and
told me he had found two or three out in Bloomsbury.


L. C. J. Holt. Look ye Capt. Porter, you must not speak so fast, it is
impossible to understand so much matter as you deliver without distinguishing
of times. You said, that some long time before the Assassination was on foot
you sent him to buy Arms, for what purpose were those Arms?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, he has told you --


L. C. J. Holt. Pray let me hear it from him again.


Capt. Porter. I say, My Lord, he knew of my being a Captain in Colonel
Parker's Regiment this two years.


L. C. J. Holt. But what were those Arms for that he bought?


Capt. Porter. To be ready against King James landed, which was designed
several times.


L. C. J. Holt. Why now you make the matter clear to me.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, that is not the thing we go upon, that is but
introductory to the business that we are now a Trying. Therefore we desire to
know of him: Captain Porter, when did you first acquaint Cranburn of the
Assassination of the King?


Capt. Porter. As soon as Sir George Barclay acquainted me with it, and desired
me to get what Men I could to effect it, I sent for Cranburn to my Lodgings in
Norfolk-street, and he came to me one Morning; and I told him there was a
design on foot, and I would tell him more of it afterward.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When was it that Sir George Barclay acquainted you with it?


Cap. Porter. About the latter end of January.


Mr. At. Genesis And what said he to it when you acquainted him with it?


Capt. Porter. He did agree to go with me, and I promised to furnish him with
Horse and Arms; and on Friday before the fifteenth I sent him with three Case
of Pistols to Sir William Parkins, to furnish the three Men he was to mount
with his own Horses.


L. C. J. Holt. Who was to have those three Case of Pistols.


Capt. Porter. Sir William Parkins was, and he carried them to Sir William
Parkin's.


Mr. At. Genesis How long was this, do you say, before the Assassination was to
have been?


Capt. Porter. It was Friday before the fifteenth.


Mr. At. Genesis That was before the first time that it was to have been done.


Capt. Porter. Yes, and Friday before the last, I sent him to look after the
Horses that Gunn said he believed he could help me to, and he came to me to the
Sun-Tavern in the Strand, and told me he and Jeffrey Gunn had found three
Horses in Bloomsbury, and I came out of the Room where I was with Sir George
Barclay and others, and there was Kendrick and Keys, and Cranburn, and I told
them we were resolved to put it in execution the next day.


Mr. At. Genesis Well pray what discourse had you with him the next day?


Capt. Porter. The next day, the 22d. he came to my Lodging at Maiden-Lane, and
I sent him to Sir William Parkins for a Note for the two Horses, that I was to
mount of his: He came back and told me he knew where to have them, and that
Captain Chernock was afraid we should not have our Compliment of Men, and
desired me to send him an account what Men I could bring, which I did by Mr.
Cranburn, and being to go to the Blew-posts, Ordered him to bring it to me
thither, and he did bring it back to me to the Blew-posts with Captain
Chernocks List underneath.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Captain Porter, was there any body present when you sent
the List, and the Prisoner brought it back to you?


Capt. Porter. Yes there was Mr. La Rue, and Captain Pendergrass, and Mr. King,
I know of none else.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray do you remember what Healths were drank after you heard the
King was not to go abroad?


Capt. Porter. I don't Remember what Healths were drank that day particularly,
but whether it were Thursday or Friday (I cannot tell particularly the day) We
drank a Health to the squeezing of the Rotten Orange upon the next Saturday.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was present that day when that Health was Drank.


Capt. Porter. Mr. Cranburn was there present at that time, and did Drink the
Health.


Mr. Cooper. Pray Sir did he meet you by appointment on Saturday the 15th, or
was it by accident?


Capt. Porter. By appointment, as all the rest did, to get ready as all the
rest did, to go upon the Design; and so it was both Days.


Sir B. Shower. If they have done with Mr. Porter we would ask him a Question
or two for the Prisoner: We desire to know when it was that those Arms were
bought, that he talks of: For we must acknowledge that Mr. Cranburn heretofore
went upon several Messages for Capt. Porter, When was that buying of Arms?


Capt. Porter. I tell you I cannot exactly tell the Month.


Mr. Cranburn. Do you remember the Year?


Capt. Porter. I believe it was less than a Year before the Assassination was
on Foot.


Mr. Cranburn. If you remember Sir, it was a Month before Col. Parker was put
in the Tower.


Capt. Porter. It was several times, I cannot tell the particular times.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord I desire to know when he first Communicated this Design
to Mr. Cranburn, and who was by, and where was it?


Capt. Porter, I told you I sent for Mr. Cranburn one Day in the Week before
the 15th, and he came to me at my Lodging in Norfolk-Street, and I acquainted
him that Sir George Barclay was come, and there was such a Design on Foot; and
I desired him to get those Pistols that he had of mine ready, and cleaned, that
they might be ready for the Execution.


Sir. B. Shower. What Day was that?


Capt. Porter. One Day in the Week before the 15th.


Mr. Cranburn. Did you ever name Sir George Barclay to me in your Life?


Capt. Porter. Yes I did, I told you he was come from France.


Mr. Cranburn. Where was that, at Mr. -- in Norfolk-Street, where I lay?


Mr. Cranburn. Who was by?


Capt. Porter. No body but my self.


Sir B. Shower. Upon what occasion did you meet there?


Capt. Porter. I sent for him to my Lodging.


Sir B. Shower. How long had Sir George Barclay been in Town, before that time?


Capt. Porter. I cannot tell the time when he came to Town.


Sir B. Shower. How long was it after he came to Town before you saw him? Had
you seen him a Week or a Fortnight before? Pray recollect your self.


Capt. Porter. I told you that the first time I heard of him, was the latter
end of January; Capt. Charnock told me he was come, but I was then Sick of the
Gout.


Sir B. Shower. Now then I would desire to know, who was by upon the Friday
before the 22th at the Sun Tavern in the Strand, when you and Mr. Cranburn were
there?


Capt. Porter. I did tell you Sir.


Sir B. Shower. I desire to know, whether there was any body besides Mr.
Cranburn, Kendrick, and Keys?


Capt. Porter. Sir, I will tell you all I can remember; I was in one Room with
Sir George Barclay, and there was Sir William Parkins, Capt. Charnock, and my
self; and afterward I went into another Room, where there was Kenrick, and
Cranburn, and Keys, and Jeffrey Gunn came in afterward, I remember no body
else.


Mr. Phipps. Was not Gun there when you first came in?


Capt. Porter. To the best of my Remembrance, he came in afterward.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, this may be a very material part of our Defense, and
therefore we must inquire a little the more into it. Mr. Porter is pleased to
say, that he was in a Room with Sir George Barclay, and Charnock, and Sir
William Parkins; and he came out into another Room, where was Mr. Cranburn,
Kendrick and Keys: and there he says, after he had been there some time, Gunn
came in, I desire to know, whether Gunn was there when he first came in?


Capt. Porter. To the best of my Remembrance, he came in afterward, but I
cannot positively tell, for I was in and out several times.


Mr. Phipps. At the time that you Communicated this Design to Mr. Cranburn,
what said he to you?


Capt. Porter. When I first Communicated the thing to him, I told him there was
a thing on Foot for the Service of King James, and desired him to go along with
me.


L. C. J. Holt. What kind of Service did you tell him it was?


Capt. Porter. He asked me, what kind of Service it was? I told him Sir George
Barclay was come over, and I told the whole Design of the Assassination of the
Prince of Orange, that it was intended to take him off, as he came from
Richmond from Hunting.


Mr. Phipps. And pray what did Mr. Cranburn say to you?


Capt. Porter. He said he would be ready to go along with me.


Mr. Phipps. You say, you sent by him Three Case of Pistols to Sir William
Parkins, at that time did you tell him for what Design those Pistols were?


Capt. Porter. I told him, they were for the 3 Men that Sir William Parkins was
to Mount upon 3 of his 5 Horses.


Mr. Cranburn. Did you speak to me to carry those Pistols to Sir William
Parkins?


Capt. Porter. I think so, to the best of my Remembrance I ordered you my self
to carry them.


Sir B. Shower. Captain Porter, I desire you to recollect your self, and tell
us plainly, whether the Design was Communicated to Mr. Cranburn before the 15th.


Capt. Porter. Certainly Sir.


Sir B. Shower. Are you sure of it?


Capt. Porter. Yes Sir, I am sure of it.


Sir B. Shower. I ask you, because you know what has been said upon this
Occasion in other Trials.


Cranburn. Where did you write the Note, that you say you sent to Sir William
Parkins? Was that Note Sealed or was it not?


Capt. Porter. I did not tell you that I writ a Note.


Cranburn. You Swore that you wrote a Note, and sent it by me to Sir William
Parkins for 2 Horses.


Capt. Porter. I said no such thing Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Look you Capt. Porter, let him ask you any Questions, and if
they be proper answer them, and let not his affirmations, or mistakes provoke
you to be angry.


Capt. Porter. I said, I sent him to Sir William Parkins, for a Note to have
the Horses from Mr. Lewis.


Mr. Phipps. Did you send him with a Letter, or was it a Message by word of
Mouth?


Capt. Porter. I did send him by word of Mouth, for a Note.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray Gentlemen observe the Evidence, Sir William Parkins was to
give a Note for 2 Horses, and Capt. Porter sent Cranburn for the Note.


Mr. Phipps. The Question therefore that I ask, is, Whether he sent a Letter
for the Note, or whether by word of Mouth?


Capt. Porter. I sent by word of Mouth.


Mr. Cranburn. Pray will you tell the Court what you said upon the 22th to Mr.
Pendergrass and me, after you came down from the Blew-Posts leaning upon the
Rail.


Capt. Porter. I don't remember a word of it, for I cannot remember every word
that I have spoken.


Sir B. Shower. If you can remember one particular, sure you can remember
another. If you cannot remember this, how came you to remember any part of the
Discourse that happened at the Blew-Posts.


Capt. Porter. Because that was material to this Business, for I had very soon
after a particular occasion to recollect it upon the breaking out of the Plot.


Mr. Cranburn. Pray what Hour was it this Saturday the 15th that you
Communicated this Design to me?


Capt. Porter. I cannot tell what Hour, but I say you met me at the Blew-Posts
Saturday the 15th.


Mr. Cranburn. You say, you Communicated it to me the 15th.


Mr. At. Genesis He says he Communicated it to you, before the 15th.


Mr. Cranburn. I desire to know where he was the 14th.


Capt. Porter. I say, one Day before the 15th, in that Week I sent for you to
come to my Lodgings, and you did come, and there I Communicated it to you.


Cranburn. Sir. I was not at your Lodgings that Week.


Mr. Phipps. What Day of the Week?


Capt. Porter. I cannot be positive whether it was Thursday, or Friday, or what
Day; but one Day in that Week it was.


Mr. Phipps. You ought to be positive when it was.


Capt. Porter. I do tell you as near as I can.


Mr. Phipps. With submission, my Lord, he ought to be positive one way or other.


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, I don't see that he ought to be positive to a Day; he may
be so if he can.


Cranburn. Pray what Day did you say you sent me to Sir George Barclay?


Capt. Porter. I do not say that I ever sent you to Sir George Barclay?


Mr. Phipps. Can you take upon you to say, That he was at your Lodgings that
Week before the 15th?


Capt. Porter. To the best of my Knowledge it was one Day that Week.


Mr. Phipps. To the best of your Knowledge: Are you sure of it?


L. C. J. Holt. Speak as certainly as you can.


Capt. Porter. Indeed, I believe so, it was before the 15th. I am sure, I
think, it was within Three or Four Days after Sir George Barclay had acquainted
me with it, I sent to the Prisoner to come to me to my Lodgings, at Mrs. -- in
Norfolk-street, and acquainted him with it.


L. C. J. Holt. And when you acquainted him with it, What did you tell him?
What Part was he to act in it?


Capt. Porter. I told him, I would have him go along with me, and that I had
set him down for one of my Party, and would provide him Horse and Arms; and he
did agree to go along with me.


Sir B. Shower. Mr. Webber, Pray let me see Chernock's Trial.


Mr. Sh. Buckingham. Why, Sir Bartholomew, is the Trial any Evidence?


Sir B. Shower. Mr. Sheriff, I know what use I can make of it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Will you ask him any more Questions?


Sir B. Shower. No, Sir.


Mr. Sol Genesis Then Swear M. De la Rue.

[which was done. Pray, Sir, give the Court, and the Jury, an Account what you
know of the intended Assassination, and what Share the Prisoner had in it.


M. De la Rue. It is too long a Story to tell you all that I know of this
Matter; but, if you please, I will tell you what concerns the Prisoner at the
Bar. I am heartily sorry that I have occasion to appear against him, as I would
be truly against any Body: But since I am here upon my Oath, I must declare the
Truth, and nothing but the Truth; and I hope I shall not declare any thing but
what is Truth. Upon Saturday, the 15th. of February, the Day that the Design
was to have been put in execution against His Majesty, and all that were in the
Coach with him, and against his Guards, I went to Mr. Chernock's Lodgings in
Norfolk-street, to inform my self, whether they resolved on that Day to go out
upon the Design; and I found by Mr. Chernock that they did resolve it, and I
stayed there a while, till such time as Mr. Chambers came in; I did not know
whence he came then, but, as I was informed afterward, he came from Kensington
to Mr. Chernock, and his Boots were dirty; and Mr Chernock told me he had sent
a Messenger to Mr. Porter, And, says he, if you will stay a little time, I
shall have an Answer. The Messenger came back, and told him, That Capt. Porter
dined at the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden. I did not go to Dine with him, but
went home, where I saw Mr. King at my Lodging, who told me, that the King did
not go out that Day. I told him, I heard he did not: I found by Mr. Chamber's
coming back, and that we had no notice from Mr. Chernock, that it was concluded
the King did not go out as it was supposed he should have gone. When I had
dined at my Lodging, I went to the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden, to Mr. Porter,
and there were Four, or Five, or Six People with him; there was one Mr.
Sherborn, and Mr. Kendrick, and Two People that I never saw before, and another
Person, but I cannot tell now who he was. When we had been there a little while,
comes in this unfortunate Man at the Bar, Mr. Cranburn; I don't know where he
had been; but by his coming in so late, I suppose he had not dined, and he
ordered the Drawer to get him some Costelets. This is all that I can say as to
that Day: I had seen Captain Porter twice or thrice between that, and the 22d.
and he desired me to be at home on Friday Night, between Eight and Nine, and he
would send to me: He did send, and I was from home. But when I came, I was
informed his Servant had been to speak with me; and in the Morning, about Eight
or Nine a Clock, Saturday the 22d. he sent his Servant to me to tell me his
Master would speak with me at his Lodgings. I went to his Lodgings, and he then
lay in Maiden-Lane, at one Brown's a Surgeon's: When I came in, he was in Bed;
and he told me in French, Tonts Parties sont Prests. All Parties are ready. I
understood all along that there were Three Parties to be engaged; one to attack
the King's Coach, and the Two others the Guards; Sir George Barclay was to head
the first, and Porter and Rookwood, the rest. Mr. Porter arose and dressed
himself, and in came Mr. Cranburn; and Mr. Porter went out to him into the
Dining Room, and what he said I cannot tell: But soon after came in Pendergrass,
Mr. Key, and Mr King, and then he takes Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Sir B. Shower. Who took that?


M. De la Rue. Capt. Porter took Pen, Ink, and Paper, and writes down a List of
his Party, and puts me down first. Mr. Pendergrass asked me if I was the
Captain, and I made him some Answer, but what in particular I cannot tell; I
think I told him, I knew of the thing before the most did: But I can remember
particularly that List was given to Mr. Cranburn, to carry to Mr. Chernock;
upon what Account it was, I cannot tell; but I concluded, that Mr. Chernock was
to be acquainted with those Persons that Porter was sure off: And Mr. Porter at
that time told me that he was disappointed of some People, and desired me to
get him some other Men in their rooms; and he sent particularly to one that Mr.
King proposed; and I did go, and brought him to the Blue-Posts, where Captain
Porter told me he was to Dine; and the Gentleman I went to, told me he would
meet me at the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden. When I came back to Mr. Porter's
Lodgings, Mr. Porter, and Mr. Pendergrass, and Mr. Oldfield, and I, went in a
Coach to the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden; and when we had been there a little
while, Mr. Cranburn came back to give an Account of the Errand Mr. Porter had
sent him upon, and he brings this List.


Mr. At. Genesis Who brought it?


M. De la Rue. Mr. Cranburn?


Cranburn. Whether did I bring it?


M. De la Rue. To the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden.


L. C. J. Holt. You must not ask any Questions till they have done with him.
But, M. De la Rue, let me ask you what Day was this?


M. De la Rue. This was Saturday, the 22d. of February; and he told Mr. Porter
there was a List of Mr. Chernock's Men at the bottom of that List, and I took
the List in my Hand, and there was Mr. Chernock's List of Six or Seven, or
thereabouts, of his Party, and at the bottom of it was R. C. I think, for
Robert Chernock. Mr. Porter takes Mr. Cranburn from the Company into another
Room, and I went after them, and he told Captain Porter, in my hearing, that
the King did not go out that Day. There is one thing I forgot, which now I
recollect, and I am upon my Oath to tell the Truth, and the whole Truth: When I
was at Mr. Porter's Lodging, he told me the King was to go out; and that Mr.
Chambers, the Orderly Man, had sent word, That the King resolved to go out
between Ten and Eleven.


L. C. J. Holt. Who said so?


M. De la Rue. Mr. Cranburn told me so at Mr. Porter's Lodgings, I say I had
forgot it, but it occurs to my memory now, that he told me there before we went
to the Blue-Posts, that the King did go out that Day between 10 and 11; for Mr.
Chambers the Orderly man had been with Mr. Chernock* or Sir William Parkyns, to
let them know so much. And afterward when he came back with the List of
Captain Porter's Men, to Captain Porter at the Blue-Posts in the Spring-Garden;
there was at the foot of that List, a List of Mr. Chernock's men in another
hand. I suppose writ by himself, but that I cannot swear whose hand it was, and
Mr. Porter took him into another Room, and then Cranburn told him the King did
not go out, and I believe it was then between 11 and 12 a Clock, and he also
told Mr. Porter, that Mr. Chernock was apprehensive the thing was Discovered,
and therefore desired him to have a care of himself, for he himself was
resolved not to lie at home that Night; I think my Lord, Mr. Porter did send
back Mr. Cranburn to Mr. Chernock, I cannot be positive whether he did or not,
but I believe he did, because I am sure Mr. Cranburn did tell Mr. Porter, Sir
George Barclay would speak with him, and Mr. Porter made answer, Why should he
desire me to go to him, when he knows I am under some Ill Circumstances, and he
can better come to me? and I believe Mr. Porter did send Mr. Cranburn once
again to Mr. Chernock.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, pray do not say any thing of any Matter but what you can
be positive in.


M. De la Rue. But Mr. Porter did not go to Mr. Chernock* nor did Mr. Chernock
come to him, therefore they stayed there and dined; and after Dinner, or a
little before Dinner, Keys the Trumpeter, came up, and told us that my Lord of
Oxford's Regiment of the Guards was returned from Richmond, foaming: Keys wen
down stairs again to learn Intelligence as I thought, and came up and told us
he saw the King's Coaches newly returned to the Mews, and Mr. Cranburn was by
all the time; I think this was before Dinner, and then we went to Dinner.


L. C. J. Holt. I tell you again, don't speak any thing that is material but
what you can be positive in.


M. De la Rue. I am positive as to the thing, and that it was the 22th. of
February, but I cannot be positive as to all the Circumstances: After Dinner
there was the usual Healths* the Jacobite Healths to King James and the Prince
of Wales, and the Restoration, and the like; and after that* I think it was Mr
Porter took an Orange in his hand and squeezed it, I am sure one in the Company
did, and drank* something to the Rotten Orange, I cannot very well remember
just now what it was; but I would be cautions of saying any thing but what is
Truth, but if your Lordship will give me leave to recollect my self, I will
tell you what it was -- Oh! it was to the squeezing of the Rotten Orange, and
the Health went round, and Mr. Cranburn was in the Company, and drank the
Health, but being disappointed and frustrated of the Design by the King's not
going abroad that Day, and Mr. Porter being cautioned by Mr. Chernock to take
care of himself, and being told that Mr. Chernock would not lie at home that
Night: and the Guards returning in that manner, they were all apprehensive that
the Thing had taken Air, and the design of Assassinating the King was
Discovered, and therefore Mr. Porter concluded of going out of Town; several
Healths were drink round, and I think about Two a Clock he went out of Town,
and then the Company broke up. This is what I can say as to the Prisoner, and I
hope I have said nothing but what is Truth.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then, my Lord, we desire to know whether they will ask him any
Questions?


Mr. Phipps. At the time you say this List* was given by Captain Porter, to Mr.
Cranburn, Did Mr. Porter declare to what purpose the List was sent?


M. De la Rue. No, Sir, not a word of any such thing. Mr. King was by, and Mr.
Pendergrass was by, and I think Mr. Keys was by, and he writ a List of his
Party, putting me down First, and Mr. Pendergrass said to me, You are Captain,
and he gave it to Mr. Cranburn to carry it to Mr. Chernock; what the particular
Message was, I cannot be positive: Indeed I don't very well remember the
Message, but the List was carried to Mr. Chernock, and to the best of my Memory
it was to give Mr. Chernock an Account what men he was sure of; for Mr. Porter
told me of several disappointments he had had, of Persons that had promised him
and failed.


Mr. Phipps. Can you remember what Mr. Cranburn said upon that?


M. De la Rue. No, I do not.


Cranburn. What Message was that you say, I brought from Sir George Barclay?


M. De la Rue. I do not say that you brought any Message from Sir George
Barclay.


Cranburn. You said that I brought a Message that Sir George Barclay would see
him.


M. De la Rue. I do not say so; but I say that you told Mr. Porter that Mr.
Chernock sent you with a Message to let him know that Sir George Barclay was
desirous to see Mr. Porter, to confer about taking care of themselves.


Cranburn. Did you hear me name Sir George Barclay's Name?


M. De la Rue. Yes, I say you told Mr. Porter that Mr. Chernock bid you caution
him to take care of himself, and that he would go that way, for Sir George
Barclay, and he, desired to see him; and Mr. Porter said it was an unreasonable
thing for Mr. Chernock to desire it, because they knew he was under
Circumstances that it was not proper for him to go, and he wondered rather they
would not come to him.


L. C. J. Holt. What time a Day was this?


M. De la Rue. It was about Twelve a Clock, I think.


L. C. J. Holt. Was it after such time as the News was brought that the King
did not go abroad that Day?


M. De la Rue. Yes, my Lord, it was after that time.


Mr. Phipps. Were you with Sir George Barclay when he was here in England? Did
you see him here?


M. De la Rue. I did not see him on this side of the Water. I knew him abroad,
and a great many other Unfortunate Persons, that were concerned in this Affair;
I knew some of them here, and that they were concerned in the Design, but I did
not converse with many, indeed with but a very few about it; for to show that I
was not a man that designed to trappan or ensnare any man, I did never exchange
Two Words about this Matter with any Persons that I knew were concerned in it,
but Sir William Parkyns, (and that but in a small measure) and Mr. Chernock,
and Mr. Porter, and Mr. King, and Col. Parker, except what past upon the 22th.
between Mr. Porter, and Mr. Chernock, when Mr. Porter sent Mr. Cranburn to Mr.
Chernock. Mr. Cranburn was one who Mr. Porter called his Quartermaster: I know
this Gentleman was commonly depending upon Mr. Porter, but I think I never was
much in his Company, I did not know what Design he had upon him, but I was told
by Mr. Porter, that he Intended to make him his Quartermaster, and I
understood Mr. Porter was to have a Troop of Horse in Col. Parker's Regiment.


Mr. Phipps. You say you knew a great many of them that were concerned, but you
discoursed and conversed but with a few?


M. De la Rue. I do so, Sir.


Mr. Phipps. How do you know that they were concerned, when you did not
discourse with them?


M. De la Rue. By Information from Mr. Chernock, and Mr. Porter.


Mr. Phipps. Do you know any thing more of Mr. Cranburn, than the List, and
what you have said already?


M. De la Rue. I give you an Account of all that I do know.


L. C. J. Holt. Answer that particular Question. Do you know nothing more than
what you have said?


M. De la Rue. No, my Lord, I do not remember nor know any more as to Mr.
Cranburn than what I have declared, and I am sorry I had Occasion to declare so
much.


Mr. At. Genesis Then call Mr. Pendergrass.

(who was sworn.)
Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you
know of the Intended Assassination, and how far Mr. Cranburn, the Prisoner at
the Bar, was concerned in it.


Capt. Pendergrass. My Lord, the 13th of February last, I came out of
Hampshire, Mr. Porter sent for me to come to Town, and I met him that day at
the Blue-Posts in Spring Garden, and there he told me of the Assassination that
was to be done on Saturday following: The next day we dined at the Rose-Tavern,
where the Prisoner dined with us, and we talked of the Business, that was
Friday the 14th. and we were to be in readiness the next day to assassinate the
King, as he was coming from Richmond; but some Company coming in afterward; we
left off the Discourse and talked no more that Night. The next day that we were
to do the Business, we met at the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden, and finding the
King did not go abroad that Saturday, we dined there at the Blue-Posts, and
talked over again of Assassinating the King, and the Prisoner was by at the
same time, they were all mightily concerned the King did not go that Saturday;
but when we had dined there, we had no further Discourse about the
Assassination that day, but every body was to prepare against the next Saturday.


L. C. J. Holt. Was that agreed upon then?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes it was, by all the Company; so we parted that day. Some
time the next Week I met Mr. Porter, and Mr. Porter asked me if I had a
Horseman's Sword; I told him no: Says he to Mr. Cranburn, let Captain
Pendergrass have one of the Horsemens Swords that you have got. Says Mr.
Cranburn to me, if you will come to my House you shall make choice of one your
self, for I have several at home. Said I, Mr. Cranburn, I cannot go that way,
but I Will take one of your Choosing, if so be you will leave it at my Lodgings: He
said he would do it, and did; he left it at my Lodgings in Suffolk-Street,
which Sword I have still. The day following I met him, and he asked me if I had
received the Sword; I said I had it; and he said, it was very well. After this
I did not see Mr. Cranburn till Saturday the 22d. at which time I came to Mr.
Porter's Lodgings between Nine and Ten a Clock in the Morning, and the Prisoner
at the Bar was there, and I heard Mr. Porter give him a Message to go to Sir
William Parkyns for some Horses, I know not how many. The Prisoner went, and in
some time after, came back again, and brought an account that the King went out
that Saturday the 22d. to Richmond; so every body was to get ready: And Mr.
Cranburn said, that Mr. Chernock desired that Mr. Porter would send a List of
his Men; upon which Mr. Porter wrote a List of his Men, and gave it to the
Prisoner to carry it to Mr. Chernock, and bid him meet him at the Blue-Posts;
and Mr. Porter and M. De la Rue and I took Coach, and went down to
Spring-Garden, and when we came to the Blue-Posts, there were some Persons that
I think Mr. De la Rue had appointed to come there; the Prisoner comes thither,
and brought the List back, with a List of Mr. Chernock's Men underneath. I know
not who the Men were, for I saw it only on the one side of the Table, in Mr.
Porter's Hand; at the same time the Prisoner brought an account, that the King
did not go abroad that day, and presently after we had the same account from
other Hands; and Captain Porter and I went out of Town, and we heard no more of
it.


L. C. J. Holt. Are you sure that he did agree to this matter before the 15th.?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes, I am sure of it, he agreed to it Friday the 14th. at
the Rose Tavern in Covent Garden.


L. C. J. Holt. On the 15th. it seems they were disappointed; are you sure
there was an Agreement to pursue it the 22d.?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes, I am sure there was, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Was the Prisoner there?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes, my Lord, I am sure that the Prisoner at the Bar was
there?


Cranburn. Pray, Mr. Pendergrass, was there any Discourse about this thing when
I was there?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes, Mr. Cranburn, you cannot but remember there was.


Cranburn. What hour did I come there, pray Sir?


Capt. Pendergrass. Truly, I cannot be positive to an Hour, but you was there
while the Discourse was.


Cranburn. Whether did I stay there all the while, and who was in the Company?


Capt* Pendergrass. All the Company broke up about six a Clock, there was Mr.
King, Captain Porter, Mr. Kendrick, Mr. Cranburn, Mr. Keys, and my self.


Cranburn. Was Kendrick there when I was there?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes, I am sure of it, I will do you all the Justice in the
world that I can.


Sir B. Shower. You say, Sir, he did agree upon the 14th. to this Design, pray
what Words did he use?


Capt. Pendergrass. He did agree, that we should attack the King the next day.


Sir B. Shower. Pray Sir, if you can, recollect your self; what did the
Prisoner say, or whether you took him to agree by being silent?


Capt. Pendergrass. He said he hoped we should execute our Business the next
Day.


L. C. J. Holt. What day was that?


Capt. Pendergrass. That was the 14th. of February, and the same Night I gave
account of the matter to my Lord Portland.


Mr. Phipps. Did he agree to be one in the Execution of the Design?


Capt. Pendergrass. Yes, he did; he discoursed the matter to me himself.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done with our Evidence.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, then what say you to it for the Prisoner?


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, what we have to say on behalf of the Prisoner in this
Respect is this, here are but three VVitnesses produced, and as to one of them,
De la Rue, there is no Evidence that he gives Your Lordships and the Jury, that
affects this matter, but only that there was a List given by Captain Porter,
and carried by the Prisoner to Mr. Chernock, and so brought back again. But he
does not recollect, nor swear to any Message that was sent from Porter by the
Prisoner to Mr. Chernock: Now, my Lord, the bare carrying of a Note of Names
will be no Evidence of Treason. M. De la Rue does not swear to any Privity of
the Prisoner, what the List was for, nor to the Delivery of the List, which is
the Overt Act in the Indictment, nor upon what account this List was written,
or sent, or brought back again* or any Word that proceeded from Captain Porter
to him upon giving the List, or any Word when it was brought back again. So
that as to De la Rue's Testimony, we must submit it to the Memories and
Recollection of your Lordship and the Jury, we think he only proves a Plot in
general, of which there is no peradventure, every Body is satisfied, that there
was such a horrible Conspiracy: those that have been condemned and executed for
it, have owned it, and so it can never be doubted, but he does not say any
thing to affect the Prisoner at the Bar; for as to the drinking of Healths, and
being present when those Healths were drank, though it be an Evidence of
Disaffection to the Government, or too much good Manners and Complaisance to
the Company a Man is in, yet that Disaffection, or Evil Temper, or
Complaisance, we hope are no Evidences of Treason. It is plain the Prisoner did
depend very much upon Captain Porter; he was in truth his Servant to go of his
Errands, and expected an Office from him, God knows when; but it does not
appear by any particular Action, that he did any thing that can be Treason,
upon M. De la Rue's Evidence. Then as to what Mr. Pendergrass says, I must
confess his Evidence comes home: For he says there was a Design of the
Assassination, and some Agreement of the Prisoner to it; but I must beg your
Lordships Favor to observe, upon Mr. Pendergrass's Evidence, if that stand
alone, it will be but one Witness, and then we are safe by the Purview of this
Act of Parliament.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay, and by the Law, before the making of that Act.


Sir B. Shower. Then, as to Captain Porter, I must beg leave to say, If our
Witnesses are come that were absent at the other Trial, and they prove what is
in my Instructions, it well be very much Questionable, whether there be any
Credibility due to his Testimony: Then if you take off his Testimony, there is
only the Evidence of Mr. Pendergrass; and if he be to be believed, to which I
have nothing to say at present, in the Case of a Man's Life, upon an Indictment
of Treason, where the Law requires two credible Witnesses, his single Testimony
is not sufficient to convict the Prisoner. We beg leave to call our Witnesses,
and then we shall leave it to your Lordship, and the Jury.


Mr. Phipps. As to the particular Overt Act laid in the Indictment, the
carrying about the List, only M De la Rue speaks to it, and Sir Bartholomew
Shower has given it an Answer, and I shall not repeat it.


L. C. J. Holt. Look ye, for that, if any one Overt Act is proved by Two
Witnesses, it is well enough.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Besides, they mistake, my Lord, extremely; for Captain Porter,
and Mr. Pendergrass, speak both of them to that particular, as to the List.


Sir B. Shower. We do not deny it; the Question is, Whether you have Two
Credible Witnesses?


Cranburn. Pray, Mr. Pendergrass, do you remember what Captain Porter said to
you, and I, when we came down to the Blue-Posts, leading from the Rail?


Capt. Pendergrass. Indeed, Sir, I do not.


Cranburn. I would have you recollect your self; as we stood against the Rails
in Spring-Garden, when we came down from the Blue-Posts, after the Design
miscarried, Mr. Porter said, Mr. Chernock, and they, might thank themselves if
it were discovered; For, says he, I never communicated a Word of this thing to
any of my Party.


Capt. Pendergrass. Indeed I don't remember a Word of it, Sir.


Mr. Phipps. My Lord, we have one piece of Evidence to offer against the
Testimony of Captain Porter: He says, That he sent Cranburn with Gunn from the
Cockpit to see for Hackney-Horses, and that Cranburn came to him to the Sun
Tavern, and there they had some Discourse about executing the Design the next
Day; and being asked who was by, when he communicated the Design to Cranburn,
and particularly, Whether Mr. Gunn was by? he says he came in afterward, but
was not there at the time of the Communication about the Design. Now we shall
prove that Gunn came in with the Prisoner, and was with him all the time, and
there was no such Discourse happened.


Sir B. Shower. Call Geoffry Gunn, and Mary Gerrard.

[They appeared. Your Lordship will observe, what Captain Porter swore, That he
went in to the Room to Cranburn, and Gunn was not there: Now, if we falsify
him in that Particular, we shall submit to your Lordship how far he is to be
believed in the rest.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir Bartholomew, ask your Witnesses what you will, but
make no Descants upon their Evidence till you have heard them.

[Then the Two Witnesses were Sworn.
L. C. J. Holt. Well look ye, you are both upon your Oaths, Consider what you
say, speak the Truth, and tell all that you know, and nothing but the Truth.
Which do you begin with?


Mr. Phipps. Jeffery Gunn, Pray, Mr. Gunn, did you go to the Sun Tavern at any
time with Mr. Cranburn?


Gunn. Yes, I did.


Mr. Phipps. What day of the Month was it?


Gunn. I cannot tell positively the Day, it was of a Friday.


Sir B. Shower. Was it of a Friday, in February, or January?


Gunn. It was in February.


Mr. Phipps. Was it before the Plot broke out?


Gunn. Yes, It was.


Mr. Phipps. How long was it before the Plot broke out?


Gunn. I cannot tell that, truly.


Mr. Phipps. Whence did you go?


Gunn. I was at the Cockpit, and I went from thence to the Sun Tavern.


Sir B. Shower. Who did you meet there?


Gunn. I saw Captain Porter there.


Sir B. Shower. What Room were you in?


Gunn. We went into a Room next the street.


Sir B. Shower. Who was there with you?


Gunn. There was Mr. Cranburn, and I, and Mr. Keys.


Sir B. Shower. How long was it before Mr. Porter came in to you?


Gunn. He came in about Half a Quarter of an Hour after I was there.


Sir B. Shower. Were you there from the beginning till Mr. Cranburn went away.


Gunn. Mr. Cranburn, and I, went from the Cockpit together.


Sir B. Shower. How long did you stay there?


Gunn. I was there about an Hour and a Half.


Sir B. Shower. Were you out of the Room at all in that time?


Gunn. Yes, I was out of the Room once.


Sir B. Shower. How long were you out of the Room?


Gunn. I went home to my Lodging


Sir B. Shower. Were you ever with Mr. Cranburn at the Sun Tavern at any time
besides this?


Gunn. Never in my Life.


Sir B. Shower. Who did you you leave with him when you went out?


Gunn. Capt. Porter, and Mr. Keys, as I remember.


Sir B. Shower. Were you there before Capt. Porter came to him?


Gunn. I was with Mr. Cranburn, and Capt. Porter came in about a Quarter of an
Hour after, we came from the Cockpit together.


Sir B. Shower. Pray recollect your self, and tell us upon your Oath, were you
there when Capt. Porter came in?


Gunn. Yes, I think I was there when Capt. Porter came in.


Sir B. Shower. Did you go and leave him there?


Gunn. We went all out together. I was there about an Hour and half.


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, but you said you were absent some time.


Gunn. I went home, and came back again.


Sir B. Shower. When you went home, did you leave Mr. Cranburn behind you?


Gunn. Yes, I think so.


Mr. Phipps. Did you leave Capt. Porter with him?


Gunn. I think Capt. Porter was with him then.


Mr. Phipps. But upon your Oath, was you in Company with Mr. Cranburn at the
Sun Tavern, when Capt. Porter came first in?


Gunn. Captain Porter went in and out several times.


Sir B. Shower. Did you see Capt. Porter before you went to your own House?


Gunn. Yes sure.


Mr. Phipps. Then it cannot be true what Mr. Porter says, that Gunn did not
come in till afterward.


Mr. At. Genesis Now Mr. Gunn I would ask you a Question or two first, Were you
there all the while that Mr. Cranburn was there, or did you go home?


Gunn. I went home.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you come back again?


Gunn. Yes, I came home and eat some Victuals.


Mr. At. Genesis How long were you absent?


Gunn. I came back in half a quarter of an hour.


Mr. At. Genesis How far is it to your House? Gunn. It Is not above 100 yards.


Sir B. Shower. Did Mr. Porter come into you before you went home, when you
first came in with Cranburn?


Gunn. He came in after we were in the Room.


Mr. Phipps. Capt. Porter said, when he came into the Room Gunn was not there.


L. C. J. Holt. He did not say positively, but as he remembered; now I would ask
you a Question or two.


Sir B. Shower. Pray my Lord, our Inference from this Evidence is thus; Capt.
Porter says, that upon Friday the 21th. of February he was with Cranburn at the
Sun Tavern, and out of one Room into another he came to Mr. Cranburn, and
talked with him of this Design, and after that Gunn came in to the Room, after
the Communication was over: Now this man swears he went from the Cockpit with
Mr. Cranburn, he was with him in the Room at first when Capt. Porter came in;
some time afterward he went to his own House, and left Captain Porter with Mr.
Cranburn, and came back again, and they came away together: Now we say, these
two are inconsistent; for Capt. Porter swears that Gunn was not there till
after the Communication was over. L. C. J. Holt. As he remembers.


Mr. Phipps. Nay, I think he was positive he came in afterward.


L. C. J. Holt. As I remember he was not positive, but call Capt. Porter again.


Mr. Phipps. When you came back from your House, who were in the Room?


Gunn. The same Company as I left, as far as I remember.


Mr. Mountague. Was Capt. Porter in the Room when you came back?


Gunn. Indeed I cannot directly tell, I believe he was.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray observe what your Witness says: He says Capt. Porter came
in and out, and was there several times before he went away.


Gunn. Yes my Lord, he was so.


L. C. J. Holt. And you were absent some time, but were you there some time
before Porter came in? Gunn. Yes, I believe I was.

[Then Capt. Porter came in.]
Mr. At. Genesis Look ye Capt. Porter, you see that man there?


Capt. Porter. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give an Account of what you know of that man's coming in to
you at the Sun Tavern.


Capt. Porter. I came several times out of Sir George Barclay's Room into
theirs, and to the best of my Remembrance, Mr. Cranburn was there before Gunn
came in.


Sir B. Shower. Do you remember whether the first time that you went out of Sir
George Barclay's Room to speak with Mr. Cranburn, Mr. Gunn was there?


Capt. Porter. To the best of my remembrance he was not; to the best of my
remembrance Mr. Gunn, I saw Mr. Cranburn in the Room before you was there.


Sir B. Shower. Did not you order Gunn to come with him to the Sun Tavern?


Capt. Porter. Yes Sir I did.


Sir B. Shower. Cannot you tell whether they came together?


Capt. Porter. I was not in the Room when they came in first, but to the best
of my remembrance he was not there when I came in the first time.


L. C. J. Holt. Now Gunn, you hear what Capt. Porter says, before you went away
to your own House did Mr. Porter come into the Room to you?


Gunn. Indeed my Lord I am not positive, I think he did.


Mr. At. Genesis Neither of them is positive, and it is a Circumstance not very
material; for it seems he was absent, and then the Discourse might be.


L. C. J. Holt. No, it is not material, but you see upon a strict Examination
what it comes to?


Sir B. Shower. They are agreed upon it I perceive, to be positive on neither
side.


Mr. Phipps. Mr. Cranburn pray ask Mrs. Gerrard what you have a mind.


Cranburn. Pray what do you know of Capt. Porters going out in Disguise, and
wearing false Hair and Vizards, and going upon the Highway, and such things?


Gerrard. I know not what Mr. Cranburn means:

(at which the People laughed.)
Sir B. Shower. It is no laughing matter, when a man is upon his Life.


L. C. J. Holt. No, no, let him have fair play; Answer the Question.


Cranburn. Do you know any thing of your Masters going abroad in Disguises?


Gerard. I do not know any thing of my Masters going upon the Highway.


L. C. J. Holt. Did he go out with Vizards, or any such things?


Gerrard. I never saw him wear a Vizard or false Beard in my Life, but he had
once a Patch on when he was forced to keep out of the way, upon the Account of
the Dog Tavern Business in Drury Lane.


Mr. Phipps. See if Mr. Edward Bouchier is here.

[He was called, but did not appear.]
Sir B. Shower. Call Mrs* Burton, (which was done); but she did not appear.


Mr. Phipps. Is William Hardyman here; he was cal'ed* but did not appear.


Sir B. Shower. Then call Simon Dawson, and we have done

(which was done)
Crier. They are all called, but they do not appear.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we must submit it to your Lordships Directions upon
the Evidence that has been given, as to the Credibility of these Witnesses, and
whether what Capt. Porter says, and what Gunn says be consistent; so that you
can be satisfied there are Two Lawful Credible Witnesses to prove any Overt Act.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes sure, but I would have you debate it if you believe there
be any thing in it. Sir B. Shower. I submit it to your Lordships Directions.


L. C* J. Holt. The Question is, Whether I should give any Directions at all or
no, or whether there be any occasion for it.


Cranburn. I declare this openly before this Honorable Court, and so many
Noblemen as are here, that Mr. Porter never made me acquainted with this
Design, till what he swore here. L. C. J. Holt. I cannot tell, it is sworn by 2
Witnesses.


Cranburn. I do declare, though Capt. Pendergrass says he does not remember it,
that Capt. Porter did declare in Spring Garden the 22th. when we came out of
the Blew Posts by the Rails, if this Design miscarry, says he, Mr. Charnock may
thank himself, for I never communicated this Secret to any of my Friends.


L. C. J. Holt. But hark ye, do you consider what you say, if this Design
miscarryed: Pray what Design was that?


Cranburn. He never named any thing but the Design, he did not say what it was.


L. C. J. Holt. But why were you employed to carry a List from Capt. Porter to
Mr. Chernock, and to bring a List back again from him to Capt. Porter?


Cranburn. I did carry the Note, but there was nothing mentioned what the List
was for.


L. C. J. Holt. Then when you were there on Friday the 14th. and there the
Design was proposed to Assassinate the King the next Day, and you engaged in it.


Cranburn. Not a Word of it True my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. Aye but Mr. Pendergrass swears it, and that you were hearty in
the Matter, and hoped you should do your Business the next day.


Cranburn. I cannot help it if he does swear it.


L. C. J. Holt. Then you were at the Meeting at the Sun Tavern the 21th.


Cranburn. My Lord you hear what Gun says.


L. C. J. Holt. As to that they are neither of them positive, but you did there
promise and undertake the Matter, that Capt. Porter is positive in, that it was
agreed by you all to do it the 22th. and Mr. Pendergrass says, when you were
disappointed the 15th. you agreed all to pursue the same Design the Saturday
following.


Cranburn. My Lord, I did not dine at the Blew Posts that day.


L. C. J. Holt. But you were there; I think indeed Mr. Pendergrass says you
came in after Dinner, and had some Stakes.


Cranburn. I never heard Directly nor Indirectly of this Design, till what I
heard them swear here.


L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen of the Jury, you do understand for what Crime this
Prisoner at the Bar is Indicted: It is for High Treason in designing and
compassing the Death of the King, which was to be effected by an Assassination,
in the most Barbarous and wicked manner, that any attempt of that nature can
possibly be made, being to surprise the King, and murder him in his Coach.

The Question Gentlemen is, whether this Prisoner be Guilty of this Crime or
no; there have been three Witnesses produced that have given evidence against
him; Captain Porter, Mr. De la Rue, and Mr. Pendergrass, and they do all tell
you, that there was such a design on Foot to Assassinate the King, as he came
from Hunting at Richmond, after he came on this side the Water, in the Lane
between Brentford and Turnham-Green. There were Diverse Persons Engaged in this
Design, which Sir George Berclay was come from France, to promote and manage
Captain Porter, as it does appear upon his Evidence, was a Person that was
principally Engaged, and at that time was hearty in the Prosecution of it.

As to Mr. Cranburn, Cap. Porter tells you he was a Man that he had had a long
acquaintance with, and had Employed him and designed to employ as an Officer
under him, in case a Revolution happened, which it seems about that time, and
some time before it was expected. Cap. Porter was to have been a Cap, and I
think he designed to promote Cranburn to be his Quarter Master; and he sent him
to buy Arms; and preparations were made for that business; but that is not the
thing that we are now upon, the matter that now properly falls under our
Consideration, is this, the coming over of Sir George Berclay, the latter end
of January, or the beginning of Febuary last, upon which as it seems Mr Porter
was Engaged, and having an Interest in this Cranburn, and there being Horses to
be furnished to attack the King and his Guards about Turnham green. This Man
Cranburn, was a Person that was engaged to be one of the Horsemen that were to
make the attack, and he tells you that he did Employ him to provide Horses and
Swords, and to prepare the Pistols, and that he did Engage in it, and
particularly that the design was to be Executed on Saturday the 15th of
February, and that he was then ready to go with Captain Porter; but on that
Saturday the King did not go abroad, whereby the design was Disappointed for
that time: Afterward there was a meeting at the Sun Tavern in the Strand,
where he met with Sir George Berclay and others of them, and there comes to
that Tavern Mr. Cranburn and others, and they were in an other Room, and
Captain Porter says he came to them, and did Discourse about pursuing the
design the very next Day, which was agreed, and Cranburn was ready to go the
next Day.

Then he tells you farther, that the next day being Saturday the 22. The second
time that this Assassination was to have been Executed, upon the desire of Mr.
Chernock, who was a Person also that was Engaged in this design. Captain Porter
writes a List of the Men he could bring, and sent it by Cranburn to Charnock;
Cranburn carries the List to Mr. Charnock, and brings it back again with an
Addition of the names of Mr. Charnock's Men underneath.

Mr. De la Rue is called, and he Swears to that very Circumstance, that Mr.
Cranburn was sent by Captain Porter with a List to Mr. Charnock, and brought it
back again from Mr. Charnock, with an Addition of other Names.

Then Mr. Pendergrass tells you, that he was with this Mr. Cranburn, the
Prisoner at the Bar, the fourteenth of February, and there was a discourse of
going in pursuance of this design the next day, and the Prisoner agreed to it,
which he is positive in: he tells you, that when they were disappointed the
15th, being at the Blew-Posts, they then agreed to pursue it the next Saturday;
Cranburn was one of them that agreed.

Captain Porter and De la Rue informs you that Healths were drank to the late
King, and the late Queen, and the Prince of Wales, as they called him, and then
at length, as the Concluding health, Captain Porter or some of them in the
Company, having an Orange in his Hand, squeezed it, and drank a Health to the
squeezing of the Rotten Orange, which was Pledged by all, and particularly by
Mr. Cranburn, as is proved by both Captain Porter and De la Rue.

So that now Gentlemen I must leave it to you, whether this is not Evidence
sufficient to prove this Man Guilty of the Treason; whereof he is Indicted,
that is of Designing and Intending the Assassination of the King, and being
engaged as a Party to execute this Design, when ever there was an Opportunity

The Council insist upon it, on the behalf of the Prisoner, that what Captain
Porter says is not Evidence: In the first place they urge that he is not a Man
of Credit, for they have mentioned that he used to be Disguised, and wear a
Vizard Mask, and go abroad under odd Circumstances, and therefore his
Reputation they hope is not good enough to make him a Credible Witness against
the Prisoner: Now the Prisoners Witness being produced, says he never knew him
go in any Disguise or wear a Vizard Mask, but once he wore a Patch, because he
was under some Ill Circumstances about a Riot in Drury Lane; every body
understands what the meaning of that was, his drinking of Healths at a Riotous
assembly, upon the 11th of June, and he being under some Prosecution for that,
occasioned him to wear that Disguise, but it was not done to Injure any Person,
or do any mischief.

But then say they he is mistaken in his Evidence, of the meeting at the
Sun-Tavern the 21st of February, the day before the last, that this design was
to have been executed, for whereas he says, that Gunn was not there when he
came to them, yet Gunn was in the Company at that time, and whereas he Swears
positively that they discoursed of going upon the same design to Assassinate
the King the next day, as was agreed the Saturday before; Gunn heard no such
discourse. Gunn is called, and he tells you he did come to the Sun Tavern at
that time, with Cranburn and Captain Porter, he came into the Room, and he
heard no such discourse. They did open it indeed that Gunn had been there all
the while, and if so then, if there had been such a discourse he must have
heard it. Gunn has been Examined, and does tell you he was not there all the
while, but went out and was absent for sometime, about half a Quarter of an
Hour.

They have made a Question whether Captain Porter came in, when Gunn was there,
he says truly he thinks that Captain Porter did come into the Room while he was
there, before he went out, but he cannot tell certainly, he was there sometime,
while he was there. Then Captain Porter was called again, and Cap. Porter does
say he knows Gunn was there, but whether he were there at the time he came in,
he cannot say positively; but Gunn says Captain Porter was goeing in and out
several times, as Porter says himself; and Gunn was absent for some part of the
time. So that I cannot see any sort of Contradiction between the Evidence that
Porter gives, and the Evidence that Gunn gives; the one is uncertain, and so is
the other as to that Circumstance.

But Gentlemen, they would infer that if there was any such Discourse while Gun
was there, it must be of necessity that Gunn must have heard it; but it is not
necessary the discourse should be when Gunn was there: Captain Porter Swears
positively that there was such a discourse of going the next day to pursue the
design, and he says he thinks Gunn was not present at that time when the
discourse was, and Gunn says he was absent some part of the time.

And so I must leave it to you, upon the whole matter, if Mr. Cranburn the
Prisoner at the Bar, did Consent and agree to Act in this Bloody and wicked
Design, then you are to find him Guilty; if you are not satisfied of that upon
the Evidence you have heard, or you think there is any Inconsistency, or
Incoherence in the Testimony on the one side, and the other; and that there is
good Reason to disbelieve the Evidence against the Prisoner, Then you are to
acquit him. You have heard your Evidence, and you had best consider of it.


Cl. of the Crown. Who keeps the Jury?


Crier. there is an Officer Sworn.

Then the Jury withdrew to consider of their Verdict, and about a quarter of an
Hour after Returned.


Cl of Ar. Gentlemen answer to your Names, John Kaine.


Mr. Kaine. Here. And so of the Rest.


Cl. of Ar. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Ar. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Foreman.


Cl. of Ar. Charles Cranburn hold up thy Hand, (which he did) look upon the
Prisoner, how say you, is he Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
Indicted or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl of Ar. What Goods, or Chattles, Lands or Tenements, had he at the time of
the Treason Committed, or at any time since.


Foreman. None to our Knowledge.


Cl. of Ar. Then hearken to your Verdict, as the Court has Recorded it. You say
that Charles Cranburn is Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted;
but that he had no Goods, Chattles, Lands or Tenements, at the time of the
High Treason committed, or at any time since, to your Knowledge, and so you say
all?


Jury. Yes.


Mr. Kaine. My Lord, the Jury humbly desires they may be discharged from their
attendance to Morrow


L. C. J. Holt. We cannot do it, unless the Jury be full without them; If you
come early, we shall dispatch you presently.


Then the Prisoner was taken from the Bar, and the Court adjourned till Seven a
Clock the next Morning.

FINIS.
THE Arraignment, Trial, and Condemnation OF Robert Lowick, For the Horrid and
Execrable CONSPIRACY To Assassinate His Sacred Majesty KING WILLIAM, In Order
to a French INVASION of the Kingdom. Who upon full Evidence was found Guilty of
High Treason before His Majesty's Justices of Oyer and Terminer, at
Westminster, on Wednesday the 22th of April, 1696, and was Executed at Tyburn
on the 29th day of the said Month. In which Trial All the Learned Arguments of
the King's Council, and likewise the Council for the Prisoner, upon the New Act
of Parliament for Regulating Trials in Cases of Treason.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Heyrick at Grays-Inn-Gate, Holbourn; and Isaac
Cleave at the Star next Serjeants-Inn-Gate in Chancery Lane. M DC XC VI.

Die Mercurii Vicesimo Secundo Die Aprilis, Anno Domini 1696. Annoque Regni
Regis GULIELMI III. OCTAVO.
THIS Day the Justices of Oyer and Terminer holden for the County of Middlesex,
adjourned over to Seven this Morning, met, and the Court was Resumed by
Proclamation in usual Form.

Clerk of the Arraignments. Keeper of Newgate, set Robert Lowick to the Bar,
(which was done) You the Prisoner at the Bar, Robert Lowick, those Men that you
shall hear called and personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord
the King and You, upon Trial of your Life and Death; if therefore you will
Challenge them, or any of them, your time is to speak unto them, as they come
to the Book to be Sworn, and before they be Sworn.


Mr. Mompesson. If your Lordship pleases to favor me with one Word for the
Prisonor at the Bar; I shall not trouble your Lordship with any thing that was
urged by the Gentlemen that were of Council Yesterday, but I shall Rely upon
something that has not yet been spoken to. My Lord, they have not laid any Time
or Place where the Consent or Agreement was for the Forty Men that were to set
upon the King and his Guards: There is a Time laid before where they met and
discoursed of the Ways and Means how to Assassinate and Kill the King; but when
it comes to the Assencerant, Concesserunt and Aggreaverunt; with Submission,
this being another Act; there ought to be another Time and Place laid, and for
that I shall Cite your Lordship two or three Cases; for Men may meet and
Propose and Discourse and Consult of such Things, though they be very Ill
Things, and yet that may not be Treason. It Is the Agreement that is the
Treason, and so 'twas held in Captain Blagues Case about Taking the Tower: They
may meet at one Time and Place, and at another Time and Place they may agree,
in Dyer, 68. B. and 69 Pl. 28. a Man was Indicted for Murder, that he at such a
Place in and upon the Person that was Murdered in Sultumferit and ipsum, the
Person that was Murdered, cum Quodam Curtello, of such a Price, percussit; and
he does not show the place where he struck him, nor had the Indictment the
Words, ad tunc and Ibidem, and therefore the Court held it void: So it is
likewise Ruled in Goodrick's Case, H^ll. 35. and 119. and therefore in
Indictments for Murder, since they generally set forth not only the Time and
Place of the Assault, but likewise of the Blow; so likewise in things of a more
inferior Nature, as Rescues, Returned by the Sheriff, that the Capias was
served, but does not show where the Rescue was, or though he shows where the
Arrest was, and an and Coupled the Rescue to it, yet it was adjudged and Ill
Return, Dyer 69. Pl. 29. 10 Edw. 4. 15 Fitz. Ret. Vic. 32 Bro. Ret. Det. Bre.
97. and Error 194. Palm. 563. And in Noy 114. there are these Words, Note, It
was Moved in Discharge of a Rescue, the Return was, that they, viz. A. B.
aforesaid the Bailiffs, ad Tunc and Ibidem Vulneraverunt, etc. And the
aforesaid George, etc. Rescuserunt without ad tunc and Ibidem, Referred only to
the Vulneraverunt, and not to the Rescuserunt, and therefore the Return was
adjudged Insufficient; for my Lord, although in Conveyances, a Clause or Word
in the beginning or end may Refer to the whole, yet in Indictments every
Sentence must be Certain, Plain, and Express, and have its own Time and Place:
Therefore in Noy's Rep. 122. Raymond was Indicted for stopping a Cross Way
leading from a certain Ville called Stoake, into a Ville called Melton in the
County of Dorset, and the Indictment was Quasht, because in the County of
Dorset shall refer only to Melton, and not to both: So an Indictment of
Forceable Entry into a Message existent Liberum Tenementum of J. S. is not
good for want of the Word ad Tunc, though the Participle existens does strongly
Imply that it was his House at that time, 3 Cro. 754. Het. 73 Noy. 131. Palm.
426. Bridge. 68. 2 Cro. 214, and 610. Sid. 102. Lat. 109, etc. and my Lord Coke
tells us in Calvin's Case 5. B. That Indictments of Treason of all others are
the most Curiously and Certainly Indicted and Penned; and all those that I have
seen and observed, have Contained more Certainty than the Indictment now before
your Lordship in Reginald Tuckers Case: The Indictment was, that he and Thomas
Place apud Bridgwater, in Com. Somersett. praedict. Compassaverunt, to Kill and
Depose the King, etc. And to bring their Treasonable purposes to effect, they
the said Reginald Tucker and Thomas Place the same Day and Year, at Bridgewater
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, against the King with a great Multitude of
People, Arrayed in a Warlike manner, viz. with Swords, etc. se ipsos illicite
and proditorie insimul ad tunc and Ibidem Congregaverunt and Assemblaverunt and
Guerram publicam Contra dictum Dominem Regem apud Bridgewater proedict. in Com.
proedict. Dicto Vicesimo Die Junii anno primo supro dicto proditorie paraverunt
ordinaverunt and Levaverunt; so in the Indictment of Gate as it is set forth at
large in a Plea in Bar of Dower, brought by his Wife, he with Force and Arms,
apud Villam de Ware, etc. assembled with a great many Persons, and Bellum
Crudele Contra Dictam Dominam Reginam apud Ware, praedict. ad tunc falso and
proditorie publicavit and Levavit ac in super ad tunc and Ibidem falso and
proditorie, Proclaimed the Duke of Northumberland to be Lieutenant General of
their Forces; and etiam falso and proditorie apud Ware proedict. ad tunc,
Proclaimed the Lady Jane Dudley Queen. This is in Bendlowes Reports, Published
by Sergeant Row, fol. 55. placito 91. So in Earl of Leicester's Case Plowd.
Com. 385. the Indictment is laid much after the same manner, and many other
Indictments, which at present I am unwilling to trouble your Lordship with; and
this being one of a new Form and of the First Impression, I hope your Lordship
will hold it insufficient. And my Lord, when they go farther, and say, Et
Quilibet eorum proditorie super se suscepit esse unum, there is no place or
time alleged where that was done, which of necessity should be mentioned: For
it is a constant Rule in our Books, that what is Issuable ought to have a place
where it may be tried. Now this is Issuable, and the most material thing in the
Indictment, is for compassing the King's Death. The Overt Acts are that
Christopher Knightley the Prisoner, and Two others, did Consult to kill the
King; and afterward did agree how to do it, viz. by Forty Horsemen Quorum,
these should be Four, and every one of them did agree to be one; then comes the
other Overt Act of Providing Arms for them. Now suppose they should not prove
the last, viz. the Providing Arms; then, my Lord, they must resort to one of
the other Overt Acts, that these Four did Consult and Agree to Kill the King;
or that these Four did agree, the manner how to do it, as is laid in the
Indictment; and it is plain they must fail of proof of either of these, for by
the not Prosecuting any one of the Name of Christopher Knightley, but
preferring a new Indictment, against one Alexander Knightley, it appears that
Christopher Knightley was not there, and the proving these Three others making
a Consult and Agreement, is not a proof of the same Overt Act, that is laid in
the Indictment as it ought to be by the late Act; unless they can prove that a
Consult of Three is a Consult of Four: and if it be answered, that it is
alleged, that Quilibet eorum super se suscepit, then will that come to be
Issuable and the most material part of the Indictment; and consequently a place
ought to have been laid where it should be Tried; this, my Lord, is a distinct
Sentence of it self, it is in a Parenthesis, and though you take it away the
sense of what remains is perfect and entire, and consequently this Sentence is
or should be entire of it self, and therefore ought certainly to be expressed.
Besides, if your Lordship pleases, it is not positively laid, what these
Persons severally undertook, to be there is indeed mention made before of Forty
Horsemen, agreed upon to set upon the King, then comes the Parenthesis, Quorum
Iidem Christophorus Knightley, Robertus Lowick, Ambrosius Rookwood and Carolus
Cranburn forent Quatuor and quilibet eorum proditorie super se suscepit esse
unum: It is perhaps expressed fully enough by the word Quorum, that it was agreed
these should be Four of the Forty Horsemen; but there wants the repetition of
the word Quorum, to express what they severally engaged to be; and the word and
cannot join and connect the Sentences: For forent and suscepit Differ not only
in Number but also in Mood and Tense, and the sense is not necessarily
coherent; for it might be true, that the Majority of the Company might agree,
these should be Four, and yet they themselves might not severally Engage
therein, and one or some of them might undertake it, and yet the Company not
agreed to it; and it cannot be mended by Intendment. There was Vaux's Case, in
the 4 Rep. 44. He was Indicted for Murder, for persuading a Man to take
Cantharedes; it was laid, That he Perswadebat eundem Nicholaum Recipere and
Bibere Quendam potem mixtum cum Quodam veneo vocat Cantharedes; and the
Indictment says, Quod proedictas Nicholaas Nesciens proedictum potem cum Veneno
proedicto flore in toxicatum sed fidem ad Hibens Dicte perswasioni Willielmi
Resepit and Bibit; but does not say, veneum proedictum, but yet it adds, Per
quod praedictus Nicholaas imediate post Receptionem veneni proedicti,
Languish'd and Dyed here, one would think was a sufficient Implication, that he
took and drank the Poison; but it was Ruled, that none of these words were
sufficient to maintain the Indictment; for the matter of the Indictment ought
to be plain, express, and certain, and shall not be maintained by Argument or
Implication, and therefore for want of those words the Indictment was held
insufficient, and the Man again Indicted for that Offense, and there seems much
more in-certainty in this Indictment, and therefore I humbly pray your Lordship
that it may be Quash't.


Sir B. Shower, My Lord, we think the Objection is fully put, and therefore we
desire to have their Answer to it.


Mr. At. Genesis We think, my Lord, this Objection will receive a very plain
Answer. The Indictment sets forth, that at such a Place the Prisoner at the Bar
did imagine and compass the Death of the King: There is a particular place
where the imagining was, and that they to accomplish that Treason, in
compassing and imagining the Death of the King, did amongst others postea eidem
due anno apud parochiam praedictam, Meet and Consult, etc. So there is the same
place set forth again, wherein they did Meet and Consult of the Ways and Means,
and Time and Place, when, where, and how to Assassinate the King: And
immediately it follows, and Conce serunt and agreaverunt, etc. that Forty Men,
whereof they were to be Four, and every one of them undertook to be One, should
do so and so. Now, my Lord, say they, It is not said that the Agreement, that
there should be Forty Men to do it, was at the same Time and Place where they
did Meet and Consult about the Ways and Means: But my Lord, with Submission, it
is very plain, that the Agreement for Forty Men, and the particular Agreement
for them to be of the Number* is but the effect of the Consultation that is
mentioned just before: For it is said, they Consulted how they should do it,
and they agreed to do it in this manner; the particular manner is set forth
immediately afterthat, it is said they did Consult of the Manner, so that, my
Lord, it is part of the former Sentence; a particularizing of what they did
agree upon at that Consultation; but it is no distinct Overt Act: If it had
been a distinct Overt Act, then the Cases that have been Cited by the Council,
do show, that there should be a particular time and place mentioned for every
Overt Act, but this is only a part of that Overt Act, that was mentioned
generally before: This tells you particularly what the means were they did
agree upon, and the Sentence is not complete till you have gone over this; so
that, my Lord, with Submission, it had been very Improper when they agreed at
such a Time and Place, of the means and ways how it should be effected, then to
set forth, that it was at the same time and Place where they did Consult of the
Ways and Means, that cannot be proper; for it is not laid at first, that there
was any particular way proposed, but only in general, they Consulted of the
Ways and Means; therefore, my Lord, all this that Mr. Mompesson has said, will
not be pertinent to this Case; it is impossible to have been otherwise; it is
but a part of the Sentence; and it is not complete till you have gone over the
several particulars, as to the Case of a Rescus, that is, the Offense upon
which the matter is to be grounded; the Verbaravit and Vulneravit are not the
Offense but the Resmeing; but where there is not one Sentence complete, till
you come to the end of these words, there it must be all taken together; so it
is here, they Consulted of the Way, and agreed this to be the Way, which they
set forth in particular: It is joined to the former part of the Sentence, and
the whole is not complete without it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis With Submission, my Lord, it cannot be otherwise, nor can they
make it sense otherwise.


L. C. J. Holt. They say you might, and should have put in, Ad tunc and Ibidem.


Mr. Sol. Genesis With Submission, my Lord, I say it cannot be repeated again:
Indeed if you would make it like the Case, as Mr. Mompesson would have it, that
Forty Men did agree to it, and Forty Men did it, it were necessary to name Time
and Place, as it is in the Case of Murder; that he did agree to Murder him, and
afterward Knocked him on the Head, there you should lay Time and Place where
he agreed, and where he did the Act, for there is an Act done; but in this Case
there is no Act done, but only an Agreement that Forty should do it, whereof
these Four were to be part of the Number. Now, they cry, you do not say what
these Four were to be for; Yes, we do, the Forty were to do such an Act, and
these were to be Four of that Forty, and every one of them undertook to be one,
so that it cannot be expressed otherwise then it is; for what they say of the
Indictments being not in the same Form that other Indictments are, that will be
no Argument at all; for it does not follow, that there must be one expressed Form
of Indictments, of right there are diverse Forms of Indictments, and all of them
good, because Indictments are to be framed, according to the particular Case,
and they cannot put me an Instance of such a particular Case as this. As to
that of the mistake of the name of Knightley. that unquestionably can be no
Objection at all; for how does it appear to the Court, that this against the
same Person that was before Indicted by the Name of Christopher, there may be
another Christopher ^or ought they know: But I will suppose, that the Consult
was proved not as it is laid, that they were to be Four; but only that they
were to be Three of them, it would be well enough against the Prisoner at the
Bar, if he be proved to be one.


Mr. Conyers. First, we have here laid a time and place for the Treason
alleged in the Indictment, and also for the Two Overt Acts, how, when, and
where it was to be done, and the providing of Arms for it; and for this
particular of the Forty Men, that they would have us put the ad tunc and ibidem
to that is but part of the Overt Act, which was before alleged for the first
Overt Act mentioned, is the Meeting and Consulting, and there we lay both Time
and Place; that on such a Day, and at such a Place, they did meet and Consult
of the way and manner how to do such an Act: And then we continue on the
Sentence, by particularizing how it was to be effected; that they did agree
there should be Forty Horsemen to do it, whereof they were to be Four; this is
but a part of the Overt Act, which is the Consulting and Agreeing upon the ways
and means; this particular means agreed* upon, being but the Result and Effect
of the Consultation before; so that we conceive there is no want of time or
place, upon which to take Issue in this Case.


Mr. Cowper. My Lord, I think with submission, there is nothing in their
Objection, and I take it to have Received a full Answer already; yet I would
ask one thing of the Gentlemen of the other side had the Sentence run without
the Words de iis modis and mediis, etc. which follow after the word
consultavit, and before the words and aggreavit; in this manner, That they did
then and there Traitorously treat, propose, consult and agree, that 40
Horsemen, or thereabouts, with Guns, and so forth. If then there had been any
Color to think it necessary, that it should be laid in this manner, That they
did then and there Traitorously treat, and then and there Traitorously propose,
and then and there Traitorously consult, and did then and there Traitorously
agree: and if not, then I would desire them to tell me why then and there is
more necessary to one Verb did agree, than it is to all the rest, in sense and
common speaking. The only use of a Conjunction Copulative, is to derive the
force of some Words in a Sentence foregoing, down to a Sentence following, to
avoid repetition: And here, though after the Consultation be put many Words
that relate to that matter by way of Parenthesis; yet the ad tunc and ibidem
still does referr to all the Verbs following, being joined by the Conjunction
Copulative; it does not vary the Case at all, the putting in that Parenthesis;
it is notwithstanding but as one Sentence: and the supposing that the
Parenthesis stood out* makes it very plain, there can be no Color to say there
wanted a Repetition of the ad tunc and ibidem to every Verb.


Sir B. Shower. With submission to your Lordships Judgment, there is no Answer
made to this Objection: I do agree, if there had been several Verbs and no
other Words had intervened, that an Et would have Coupled all together, and you
need not have repeated ad tunc and ibidem to every one: But here is a Fact
after the Verbs that makes one complete, entire Sentence; and if this of the 40
Men were left out, it had been a good Sentence, that they did propose and treat
how, where and when; that is a Sentence of it self, the Consulting and the
Treating of the Ways and Means: But then they say, And they did agree and
assent that 40 should do it; now there is no necessity for the interpreting of
these words, That they should consult and agree at the same place and time;
there is no necessity to conjoyn this Agreement for the 40 Men with the
Consultation; they might propose and consult at one time and place, and not
agree, and afterward agree at another time and place; it is not a
Specification, or, as they call it, a specific Account of the Consultation,
nor a necessary Effect of it, so as to make it necessary to join them together;
they might meet and consult at one time and place; and at another time and
place they might agree that 40 should do it; and therefore when you say at one
time and place they did consult and propose, and afterward they did agree; it
is not necessarily implied, that it must be at the same time and place; and
when it is not necessarily implied, we think it necessary in Indictments, for
Certainty-sake, to have ad tunc and ibidem inserted again.


Mr. Mompesson. My Lord, Mr. Solicitor says, That as to other Precedents, th^^
does not make it necessary that this should be like them; and that it is no
Argument that it ought to be so here. My Lord Coke, in Calvin's Case, tells us,
That by Precedents the Law is known, and that Indictments of Treason are of all
things the most curiously Penned; and it is common to infer the Law is so,
because usually it is so in the Precedents of Indictments. Mr. Solicitor says
likewise, That there may be a Christopher Knightley besides an Alexander; but I
cannot take that for an Answer to the Exception I urge, which is the want of ad
tunc and ibidem at the Quorum, and the Quilibet for the Quilibet may come to be
in Question as the most material part of the Indictment, because the Agreement
of the Four upon the meeting of the Four is alleged as an Overt Act: Now, with
submission, they must prove the Assembly of the whole Four, or they do not
prove the Overt Act expressly laid; then as to the Quilibet suscepit, which is
the most material part, it has no time nor place.


Mr. At. Genesis No sure, we do not need to prove all Four, for it is a distinct
Offense in each; and if any one undertook, it is well enough against him; and
for the time and place, we tell you, it is part of the former Sentence, and
makes but an entire one.


Mr. Mompesson. As for the Residue of the Verbs, if they had been omitted, it
had been good Sense; but this is a perfect entire Sentence of itself, when it
tells you what they consulted and treated off, as in the Case of the Rescous
that I put; if it had stopped there, it had been a good Sentence without the
Vulneraverunt.


Mr. At. Genesis The Rescous is the Offense in that Case, the other is distinct:
But here, in this Case, nothing can be plainer than that all is one Act, as we
have laid it, That at such a time and place they did consult and treat of the
Ways and Means; but then there is no Agreement mentioned till after we have
said they did consult of the Ways and Means, and did agree that this should be
the Way: This is certainly one entire Sentence that shows what the Agreement
was upon the Consultation as the Result of it.


Mr. Cowper. As to what Sir Bartholomew Shower says, That we ought to repeat
the ad tunc and ibidem, unless the sense of the Words implies a Necessity that
the Consultation and the Agreement should be at one time and place. My Lord,
there can be nothing in that, for it does not arise from the Necessity of the
thing one way or the other; but we take it as an entire Sentence, and that the
whole Matter is sufficiently connected and laid to one time and place, though
it might be divided, it must be taken, as alleged, to be one entire Fact, or
else it Recurrs to the same Objection, that ad tunc and ibidem must as well be
put to every Verb; for it is possible they might propose at one time and place,
and consult at another, and debate at another, as well as agree at another: So
that nothing is to be argued from the Necessity of the thing more in one Case
than the other; for one Man might propose it in one place, and the rest might
then shake their heads at it, and then they might again meet and consult at
another place, and afterward agree at a third: But when it is said then and
there they did meet, consult and agree, it cannot be understood but that the
Agreement was at the same time and place with the meeting and consult.


Sir B. Shower. But this can be no Answer that Mr. Cowper gives now, for
Proposing, and Consulting, and Treating, and Debating, are all of the same
signification, for one Man's proposing to another; and the other's proposing to
him, is Consulting, Treating and Debating; but now Consulting and Agreeing are
different things.


Mr. Cowper. So is Proposing and Consulting; One may propose, but there must be
at least Two to consult: there is that nice Difference between them.


Sir B. Shower. Every one must agree for himself, and that must be certainly
laid with Time and Place, let the Proposal and Consultation be what it will.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Mompesson puts that Case in Dyer upon an Indictment of
Murder, That on such a Day, and at such a Place, the Party made an Assault upon
the persons slain, and percussit; but does not say, Et ad tunc and ibidem
percussit, and for not alleging that the Indictment was held naught.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, that is a different Case from this, because insultum
fecit, and the percussit, are different Crimes; there is a great Difference
between an Assault and a Stroke: But here it is, That they did Propose and
Consult of the Ways and Means, and agreed upon this particular Way; that is the
same thing; it is not an entire Sentence till you come to the end of it, then
it is complete when you show what was the Effect of the Consultation; what they
were agreed upon, and not till then.


Mr. Mompesson. A Man's holding up his Hand is an Assault, but he must actually
strike to be Guilty of Murder: So a Man may debate, and yet not agree; it is
the Agreement that is the Treason.


L. C. J. Holt. Read the Indictment.


Cl. of Arr. DEcimo die Februarii anno Regni dicti Domini Regis nunc septimo,
and diversis aliis diebus and vicibus, tam antea quam postea, apud Parochiam
Sancti Pauli Covent Garden, proedict', in Comitatu proedict' false, malitiose,
Diabolice, proditorie, Compassaverunt, Imaginati and Machinati fuerunt,
Excogitaverunt, Designaverunt and Intendebant dictum Dominum Regem nunc
occidere, interficere, and murdrare, and stragem miserabilem inter fideles
subditos ipsius Domini Regis per totum hoc Regnum Anglioe passere and causare
and ad easdem nefandissimas, nequissimas and Diabolicas proditiones and
proditorias compassationes, machinationes, and proposita sua proedicta
perimplend' perficiend' and ad effectum redigend' ipsi iidem Christopherus
Knightley, Robertus Lowick, Ambrosius Rookewood and Carolus Cranburne, and quam
plurimi alii falsi proditores (Jurator' proedictis ignoti) postea scilicet
eodem decimo die Februarii anno supradicto apud Parochiam proedictam in Com'
proedicto, ac diversis aliis diebus and vicibus, tam antea quam postea, ibidem
and alibi in eodem Com' falso, malitiose, advisate, clandestine, proditorie, ac
vi and armis conveniebant, proposuer' tractaver' consultaver' consenser' and
aggregaver' ad ipsum Dominum Regem nunc ex insidiis and dolo percutiend',
Anglice to assassinate, interficiend* and murdrand' and ad execrabilem,
horrendam and detestabilem Assassination', Anglice Assassination, and
Interfectionem ill' citius exequend* and perpetrand' postea, scilicet eisdem
die and anno ac diversis aliis diebus and vicibus apud paroch' proed' in Com'
proedicto proditorie tractaver' proposuer' and consultaver' de viis, modis and
mediis ac tempore and loco ubi, quando, qualiter and quomodo dictum Dominum
Regem sic ex insidiis facilius interficerent, and consenser' aggregaverunt and
assenser' quod quadragint' homines Equestres aut eo circiter (quor' iidem
Christopherus Knightley, Robertus Lowick, Ambrosius Rookewood and Carolus
Cranburne sorent quatuor, and quilibet eor' proditorie super se suscepit esse
unum) cum Bombardis, sclopis and sclopetis, pulvere bombardico, and globulis
plumbeis onerat' and cum gladiis, ensibus and aliis Armis armat' insidiati
forent and essent in subsessu, Anglice in Ambush, ad eundem Dominum Regem in
Rheda sua, Anglice his Coach, existen quando foris iret invadend' Quodque
quidem and competens numerus de hominibus illis sic armat' in satellites,
Anglice the Guards, ipsius Domini Regis eum tunc attendend and secum existen'
aggressi forent and eos expugnarent and devincerent, dum alii eorundem hominum
sic armat' ipsum Dominum Regem percuterent, interficerent, occiderent and
murdrarent.
Mr. Mompesson. The Consult is like the Assault, and the Agreement is like the
Stroke.


L. C. J. Treby. It is a nice Case as you would have it, but I think it is very
natural as the King's Council put it at first; they lay the Consultation of the
Ways and Means how it should be done, and then they conclude that thus it shall
be done: all which makes but one entire thing.


L. C. J. Holt. They say they met that day at St. Paul Covent Garden, that is in
the beginning, and did consult how to Kill the King; and they consented and
agreed among themselves, that it should be done in this manner: Does not this
referr to both Time and Place in the beginning? It is a continuing on of the
same Sentence, and makes all but one and the same Act; it is the Result of the
Consultation at that time and place.


Sir B. Shower. But, my Lord, it might be at another place: they might Consult
at one place, and Conclude at another.


Mr. Conyers. But it is laid to be at the same place, for no other place does
appear, and it is one continued Sentence.


L. C. J. Treby. You would make the Repetition so frequent and reiterated, that
it would become absurd.


Mr. At. Genesis Indeed I do not know what these Gentlemen would have.


Sir B. Shower. We would have this Indictment as all others are, the Precedents
are as we say, and we hope this shall pursue 'em, or else be quasht.


L. C. J. Holt. Look ye here, Sir Bartholomew Shower; Suppose this part should
not be right, that will not Vitiate the whole Indictment.


Mr. Mompesson. But your Lordship wont suffer them to give Evidence of that
part that is Vicious.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, yes; it comes within the first Words of the Time and Place
laid; they may give Evidence of it* because this is but a setting forth the
Manner agreed upon for the Execution of the Design that was before consulted
and treated off; it is comprehended in the former Words; and if they had
omitted this out of the Indictment, the Indictment had been never the worse;
there had been a sufficient Overt Act alleged to prove the Compassing and
Imagining the Death of the King; for if People at such a place and time meet,
and propose the way and means how to effect it, do you think the Indictment
would not be good enough without laying the particular means agreed upon?
Certainly it had been well enough if this had been omitted. Do you think they
cannot give in Evidence this as a Proof of the Overt Act? Certainly they may.


Sir B. Shower. The Question will be, my Lord, then upon the whole, Whether the
Conclusion of the Indictment, contra legiantiae suae Debitum, shall be taken
Distributively to every Fact, and if so, then there ought to be time and place
alleged to every Fact.


L. C. J. Holt. Suppose you lay several Overt Acts, and prove but one yet he is
to be found Guilty of the High Treason, which is the Imagination, and
Compassing the Death of the King, which is the Crime laid in the Indictment;
then suppose this was left out of the Indictment they might give it in Evidence
as a Proof of the Overt Act, that is well laid for time and place; and
therefore though it be expressed, and not so fully and particularly laid, we
cannot quash the Indictment for it, because the Indictment would have been
good, though that had been omitted.


L. C. J. Treby. That is certainly true, it is no Cause for quashing the
Indictment.


Mr. Soll. Genesis The Indictments against the Regicides were for Compassing the
Death of the King, and they gave in Evidence that he was put to Death, though
they charged in the Indictment only the Compassing and Imagining the Death of
the King.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay sure, That is an Overt Act with a Witness, the Indictment
was not laid for Murdering the King, but for Compassing his Death, which is the
Treason according to the Act of Parliament of 25th, Ed. the 3d. and as an Overt
Act they gave the cutting off his Head in Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis The Indictment says, they Compassed and Imagined the Kings
death, and they agreed to do it in this manner; if this be not all one entire
Sentence I know not what is


L. C. J. Holt. As to your Case, Mr. Mompesson, which you quote out of Dyer, it
is possible a man may make an Assault at one time, and at another time make an
Assault and give a stroke, but this is all one Act, it does but specify what
was generally consulted off and proposed.


L. C. J. Treby. Pray, do you think a man may Demurr upon a Common Action of
Battery where, it is said first, at such a time and place, Insultum fecit and
verberavti, vulneravit, because there is not a place set to every word.


Mr. Mompesson. Indictments ought to be very curiously Penned, and what is good
in an Action will not be good in an Indictment, with submission.


L. C. J. Treby. But suppose you showed it for Cause upon special Demurr.


Mr. Mompes. My Lord, I cannot tell what it would amount unto.


L. C. J. Holt. You cannot quash the Indictment at this time, that is not
possible, because the Indictment is good as to the rest, supposing this was not
so well as it might be.


Mr. Mompes. Then, my Lord, I am in your Lordships Judgment, whether they shall
be admitted to give in Evidence this particular thing.


L. C. J. Holt. They may certainly give in Evidence, the Agreement to have 40
men to kill the King, as a proof of the Consultation, Agreement and Consent to
kill the King; and the Consenting to have 40 Horsemen is an Evidence of their
treating, proposing and consulting to kill the King. Then for your Objection of
Quilibet suscepit to be one, that is well enough, it is all still but one
Sentence.


Sir B. Shower. One of which is it, for they have not laid in the Indictment
what it is, whether it be one of the Four, or one of the Forty.


L. C. J. Holt. Whether it be one of the Four, or the Forty is not material,
for cannot one be found Guilty and the rest Acquitted? the one is not charged
with the Act of the other, but they are several Offenses, and each must answer
for himself in all Indictments. Offenses are several. Suppose an Indictment of
Conspiracy, and it is laid in the Indictment that Four did Conspire, cannot you
prove that two Conspired? no Question you may. It is not certainly necessary
that every one should be proved to have Conspired. Suppose it were alleged
that Four did beat a man, and does not say Quilibet eorum beat him, you may
give in Evidence that one did beat him.


Sir B. Shower. No Question of that in Case of a Battery, but in the Case of a
Conspiracy there must be more than one.


L. C. J. Holt. Nay, I will ask you even in an Action of Conspiracy, where the
very Gist of the Action is Conspiring together, cannot two be found Guilty and
the rest Acquitted? In Riots there must be Three or more It may be you will lay
Ten, but it is sufficient; I hope, if you prove it upon any Three of them.


Mr. At. Genesis The Difference is betwixt Contracts and Crimes, for Contracts
they are joint, but Crimes they are in their own Nature several.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Besides, my Lord, though they be out of time, yet this is not
to the Abatement of the Indictment; but to the Evidence; how do they know, but
we will give it in Evidence that Christopher Knightly was one.


L. C. J. Treby. Mr. Mompesson moves it as a Caveat against your giving it in
Evidence.


Sir B. Shower. If in an Outlawry against diverse they leave out these words,
Nec eorum aliquis comperuit, that is every day held to be naught, and for that
Reason we say, the Quilibet eorum suscepit is necessary too, and without being
laid cannot be given in Evidence, and if it be laid, it ought to have time and
place.


L. C. J. Treby. The Default of appearance must be a several thing, and when he
lays it jointly non comperuerunt, it may be true that all did not appear, if
any one made Default; but when you Charge men with a Fact done, though in the
plural number, yet it is a distinct separate Charge upon every one.


Cl. of Arr. Robert Lowick those men that thou shall hear called, and
personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King, and you,
upon Trial of your Life and Death; if therefore you will Challenge them, or any
of them; your time is to speak to them as they come to the Book to be sworn,
and before they be sworn. George Ford.


Lowick. I do not except against him.


Cl. of Arr. Hold the Book to Mr. Ford.


Crier. Look upon the Prisoner, you shall well and truly try, and true
Deliverance make, between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at the
Bar, whom you shall have in Charge, and a true Verdict give according to your
Evidence: So help you God.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Trench.


Lowick. I have nothing to say against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. John Wolf.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. James Bodington.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. John Raymond.


Lowick. I say nothing against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. George Hawes.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. Thomas Glover.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Matthew Bateman.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. James Partherith.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Blisset.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Alexander Forth.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Francis Chapman.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Nicholas Roberts.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Playstead.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. John Hall.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. William Partridge.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Peter Levigne.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Moody.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Ramage.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. Edward Townesend.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. William Gunson.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. John Wyborne, he did not appear. William Strode.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. William Wild.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. William Pitts.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
C. of Arr. William Smith.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. Moses Cook.


Lowick. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Benjamin Boltby.


Lowick. I do not except against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. Elias Fletcher.


Lowick. I have nothing to say against him.

(He was Sworn.)
Cl. of Arr. Crier countez. George Ford.


Crier. One, etc.


Cl. of Arr. Elias Fletcher.


Crier. Twelve Good Men and True, stand together and hear Your Evidence.


L. C. J. Holt. Now the rest of the Jury that have appeared are Discharged.


Cl. of Arr. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. Oyez, If any one can Inform My Lord's the King's Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, the King's Sergeant or the Kings Attorney General, before this
Inquest be taken of the High Treason, whereof the Prisoner at the Bar stands
Indicted, let them come forth, and they shall be heard, for now the Prisoner
stands at the Bar upon his Deliverance; and all others that are bound by
Recognizance to give Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come
forth and give their Evidence, or else they forfeit their Recognizance. The
Names of the Twelve Sworn are these; George Ford. Esquire Jur. Thomas Trench. Esquire
Jur. John Wolf. Esquire Jur. John Raymond. Esquire Jur. George Hawes. Esquire Jur. Matthew
Bateman. Esquire Jur. Thomas Ramage. Gent. Jur. William Wild. Gent. Jur. William
Pitts. Gent. Jur. William Smith. Gent. Jur. Benjamin Boltby, Gent. Jur. and
Elias Fletcher. Gent. Jur.



Cl. of Arr. Robert Lowick hold up thy hand; which he did. You that are Sworn,
look upon the Prisoner and hearken to his Cause. He stands Indicted by the Name
of Robert Lowick, late of the Parish of St. Paul Convent-Garden, in the County
of Middlesex, Gentleman; for that he, together with Christopher Knightley, late
of the same Parish and County, Gentleman; Ambrose Rookwood, late of the same
Parish and County, Gentleman; and Charles Cranburne, late of the same Parish
and County, Yeoman; not having the Fear of God in their Hearts, nor weighing
the Duty of their Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of
the Devil, as false Traitors against the most Serene, most Illustrious, most
Mild and most Excellent Prince, our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the III. by the
Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith, etc. their Supreme, True and Rightful, Lawful and Undoubted Lord; the
Cordial Love and True, and Due Obedience, Fidelity and Allegiance, which every
Subject of our said Lord the King, that now is, toward him our said Lord the
King, should then of right, ought to bear, withdrawing and utterly to
extinguish, intending and Contriving, and with all their strength Purposing,
Designing and Conspiring the Government of this Kingdom of England, under him
our said Lord the King that now is, our right, duly, happily, and very well
established, altogether to subvert, change, and alter; as also the same our
Lord the King to Death and final Destruction to put* and bring, and his
faithful Subjects, and the Freemen of this Kingdom of England, into
intolerable and most miserable Slavery to Lewis the French King, to subengate
and inthral, the 10th day of February, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and diverse other days and times, as well
before, as after, at the Parish of St. Paul's Covent Garden aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, falsely, maliciously, devilishly, and traitorously, did
Compass, Imagine, and Contrive, Purpose, Design, Intend, our said Lord the King
that now is, to Kill, Slay, and Murder; and miserable Slaughter among the
faithful Subjects of our said Lord the King throughout this whole Kingdom of
England, to make, and cause, and the same their most wicked, impious, and
devilish Treasons, and traitorous Compassings, Contrivances, and Purposes
aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect, they the said Christopher
Knightly, Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburn, and very many
other false Traitors to the Jurors unknown; afterward, to wit the same Tenth
Day of February, in the Year abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, and diverse other Days and Times, as well before, as after; there,
and elsewhere, in the same County, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, secretly,
and traitorously; and with Force and Arms did meet together, propose, treat,
consult, consent, and agree, him our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is,
by lying in Wait and Wild, to assassinate, kill, and murder, and that
execrable, horrid, and detestable Assassination and Killing, the sooner to
execute and perpetrate; afterward, to wit, the same Day and Year, and diverse
other Days and Times, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid;
traitorously did treat, propose, and consult, of the Ways, Manner, and Means,
and the Time and Place, where, when, how, and in what manner, our said Lord the
King, so by lying in Wait, the more easily they might kill; and did consent,
agree, and assent, that Forty Horsemen, or thereabouts; of whom the said
Christopher Knightly, Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburn,
would be Four; and every one of them traitorously took upon himself to be one,
with Guns, Muskets, and Pistols, laden with Gun powder and Leaden Bullets;
and, with Swords, Rapiers, and other Arms, armed, should lie in Wait, and be in
Ambush, the same our Lord the King in his Coach being, when he should go abroad
to set upon, and that a certain and competent number of those Men so armed
should set upon the Guards of him our said Lord the King then attending on him,
and being with him, and should fight with them, and overcome them, whilst
others of the same Men so armed, him, our said Lord the King, to assassinate,
kill, slay, and murder: and they the said Christostopher Knightly, Robert
Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburn, their Treasons, and all their
Traitorous Intentions, Designs, and Contrivances aforesaid, to execute,
perpetrate, fulfill, and bring to effect afterward, to wit the aforesaid 10th
day of February, in the Seventh Year abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, diverse Horses, and very many Arms, Guns, Pistols, Rapiers,
and Swords, and other Weapons; Ammunition, and Warlike things, and Military
Instruments, falsely, maliciously, secretly, and traitorously did obtain, buy,
gather together, and procure; and did cause to be bought, obtained, gathered
together, and procured with that Intent, them, in and and about the detestable,
horrid, and execrable Assassination, Killing, and Murder of our said Lord the
King, that now is, as aforesaid, to use, employ, and bestow; and the same
promises the more safely, and certainly to execute, do, and perpetrate, he the
aforesaid Christopher Knightly, with one Edward King, lately of High Treason,
in contriving and conspiring the Death of our said Lord the King that now is,
duly convicted and attainted, by the Consent and Assent of diverse of the
Traitors and Conspirators aforesaid, the said tenth day of February, in the
Seventh Year abovesaid, traitorously did go and come to the place proposed,
where such intended Assassination, Killing, and Murder, of our said Lord the
King, by lying in Wait, should be done, perpetrated and committed, to view,
see, and observe, the Convenience and Fitness of the same place for such lying
in Wait, Assassination, and Killing, there to be done, perpetrated and
committed; and that place being so viewed and observed afterward, to wit, the
same day and year, his Observations thereof to several of the said Traitors and
Conspirators, did relate and impart, to wit, at the Parish aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, and the aforesaid Charles Cranburn, the same Day and Year
there in order, the same execrable, horrid, and detestable Assassination, and
Killing of our said Lord the King, by the Traitors and Conspirators aforesaid,
the more readily and boldly to execute, perpetrate, and commit, advisedly,
knowingly, and traitorously, did bear and carry among diverse of those Traitors
and Conspirators forwards and backwards, from some to others of them, a List of
the Names of diverse men of those who were designed and appointed, our said Lord
the King, so as aforesaid, by lying in Wait to kill and murder, against the
Duty of the Allegiance of them the said Christopher Knightly, Robert Lowick,
Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburn; and against the Peace of our said
Sovereign Lord the King that now is, his Crown and Dignity, as also against the
form of the Statute in such Case made and provided: Upon this Indictment, he
has been arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded Not Guilty; and for his Trial
has put himself upon God and the Country, which Country you are: your Charge
is to inquire, whether he be Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
indicted, or Not Guilty; if you find him Guilty, you are to inquire, what Goods
or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, he had at the time of the High Treason
committed, or at any time since, to your Knowledge. If you find him Not Guilty,
you are to inquire whether he fled for it, if you find he fled for it, you are
to inquire of his Goods and Chattels, as as if you had found him Guilty; if you
find him Not Guilty, and that he did not fly for it, you are to say so, and no
more; and hear your Evidence.


Mr. Mountague. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
this is an Indictment of High Treason against Robert Lowick, Prisoner at the
Bar, and the Indictment does charge him with compassing and imagining the Death
of the King, and endeavoring to subvert the Government, and inslave this
Kingdom of England, and bring it under French Tyranny and Slavery, and the
Indictment sets forth that Robert Lowick, the Prisoner at the Bar, the Tenth of
February, met several false Traitors, and there consulted and treated how to
assassinate his Majesty; and agreed, that 40 Horsemen to get together, some to
attack the Guards, while others were to assassinate the King in his Coach; and
the Indictment charges him likewise, with getting together Horses and Arms for
this purpose, to this he has pleaded Not Guilty. We will call our Evidence,
and prove the Fact against him, and we do not doubt but you will do your Duty.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen that are
sworn, this is an Indictment of High Treason, in conspiring and compassing the
Death and Destruction of the King, the nature of our Evidence against the
Prisoner at the Bar.

You will hear Gentlemen by the Witnesses that about Christmas last a
Conspiracy and Design was set on foot to assassinate the King, and accordingly
to accomplish it, there were several persons sent over from France by the late
King James, who were part of his Guards, and particularly Sir George Barclay
was to be the Head of them; he was a Lieutenant of the Guards there, and he was
sent over in January last, and there were a great many Troopers sent over, who
were to be under his Direction, particularly Mr. Harris, who will give you an
account, that he was sent over by order of King James, and he was told
particularly King James had a Service for him to do in England, and he hoped it
might be an opportunity to advance him. He was to observe the Orders of Sir
George Barclay, and by what Token he should know him; he was to meet him in
Covent Garden, and he was told he might find him there twice a week in the
Square, about six a Clock after it was dark; and that he might know him, he
told him, he would have his White Handerchief hanging out of his Pocket,
accordingly Mr. Harris came over, and Mr. Hare came with him, and they came and
did meet with Sir George Barclay, and they, together with Sir George Barclay,
and several others here in England, Mr. Porter, Mr. Charnock, and Sir William
Parkyns, did enter into Consultation how to effect it; there were several
Meetings about it, and you will find the Prisoner at the Bar was at several
Meetings to that purpose, and they did undertake, among them, to provide so
many Men as might make about the Number of 40, which they thought sufficient
for the execuion of this Design.

Gentlemen, you will hear that the Prisoner at the Bar did treat with several
persons to be engaged in it; particularly, about the 5th of February, he sent
to one Bertram, and asked him, if he would be engaged in a Design for King
James's Service that was quickly to be executed, without asking of Questions,
and afterward I think he undertook he would; so about the 14th February he met
him again, and that was the day before the first time they intended to attack
the King* and then being so near the time when it was to be executed, he
thought it proper to acquaint him with the thing he had engaged him in, and he
did acquaint him, that the next morning they were to be ready to attack the
King and his Guards, and bid him be sure to get his Boots and other things
ready for that purpose, and he gave him a Guinea in order to it. Bertram, it
seems, on the 15th of February did not come, and the King it seems did not go
abroad that day, so they were disappointed at that time; but the Sunday after
Bertram met him, and Mr. Lowick complained that he had not come upon the
Saturday according as he had undertaken; and he told him it would have been the
same thing, he would have disappointed them if the King had been in the Field.

Gentlemen, you shall find, that as he thus engaged Mr. Bertram, so he was to
provide several others; and he did declare, that at his own Charge he had got 2
or 3, he complained of it as a Hardship put upon him, that whereas Mr. Harris
had 6 s. a day Subsistence, and was only to take care of himself, he, Mr.
Lowick, had at his own Charges engaged and provided several.

You will find Gentlemen that Mr. Rookwood, who was tried Yesterday, had
several Meetings about it, with Mr. Lowick and Mr. Harris; they did think it to
be a barbarous thing: but however they were resolved to obey Orders, and the
Prisoner in particular said he would obey Orders, tho he thought it a very
wicked thing.

Gentlemen, you will find by the Evidence how the Matter was carried on; the
Prisoner was to be engaged in it, and did not only imbarque himself in Person,
but engaged others, and did treat with them about it. We shall call our
Witnesses, who will give you a full account of it, and then we shall leave it
with you, who we question not will do Justice: First call George Harris; who
appeared and was sworn.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray will you give an account to my Lord and the Jury, what you
know of the intended Assassination, and what part the Prisoner at the Bar had
in it.


Mr. Conyers. Begin from the first, and tell your whole Knowledge as you did
Yesterday.


Mr. Harris. On the fourteenth of January, New Style, I was ordered to wait
King James at Dinner; after Dinner was over, I was called in, where was Coll.
Parker, and Mr. Hare, at the same time, and King James told me he was very
sensible of the good Service I had done him; and now he had an opportunity of
doing something for me: I was to go into England, and there to be subsisted,
and I was to follow the Orders of Sir George Barclay; the King told me I should
find Sir George Barclay in Covent Garden, with a White Hanker chief hanging out
of his Pocket, on Mondays and Thursdays between the Hours of six and seven in
the Evening, and that was the sign I was to know him by, and he ordered me to
go to Mr. Caroll, that is Secretary to the late Queen, and Coll. Parher went
along with me, and he ordered me ten Lewedores, and Mr. Hare as much, which Mr.
Caroll gave us; and if that were not sufficient, or if we were Wind-bound at
Calice, we had Orders to apply to the President of Calice to be furnished with
what we wanted: Accordingly we went, and the Wind not serving when we came to
Calice, we were forced to stay there, and our Charges were paid to our Landlady
by the President of Calice, according to the Order we received at St. Germains;
when the Wind served fair we went on Board, and came to Rumney-Marsh, to one
Mr. Hunt's House, and from thence he furnished us with a Couple of Horses, and
we came the Sandy-way to one Mr. Tucker's, and from thence to Mr. Cross's, and
from thence to Graves-end, and from thence to London: We came up in the
Night-Tide, and being late when we came to Town. Sunday Night we lay at an Inn
at the lower-end of Gracious-street; the next Day we went to look for Sir
George Barclay, but not finding him in Covent Garden, according to what King
James told us, I admired at it; but one Mr. Birkenhead meeting my Comrade the
next day, said Sir George Barclay desired to see us, and appointed us to meet
him, which we did that Night, where Sir George Barclay asked us how the King
and Queen, Prince and Princess did; he told us at that time he had no Money for
us, but in a few Days we should have Money; and accordingly he sent us Money.
We had five Guineas but it was at twice, two Guineas at one time and three at
another, and this was for a Months Subsistence at Five Shillings a Day, Guineas
going then at Thirty Shillings. And afterward when Major Holmes delivered the
Horse, upon Saturday the fifteenth, we had another Guinea that made up what we
had to be six Shillings a Day when we had Horses, and five Shillings a Day when
we had none: and as for Mr. Lowick, the first Saturday which was designed for
the Assassination, I happened to be at Mr. Counter's Lodgings in Holbourn, a
Confectioners; and there I see Mr. Lowick come in.


Mr. Conyers. Who Lodged there, pray Sir?


Harris. Sir George Barclay and Mr. Counter had Lodgings there, and Mr. Lowick
came in there, but I cannot say he staid there any time, I think he went out
presently afterward. The next Week I met Mr. Lowick in Red-Lion-Fields and
discoursed with him there about this Matter, and I told him what a barbarous
and inhumane thing it was that we should be the Murderers of the Prince of
Orange, and that it would render us odious to the World, and that we should be
a continual Reproach to our Selves; he did agree it was so: But in conclusion
Mr. Lowick said he would obey Orders, and he said Sir George Barclay he was
sure would not do it without Orders. That Day when we were walking out we met
Sir George Barclay and Major Holmes riding in the Highway up toward
Islington, and we spoke to him, for Mr. Lowick told me the Thing was
discovered, and his Name was given up, and other Gentlemen's, and I think
another; and so he told me that one Harrison had told him of it, and forewarned
him that Night from lying in his Lodging; and he told him that he believed it
would not be safe for the rest to lie in their Lodgings, or to that effect.


Mr. At. Genesis When he said he would obey Orders, What was the Discourse about?


Harris. We were talking of Murdering the Prince of Orange; and not only that,
but I do believe that Mr. Lowick is so sensible that what I say is true, and he
is a Man of so much Conscience and Honor, that he will not contradict any
thing that I affirm or have said here. On Saturday the Two and Twentieth we
dined at the Castle, a Tavern or a Cook's Shop, at the end of Red-Lyon-Street.
I was much in a Sweat, and he asked me what made me so? I told him I had been
getting Captain Rookwood's Party ready; and I told him laughing, that Captain
Rookwood said I should be his Aid du Camp, and so I was getting the Men
together: says he to me, you may very well do it, for you have Six Shillings a
day, and I have nothing. Mr. Lowick, you know what I say to be true, I know not
why you lift up your hands; but you did tell me I might very well do it, having
Six Shillings a day, and you had nothing, and yet brought a couple of Men at
your own Charge, and that their Horses could not be discharged unless you went.
These were his Words, my Lord, or to this effect.


Mr. At. Genesis What do do mean by being discharged?


Harris. I mean this, that I believed he paid for them; and they were waiting
at a House till he came.


Mr. Conyers. Why were they to be discharged that day?


Harris. The Reason why they were to be discharged that day was, because
Captain Rookwood had told him before, that the Prince of Orange did not go out
that day; and therefore we went together to walk toward Islington.


L. C. J. Holt. What day was that?


Harris. The second Saturday that it was to have been executed. I was not a Spy
upon any Man's actions: I cannot tell what they did any more than I tell you: I
do not wrong you any way in the World, Sir, I am sure on it.


L. C. J. Holt. When was it that you spoke with Mr. Lowick about Murdering the
King?


Harris. It was Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, I cannot be exact to
the day, but it was one of these days, after the first Saturday; I cannot be
positive what the day was.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, it was between the two days?


Harris. Yes, it was.


L. C. J. Holt. How did you know of that Design of Murdering the King?


Harris. I was informed of it by Captain Rookwood the first Saturday, and I met
Mr. Lowick and had this Discourse about it; and afterward they informed me
that Mr. La Rue did not lie at his Lodgings, and the thing was discovered, and
they believed that Rue had discovered it: And I desire you will call Mr. La Rue
as to this Matter; for I believe he will own it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis How came you to trust him with such a Discourse?


Harris. Because we met there at Counter's Lodgings, and we had several times
Discourses of it; there was Major Bernard and Captain Rookwood besides, and I
always declared against it, as a barbarous inhumane thing, not to be answered
before God or Man, and that we should be odious to all the World if the thing
were effected, as I believed it would not be. I would never show my Head after
such a thing.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Do you remember who began the Discourse of this matter?


Harris. I cannot tell that. I cannot come to every particular.


Sir Barth. Shower. You said just now, you apprehended Mr. Lowick to be a Man
of Conscience and Honor; Pray what were his Sentiments about it?


Harris. His Sentiment was, that he would obey Sir George Barclay's Orders, and
he was sure Sir George Barclay would not do it without Orders.


Sir Barth. Shower. Did not he declare it to be a Barbarous Design?


Harris. I cannot remember every particular thing that he said; for I am not a
Spy upon any Man's Actions.


Lowick. When you were talking of that Design that you speak of, pray did I
consent to any such thing?


Harris. I tell you how far you consented; you said you would obey Sir George
Barclay's Orders, and you was sure he would not do it without Orders.


Mr. Mompesson. Did you see any of Sir George Barclay's Orders?


Harris. No, I did not, I was to follow his Orders; but what Orders he had I
cannot tell.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What did Sir George Barclay tell you you were to do?


Harris. Sir George Barclay declared on the first Saturday that we were his
Janissaries, and talked of attacking and bringing away the Garter: I cannot say
this Gentleman was by then; and afterward Sir George Barclay went out and
returned, and came in again into the Room, and declared that we were Men of
Honor, and that we were to attack the Prince of Orange.


Mr. Mompesson. Did Sir George Barclay give the Prisoner at the Bar any Orders.


Harris. I don't tell you he did.


Mr. Mompesson. You say you met Sir George Barclay and Major Holmes upon the
Road going to Islington: How do you know the Prisoner was there?


Harris. Why, was not I with him? I am very sorry to come upon this Account;
but you know it is Truth all that I say; and I am sure you are sensible I do
you no Wrong: he met Sir George Barclay and Major Holmes, and he went down and
said something to Sir George Barclay in the Highway; what it was I don't know;
but I stood, and Captain Rookwood and Mr. Bernard said something to him, which
you very well know.


Mr. At. Genesis What was it?


Harris. I cannot tell, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis We do not desire you to tell what you cannot tell: Is this all
you know?


Harris. It is all at present that I recollect.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then pray swear Mr. Bertram

(which was done.)
Mr. Conyers. Pray will you give an Account to my Lord and the Jury what you
know of this Intended Assassination, and how far the Prisoner was concerned in
it.


Bertram. My Lord, about the beginning of February last, Major Lowick came to
me, and asked me if I would espouse a thing with him that might be for my
Advantage; I told him that I thought I might espouse any thing that he thought
fit to engage in.


Mr. Mompesson. Whom did you tell so?


Bertram. Major Lowick; and he told me it was well, and desired me to ask no
more Questions: I did not, but it went on till the 14th of February, when he
desired me to be at his Lodgings at Twelve a Clock. I was so, about that time,
but he was not within, and I staid till he came in, and he took me up into his
Chamber, and told me he believed they should Ride out in some little time; and
he told me he believed the King was to be seized in his Coach; and he gave me a
Guinea to buy me Necessaries.


L. C. J. Holt. What Necessaries?


Bertram. I cannot say he named any.


Mr. At. Genesis But for what purpose were those Necessaries?


Bertram. I don't know that he named any thing, indeed.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, Did he tell you when you were to be ready?


Bertram. If you please to give me leave, I Will tell you: He desired me not to
be out of the way; and the next Morning I was to meet him at the Purl House in
Hartstreet. I did not meet him; and the next time I saw him, I am not positive
whether it was the next day after the Fifteenth when I was to meet him at
Hartstreet, but did not so; but the next time I saw him he asked me why I did
not meet him according to his Appointment? I told him, I had some Reason for
it, and he answered me again, That he believed, if the King had been in the
Field, I would have done the same; but I have not seen him since till I saw him
at the Bar.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you no Discourse of Horses that you were to provide?


Bertram. I do not remember any particular thing more than I have told you.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he not tell you what the Design was you were to go about?


Bertram. He did not tell me of any other Design than as I tell you, for he
believed I knew of it, I thought so at least; the first time I knew of it was
from Mr. Chernock.


L. C. J. H. What did he tell you was the Design that you should Engage in for
your Advantage upon Friday the 14th, when he gave you the Guinea?


Bertram. He told me, he believed they should ride out very suddenly, and that
the King was to be seized in his Coach.


L. C. J. H. Did he tell you when the King was to be seized?


Bertram. No, he did not tell me when, but this was the 14th the next morning I
was to meet him at Hart-street, but did not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who did he tell you the King was to be seized by?


Bertram. He did not nominate any one else, for he obliged me not to ask him
Questions, nor I did not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he name himself to be concerned?


Bertram. He named himself so far, as that he believed he should ride out very
suddenly.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was it the next-morning, or the next day?


Bertram. I cannot say that he named any particular time.


Mr. At. Genesis Will they ask him any Questions?


Sir B. Shower. No, I think we shall not.


Mr. Mountagu. Pray, Mr. Bertram, will you answer me one Question? What did he
say to you when he checked you for not coming according to his Appointment?


Bertram. I took it as a kind of a Check; he told me, that if the King had been
in the Field, he believed I would have done the same.


Sir B. Shower. There is one thing we must a little Examine this Gentleman to;
Were not you under a Necessity before that time that he gave you the Guinea?
Pray what Condition were you in?


Bertram. Under Necessity, Sir! I was never very plentiful of money of late.


Sir B. Shower. Did he never give you a Guinea or two before in Charity, and
out of Compassion to your Necessities?


Bertram. He has given me money several times before, and I believe if I would
have asked him any money he would have given it me.


Mr. At. Genesis Was this money given you for Charity, or for any other, and what
purpose?


Bertram. I did not ask him for any thing, but he gave it me, and said, There Is
a Guinea to buy you Necessaries.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the Discourse before that?


Bertram. I told you, he said, he believed they were to ride out very suddenly,
and he believed the King was to be seized in his Coach, and he desired me not
to be out of the way.


Mr. Cowper. And when he gave you the Guinea to buy you Necessaries, was it
immediately after this Discourse?


Bertram. Sir, it was at the same time.


Lowick. Did not I give your Wife a Guinea two months before this?


Bertram. Yes, Sir, I acknowledge I was informed you did, I was not in Town
then.


Lowick. Pray let the Court know that.


L. C. J. H. Did he tell you, the King was to be seized in his Coach before he
told you they were to ride out very suddenly?


Bertram. No, afterward; and then he gave me the Guinea.


Sir B. Shower. His Words are not coupled together, they have no relation to
one another.


L. C. J. H. No, but he told him, they were to ride out very suddenly, and the
King was to be seized in his Coach, and gave him a Guinea to buy him
Necessaries at the same time.


L. C. J. Treby. There Is no doubt he was engaged in the Design with those other
Persons.


Mr. Conyers. And afterward he rebuked him because he had not met him; and he
said, it would have been the same thing, if the King had been in the Field.


Mr. Mountagu. What day in the week was it that you failed him?


Bertram. It was on a Saturday.


Juryman. Pray, my Lord, we desire to know, who he did understand by the King
that was to be seized.


L. C. J. H. What did he call the King?


Bertram. He said nothing but the King.


L. C. J. H. Who did you understand by that?


Bertram. I leave it to the Court, I am not to interpret Things.


L. C. J. Treby. Did he name the Prince of Orange, or King James? Did you think
King James was to be seized?


Bertram. My Lord, I tell you what he said, I am not to interpret his Words.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you believe he meant King James, or this King, that was to be
seized?


Bertram. I believed it might be the King here.


L. C. J. H. Take the Words as they are; he asked him before, Whether he would
engage in a Design that might be for his Advantage; on Friday the 14th of
February he meets him at his Lodging, and tells him, he was to ride out
suddenly, and that the King was to be seized in his Coach, and appointed him to
meet him the next morning, and gave him a Guinea to buy him Necessaries.


Mr. Mompesson. Pray, has not Mr. Lowick given you Clothes, Linen and other
Things at any other time?


Bertram. Sir, you have been always ready to serve me, I must acknowledge, and
you have been very kind to me.


Lowick. If you please to give an Account of my Character, whether ever I was
guilty of any bloody Thing.


Bertram. No, Sir.


Sir B. Shower. How long have you known Mr. Lowick?


Bertram. I believe I have known him this 20 years.


Sir B. Shower. What Behavior has he been of?


Bertram. He has always had very good Behavior, and the best; he has had the
best Character of all Mankind.


Sir B. Shower. Did you ever know him inclined to do a rash Action?


Bertram. Never in my life.


Sir B. Shower. Did you ever know him do a malicious Action?


Bertram. But he had always the Character of a good Man, and was always ready
to serve any Man in his Necessities, and to do Good; he has that General
Character abroad.


L. C. J. H. Where does he live?


Bertram. He lived last at Brownlow-street, but he has no Wife nor Family, and
so has no fixed Being.


L. C. J. H. What was his way of Living?


Bertram. He was bred a Soldier, and has been abroad.


L. C. J. H. Where?


Bertram. In Ireland.


L. C. J. H. In whose Service?


Bertram. In the Service of King James.


Lowick. He knows particularly, that once I was upon a Party and saved 5
Officers from being killed in cold Blood.


L. C. J. H. What Countryman is he?


Bertram. Yorkshire.


Mr. Mompesson. Was he accounted of a cruel or a bloody Nature?


Bertram. No, of a quite contrary.


Juryman. My Lord, I desire to know for what Cause he gave him or his Wife a
Guinea.


Bertram. I know not what that Guinea was for that he gave me the 14th of
February any otherwise than as I have told you.


Mr. Mompesson. What was the Guinea given to your Wife for?


Bertram. For that Guinea given to my Wife, it was out of his own Kindness and
Goodness to my Family and me.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the other Guinea for? You are upon your Oath.


Bertram. Indeed, Sir, I cannot tell, he gave it me to buy me Necessaries.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there nothing else mentioned what Necessaries those were to
be?


Bertram. No, Sir, upon my Oath there was not any Particular mentioned.


Mr. At. Genesis What made him so kind to you, pray?


Bertram. We were both born in a Town, and I believe we are near Related.


Sir B. Shower. You say you are Towns-People, and have been long acquainted,
and you knew him in Ireland, pray did you ever know that he saved any People's
Lives?


Bortram. I was not in that Action my self, but all that were in it gave that
Relation; that he was very favorable, and did save Peoples Lives, particularly
one Captain Harlow, and brought him and others Prisoners, and I remember the
thing; it was about a Fortnight before the business of the Boyne, upon a Sunday
Morning, that they took those Prisoners, and he did persuade several Parties
that he Commanded, to decline Killing, as much as they could; I was not in this
Action, but this I heard of all that were in it, and from the Prisoner.


Mr. Solli. Genesis When he gave you that Guinea, did not he speak any thing of a
Horse that was to be provided for you?


Bertram. Not a word; I never did see a Horse upon that Account, nor was I
Master of a Horse, nor was I told I should have a Horse in any respect
whatsoever.


Juryman. How could you Ride out as you say they were to do, without a Horse,
or without knowing any thing of a Horse to be provided for you?


Bertram. I did not know of a Horse.


L. C. J. H. But he said you were to Ride out speedily.


Bertram. No, he said in general, we should Ride out suddenly.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who was there besides your self?


Bertram. No body.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Then that we must mean you and him. And how were you to Ride
out without a Horse? Pray mind what you Swear?


Bertram. I was to meet him the next Morning, but did not.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray what could you understand by that, that you were to Ride
out suddenly, and had no Horse?


Bertram. That was understood, that if I did Ride out, I must have a Horse.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who should you have it from, had you a Horse of your own?


Bertram. No, I had not.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did you intend to Hire a Horse?


Bertram. No, I did not.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did not you ask where you were to have a Horse?


Bertram. No, I did not Ask nor Inquire, nor was it promised me, I should have
a Horse.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did he tell you where you were to Ride?


Bertram. The next Morning I was to meet him.


Mr. Attor. Genesis For what, to Ride out was it?


Bertram. I cannot really tell whether it was upon that Account or not.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Whether did he tell you where he was to Ride?


Bertram. Indeed he did not.


Juryman. It is very strange that you did not ask him where he was to go, nor
ask him for a Horse.


Bertram. I was so Senseless, that I neither did ask him about a Horse, nor
ever knew of any that was to be provided for me.


Juryman. Did you understand what was meant by the Riding out suddenly?


Bertram. I did take it to be about the business, the seizing of the King.


Juryman. Did he compare it to Attacking him in the Field?


Bertram. No, he did not; but he said he believed the King would be seized in
his Coach; he made no Comparisons.


Mr. Montague. Pray Mr. Bertram, why did you not meet him, what Reasons had you
for not doing it?


Bertram. I thought it not requisite to meet him.


Mr. Montague. What had you no mind to the thing?


Bertram. No, I had not, because I thought the thing very unlawful.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray what was that thing you speak of, that you thought was
unlawful?


Bertram. I thought it was about Seizing and Killing the King.


L. C. J. H. Pray mind, there is no body desires you should speak more then the
Truth, but on the other side, being upon your Oath, you are to speak the whole
Truth, for if you Conceal any part of the Truth, though you have a Kindness for
your Countryman Mr. Lowick, who has been kind to you, you will forswear your
self, for you make a different Representation of the matter, and make it appear
quite otherwise then it is; pray do not strain one Tittle, but let us have all
the Truth.


Bertram. I don't believe, I strain one Bit.


Mr. Mountagu. Then tell my Lord, why did not you meet him.


Bertram. I did believe it was about Seizing and Killing the King, and I did
think it to be Illegal.


Mr. Mountagu. Why did you think it was about that?


Bertram. Because Mr. Charnock had told me of it before.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How did you know that was what Lowick spoke to you about?


Bertram. I did suppose it to be the same, because he desired me at first to
ask no Questions, no more did I, but I took it always to be the same thing.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What did he say to you?


Bertram. He told me he had a business to propose to me, if I would Engage in,
that would be for my Advantage, but I must ask no Questions; talked of Riding
out suddenly, and that the King was to be Seized in his Coach and having heard
of it from Charnock, I thought it was the same business.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Then my Lord, we have one Witness more, call Captain Fisher,
[He did not appear.] If he does not appear, we shall let them go on, and when
he comes in, we can examine him afterward.


L. C. J. H. Is he a material Witness?


Mr. Sol. Genesis We do apprehend he is a very material Witness.


L. C. J. H. If you think him a material Witness, it will not be proper for
them to enter upon their Defense, till they have heard the whole Accusation.


The Court staid for Mr. Fisher's coming for near an Hour, and at last he came
in and was Sworn.

L. C. J. H. Who is this?


Mr. Attor. Genesis This is one Captain Fisher.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Captain Fisher, do you know Mr. Lowick, the Prisoner at the
Bar?


Captain Fisher. I have not Talked with Mr. Lowick since the 8th of February,
and then he Talked that he would be ready to serve his Master to the uttermost
of his Power.


L. C. J. H. What Master?


Captain Fisher. King James.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What particular Service?


Captain Fisher. He named no particular Service, but only that he would be
ready to serve his Master to the uttermost of his Power.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Where was this?


Captain Fisher. At the Cock in Bow-street.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who was in Company?


Captain Fisher. There was Mr. Harrison.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray give an Account of what you know of this Barbarous bloody
Design.


Captain Fisher. I believe there was a Design to seize the Prince of Orange.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What do you know of it? you say you believe it.


Captain Fisher. I believe it by my Knowledge, because I was concerned in it.


Mr. Attor, Genesis By whom was that Design carried on?


Captain Fisher. By Sir George Barctay and Mr. Harrison.


L. C. J. H. What was the Design?


Captain Fisher. We were to fall upon the Prince of Orange.


L. C. J. H. You called him so, the Prince of Orange?


Captain Fisher. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Well, tell us what happened.


Captain Fisher. It was to have been done the 15th of February, and we met
accordingly the 14th, but the King not going Abroad, it was put off.


L. C. J. H. Who met on the 14th?


Captain Fisher. I met only Mr. Harrison and Sir George Barclay, then it was
put off till the 22th; upon the 21th, we met at the Three Tuns in Holborne, and
from thence we came to the Sun Tavern in the Strand, and there was no body but
Mr. Harrison and I together, and Sir George Barclay came to us; I believe there
were about 14 or 16 in the House; there Sir George Barclay told me, Mr. Lowick
was to meet me and two more at an Inn by St. Giles's Pound, and that we were to
go together to seize the Prince of Orange the 22th.


L. C. J. H. Did you meet him?


Captain Fisher. I did not meet him, it being put off by the King's not going
Abroad.


L. C. J. H. This does not affect Mr. Lowick at all.


Mr. Attor. Genesis It does not, we acknowledge, but at that time which you speak
of, the 8th of February, had you any knowledge of the Assassination.


Captain Fisher. There was no Assassination at that time, at least it was not
then declared.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was your Discourse about then?


Captain Fisher. There was Notice of the King's preparing to come for England.


Mr. Attor. Genesis You say Mr. Harrison was there.


Captain Fisher. Yes, and Talked very little about the matter, but only that
there were Preparations for the King's coming.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What did Lowick say to you?


Captain Fisher. I have told you all that Mr. Lowick said to me.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Repeat it again.


Captain Fisher. He said he would be ready to serve his Master, to the
uttermost of his Power.


Mr. Cowper. Had you no discourse about an Act of Parliament.


Captain Fisher. Mr. Lowick said it was not convenient to Talk with more then
one at any time, for there was an Act of Parliament on Foot, that under two
Witnesses nothing should affect a Man's Life in Treason.


Mr. Attor. Genesis The Act of Parliament was then a making.


L. C. J. H. When Mr. Lowick said he would serve his Master, what Discourse had
you about it.


Captain Fisher. Mr. Lowick said not a word within, but at the Door he said he
would serve his Master to his Power.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was that, that they would not Talk with above one at a
time?


Captain Fisher. Nothing that was thought Treasonable Practices should be
Discoursed of before above one at a time, so I understood it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then my Lord we have done.


Sir B. Shower. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; I
am of Counsel in this case for the Prisoner at the Bar, and we do hope here is
not Evidence sufficient to convict him of High Treason, the Question is not
whether there was a Plot or a Conspiracy to Assassinate the King, or to prepare
for an Invasion, but all that you are to consider, Gentlemen, is, whether the
Evidence against Mr. Lowick, be sufficient to convince you, that he did design
to Seize and Assassinate the King; there are three Witnesses produced, but we
think this last Witness, Fisher, his Testimony does not hurt him in the least.
We know your Lordship will Declare and Direct the Jury, that the Evidence in a
case of Treason ought to be plain, not only with respect to the Fact, that it
was done; but also of such Facts as are the Evidences of a man's intentions,
and those are not to be Construed by Strains and Intendments, or Implications;
unless they be such as Evidently, Naturally, and to common Understanding
express the Intention, it cannot be good Evidence in Treason: Now we say that
Captain Fisher has said nothing at all that will affect the Prisoner, for all
that he says is, that the Eighth of February he said he was ready to serve his
Master to the utmost of his Power, and any words as well as these may be
Construed to make a Man Guilty of Treasonable Intentions; for it might be a
Recollection of Favors Received, or it might be a Grateful intent to serve him
upon particular occasions* but that is no Evidence upon this Indictment.
Suppose it was to serve him upon the supposed intended Invasion, yet with
submission, that is not Eviednce of the Overt Act laid here; here is no Overt
Act mentioned of preparing Arms, or Encouraging Men, or Seducing the King's
Subjects in order to the better restoring of the late King James, or the
expected Landing of the French, or the like All that is laid to the Prisoner's
charge, is the Compasting the King's Death, and a Design to Assassinate him in
his Coach, and in order to the Assassination, he was to buy Arms and Horses;
now all that he says is quite of another Nature, of a quite different Strain,
and has no tendency to this matter, and nothing he says that Lowick should say,
but is applicable the other way, and tends more Naturally to the Invasion, then
to the Assassination. Your Lordship observes there was some notice taken of
what Mr. Lowick should say, concerning the Act of Parliament, that he would not
talk with above one at a time; how far when life is concerned such loose
discourse ought to be enforced before a Jury I must leave to your Lordship; tho
a Man may be Innocent, yet he may be Cautious, and the more Innocent, perhaps
the more Cautious; but that is applicable to the Invasion too, and has no
Relation to the Treason in this Indictment more than any other. It shows he was
more wary then others were, but it is not applicable to the Fact that he now
stands charged with. Then the whole of the Evidence depends upon the Testimony
of Mr. Harris and Mr. Bertram, and we think they are not two Witnesses to one
thing, and what they say must be strained, and intended and presumed, to make
Evidence of Treason; for what Mr. Harris says about the Discourses between him
and the late King James, about Receiving Orders from Sir George Barclay, and
his passage over from France, and the several Stages he and Mr. Hare traveled,
and the Discourses between Sir George Barclay and him; Your Lordship will
acquaint the Jury that is no Evidence to affect Mr. Lowick, no^ what Berkenhead
and Hare agreed upon does any way affect Mr. Lowick, for those things may be
all true and yet Mr. Lowick innocent of what he stands charged with in this
Indictment; he says, that upon the first Saturday he saw Mr. Lowick at the
Confectioners, but he cannot say he staid there at all, there was not a word
spoken by Mr. Lowick that he remembers then, but what he says that seems to
touch, and the only thing that touches Mr. Lowick, in all this Evidence is,
that that upon Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, it is a pretty large
time, between the Fifteenth and the Twenty second, he was talking with Mr.
Lowick about the Barbarity of this business, and that Lowick after all, said he
would obey Orders; now with submission, my Lord, to make that to have Relation
to the Assassination must be by a forced strained Intendment; he does not
Declare what the Orders were, nay, he does not affirm there were any Orders for
the Assassination, but only that he would obey Orders; here is no Order by
Writing, no Order by Parole that Mr. Lowick declared he would obey: as to what
Lowick declared about his Intention of Riding out and Seizing the King in his
Coach; that cannot be intended the Order that he was to obey to Assassinate the
King, that Order does not appear, there are no footsteps of it in all the
Evidence, so that there is nothing in that Testimony that will hurt Mr. Lowick:
Then upon the Two and Twentieth when they Dined together, Mr. Harris says, that
there was a Discourse of two Men, but it does not appear, nor does the Witness
give any account what those two Men were to be for; it is true two Men he was to
get Discharged, but that is not Evidence that these Men were to make a Part of
those Forty, neither the words before nor the words after can have that
Construction; nay it does not appear it was for any purpose at all, now in the
case of Life, where a Man stands at the Bar, we hope such an Evidence shall not
be Construed to make a Proof of a Treasonable intention, that these were to
Assassinate the King, or to make part of the Forty that were to do it, when it
does not appear they were there, nor who they were, nor any sort of Notice
taken or given upon what account they were, Provided. And then as to Mr.
Bertram's Evidence, it is Palpable that his Evidence and whatsoever he says
cannot amount to make one Witness to prove an Overt Act within this Statute,
and that there must be two Witnesses the Law requires; what does Mr. Bertram
say to prove any Man Guilty of Treason, but only by Intendment, Thought or
Suspicion? It is true, Mr. Bertram's Evidence would be good enough to commit a
Man upon Suspicion for Treason, but to Convict him it cannot be; he says that
in the beginning of February he spoke to him and, told him he would employ him
in a business that would be for his Advantage, but he must ask no Questions;
this is very dark, for the meaning of it does not appear what was intended by
it; it might be one thing as well as another, it might be to employ him in his
Family, or it might be to send him of a Journey, or it might be the taking of a
Farm, but to apply that as an Evidence of a charge of High Treason, that we
think is very hard, and we hope your Lordship will think so too; but then he
comes and tells you further of a Discourse upon the Fourteenth, of his Riding
out suddenly, and that the King was to be seized in his Coach, but he does not
say that he was to seize him, nor that he would be concerned in it, nor that he
knew of it, nor did Declare at what time it was to be done, nor any thing
certain whether it was a Prophecy, or a Dream, or a Story that he related
again, or what it was; there is no Connection between the Riding out suddenly
and the other words of seizing the King in his Coach; then he says he gave him
a Guinea to buy him necessaries, the Man acknowledges Mr. Lowick several times
had given him in Charity Money, Clothes and other things, and gave his Wife a
Guinea, as you observe, in Charity, but he gave him this Guinea on purpose to
buy him necessaries, and it is hard that a Man's Charity to a Countryman, to a
Townsman, to an ancient acquaintance of Twenty Years standing, to a Person that
he had been familiar with formerly, and known to have lived well, should be mis
interpreted and strained, to make it a giving him Money as Subsistence, and a
Reward for the doing such a Mischievous Bloody Act; We say his Charity to this
Man formerly is inconsistent with the Supposition that he could be Privy to
such a Barbarous Design now, and we hope the Jury will consider the Character
that that very Man has given to my Client, for the same Witness gives you an
account of his Behavior all along, that he was not given to Rash and Barbarous
Actions, nor Guilty of any Malicious thing, nay, that he prevented Mischief and
the Killing of People in cold Blood. We must leave it to the Jury's
Consideration, and your Lordships Direction. All these things that they say may
be true, and Lowick be not Guilty, and the acquitting of Mr. Lowick will be no
Reflection upon the Witnesses, nor any discredit to the Testimony that has been
given of this Conspiracy, but we hope it is doing Justice to this Man, the
Witnesses not coming up to the Proof of what is laid in the Indictment. We must
beg your Lordships patience a little longer, and call some Witnesses to give
you an account how long they have known Mr. Lowick, and what his real Character
is; they will tell you he is a peaceable good Man, and show you that his Temper
and Inclination was rather to a sober quiet Life than to lead him to such
action, and that they cannot think him likely to be tempted to be concerned in
such a Design; and then we must leave it to the Jury. Call Mrs. York.


Lowick. I believe there is no body here that knows me but will give me that
Character.


Mrs. York came in and was Sworn.

Sir B. Shower. Pray Mrs. York how long have you known Mr. Lowick.


York. About a Dozen or Fourteen Years.


Sir B. Shower. What sort of Disposition is he of?


York. He is a Civil Honest Man as ever I saw in my life, or ever knew of; and
I never heard otherwise from any one that knew him.


Sir B. Shower. What was he in his Actions, was he Malicious, or good Natured?


York. As good a Natured Man as ever I saw.


Mr. Mompesson. Has he the Reputation of a Cruel Bloody minded Man?


York. Quite the contrary. He lodged in my House half a year, it is not quite
a year ago since he lay at my House. He was the most Obliging Man that ever lay
in my House: he was so Civil to all the Lodgers that they admired him for his
goodness, and made them in love with him.


L. C. J. Holt. How came he to Lodge at your House?


York. He came from his other Landlady, they could not agree, his other
Landlady was a sort of a Shrew, and therefore he did not care for staying
there; and I desired his Company because I knew him to be so Obliging and Civil
a Man.


L. C. J. Holt. Where is your House?


York. In Bloomsbury.


L. C. J. Holt. What is his way of living, is he a Man of an Estate?


York. I cannot tell, I did not inquire into that.


L. C. J. Holt. Had he no Employment to get his Living by?


York. I do not know any thing of that, I never inquired into it; he paid me
very Honestly for my Lodging, and he is a very good Man for any thing I know.


Sir B. Shower. Then call Mrs Mosely.


She came in and was Sworn.

L. C. J. Holt. Well, what do you ask this Gentlewoman.


Sir B. Shower. Pray Mrs. Mosely will you tell my Lord and the Jury: do you
know Mr. Lowick?


Mosely. Yes Sir, I do.


Sir B. Shower. How long have you known him?


Mosely. Near twenty Years.


Sir B. Shower. Pray give an account upon your knowledge what Disposition and
Temper he is of, whether he is Rash, Malicious, Bloody, and ill Natured.


Mosely. He is a Peaceable, Virtuous, Honest Man, and a Man that I never heard
or saw that Creature that could speak any ill thing of him in my life; nor I
never heard him speak any thing Maliciously of any Creature in my life to do
them a prejudice: so far from that, that he is a Man has a Character, perhaps,
above any Man that I could speak or hear of in my life. I speak it even above
my own Relations, they may have some Passions; but I never see that Gentleman
in a Passion in my life. He has lain in my House several times, and he has had
Company come to him, but never any that was Scandalous one way or other. I
never saw him Fudled; nor ever heard him Swear, nor any one accuse him of any
of those things.


Mr. Mompesson. Call Dr. William Mew.

He did not appear.
Sir B. Shower. The Prisoner has something to say for himself my Lord, but we
must submit to your Lordships Consideration, and the Juries, whether there be
any Evidence but what is dark and savours of Suspicion only; Suspicious it is,
but whether there be any Evidence that is plain and direct as the Law requires
in Cases of High Treason, we must leave it to your Consideration, for we
apprehend there is none.


Lowick. My Lord, as to this Business, the thing that I stand accused of, the
Assassination, I know nothing in the World of it, nor never did directly or
indirectly; and if I am Convicted, and could to save my life be the death of
the poorest Child in the World, I would not save my life to do it.


L. C. J. Holt. Look you, I would put you to make answer to some things; you
were at Sir George Barclays at the Confectioners in Holborn: and it is sworn he
came over upon such a Design. Then you were with Mr. Harris at Red Lion Fields,
and there he was speaking to you of the horridness of the Design that was to be
Executed upon the Kings Person the Saturday before, and he told you he did
mislike it; and thereupon you answered that you would obey Orders, and that Sir
George Barclay had Orders for it, otherwise he would not do it.


Lowick. Sir George Barclay never spoke one word of it to me.


L. C. J. Holt. Every body knows now upon what Design he came over from France,
and when Mr. Harris showed this satisfaction with the thing, you made that
answer to his Discourse.


Lowick. He never said one Syllable to me of it. I trust to your Lordships
Judgment, and the Juries Mercy.


L. C. J. Holt. And then I would have you answer to another thing, when you
Dined together on the Saturday the two and twentieth, what were those two Men
that could not be Discharged without you?


Lowick. My Lord, I know nothing in the World of two Men.


L. C. J. Holt. You went to Discharge them, for the King did not go abroad that
day.


Lowick. I know nothing of it.


L. C. J. Holt. He Swears this, and that is as to him; but then as to Bertram,
what Design was that, that you were to engage Bertram in for his Advantage, and
he was to ask no Questions?


Lowick. My Lord, He is a poor Man, and my Countryman, and I have at all times,
from time to time, for this seven Years, helped to Subsist him and his Family,
that he will not deny, and I have several times given him both Cloths and Money.


L. C. J. Holt. Then I would ask you again, When he came to your Lodging on
Friday the Fourteenth of February, and you told him the King was to be seized
in his Coach, and said that we were to Ride out very suddenly, and you
appointed him to meet the next Morning; and because he did not meet you blamed
him, and said it would have been the same thing, if the King had been in the
Field? Look you, I would have you give answer to this if you can.


Lowick. I remember nothing in the World of it, not a word I assure you, and to
the best of my remembrance I did not see him in two days after.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I must beg leave to Answer to the Objection that the
Counsel for the Prisoner have made, that there are not two Witnesses to prove
the Overt Act laid in the Indictment, and so the Law is not satisfied. In
Answer to that, I desire your Lordships favor to observe how the Evidence is,
and then we shall see whether there are not plainly two Positive Witnesses of
the Overt Act, by agreeing to Assassinate the King. The first Witness is Mr.
Harris, Your Lordship observes that Mr. Harris gives an account that Mr. Lowick
was at Sir George Barclay's Lodgings the first day that it was to have been
Executed; and that afterward between the Fifteenth and the two and twentieth,
those being the first and second Days that this was to be done, when he and
Rookwood, and the Prisoner Lowick, were walking together in Red Lion Fields;
and there had some Discourse about the intended Assassination, and the
Barbarity and Bloodiness of it, and Mr. Harris and Mr. Rookwood were averse to
it. Mr. Lowick said he would obey Orders, and he was sure Sir George Barclay
would not do it unless he had direct Orders for it, that was twice Repeated by
him, as Harris Swears: and afterward Mr. Harris tells you that the Two and
Twentieth he Dined with Mr. Lowick, and Mr. Lowick observed that Mr. Harris
came in in a great Sweat, and asked him how it happened, he said he had been
about to get ready Rookwood's Party that were to seize the King, for he was to
have one Party. Says Mr. Lowick to him, you need not Grudge to do it, you have
six Shillings a day, I have nothing; and yet I, at my own Charge, am to provide
two. This is as Positive Evidence as well can be of his being privy to the
Design; and his engaging People at his own Charge, shows a great deal of
forwardness and Zeal in the Prisoner to the Business. My Lord, I think this is
positive and plain Evidence, and not only made out by Inferrences and
Constructions, as Sir B. Shower says, but plain positive Proof. The first day
he was with several of them, and when they Discoursed of the thing afterward,
he declared he would obey Orders; and what could those Orders be but for what
they were Discoursing of, and nothing was Discoursed of but this Design they
were engaged in, and this was to justify the thing, and take off the
apprehension of the Barbarity of it: this is Harris's Testimony. The next
Witness is Bertram, and he tells you that the Fifth of February the Prisoner
sent for him, and when he came to him, he asked if he would Engage in a
Business that might be for his Advantage, and ask no Questions: so at that time
he did not acquaint him what the thing was, but that shows it was a thing that
was to be kept Secret at that time, in regard he did not think fit to acquaint
him at the first Instance. But the Fourteenth of February, when he met him
again, the day before the first time that it was to be put in Execution;
Bertram Swears he told him that they were to Ride out the next Morning, that
must be Lowick and Bertram, for there was no Body else there; and that the
Prince of Orange was to be seized in his Coach. Was it possible the Prisoner
could be ignorant of it? When he engaged him to go upon a Design without asking
Questions; sent for him the day before, acquainted him they were to Ride out
the next Morning, and that the King was to be seized in his Coach, and bid him
be ready against next Morning, and gave him a Guinea at that time; the Witness
says it was for Necessaries, but he does not pretend that it was for Charity,
as formerly. And that must be for Necessaries for that purpose that they were
then Discoursing of, when he desired him to be ready the next day, and gives
him Money to buy him Necessaries: What can that be, but Necessaries for what he
was to be ready for? And then he did not come the next day, and he tells you
why, because he thought it a very wicked and unlawful thing, and so he
disappointed him; and the next time Lowick Chid him, and told him he would have
served him so if the King had been in the Field. This is plain, though I
believe Bertram does Speak as tenderly as he can, being his Friend and old
Acquaintance, and is willing to say as little as he can of him; so that I
believe no body thinks but what Bertram says against the Prisoner is true, and
what he Swears is plain and positive. To show that Lowick did engage in the
Design, he acquainted him with it the Fourteenth, by telling him the King was
to be seized, and they were to Ride out, and he was to be ready the next day.


L. C. J. Holt. He does not say they were to Ride out the next day.


Sir B. Shower. No, the words were we are to Ride out suddenly.


Mr. At. Genesis I think he did say they were to Ride out the next Morning.


L. C. J. Holt. No, Call him in again.


Mr. Cowper. The Words were, we shall Ride out suddenly, and bid him meet him
next Morning; and afterward Chid him for not meeting accordingly, and told him
it had been the same thing if the King had been in the Field.


L. C. J. Holt. If you cannot agree upon the Evidence, you must call in the
Witness.


Mr. Mountague. My Lord we are agreed upon the Evidence, it was suddenly.


L. C. J. Holt. Well then, there is no occasion, have you done on both sides.


Counsel. Yes my Lord, we submit it to your Lordship.


L. C. J. Holt. Gentlemen of the Jury, this Prisoner at the Bar, Robert Lowick,
is Indicted of High Treason, for Compassing and Imagining the Death and
Destruction of the King by an Assassination; you have heard what Evidence has
been given upon this Indictment. And in the first place, It is proved to you
that there was a Design to Assassinate the King; which was to be carried on
under the Conduct and Management of Sir George Barclay. The Question that you
are now to Consider of, is whether the Prisoner at the Bar was concerned or
engaged in the Prosecution of that Design. There have been two Witnesses
produced, who have given their Evidence, and have been very strictly Examined,
and Observations have been made upon the Testimony they have given.

The first Witness is Mr. Harris, and he gives you some account of the Original
of this Design. He tells you how he was at St. Germains, and Introduced to the
late King James, who did express a great kindness for him, and told him that he
had an Opportunity of doing something for him that would be for his Advantage:
and that he and one Hare, who was present at that time, should go into England
(for it seems they were both together Introduced by Colonel Parker) and should
be Subsisted in England, and thereupon Directions were given them what Course
they were to take; which was to go to Calice, and to each of them ten Lewedores
were given for their Charges, and they were acquainted that if it happened that
they should lie there so long for want of a Wind to bring them over hither that
their Money was spent, Provision should be made for their supply there. They
had farther Directions, that when they came into England they should apply
themselves to Sir George Barclay, and follow his Orders, with Instructions how
to find him; being told that Sir George Barclay would be walking in Covent
Garden every Monday, and every Thursday Night, about the hours of six or seven
a Clock, and that they should know him by a White Handkerchief that was to hang
out of his Pocket.

Mr. Harris further tells you, That they did come to Calice in order to Embark
for England, and there they happened to stay a considerable time, even so long
that their Money would not defray their Expenses there, and they found it true
as it was promised them; for the President of Calice paid the Reckoning for
them at the place where they Lodged; and afterward they came into England, and
landed in Kent, and came to Rochester, and from thence to London. About the
latter end of January Old Style (for it should seem it was the 14. New Style,
which is the 4. Old Style, they were of St. Germans) he tells you that he did
go the first Monday, after their arrival, into Covent Garden, to look after Sir
George Barclay, but then mist him. But afterward his Companion, Mr. Hare, met
with one Berkenhead, and complaining that they had not met with Sir George
Barclay according to the Directions they had abroad: whereupon, by the means of
Berkenhead, they were brought to the Speech of Sir George Barclay, who gave
them reception, and owned that he had Authority to Subsist them; but said he
had not then Money, but shortly should, and when he had they should be sure to
receive their Subsistence. He tells you, that after this, Sir George Barclay
gave them Subsistence Money, paying them at the Rate of five Shillings a day
when they had no Horses, and when they had, six Shillings a day: so they put
themselves altogether under his Command and Conduct. He has given you an
Account what Discourse he had with Mr. Rookwood, from whom he discovered what
the Design was in which he was to be engaged. And the Design to Assassinate the
King was first intended to be put in Execution on Saturday the 15. of February,
at which day Mr. Harris, and others, being at Sir George Barclay's Lodgings;
Sir George said they were his Jamsaries, and afterward Carest them, and said
they were Men of Honor, and told them that they were to Attack the Prince of
Orange and his Guards; but it seems the King not going abroad that day, they
lost that Opportunity.

Truly, Then Mr. Harris began to be a little troubled, and concerned, when he
understood the meaning of his being under Sir George Barclay's Conduct. And he
says that after that first Saturday the 15. and before the next Saturday the
22. he met with Lowick, Rookwood, and Bernarde, and he was complaining of his
being engaged in such a Design as this was. He called it then the Murder of the
Prince of Orange, and said it was a Barbarous thing, and he did not like it,
nor Rookwood neither; but as for Mr. Lowick whether he disliked it or no, I
know not, but he made Answer to him I will obey Orders: says he Sir George
Barclay has Orders for it, or otherwise he would not do it.

Then you are told further, that after this, on Saturday the 22. Mr. Harris
Dined with Lowick at a Cooks at the end of Red Lion Street, and being there
together, Harris being in a Sweat, and was asked the reason by Lowick, he said
he had been giving of Orders for the getting some Men together that were to go
under Rookwood, and Lowick told him he might very well do it, for he had Pay 6
s. a day; but says he, I am to Subsist two Men, and have nothing at all. Mr.
Harris wished him to go to Sir George Barclay, and Complain of it to him, but
he said he would not; but it seems, it being then understood by them that the
King did not go abroad that day, Lowick said he must go and Discharge the two
Men, and went about it. This is the Sum and Substance of Mr. Harris's Evidence
against Mr. Lowick.

The next Witness is Bertram, and he tells you that sometime before the
Fifteenth of February, which was, as I told you, the very first day that they
did design to assassinate the King, Mr. Lowick sent for him, and told him, that
he would put you upon a Business that shall be for his Advantage, if he would
undertake it without asking any Questions, this was sometime before, but the
certain Day Bertram does not remember; but he tells you farther, that on Friday
the Fourteenth of February, he was with Lowick at his Lodgings, and he said
unto him, that the King, he did believe, was to be seized in his Coach, and we
are to ride out suddenly, and then he gave him a Guinea to buy him Necessaries,
and withal, bid him meet him at the Purl-House in Hart-street next Morning; and
Bertram tells you, he had understood what this Design was, for he had it before
from Chernock, and did forbear to go the next Morning, because he did dislike
it. After this Mr. Lowick met him and chid him for disappointing of him, in not
meeting him as he directed, for says he, it would have been the same thing if
the King had been in the Field: This is the sum and substance of the Evidence
that Bertram has given against him.

Now Bertram, being cross-examined on the behalf of the Prisoner, says he has
known him a great while, and that he is a Man of a peaceable and fair
Disposition, very charitable, and that he has given him Money before, and
particulary a Guinea to his Wife in his absence.

Indeed I might have mentioned the Evidence of Fisher to you, but that is but
circumstantial, and does not come home to the Case, but being given it may be
mentioned, and that is, about the Eighth of February, Fisher had some Discourse
with Lowick, and it seems there was notice taken of the intended Invasion, and
Lowick said he would serve his Master faithfully; and that the Witness thought
was meant of the late King; and he said at another time, that he would not
discourse with above one at a time, because of the late Act of Parliament that
was then a passing, relating to High Treason, that required two Witnesses. Now,
I say, this is not any Proof against the Prisoner, but it is a Circumstance
that may show his Inclination to the late King.

The Council for the Prisoner have insisted upon the Insufficiency of the
Evidence that has been given on behalf of the King, and have said, that the
late Act of Parliament requires two Witnessesses, which is true, but not two
Witnesses to any one Overt Act; but if there be two Witnesses, one to one and
another to another Overt Act, that is sufficient; but they say that it is not
so in this Case. In the first place they object against the Evidence that is
given by Harris, they say it is short, that must be left to your consideration;
whether the Evidence that is given by Harris, concerning Mr. Lowick, does prove
to your satisfaction, that he consented and agreed to the Assassination of the
King, you are to weigh the Evidence, when it is sworn that when Harris,
Rookwood, and the Prisoner were walking in Red Lion Fields, and talking of this
horrid Design, and Harris complained that it was a barbarous thing to murder
the Prince of Orange, as they called him, you must consider what Answer Lowick
did make about obeying of Orders, then his subsisting of Men at his own charge
without Pay, and complaining of his having no Pay, and his discharging them the
last day that the Assassination was intended, that I must leave to you, whether
or no this is not an Evidence, if you believe the Witness, to satisfy you that
he was engaged in this Design.

Then Gentlemen he has also been desired to give an Answer to this Question,
and to tell upon what Design he was to employ Bertram that should be for his
advantage; but he was to ask no Questions, and afterward whether he did tell
him the King was to be seized in his Coach, and they were to ride out suddenly
and bid him meet him the next Morning, and when he did not meet him, he said it
would have been the same thing if the King had been in the Field. If this be an
Evidence of Mr. Lowick's engaging in and agreeing and consenting to the Design,
then here will be another Witness against the Prisoner besides Harris.

Gentlemen, you are to judge of this matter and of the Evidence. It is true, we
are not to put, in the case of a Man's Life, any forced and violent
Constructions upon any Words or Discourses; but if the Evidence be plain and
clear, tho he did not say in express Words, that he did design to assassinate
or kill the King; yet, if upon the whole Discourse that past between them it
appears plainly, clearly, and satisfactorily to you that he did consent and
agree to this Design, or was engaged in it, here is another Witness, I say, to
prove him guilty, besides Harris, you are to consider the whole Evidence, the
subject matter of Discourse, and if you are satisfied, I say, that he was
engaged in such a Design by the Proof of Bertram, as well as of Harris, then
there are two Witnesses, which is as much as the Law requires.

But, indeed, the Council have called several Witnesses to prove that the
Prisoner has lived very peaceably and quietly; one Woman says she has known him
Twelve Years, and that he lodged at her House, and that he was a Man of great
Temper and Candor, and not disorderly, but had a general good Esteem and
Character: And then there is another, Mrs. Mosely, that proves the like, and
says, she has known him these Twenty Years, and she says no Man has a better
Character: And Mr. Bertram has said that he was not of a rash or bloody Temper.

Now Gentlemen, I must leave it to you upon the Evidence that you have heard,
there are these Witnesses that have been produced, and there are these
Circumstances that appear in the Case; if you are satisfied upon this Evidence
that has been given, that the Prisoner Mr. Lowick, did consent to and engage
himself in that Design of assassinating the King, then you are to find him
guilty; if you are not satisfied, you are to find him not guilty; you have
heard your Evidence, and had best consider of it.


Then an Officer was sworn to keep the Jury, who withdrew, and staid out about
half an hour, and then returned.

Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury answer to your Names. George Ford.


Mr. Ford. Here, etc. And so of the rest.


Cl. of Arr. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Foreman.


Cl. of Arr. Robert Lowick, hold up thy hand. (Which he did) Look upon the
Prisoner, how say you? Is he guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
indicted or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty, my Lord.


Cl. of Arr. What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements had he at the time of
the Treason committed, or at any time since?


Foreman. None, to our knowledge, we do not find any.


Cl. of Arr. Then hearken to your Verdict, as the Court has recorded it. You
say that Robert Lowick is guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
indicted, but that he had no Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements at the time of
the High Treason committed, or at any time since to your knowledge, and so you
say all.


Jury. Yes.


L. C. J. Holt. Discharge the Jury.


Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury, the Court discharges you, and thanks you
for your service.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Attorney, Will you have the Prisoners set to the Bar?


Mr. Attor. Yes, if your Lordship please.


Then the Keeper of Newgate brought Rookwood and Cranburn, and all three were
set to the Bar.

Mr. At. Genesis If your Lordship please to give Judgment against the Prisoners
that are convicted.


L. C. J. Holt. Ask them what they have to say for themselves in arrest of
Judgment.


Cl. of Arr. Robert Lowick, hold up thy Hand; you stand convicted of
High Treason, in conspiring the Death of the King by Assassination, what can
you say for your self why the Court should not give Judgment against you, to
die according to Law.

[Then the Keeper bid him kneel.]
L. C. J. Holt. No, no, he need not kneel; if you have any thing to say, Mr.
Lowick, we will hear you.


Lowick. I throw my self upon the Kings Mercy.


Cl. of Arr. Ambrose Rookwood, hold up thy hand, (which he did) you stand
convicted of the same High Treason, for conspiring the Death of the King by
Assassination, what can you say for your self why the Court should not give you
Judgment to die according to the Law.


Rookwood. All that can be said has been said already, and so I shall say no
more.


Cl. of Arr. Charles Cranburn, hold up thy Hand, thou stand convicted of
High Treason, in conspiring the Death of the King by Assassination, what can
thou say for thy self, why the Court should not give the Judgment to die
according to Law?


Cranburn. I have nothing to say but what I have said already.


Cl. of Arr. Then Crier make Proclamation.


Crier. O, yes, all manner of Persons are commanded to keep silence while
Judgment is in giving, upon pain of Imprisonment.


L. Chapter J. Holt. You the Prisoners at the Bar, Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rookwood,
and Charles Cranburn, you have been indicted, and upon full and clear Evidence
have been convicted of High Treason; a Treason that was advanced to the highest
degree both of Malice and Mischief against the King and Kingdom; you designed
to assassinate the King with an intent to subvert the State, and by the
introducing of a foreign Power to destroy the ancient Liberty and Constitution
of England.

Our French and Popish Enemies, by whom you were employed in this bloody
Enterprise, did very well know, that the Wisdom and Courage of his present
Majesty has rescued this Kingdom from that Slavery and Oppression which they
often threatened to bring upon us; they knew that under his Government we have
been protected in the enjoyment of our Religion, Laws and Liberty for several
Years, and that his Majesty is the Head of the Protestant Interest, and the
Protector and Preserver of the Liberty of Europe, and that upon the
Preservation of his Life and the Safety of his Person, the Good and Happiness
of multitudes of People do depend, which the French King's Pride and Ambition
has been ready to take hold of any opportunity to enslave and oppress.

Your being engaged in such a horrid Design against so precious a Life, and to
be the bloody Instruments to give that dismal Stroke, which would have brought
Mistry and Desolation upon so many Men, renders you worthy to undergo a greater
and more severe Punishment than by the Law of England can be inflicted; but
that there is no greater provided for such Criminals, is to be imputed to the
ancient Honesty and Integrity of English Men, who, when they framed this
Constitution of Government, never imagined England should produce such
degenerate Wretches, as would endeavor by Plots and Contrivances to betray
their Country to a foreign Yoke, and subject themselves and their
Fellow Subjects to the slavish Dominion of Strangers.

Your Crime being so great it is now high time for you seriously to reflect
upon it; and tho you deserve to suffer the greatest of Punishments, yet I have
that Compassion for your Persons, that I wish heartily you would make use of
that Opportunity which is now put into your Hands, to repent. And since you are
adjudg'd by the Law unworthy to live here, that you will make preparation to
appear at another Tribunal, where you must have another Trial, and without an
hearty and sincere Repentance, receive a more severe Sentence. I hope this
Calamity, and the Judgment that is to fall upon you, will be an Admonition to
you to take better advice in the last part of your time which is left you, than
you have done in the whole course of your Lives, and that you will be wiser
than to follow the Direction of those Guides whose Principles and Doctrines
have so far perverted and corrupted you, as to engage you in such a bloody
Design. I shall leave you to make that Preparation for another World, which is
proper for Men in your condition, and pronounce the Judgment of the Court,
which the Law has appointed and the Court does award;

That all of you be conveyed from hence to the Prison from whence you came, and
from thence every one of you is to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of
Execution, where you are to be hanged by your Necks, and to be cut down while
you are alive, your Privy Members are to be cut off, and your Bowels to be cut
out of your Bodies and burnt in your view, your Heads are to be cut off, and
your Bodies to be divided into four parts, and your Heads and Quarters are to
be disposed where his Majesty shall appoint. And I pray God to have Mercy on
all your Souls.


Cranburn. I humbly desire the liberty of my Wife and Relations to come to me,
and such Divines as I shall desire may have free recourse to me.


L. Chapter J. Holt. You shall have that liberty that is allowed to all Persons in
your condition.


Rookwood. I must beg the same Favor, to have some few Friends and Relations
come to see me without a Keeper.


L. Chapter J. Holt. You shall have a Warrant for your Friends to come to you.


Rookwood. I beg your Lordship that you would please to specify it in the
Warrant, because they would not grant hitherto without a Keeper being by.


L. Chapter J. Holt. You mean, you would have your Brother permitted to come to you.


Rookwood. Yes, and some few Relations.


L. Chapter J. Holt. What is usually done in such Cases let it be done.


Lowick. My Lord, I desire the same thing, that my Sister may come to me, and
that the little time I have I may be private with my Friends.


Mr. At. Genesis If your Lordship please, they may give the Names of those they
would have admitted to them, and then the Keeper will attend your Lordship for
your Direction.


L. Chapter J. Holt. That the Keeper must take care of, lest they allow such a
Liberty as may endanger an Escape; for their being alone may prove a dangerous
thing.


Mr. At. Genesis It is reasonable they should tell who they are, before they be
admitted.


L. Chapter J. Holt. You allow them, I suppose, to have private Discourse in the
same Room, if a Keeper be by.


Cranburn. No, my Lord, we never had.


Mr. At. Genesis Such as your Lordship thinks proper to be admitted to them may
have Discourse with them in private, if the Keeper be in the Room, but no
others but such as your Lordship shall allow; for we know what has been the
effect of a Liberty of access to some Prisoners.


L. Chapter J. Holt. Let us have a Note of those Names that you would have come to
you, and we will give Directions that shall be proper in it.


Cl. of Arr. Sheriff of Middlesex, you must take them into your custody till
Execution is done.


Then the Keeper took away the Prisoners, and the Court adjourned the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer to Hicks's Hall, at Three of the Clock that
Afternoon.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, and will be published this Week, a complete Guide
for his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, according to the best approved
Authors; in Two Parts. The First containing the Common and Statute Law; the
Second consisting of the most Authentic and Useful Presidents which do
properly concern the same, by J. Bond, of Greys-Inn, Esquire. Continued down to
this time; with a Table referring to all the Statutes relating to a Justice of
the Peace, by E. Bohun, Esquire; being the best of this kind. Printed for M.
Gilliflower, Isaac Cleave, in Chancery Lane, and W. Freeman.

The Reports of diverse special Cases adjudged in the Courts of King's Bench,
Common Pleas, and Exchequer, in the Reign of King Charles II. Collected by Sir
T. Raymond, Knight, late one of the Judges of the said Courts. Printed for
Samuel Heyrick, at Greys-Inn Gate, Holborn.

Remarks (upon an Heroic Poem entitled Prince Arthur) written by Mr. Dennis
Printed for Samuel Heyrick and Richard Sare, at Greys-Inn Gate, Holborn.


