AN ACCOUNT OF THE PURGING and PLANTING OF THE CONGREGATION OF DALKEITH.

CONTAINING, I. The Copy of a late Paper, Entitled, Information for Mr.
Alexander Heriot, etc. II. A short Relation of the Presbytery of Dalkeith,
their Procedure in reference to the Sentencing of Mr. Heriot, and their
Planting of the Congregation of Dalkeith. III. An Answer to that Paper, called,
Information for Mr. Alexander Heriot (designed) Minister at Dalkeith,


Published for Information and Satisfaction of these who are willing and
Desirous to know the Truth of the foresaid Affair, which has been very grossly
Misrepresented by some; and particularly for the Information of the Members of
the next General Assembly.

Edinburgh, Printed by George Mosman, and are to (...) Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Close, 1691

PREFACE:
IN order to the more easy clearing and understanding of this Affair
concerning the Congregation of Dalkeith, it will not be amiss in the first
place to give the Reader the true Copy of that false Invective, called,
Information for Mr. Alexander Heriot (designed after Deposition) Minister at
Dalkeith: Which also may contribute something for stopping of Mr. Heriot's
Mouth, and preventing his frequent and causeless Clamours and Complaints, that
his Defenses are not heard, nor answered. This also is done, partly for the
more full Information of all Readers, and especially of the Members of the next
General Assembly, who may find in Mr. Heriot's own Paper (although it had no
Answer annexed) such a Testimonial and Character of the Man himself, as may be
sufficient to direct them unto a righteous Sentence in his Affair, and partly
also to show the fullness and pertinency of the following Account and Answer.

INFORMATION FOR Mr. Alexander Heriot Minister ar Dalkeith. In Relation to the
Lybe against him, before the Presbytrie at Dalkeith, and the Sentences thereon.
And Petitions to the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council. The Appeal given
in by the said Mr. Alexander Heriot to the Synod of Midlothian. containing a
short Information of the Progress of that Process, to that time, is as follows.
MOderator, Being conscious of my Innocence, and finding my self Wronged, and
Injured, I here Appeal from this Synod, to the first General Assembly, when it
shall meet; And in the mean time to Their Majesty's Protection, for Justice and
Relief; and since the Law allows the Liedges a competent time to give in the
Reasons of their Appeals; I here Protest within Twenty four hours, to give in
the Reasons of this my Appeal to your Clerk; And withal, I protest that this
be Recorded by him. And upon all I take Instruments.

The Reasons of Appeal of Mr. Alexander Heriot Minister as Dalkeith, from the
Synod of Midlothian, to the next Lawful General Assembly, And to Their
Majesty's Protection for Justice, and Relief in the mean time.
THere being a Lybel given in to the Presbytery of Dalkeith against the said
Mr. Alexander Heriot, and the Lybel bearing it to be given in, in the Name of
the Parochiners, the said Mr. Alexander Heriot and Parochiners compeared, and
craved that the Ingivers of the Lybel might be condescended upon, and that they
might own and subscribe it; And that in regard that the said Heretors and
Parochiners did not only Viva Voce. but by a Write under their Hands Disclaim
and Disowne it, except Alexander Calderwood, and a few others, ex faece populi.
And albeit no Lybel ought to be admitted without a Pursuer; yet the Presbytery
refused to condescend upon the Ingivers of the Lybel, or to ordain them to own
and subscribe it. Like as, none had the confidence to own it, except the said
Alexander Calderwood, who sat among them as one of the Ruling Elders, and who
is notourly known to be the said Mr. Alexander Heriot's declared Enemy (although
without cause) and who invented and reported most false Calumnies against him,
of which when he was challenged, his answer was, That whether they were true or
false, he had thereupon taken two hundred of the Parochiners from his
Communion; And a Declinator being given in against him as Informer and Promoter
of the Lybel, which not only consisted in the knowledge of the Presbytery (who
had no other Information but his) but which was like ways offered to be proven
be his Oath; yet notwithstanding thereof, against all Law, Reason, and good
Order, the Presbytery would not remove him, but allowed him to sit as one of
Mr. Heriot's Judges, and appointed him one of the Examinators of the Witnesses.
And he forgetting that station, informed and tampered with some of them, and
threatened others, as to what they should depone: And the Witnesses being
overawed and interrupted in their Examinations, and not allowed to declare the
hail Truth in complext matters of Fact, whereby the Depositions may be lame and
weak, and carry a quite contrary meaning of the Truth, of what the Witnesses
offered to depone; And some of the Witnesses having desired that they might see
and read their own Depositions before they subscribed them, the same was
absolutely refused, with this Expostulation, What? do you distrust us? and do
you question our Clerk's honesty? And thus they caused these Witnesses
subscribe what was written, so that there may be left out the material parts of
their Depositions, which cleared their Minister. And not only are there several
Articles of the Lybel, which are not upon these Heads, to which the Trial of
the Regular Clergy is restricted be Act of Parliament, and which are in
themselves alterius fori, but likewayes there was an additional Lybel raised
against the said Mr. Alexander, and without any Citation given to him
thereupon, or Copy, Sight or Notice given to him thereof, Witnesses are
examined, then all which there can be nothing in judicial Procedures more
Partial, Pernicious, and Unjust. And Mr. Alexander Heriot having appealed from
the Presbytery to the General Assembly; the Presbytery notwithstanding thereof
proceeded, and found the Lybel Relevant and Proven; and therefore, and in
regard of Mr. Heriot's Contumacy (as they termed his Appeal to the General
Assembly, which sat in October last) they Suspended him from the Ministry, and
referred him for farther Censure to the General Assembly. But the General
Assembly having found no Contumacy in the Appeal, they referred him to the
Synod. And now the said Mr. Alexander does again Appeal from the Synod, and
from any Sentence they shall give in this Matter, to the next lawful General
Assembly, and in the mean time, to Their Majesty's Protection for Justice and
Relief. For their Grounds and Reasons.

Primo, There being a Petition given in by the Heretors and Parochiners of
Dalkeith to the Synod, attesting, the said Mr. Alexander his Faithfulness in
the Ministry, and his Innocence as to the things Lybelled against him; and
craving, that according to the Act of Parliament, the Depositions of the
Witnesses might be made patent, that they might be the better Redargued; yet
the Synod suffered not the said Petition to be read.

Secundo, The said Mr. Alexander having represented to the Synod the foresaid
Procedure of the Presbytery against him, and having craved that the Depositions
of the Witnesses, might be read before him, and that he might have a Copy of
the Additional Lybel, which he had never seen; and that conform to the Act of
Parliament, the Depositions of the Witnesses might be made patent to him, to
the end that he might have a Copy thereof, to the effect he might the better
clear himself, from any thing that may seem to be deponed against him; yet
notwithstanding thereof, (and contrare to Law) the same was also refused by the
Synod, and undoubtedly for this Reason, That the Probation was weak, and might
not abide the Light nor Trial, for Veritas non quaerit Angulos.

Tertio, The said Mr. Alexander having represented to the Synod, That he was
informed that one of the Articles deponed against him, was, That he should have
danced about a Bonfire the 14 of October 1688. And that the same was the only
Article proven against him, which he instantly redargued, for the said 14 day
of October 1688* fell upon a Sunday, and that the Witnesses and hail
Inhabitants of Dalkeith cannot but declare, that there was never Bonfires at
Dalkeith upon a Sunday, so that they deponed falsely. And the Dancing about a
Bonfire being so public an Act, that not only the Witnesses that have deponed
it, but likewayes many others would have seen it, and all the Inhabitants of
Dalkeith would have heard of it, if it had been true: Yet notwithstanding
thereof, all the Neighbors to that Bonfire, and hail Inhabitants of Dalkeith
will declare and depone, that they neither saw nor heard of their Minister
dancing at that, or any other Bonfire; yet notwithstanding of that clear
Conviction, and redarguing of that Article, the Synod had no regard thereto,
affirming that there was no help for it now, it being so deponed; which is no
other thing, than as if they had said, that they were not concerned tho it were
false, for it was so deponed; and which is so consequential to a clear and
positive Redarguing, and Improbation of the Article, and Probation thereof,
that the prejudice and design of the Synod to proceed against the said Mr.
Alexander upon whatever was alleged, although without probation, or upon a
Redargued Probation, is evidently manifest.

Quarto, The said Mr. Alexander represented to the Synod, that he bad formerly
Appealled from the Presbytry, and that it was but too evident from what is
above narrated, that they were his Party. And which was farther demonstrate
from this. That, the said Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood, did in face of
the Synod not only interrupt the said Mr. Alexander when he was speaking; but
likewayes debated and reasoned against him as Parties, so that it could not but
be expected, but that they would do more when he was removed out of the Synod,
and therefore the said Mr. Alexander declined the Presbytery and Alexander
Calderwood as his Judges, and craved that they might not sit to judge him; yet
notwithstanding thereof, against all Law and Justice, they were not removed.

Quinto, Several Members of the Synod interrupted the said Mr. Alexander, while
he was Vindicating himself, in the face of the Synod, and craving a sight of
the Additional Lybel, and Deposition of the Witnesses; And cried out, That the
same should not be granted to him, as if every one of them had had a Decisive
Voice, and which is without Example in any Judicatory, for any of the Judges to
interrupt the Defenders speaking, and to cry out their Opinion, or rather
Sentence, before the Defender be removed; And which openly discovers their
Prejudice, Design and Resolution of proceeding against the said Mr. Alexander,
although without just cause.

Sexto. The Prejudice and Design of the Synods proceeding against the said Mr.
Alexander, on the said lame, weak, and null probation, is evident, in so far as
several Members of their Number did speak and deal with him to dimitt, or that
otherwise they would depose him. And there is no thing more certain, than that
they would never have Dealt with him to dimitt, if the Probation against him
had been good; Their malice to the Regular Clergy being such, as that they
would rather Depose them for Immoralities, and Errors in Doctrine to Publish
them, than to suffer them to dimit, and get off without stain, when they are
guilty of the same. But Mr. Alexander being Conscious of his own Innocence
refused to Demit, but rather to suffer their Extremity, from which he hoped GOD
in his good time would Vindicate him. And therefore it being evident from the
Grounds forsaid, that the Synod has behaved themselves most partially, and
against all Law and Form: The said Mr. Alexander does therefore Protest against
the Synods further Proceeding in the said Matter, and appeals from them, and
from any sentence they shall give therein, to the next General Assembly, And
to their MAJESTY'S Protection, for Justice, and Relief in the mean time; And
Protests, That the said Lybels, and Witnesses Depositions taken thereupon, may
be preserved, and not put out of the way, That so the same (and not Copies
thereof) may be produced to the next General Assembly; Or to any their
Majesty's shall be pleased, out of their Royal Authority, to appoint to
consider the same: And that as the said Mr. Alexander will publish and disperse
his Appeal, and his Answers to the first Lybel; Which he only did see for his
own Vindication from any sentence that shall follow thereupon; So he expects,
and earnestly Desires, that the said Synod may Print both the Lybels against
him, and Depositions taken thereupon, for vindication of their Justice, (if
they can conceive they have done right) But which Mr. Alexander hopes will
rather vindicate his Innocence. And further, Mr. Alexander Craves, and
Protests, That this his Appeal may be insert in the Books of the Synod.

Notwithstanding of the Appeals foresaid, the Synod proceeded, and Deposed the
said Mr. Alexander from his Ministry, And thereupon the Eldership of the
Parish was invaded, and some few, (severals of them scarce worth to be noticed
as Residenters, have usurped the power of electing Elders, and have elected
many more than the number formerly used, purposely as they think, to make the
greater Figure; although but of the most inconsiderable of the Paroch; And of
Design to Call, Impose, and Obtrude a Minister upon the Rest against their
will, contrary to the Laws of Charity, Practices of Christian Churches, and
profession of Presbyterians; Notwithstanding that the said Mr. Alexander Heriot
his Appeal does preserve his Right, and keeps all in statu quo, the time of the
Appeal, while it be discust.

Whereupon, not only the said Mr. Alexander Heriot, but likewise the Heritors
and Parishioners of Dalkeith, have given in a Petition to the Lords of their
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, That they may be pleased to discharge
the Calling of a Minister while the Appeal be discust; And that in the mean
time, he may be restored to the Exercile of his Ministry. And that the
Presbytrie of Dalkeith, And others havers of the Lybels given in against him,
and Depositions of the Witnesses may make the same patent to him, as Law
appoints; That he may know what is lybelled, or may seem to be proven, to the
effect he may the better clear himself of the samen, which is nothing but false
lies and calumnies: And whereof several of the Presbyterian Ministers, who have
seen the Lybels and Depositions, Affirm, that there is nothing proven. But the
dancing about the Bon-Fire, which is not only clearly redargued to be false as
said is, there being no Bonfires either on the foresaid day, nor for several
months either before or after; But likewise if the persons who have deponed it
were known, and re-examined, it will be found, they have deponed falsely; And
that they have been dealt with so to Depone; And that this Falsehood may not be
discovered, not only are the Depositions kept up, contrary to express Law and
Act of Parliament; But likewise, no notice can be gotten who were the persons
who have deponed it, that they may be insisted against.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council, are
not Judges competent to the sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, and that as they
cannot put in Ministers in Churches, so they cannot meddle with sentences of
Depositions. It is answered, 1 mo. That be the 1: Act 8 Parl: Ja: 6: It is
Statute and Ordained, That his Majesty, and Council shall be Judges competent,
To all persons Spiritual and Temporal, in all matters. And to pretend, that the
Council is not Judge competent to sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, is no
other then to affirm, That these Courts have an Arbitrary power, and may do
wrong at their pleasure without Remeed or control. For it is evident, That Mr.
Heriot is most unjustly pursued and Deposed. And it is also evident, that if it
be not Redressed be the Council, he will never be Restored be those Ministers,
who have dealt so unjustly with him.

And whereas, it is alleged, That as the Council cannot put in Ministers, so
they cannot meddle with sentences of Deposition. It is answered, That the
Council has not the power of Admission and Ordination of Ministers. But if a
Minister having a lawful Call, the Presbytery should refuse to Admit and
Ordain him, albeit they have nothing to object against him, upon Application to
the Council or Session, Letters will be direct to Charge the Presbytery, to
Admit and Ordain him, but multo magis in this case, where a Minister is Deposed
from his Ministry, as likewise from his Benefice, (which is his Livelihood and
Maintenance) And yet most unjustly, and without Ground or Reason; The Council
is most proper Judge, for Restoring him against the foresaid Oppression,
Injury and Unjust Sentence.

And for a further evidence of this unjust Sentence, it is Humbly desired, that
the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council will be pleased to take notice, That
in the first Lybel there are many Articles which are not Relevant; And it is
said, that there is none of them proven, but the Dancing about the Bonfire: And
yet the Presbytery by their Sentence, found the Lybel Relevant and Proven,
which must be understood as to the hail Articles of the Lybel complexlie, then
which there is nothing more false as will appear by the Lybels and Depositions,
if they were produced. And yet thereupon Mr Heriot is first suspended be the
Presbytery, and referred be them to the General Assembly for further Censure,
as if great Immorralities in Life, and Errors in Doctine, had been proven
against him. And the Synod (to which the Assembly remitted him) following the
steps of the Presbytery, deposed him. Now when Presbytery and Synod, have acted
thus contrary to express Law, and have done open and manifest Unjustice; (and
whereof all that heard of it are convinced and sensible) And having stated
themselves Parties against him, there can be no Remedy expected from the said
Unjustice, Injury, and Oppression, unless the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy
Council interpose their Authority.

If it be alleged, That be the late Act of Parliament, The Act of Supremacy in
Church matters is Rescinded; It is Answered, That the Act of Parliament 1669 is
Rescinded, which extended the Supremacy, to the Ordering and Disposal of the
External Government and Policy of the Church, and to the Enacting of
Constitutions, Acts, and Orders in the Church. But the foresaid Act of K: Ja: 6
his 8 Parliament, is not Rescinded, which is only as to the Judging of
Ecclesiastic Persons in matters complained upon, And which power is inherent
to the Crown, otherwise there should be Regnum in Regno; And Church
Judicatories should have Arbitrary power, without Redress or Control, as said
is.

In Regard whereof, The Lords of Their MAJESTY'S Privy Council are Judge
Competent, to this Injury, Injustice and Oppression; And the Desire of the
Petitions ought to be Granted.
A short Relation of the Presbytery of Dalkeith their procedure in Reference to
the Sentencing of Mr. Alexander Heriot and their planting of the Congregation
of Dalkeith.
IT is not to be doubted, but that a late Pamphlet called An Information for
Mr. Alexander Heriot (Designed) Minister at Dalkeith, has spread through a
great part of this Kingdom; and it may perhaps be thought strange, that none of
the Members either of the Presbytery of Dalkeith, or Synod of Louthian and
Tweddale, have appeared to vindicate the Innocence of these Judicatories, and
to wipe off the soul Aspersions cast upon them by that defamatory Paper. But
the truth is, an Answer to that Paper was prepared about four Months ago, and
the Reason why the publication thereof was at that time delayed, was because it
was judged convenient to know the mind of the Synod (whose integrity was also
questioned and reproached by the Informer) before any Answer to that Paper
should be emitted. But the Synod sitting in May last, and judging the Calumnies
of that Paper obvious enough, declined to trouble themselves with any review
thereof as a thing not worthy of their time: But some of the Synod put it in
the hands of a Person, whose acquaintance with the process of Mr. Heriot
qualified him to descry the Informers lies thereanent. And again, this Person
being diverted with a throng of business, till the Plantation of the Kirk of
Dalkeith was near an Issue, it was thought expedient still to forebear the
Answer of that Paper, till the Answerer might be able to give a joint view of
the process of Mr. Heriot, and of the method taken for the settlement of the
Paroch of Dalkeith with a qualifyed Minister: Which being now brought to an
happy Period, it seems high time, after so long forbearance, to undeceive all
that are willing to know the truth; and to give in the first place a
compendious, but distinct account of the Process, and then refell the Informers
mis-representation of the same, only let this be premitted, that the reason why
the names of the Witnesses are not expressed, the Reader will find in the Answer
to the Information.

To begin with the Process then, the Reader may remember that the Act of
Parliament Restoring Presbyterial Government Authorized the General Meeting of
Ministers and Elders to Purge the Church of Ministers that were Insufficient,
or Scandalous, etc. Either by themselves or such as they should appoint.
Whereupon the General Meeting enjoined Synods and Presbyteries to receive
Lybels against any Incumbent within their respective Bounds, and to call for
Assistants from Neighboring Presbyteries or Synods to concur with them in
judging the same: In compliance wherewith, when the Presbytery of Dalkeith
received any Information against any of the late Conformists within their
Bounds, they did not proceed without the assistance of some from the
Presbyteries of Edinburgh and Haddingtoun; and particularly when the Process of
Mr. Heriot was led before them, which proceeded thus.

Upon the 7 th of August 1690. An Information or Lybel was given to the
Presbytery against Mr. Alexander Heriot then Incumbent at Dalkeith, which being
judged Relevant, Citation was appointed to be given him to compear against that
day eight days; at which day Mr. Alexander Heriot did personally compear,
heard his Lybel read, received a double thereof, and was granted a competent
time to answer it, viz. till the 28 th day of the said month of August, unto
which day he was summoned apud Acta to compear again and give in his answers.
But on that day, the Visitation (consisting of the Presbytery of Dalkeith, and
assistance from the Presbyteries of Haddingtoun and Edinburgh) being
constitute, and Mr. Heriot Legally called, he did not personally compear; but
for him appeared one Mr. James Hamiltoun alleging a Commission from Mr.
Alexander Heriot to compear in his name, and desiring to know who were his
Accusers, that they might subcribe his Lybel. The Copy of Mr. Hamiltouns
Commission or procuratory follows, which the Reader is desired to consider,
because that Mr. Heriot in his Information, and in his Appeal from the Synod,
calls it an Appeal from the Presbytery, and improves it under this Character.

The Copy of Mr, Heriots Factory and Declinatour.
I Mr, Alexander Heriot Minister at Dalkeith, do by their presents nominate and
constitute Mr, James Hamiltoun Writer at Edinburgh to be Procurator for me to
the effect underwritten, giving and committing to him full power in my name to
compear before the Ministers of this Meeting within the Presbytery of Dalkeith,
to whom there is a Lybel given in against me, and to crave that the Accusers
may be condescended upon and subcribe the Lybel; in regard the Heretors and
Parishioners (in whose name it is pretended to be given in) disowns the same,
and to protest that before the same be subscribed, it ought not to be
respected: and in regard I conceive that these Ministers are not the Presbytery
of Dalkeith, and that by the Act of Parliament they have no judicative Power
while it be given them by the General Assembly which is to be in October next,
therefore to protest and declare that any compearance made herein shall not
import an acknowledgment of their pretended Judicatory and Jurisdiction, which
I hereby disown and disclaim, but that the said compearance was and is to know
the Lybel and Lybellers that I may vindicate my self from the false Calumnies
and Accusations therein contained: And upon the hail premises take Instruments
in the Hands of an Notar. In witness whereof their presents are subcribed with
my own Hand, the twenty eight of August 1690 Years. Heriot

The Presbytery and assistance having considered this Paper, wherein Mr. Heriot
does decline the Presbytery in most contemptible Expressions, thought it not
proper to Debate with Mr. James Hamiltoun in Causa, nor yet to admit of any
Procuratory, nor of Accusers, or any under that Character to subscribe the
Information or Lybel; and also considering that Mr. Heriot did not compear
personally as he was obliged, thought fit forthwith to proceed to the leading
of Witnesses: for, though the Declinator yielded sufficient ground of Censure,
yet to prevent all Clamours, it was thought expedient to try the truth of the
Lybel.

The Officer, having been appointed to cite Witnesses, gave in his Executions,
which being read, the Witnesses were called, and all who compeared, after
invocating the Name of God, were Sworn and purged of malice and partial
Counsel; and being severally examined, the Presbytery and their assistants
collated their Depositions, and applying them to the several Articles of the
Lybel, they found several Articles duly proven, as follows.

1. Extravagant Lightness in Dancing about a Bon-fire publicly on the street
with Pipe and Drum and Drinking an Health upon his Knees.

For instructing this Article three witnesses, being examined, in their
Depositions they concur, That they saw Mr. Alexander Heriot dance about a
Bonfire in the public Streets of Dalkeith with Pipe and Drum and drink an
Health upon his Knees. What is alleged by the informer against this Article
and to invalidate the testimonies of the Witnesses is afterward considered and
answered.

2. Ordinary and usual profaning of the Lords Table by admitting of Scandalous
persons and such as were notourly profane in their Lives: As habitual
Drunkards, Swearers and the like, and several instances given hereof.

To this Article deponed six Witnesses all concurring that Mr. Alexander Heriot
admitted to the Lords Table Scandalous persons and two condescend upon the
instance of John Dickson, and four, whereof two, are Elders pitched upon Andrew
Nivil besides other Scandalous persons named.

This Article alone, being thus fully proven makes Mr. Heriot deserve the
Sentence of Deposition especially because there is an Act of the General
Assembly Anno. 1598 Ratified by the Assem. Anno 1638. for deposing such
prophaners of the Lords Table.

3. His debauching the consciences of his Parishioners by pressing and
threatening them upon highest pains to take many Oaths contrary to their Light.

Touching this Article: two Witnesses agreed that upon the Sabbath immediately
preceding the day that the Oath of Abjuration was tendered, Mr. Alexander
Heriot did threaten all with pain of death that should refuse it. Four
concurred in this, that Mr. Heriot pressed his Parishioners to swear several
Oaths, whereof one was Sinful and Illegal as the Oath that they should not lift
Arms against the King nor any Commissionate by Him, upon any pretext
whatsomever. Others were captious, as who and how many had been lodged by them
since November preceding, and the like. Others deponed that he threatened them
with imprisonment in case they refused to Swear.

4. His Scandalous and Impudent Railing from the Pulpit upon particular persons
of Highest note, as the late Duke of Monmouth, the late East of Argyle, and the
Earl of Melvill his Majesty's High Commissioner and Others.

Seven or Eight Witnesses agree in this, that from the Pulpit in the year
Eighty three Mr. Alexander Heriot Railed against Monmouth, Argyle, and Melvil,
calling one of them a Bloody Absalon, another Hereditary Traitor, another Rebel
and Disturbers of our Israel and other stuff to this purpose.

5. His rejoicing and showing evidences of cheerfulness at the News of the
Defeat of the Kings Army at Gillicrankie.

Three Witnesses being examined concurred in this that Mr. Alexander Heriot, at
the News of the Defeat of the Kings Forces at Gillicrankie* showed signal
evidences of his Joy and Satisfaction, and caused give the Reporter thereof a
Drink. And shall he that is Glad at Calamities pass unpunished.

6. That in his seeming Observance of the late public Thanksgiving for the
Preservation of their Majesty's Persons and Government, the Defeat of the Irish
Army, and discovery of the late Plot he, made no mention of any of them,
either in Praying or Preaching, whereby there was plain dissembling with God
and Man.

Three Witnesses having deponed concur in this, that on the late public
Thanksgiving, enjoined by Authority Mr. Alexander Heriot did neither by any
preliminary Discourse, nor in Sermon or Prayer, make any mention of the Defeat
of the Irish Army, the preservation of their Majesty's Persons and Government
nor of the discovery of the late Bloody Plot.

7. His perscuting of Sober People in his paroch for their Presbyterian
Principles Four Witnesses agree in this, that by Mr. Aelxander Heriots
Instigation and influence upon the Magistrates, some were Fined and forced to
fly the place for Baptizing their Children with Presbyterian Ministers.

8. Negligence of Discipline in the case of gross Scandals. And particularly
in the case of Thomas Finlaw and Janet Somervell who lived together as married
Persons: Notwithstanding it was notourly known that the said Janets first
Husband was alive.

Three Witnesses concur that William Gardener, William Sadler, and John
Dicksone were guilty of Fornication and yet had from Mr. Alexander Heriot the
benifite of a sealing Ordinance without satisfaction previously required. And
as to the particular instance above mentioned, four or five Witnesses deponed,
that they saw Janet Somervels first Husband after she was Married to Thomas
Finlaw. It was also deponed, not only that this was notourly known, but also
came to Mr. Heriots Ears, and one, at least, of his Elders deponed that he knew
no diligence done for censuring either of them. The same was declared by the
parties themselves.

There were other two Articles proven in the process which being of lesser
weight, for Brevities sake shall be omitted.

When the Presbytery and assistants had seriously, and a long time deliberated
upon this whole process, that they might not proceed rashly in a matter of
moment they delayed to pass any Sentence till another day.

Upon the twelvth day of September. The Presbytery and assistants did again
revise, cognosce and judge upon the whole process, and first they judged Mr.
Alexander Heriot upon the account of his declinator and rest of his conduct to
be contumacious; and then having deliberately advised the articles of the Lybel
with the depositions adduced to instruct the same, they concluded him to be
censurable, and therefore did Suspend him from all Ministerial function, and
referred him for further Censure to the next enshewing General Assembly, or
next Synod of Louthian and Tweddal, if either of these should judge him farther
Censurable. And so tender were they of Mr. Alexander Heriot, that
notwithstanding of his declinator, yet before sentence past they called him,
and also sent to his House, to hear if he had ought to allege why sentence
should not be pronounced: But he did not Compear. And therefore after Sentence
an Extract thereof was presently sent to him. And upon the whole I darre appeal
to any Person whom prejudice has not Blinded, whither or not the Presbytery of
Dalkeith and Assistants joined with them, have not proceeded upon a relevant
Lybel and plenary Probation: And also with that Candor, Singleness, and
deliberation, as becomes in a Case of such Weight.

But to proceed, Mr. Alexander Heriot, being cited, after six free Days to
compeare before the General Assembly, and accordingly upon the 3 d, of
November, 1690. He compeared and declared he past from his Declinature and
submitted his Case entirely to the General Assembly: Who thereupon did referr
the same to the cognition and decision of the Synod of Lothian, and Tweddale,
as their Act Dated the said third of Nov^mber bears. Upon (...)the day of
December, immediately following Mr. Alexander Heriot being called, compeared
before the Synod, and not only before Sentence past, but even before the
process was considered, made an appeal from the Synod to the next General
Assembly. But notwithstanding thereof, according to the trust committed unto
them by the Assembly, the Synod considered and revised the whole process, and
pronounced Sentence of Deposition against Mr. Alexander Heriot, and appointed
one of the Members of the Presbytery of Dalketth, to intimate the said Sentence
the next Lords day, and to declare the Church of Dalkeith Vacant.

After this the Presbytery of Dalkeith finding the Church of Dalkeith Vacant;
in order to the legal settlement thereof, proceeded to the Election of a
Session after this manner. They appointed one of their own number to Preach
there upon a Lords day, and after the Sermon publicly to desire the Heritors
and heads of Families to meet upon a convenient day (which was also specially
condescended upon) to make a list of Persons fit to be Elders and Deacons in
that Paroch. Which list being brought to the Presbytery and the Persons
Nominate being tried, an edict for them was publicly served in the Church of
Dalkeith, and being returned to the Presbytery, no objection was alleged
against any Person named in the list, only a Protestation was made in behalf of
Mr, Alexander Heriot, against the Election of any Eldership there, upon
pretense of his standing Relation to that Congregation. But the ground of that
Protestation being null, the Presbytery did forthwith appoint one of their
number upon a Lords day following, to preach in the Church of Dalkeith, and
with the usual Solemnities to ordain the Persons named in the List, to be
Elders and Deacons there: Which was accordingly done upon the Eight of
February, of this present year of God, 1691.

This (it seems) did alarm Mr, Alexander Heriot: For shortly after some Person
( I shall not say, ex foece Populi: But who seems to be neither Divine nor
Lawyer) has had the imprudence, or rather the impudence, to cause Print
Reasons of Mr. Heriots appeal from the Synod and some Notes in Relation to the
Presbyteries procedure against him, whereby his case is most grossly
misrepresented: Yet thereupon does he Petition their Majesty's privy Council,
as the Judges competent, to repone him to the exercise of his Ministry and to
interpose their Authority in discharging to call any Minister to the Church of
Dalkeith. But the Right Honorable the Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council,
knowing their duty better then Mr. Heriot, or his Advocates can inform them.
And considering the extent of the power belonging to the civil Magistrate in
such cases, did by their Act dated the 17. day of March, 1691, (contrary to Mr,
Heriots expectation) only recommend to the Presbytery of Dalkeith, Synod of
Lothian and next General Assembly respective, before whom the process and
Sentence of deposition was led and pronounced against the said Mr. Heriot, to
revise and reconsider the same, and to do all Justice thereupon to him
according to Law. And to have due regard, how, and in what manner the Church of
Dalkeith, should be legally provided of a Minister.

Now Mr. Heriot, having missed the mark he aimed at by this arrow dipped in
Poison, and resolving to trample upon all Government Civil and Ecclesiastic,
not only continues to dwell still in the manss whereto now he has no real
right, but in the hight of contempt, has therein erected a meetinghouse, where
he exercises all parts of the Ministerial function, to the great disturbance,
not only of the Town of Dalkeith, but also of the whole Country round about.

Conform unto the Interloquitor of the Privy Council, and in compliance
therewith, the Synod of Lothian and Tweddale, in the beginning of May, did
again diligently peruse the whole process of Mr. Alexander Heriot, reconsidered
the Probation. And having revised the same publicly, found no ground to make
any alteration in the former Sentence, but did by an unanimous Vote, adhere to
and ratify the same; and appointed a Minister of their number to intimate their
adherence to, and ratification of it, in the Pulpit of Dalkeith. And appointed
the Presbytery of Dalkeith, to have special regard to the Paroch of Dalkeith,
and to plant the same with their first Convenience.

Upon the eight of June a Gentleman presented to the Presbytery a Letter from
my Lord Raith. dated at Mommeal 30. May 1691. And directed to the Moderator of
the Presbytery, to be communicated to the Presbytery, and parochin of Dalkeith,
bearing that the Duchess of Buccleuch (since the Church of Dalkeith is Vacant)
recommends Mr. William Mein to be Minister of Dalkeith, and gives her Graces
consent to him to be admitted there. Herewith joined an Elder of Dalkeith,
showing that the Session there inclined to choose Mr. William Mein for their
Minister; whereupon the Presbytery appointed one of their number to go to
Dalkeith, and after due intimation given to the Heretours and Elders to meet
upon a convenient day, to meet with them and according to order to preside in
the Election, and Call, of a Minister. At the next Diet of the Presbytery, the
Brother reported that according to appointment he had seen the plurality of the
Heretours and all the Elders of the Parish of Dalkeith subscribe a Call to Mr
William Meine. And withal that some of the Heretores and others came in, and
Subscribed a Paper which they said was a Call to Mr. James Lundie Minister at
North-Leith to be their Minister, in the mean time protesting that it was
without prejudice to Mr. Alexander Heriot his Right, which protestation made
him conclude that they were not in earnest, and therefore to take no notice of
what they did. After this report appeared two of the Ruling Elders of the
Parish of Dalkeith, with a full Commission presenting a Call to Mr. William
Mein subscribed, attested, and duly endorsed upon the back, and supplicating
the Presbytery to prosecute the said Call with all expedition. Appeared also
two Gentlemen or three, from the Parish of Dalkeith with some Papers, alleging
they had a Call to Mr. Lundie. But being demanded if they had any Commission,
plainly answered they had none, Wherefore the Presbytery finding that they
pretended to represent a Community, and yet had no Commission to negotiate in
their name, thought it not fit to enter upon the cause with them. And therefore
finding no competition in this pretended Call, judged themselves oblidged to
prosecute the Call given to Mr. William Mein. And to that effect appointed two
or three of their number, with some of the Session of Dalkeith to go, and in
their name, and in name of the said Session, to tender the Call to the said Mr.
William Mein, and one of them to Preach and serve Mr. Meins edict at the Kirk
of Dalkeith next Sabbath, being the 21. of June. When the execution of the
Edict was returned. There appeared two or three Persons and gave in objections
against Mr. Mein his being Minister of Dalkeith: appeared also one Mungo
Strachan, and in Mr. Heriots name protested against both the Calls given to Mr.
Mein, and Mr. Lundie; when the Presbytery had duly considered the objections
they answered them as follows.

OBJECTIONS, by the Heretors and Elders of Dalkeith, against the Call given to
Mr. William Mein, to be Minister at Dalkeith, and protestation, and appeal
thereupon.
FIrst the said Call is null, because it is given by some Persons as Elders,
and Deacons, who are neither Elders nor Deacons, for the Kirk-Session was not
disolved by the pretended Deposition of Mr. Alexander Heriot the Minister. But
the said Session stands and continues while a Minister be settled in the Kirk,
and until the Minister and Session choice a new one; and as there was no
settled Minister at this pretended Election, so there was none of the Session
thereat, but two Persons, and the rest of the Electors were for the most part
of the meanest of the People.

2. Although the Session had been Lawfully Elected and constitute as it is not,
yet the Call, is null: in so for as it is given by Deacons, for by the Act of
Parliament the Righe and privilege of calling of Ministers is given to
Heretors and Elders, and not to Deacons.

3. No respect can be had to the said Call, in so far as it proceeds from many
Persons, who are neither Heretors nor Elders. For 1st. Although the Act of
Parliament require the approbation of the Parochiners to the Call given by the
Heretors and Elders, yet it does not give to the Parishiners a Right and
Privilege of Calling. But in case of the Parishiners their not approbation of
the Call given by the Heretors and Elders, In that case the Heretors and
Elders, are to call another Preson, so that this Call: In so fare as it is
given by Parochiners it is not to be respected, 2dly, The said Call and
Approbation thereof is null, in so far at it is given by Tutors and Curators of
Minors, at least by Curators without the Minors, whom they could only Authorize
therein, or by Persons as Tutors and Curators, who have not accepted these
Offices upon them, or by Servants, or hy Women, because that by the Act of
Parliament, as none of those Persons has the Right and Privilege to call a
Minister; So it requires not their Approbation to the said Call.

4, And as the forsaid Call given to Mr. Mein. is a Null Call for the reasons
forsaids, so likewise it cannot be admitted in competition with the Call given
to Mr. James Lundie Minister at North-Leith for the Reasons following.

1, Because the call given to Mr. Lundie is by the far greatest and best part
of the Heretors and Elders, and which is likewise approven by the far greatest
and best part of the rest of the Householders, to which likewise the approbation
of the far greatest number of the Servants and Women in the Paroch can be had,
if it were necessary whereas the call given to Mr. Mien is by very few of the
Heretors and Elders and few of those of any consideration, and by the other
persons foresaids whi are likewise in a mean condition, and has not the right
and privilege to Call. 2. Mr, Lundie, was formerly Minister at Dalkeith, a
Person above all exception, and eminent in Learning, Ability in Preaching,
Piety, Charity and in diligence in all the parts of the Ministerial Function,
and of singular and exemplar Life and Conversation, whom the Heretor, Elders,
and Parishoners of Dalkeith know, and by whom they have been greatly edified,
whereas Mr. Mein. Is not known to them, and is of meaner Gifts and Abilities
and who was rejected and refused by other obscure Parishes, And by whom they
cannot be edified, so that be ought not to be imposed and intruded upon them,
which will Infalliblly prove as incomfortable to him, as troublesome to them.

And therefore the Heretors and Elders, who has called, Mr. Lundie protests as
formerly against the foresaid unlawful Call, given to the said Mr. William
Mein, and against the Presbyteries proceedings upon the said Call and appeals
as formerly from the Presbytery to the next Synod and to their Majesty's, and
Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council for justice and relief therein in the
mean time.

To the first it was Answered that the Presbytery is satisfied as to the
Legality of the Election of the Eldership, and that they own no Eldership
there, but that which was erected by them. And that because the Act of
Parliament restoring Presbytery, did put the Government in their hands, and
such as should be raceived by them, and that there is no need of of a settled
Minister in order to the Election of an Eldership.

To the second it was answered that the subscriptions of Deacons is only
cumulative, and ex abundantia, they subscribing only as Consenters, Albeit the
calling of a Minister be lodged in the Heretors and Elders, yet no Law inhibits
other parishoners to testify their approbation of the thing by their manual
subscriptions to the Call.

To the 3, which has two Branches, it was answered and 1 st To the first
Branch as was above answered to the 2 d Objection Moreover it were no sollecism
though all the heads of Families within the Parish had subscribed. 2. To the
other Branch, it were tedious and would prove unnecesary to canvass every
individual subscription, but the Presbytery has done nothing in this case, but
what the Law allows and is commonly practiced.

To the 4 th wherein a competition is alleged to be between the Call given to
Mr. William Mein and another given to Mr. James Lundie, its answered there is
no such competition, there being no Legal Call at all to Mr. Lundie, as appears
from what is above mentioned. And it may be thought Strange why Gentlemen who
(its hoped) do value both their own, and Mr. Lundie's credit do borrow his
name to a mock Call, and urge it in a matter so serious and weighty: For
whatever Strangers not knowing the case may be made to believe: Yet the
Presbytery of Dalkeith know That the very Gentlemen that presented this
alleged Call, did before them judicially confess that there only design was
but to prevent the jus Devolutionis. But to come to the Reasons alleging Mr.
Lundie's Call to be preferable to the other. 1. To the first its answered, that
all the Elders subscribe Mr. Meins Call, and none Mr. Lundie's, and that the
Presbytery understands Mr. Meins Call to be subscribed by the most considerable
part of the Heretours, especially the Duchess of Buccleuch, who is the chief
Heretour, having given consent to it by her Grace's Honorable Commissioners.
To the 2 d. Its answered 1. That whatever relation Mr. Lundie might have had to
the Parish of Dalkeith formerly, yet he has none at present. 2. That though the
Presbytery thinks it not fit to compare Mr. Meins, and Mr. Lundie's Gifts or
other endowments together, nor yet to flater the one and derogat from the
other: Yet they are satisfied with the Ministerial qualifications of Mr.
William Mein, as also with his practice, Conversation, and fitness for the
Parish of Dalkeith. And the Presbytery makes no question, but through the
Blessing of God upon his Labors he may prove an useful Instrument in that
Corner of our Lords Vinyeard. 3. Its a most calumnious untruth that ever Mr.
William Mein was refused or rejected by any Parish, whether famous or obscure.
Whosoever are acquaint with him know that he is of another Spirit than to thrust
Himself upon a People that are not sueing for Him. Neither is the Presbytery
resolved to intrude him upon the Parish of Dalkeith, but fairly to settle him
there, upon a Legal Call from the plurality of the Heretours and all the
Elders. And as no faithful Minister of Christ can warrantably expect immunity
from troubles, So its hoped God shall support Mr. Mein under what he may meet
with.

The Presbytery having considered the Objections and found them by the Answers
given to be non relevant and laying no weight on them, nor upon the
protestation founded thereon, did without farther Demurr judicially tender the
Call to Mr. William Mein, and upon his modest Submission, appointed the day
whereon he might be addmitted. And accordingly upon the Seventh of July 1691.
After a Sermon Preached with Reference to the occasion, Mr. William Mein was
admitted Minister of the Gospel at Dalkeith, in the Kirk of Dalkeith, The
Presbytery having given him the Right hand of Fellowship, and the Heretours and
Elders having received him as their Minister.

Its true the two Persons above mentioned, and Mungo Strachan appeared upon
this occasion also, and renewed their respective protestations, but the
Presbytery having answered them formerly, proceeded now notwithstanding thereof.

An Answer to Mr. Heriots Information.
NOw for Answer to the Paper called Information for Mr. Alexander Heriot,
wherein his Case and Cause is grossly misrepresented, we say, with the wise
man, He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his neighbor comes
and searches him, and then there is a further discovery of Truth and Equity:
and therefore although it would be both needless and nauseous to give a
particular and distinct Answer to every thing in that Printed Information, yet
for satisfaction of some that may be ignorant, or misinformed, and so puzzled
with many positive Assertions of great untruths, lies and calumnies therein
contained, it is thought fit at present to remark these few things following in
order, according to the Method of the foresaid Information.

1. He calls the Synod of the three Louthians and Tweddale the Synod of
Mid-Louthian only: Whereby in the very entry and Tittle of his Paper, he
bewrayes no small ignorance of the constitution and extent of the Judicatory
from which he did appeal. It would seem that he is not well acquaint even with
Names and Things, that he might easily have known long ago, and are of his
concernment, to know. But this is a mistake of so small consequence, that it
would not have been worth the while to take any notice thereof, were it not for
the presage of it. Coespitare in limine mali ominis est.

2. In his Information it self then, one of the first things remarkable is the
account he gives of the Presbytery of Dalkeith's procedure against him: wherein
among other things he says that the Presbytery of Dalkeith refused to conscend
upon an Accuser or Pursuer, or to allow any under that Character to subscribe
the Lybel given against him. To which it is Answered. 1. That he Called for no
Accusers when he compeared personally before the Presbytery. 2. How consonant
soever such methods of producing Accusers, may be to processes before Civil
Courts (where also in several cases it is not required) yet the said Presbytery
did, and still do judge that the formal appearing of Accusers as such in
ordinary cases of Scandal, to be some way unbeseeming Church-Judicatories, who
are called out of zea to the Glory of Christ, to inquire into the Scandals that
fall out, within the bounds of their inspection, even although their should be
no Complainer, as is manifest, Rev. 2. Whereas admitting of Accusers commonly
tends not to edification (the only end of Church Censures, 2 Cor. 13.10,) But
to the begetting and cherishing bitigious debates, rancour and malice: As has
been too manifest in some late cases. 3. The Presbytery of Dalkeith have for
their Vindication herein, both the ancient and usual practice of the
Judicatories of this Church, and the sentiments of our worthy Predecessors:
Witness Ames de conseten. Lib. 5 Cap. 54. Qu: 4. And Mr. Durham in his Treatise
Of Scandal, part, 2. Chap. 10. Yet 4. notwithstanding of what was said, there
were two or three persons ready to have subscribed his Lybel, and to have
appeared as his Accusers, if need had been: But Mr. Heriot pretended this by
his withdrawing, and obstinate declining of the Presbytery, and refusing to
appear before them: So that they could not produce his Accusers before him,
when he would not himself compear before them, so that his clamor about this,
is groundless and unjust.

3. He says that the Heretours and Parishoners of Dalkeith, did by a write
under their hands disclaim and disown the Lybel, except Alexander Calderwood,
and a few others ex faece populi. Ans. 1. It is a notorious falsehood. For Mr.
Heriots party gave no such writing under their hands to the Presbytery. 2
Though it were true, yet it makes nothing for his Vindication, nor against the
truth of the Lybel given in against him, which he knows may be true, and well
proven by plenty of Witnesses; although as many thousands as single Persons had
disowned it. Yet for further clearing of this particular, let it be considered,
1. That Mr. Mark Lermont with a confused Rabble following him appeared, and by
word of mouth disowned the Lybel: Which showed little either prudence or Piety,
whither the said Lybel were true or false: For (besides that they knew not how
it would be proven) if it were true, then their disowning it, kithed little
respect to their own spiritual thriving: But if false, then they ought rather
to have furnished Mr. Heriot with means to disprove it. Yet to do them Justice,
they appeared not with Mr. Heriot, but a fortnight after, they rushed in before
the Presbytery when Mr. James Hamiltoun presented Mr. Heriots Declinature, And
as they disowned the Lybel, so they disowned the Declinature. 2. I know no
Heretors that appeared to disown that Lybel except Mr. Mark Lermont be counted
one before his Fathers Death. 3. The Parishoners who compeared were but a small
part of the Parish, and these also dissaffected to the Government Civil and
Ecclesiastic; and some of them Drunk, Tumultuous and Outrageous: So that Mr.
Heriot has more cause to be ashamed, then to boast of their appearance and
Testimony for him; for commonly persons of that sort give their Testimony to
such as themselves. 4. Their disowning the Lybel before it was put to probation
and trial, could not signify more, than either that they had no hand in giving
it in, which may be true enough; or that they were not willing that Mr. Heriot
should be called in question for any misdemeanors whatsoever, and how far this
may conduce for Mr Heriots Vindication, who can tell? 5. He alleges that only
Alexander Calderwood and a few others owned it, and afterward that Alexander
Calderwood was the only Informer, thereby excluding these others seemingly:
Which as it is both false and not coherent in its self; so if it were true, it
would make nothing for him: For if an Information or Lybel against a man be
found relevant and true, the paucity of these that own it, ought not to hinder
the guilty and Scandalous sinner from meeting with deserved Censure. He
alleges that the Presbytery had no other Informer against him, but only
Alexander Calderwood. But though this had been true (as it is not) yet had the
Presbytery been oblidged to receive a complaint from him alone, and to put the
same to Trial: For if no complaint against a Minister could be admitted, except
the plurality of his Parish did prosecute the same, the Church would quickly be
pestered with unfaithful Teachers; because the Gospel affords much Ground to
believe, that the wicked and unsound Professors will in number always exceed
the truly Godly: So that if a corrupt Pastor should get the corrupt part of his
Parish (which will easily be found the greatest) to befriend him, then there
would be no access to censure him: And how absurd, and of what bad consequence
this would be, is obvious to any judicious Christian to consider^ Besides, it
may here be remembered that Mr. Heriot is of another Judgment than the Apostle
Paul about this Question; for the Apostle 1. Tim. 5 19. Requires but two or
three Witnesses in order to the receiving an accusation against an Elder: But
Mr. Heriot requires the plurality of the Parish in order to it; and quarrels
with the Presbytery of Dalkeith for receiving an Accusation against him from a
few, as he alleges. 6. Whereas he would make the World believe that the
Heretors and Parishoners are very unanimously for him; let it be considered,
that the Chief Heretor is not concerned, and that the Chief of the Heretors he
boasts of, has but a smally early rent in the Parish, besides his dwelling
house; and the rest of his Heretours are yet more inconsiderable that way. 7.
He says, that these others who appeared against him, were ex foece populi:
Why? Because perhaps they are generally of the poorer sort: Which though it
were true, is no better help to his Cause, than to bewray in him a profane
Spirit, of the same stamp with these who counted the Apostles of Christ
(because poor unlearned Men) to be the Filth of the World, and the offscouring
of all things 1. Cor 4.13. And it seems he has not well read, nor understood,
Iam. 2, 4.5. Besides it is well known, that not a few of these he speaks so
contemptibly and basely of, yet for their temporal interest may vye with Mr.
Heriots Heretors: and for their sense of Religon, Fear of God, and morality of
Life, are very far above his flos populi; So that if it were known to the
World, who they are whom Mr Heriot calls the dregs and off-scourings of the
People, and who they are whom he reckons the choice of the People, it would be
evident what complexion of Spirit he is of: And is it not a great pity and
loss to the Church, that such a Minister as counts and calls the serious
Praying Folks in his Parish, the dregs of his People, should yet be suspended
by a Presbytery, and deposed by a Synod? Hinc ille Lachrymae. Finally, if Mr.
Heriots memory had not been wilfully bad, he might easily have remembered that
these of whom he here speaks so slightingly for their external meanness, did
yet in his own time and under his view, for the space of three years maintain a
Minister and a Precenter, by their own voluntary Liberality: And therefore they
cannot be such a contemptible company, as Mr. Heriot represents them to be.

4. He says that when Alexander Calderwood was charged with inventing and
reporting most false calumnies against him, he replied, Be they true or false,
I have taken two hundred Persons from his Communion. To this imputation
Alexander Calderwood Answers, that it is most calumnious, and that Mr. Heriot
can never prove it. Nor do I see how the foisting in of this Story among his
weak defenses, serves for any other purpose, than to tell the World that Mr.
Heriot is a man that loves to tell an ill Tale (true or false) of any that bear
the name of Presbyterian, even though it be nothing to his present purpose.

5. Another thing affirmed by Mr. Heriot is that he did except against
Alexander Calderwood as a party, and yet he was permitted to sit in the quality
of an Elder, as one of his Judges in the Presbytery; Ans. This is like the rest
of his Calumnies: For, 1. Neither did Mr. Heriot at his own personal
compearance, nor afterward in his Declinature, make any exception against
Alexander Calderwood: Though indeed Mr. Hamiltoun afterward did require the
Presbytery to remove Alexander Calderwood. 2. It is not true that the
Presbytery did allow him either to debate or vote in Mr. Heriots Case; though
they sustained him indeed as a Ruling Elder to judge in other cases: And they
yet know no Reason why he ought to have been removed; and so hindered from
giving his advice and assistance in other cases and causes: Had the Presbytery
no other cause in hand but Mr. Heriots? And must Mr. Calderwoods Legal showing
his dissatisfaction with Mr. Heriots Scandalous carriage, render him incapable
of sitting in the Presbytery. 3. When Mr. Hamiltoun, Mr. Heriots Procurator
desired that Alexander Calderwood should be removed, it was refused by the
Presbytery, not because he was sustained Judge in this case, but because (as
the Presbytery then expressly told Mr. Hamiltoun) that seeing Mr. Heriot had
declined them, they could not debate with him in Causa.

6. Another falsehood in Mr. Heriots narrative, is, that Alexander Calderwood
informed, tampered with, and threatened some of the Witnesses* Ans It is sure
that before the Presbytery there appeared not the least shadow of any such
thing. And it may be remarked here, that though before the Synod, Mr. Heriot
said that Alexander Calderwood suborned the Witnesses; yet now in his Printed
Paper, he alters and mitigates his Style (having some wit in his anger) and
forbears the word suborning, lest he should be made to answer for it before a
Criminal Judge: Therefore he now speaks more softly, though still falsely.

7. The great Accuser of the Brethren himself could invent nothing more
maliciously false than what he alleges against the Presbytery in their
Examination of the Witnesses: For greater Candor could scarce have been than
what was used therein. None of the Witnesses were refused or hindered to see or
read their Depositions: Yea, none were suffered to subscribe their Depositions,
till they heard them distinctly Read, and were asked again calmly, if they had
freedom to subscribe the same: None were interrupted, but when through
simplicity or worse, they spoke besides the purpose: And it was necessary to
put them to Categorick Answers to the Interogatories proposed, and not to
suffer them to speak nonsense or impertinencies: and its impossible that any
Court can either maintain their Authority, or expede their business, if all who
come before them be permitted to utter what ever they list. There was not the
least appearance of over-awing any, except by the Oath of God, which they were
under; which was especially inculcated when they refused to depone and Answer,
as some did: And one of the Witnesses did, according to the Discretion he had,
desire eight days time to advise, whether he should subscribe what he had
Deponed upon his Oath, or not. So that Mr. Heriots account of the Examination
of the Witnesses is wholly false, and maliciously injurious.

8. Mr. Heriot says that there are several Articles of the Lybel, which are
not upon these heads to which the Trial of the Regular Clergy (as he
Irregularly and Popishly Styles his Prelatick Brethren) is restricted by Act of
Parliament, and which are in themselves alterius fori. Ans. This also is false:
For whosoever shall read Mr. Heriots Lybel, shall not find one Article in it, that
is not easily reducible, either to Scandal or negligence, and therefore to the
heads whereupon the trial of the late Conformists is (according to the Act of
Parliament) to proceed: And though some of these things libelled may be found
in some respects to be alterius fori, yet it does not therefore follow that
Ecclesiastical Courts may not meddle with these things at all. I confess, his
disaffectedness to their Majesty's Government, deserves a chastisment from
Civil Courts; yet in as much as it vented it self even in the exercise of his
Ministerial function, it was the more Scandalous, and the ground of a
Church-censure: And it is well known that one and the same miscarriage may be
judged both by Civil and Ecclesiastic Courts, and yet both of them keep within
their own proper and distinct sphere: but Mr. Heriot will not know the
distinction of these Courts, but fain would confound and embroil all; as
appears both by his insolent practice, and by the close of his Information, as
we may afterward see.

9. He complains of an additional Lybel, and that he got no citation to Answer
to it, nor Copy of it, and exclaimes wickedly against the Presbytery for this
and their procedure thereupon, and in the bitterness of his Spirit dictates to
the World his Censure of it in these Words, than all which (says he) there can
be nothing in Judicial procedures, more partial; pernicious and unjust. Ans
Herein he shows more ignorance and malice than either wit or honesty: And if he
would be sober and calmly compose himself to hear truth and reason, I would
tell him that he was still under citation to the Presbytery, till he declined
them: and after that, to what purpose should he have been cited to appear
before them whose Authority he had simply declined. Besides he may know (if he
please) that there was no Addition made to the Lybel after that Diet of the
Presbytery unto which he was cited apud Acta by the Moderator in face of the
Presbytery: And if he had appeared at that Diet to which he was cited, he had
got the Copy of that Additional Lybel (as well as he got of the former) and
time also to prepare and give in his Answers to it: So that he has no reason to
complain of the want of a Copy of any Addition that then was made: for he would
no more bear from, nor meddle with the Presbytery, but declined them before
they did any thing in his affair that he could or did complain of; as appears
by the Declinature it self.

10. He says with an admirable either ignorance or impudence, that he appealed
from the Presbytery to the General Assembly. Doubtless the man's own Conscience
cannot but tell him, that there was not the least hint of any such thing. There
was indeed a pretended Factory to one Mr. James Hamiltoun presented to the
Presbytery (a true Copy whereof is herewith Printed supra in the Narrative)
which bears a Declinature of the Presbyteries Jurisdiction, but not the least
show of an Appeal: So that both malice and weakness appear in his thus making
lies his refuge. In this his Declinature he would not so much as call them the
Presbytery, but in contempt the Ministers met at Dalkeith, and disclaimed their
Authority as incompetent Judges of him (forsooth) yea expressly denies them to
be the Presbytery of Dalkeith: And thus he did stubbornly and proudly trample
upon both the constitution and Government of this Church, and also the Civil
Authority of King and Parliament establishing it: And for this his Contumacy,
the Presbytery might well have forthwith deposed him, and that by Law, and
according to their duty; but to evite the show or appearance and Clamours of
Rigidity, they proceeded to the process. It may also here be observed that in
this his declinature, he declines the Ministers he should have added, and
Elders, if his memory had been good) as no Presbytery, and that because they
could have no Power to Act as a Presbytery till they received it from the
General Assembly: Which is such a piece of Nonsense as needs no confutation:
For who knows not that Presbyteries are established by the Law, and General
Assemblies made up of Delegates from them? Besides that by this sort of rare
reasoning, Mr Heriot bewrayes both Ignorance and infidelity in the Protestant
Doctrine about the Jus Divinum of Church Government, and the intrinsic power
of Ministers and Elders; as the judicious Reader will easiely perceive at the
first hearing of his Argument. And after all this and much more of arrogant,
stubborn, and obstinate carriage toward the Presbytery, was it any wonder that
the Presbytery declared him contumacious? had they not great and Just cause so
to do? Could they do less? Nay let the most bigot Prelatists, upon a
supposition of the Presbyteries Authority, but consider Mr. Alexander Heriots
conduct toward them, and if he be a Person of any Ingenuity and Candor we
might refer this unto his Determination, whether or not the Presbytery had
reason to declare the said Mr. Alexander contumacious? Was he not evidently,
and eminently such? And does he not still continue and show himself more and
more such, even to the Superlative degree? Has he not Treated the Synod as
Insolently in his Language as the Presbytery, as appears from his printed
Information? does he not appear to be a scornful and Stout hearted Person, that
is far from righteousness? Does he not utter vain knowledge, and fill his Belly
with the East Wind?

11. But this vain man proceeds to lie also upon the late General Assembly, and
boldly says, that they found no contumacy in his Appeal. But for Answ. 1. Does
he not know that there was no such thing as an Appeal of his from the
Presbytery to the General Assembly, and that his appearing before the Assembly
was upon the Summonds raised at the Instance of the Presbytery of Dalkeith, to
which Assembly they had referred him? Has he forgot that he appeared not there
to prosecute any appeal (which never was) but to answer the Summonds? 2. If
there had been any such thing as an appeal of his from the Presbytery to the
General Assembly, yet it would have been Illegal and Unformal, and also unjust
and unreasonable, because of these Rules of the Cannon Laws. 1. Appellaridebet
ab Inferiore Judi^^ gradatim (non per Saltum) ad Superiorem. 2. Prohibetur
Appellatio. 1. A regularis Disciplinae correctione. 2. A gravamine futuro. 3.
He speaks as if the Assembly had cognosced upon the Cause: whereas it is well
known that the Assembly did not at all enter upon the Cause, but leaving it
intacta and integra, referred it to the Synod of Louthian and Tweddale, giving
them full power to determine therein as they should find meet. 4. Is it not
pleasant here to remember that Mr. Heriot when before the General Assembly
called his Paper (which he sent in to the Presbytery) his Declinature, and
passed from it; yet now in this Information be again and again calls it an
Appeal, and owns and pleads it as such, in his plea against the Presbytery and
Synods? How shall we understand these contradictions? Must he, to save others
the labor of it, give himself the lie? It would seem that Mr. Heriot has had
some more ingenuity before the General Assembly, than he has elsewhere and at
other times, for that Paper was indeed only a Declinature, and he then gave it
its true name: neither could he have passed from an Appeal (if any such thing
had been,) for his so doing would have imported his approbation of the
Presbyteries procedure in his affair, and even his passing from his Declinature
imported little less. However he should have remembered the known Proverb, that
a Liar has need of a good Memory.

12. He injuriously and falsely alleges that the Presbytery founded his
contumacy upon his Appeal from them: For its referred to his own Conscience, 1.
If ever he appeared before the said Presbytery but once? 2. If he offered
directly or indirectly to make any Appeal from the Presbytery at his then
compearance? 3. If he did not in his Declinature afterward retract his first
and only compearance, expressly denying that it imported any acknowledgment of,
or submission unto the Presbyteries Authority and Jurisdiction? 4. If any
commissionated by him appeared before them (while his Process was in
Dependence) except once the forementioned Mr. James Hamiltoun. 5. If the said
Mr. Hamiltoun did in his name make any Appeal*

But to undeceive the World, be it known that Mr. Heriots being declared
Contumacious, was founded, 1. Upon his declining of the Presbytery and
Jurisdiction thereof, plainly affirming them not to be the Presbytery of
Dalkeith, 2. Upon his obstinat refusing to compear before the Presbytery of
Dalkeith and their Assistants from the adjacent Presbyteries, Authorized by the
General Meeting of the Ministers and Elders of this Church, conform to the Act
of Parliament, to try Incumbents: For though he appeared once, yet did he pass
from the same in his above mentioned Declinature. In both which there was
manifest contempt not only of the Ecclesiastic Government, but also of the
Civil, Establishing the Ecclesiastic; and consequently a valide ground
whereupon to declare him Contumacious. It is true, Mr. Heriot did (with more
cunning subtilty then conscientious ingenuity) before the General Assembly pass
from his foresaid Declinature, (and consequently from his pretended and falsely
alleged Appeal to the Assembly: for he had done nothing else that he could
call his Appeal: and even this his slight sort of seeming repentance contributs
more than he is aware of, to justify the Presbyteries having formerly declared
him contumanious: For upon the matter, he hereby, before the General Assembly
declared himself to have been contumacious, and recanted it: though now again
he denies his contumacy, and so recants his recantation, and Repents of his
Repentance; and that even while he is going on in a greater contumacy against
the Synod.

13. But let us behold yet more of the impudence of this man: he knows and in
part acknowledges that the General Assembly referred his Case and Cause
untouched unto the Synod of Louthian and Tweddale; whereby the said Synod had
the Assemblies full Power, quoad hunc effectum committed unto them, to cognosce
upon and determine in his Cause: yet with abundance of confidence, and contrary
to all reason and order of Judicatories, this man appeals back again from the
laid Synod unto the next Lawful General Assembly: and this also he does,
before he did or could understand what would be the Synods Judgment of his
Process, even as he served the Presbytery with his Declinature: the man is so
very quick and foresighty by the help of a guilty Conscience. Perhaps he thinks
that his qualifying the next Assembly with the word (Lawful) gives him a
reserve not to discuss his Appeal before an Assembly constituted according to
the present Establishment, but framed after his own corrupted judgment*
however, I shall not easily be persuaded that the man who so irregularly and
irrationally counter Acts and Rebels against the renewed Sentences of the
Inferior Judicatories, has any purpose to appear and plead such a desperate
Cause before the Supreme Judicatory of this Church: yet I deny not, but Mr.
Heriot is a very bold man, and may venture upon great and hard matters, of this
kind. I must here also crave leave to tell him, that by this his Appealing from
the Synod, he has transgressed against several Texts, of his and his Brethrens
dearly beloved Canon Law. ex. gr. 1. Se Delegans carius Causae Jurisdictionem
subdelegato mandato mandaverit, in hoc. Casu, um ipse nihil Jurisdictionis sibi
refervarit, non ad cum; sed eius Superiorem facienda provocatio. 2. Apellare
non potest, qui condemnatus est ob contumaciam veram and others of the same
kind may be added.

14 Now let us consider the Reasons he gives of this his Irregular Appeal from
the Synod. The first is that the Petition of the Heretors and People of
Dalkeith (attesting his faithfulness in the Ministry and his innocence as to
the things Lybelled against him, and craving that the depositions of the
Witnesses might be made patent) was not suffered to be read in the Synod. Ans.
The Synod were Authorized by the General Assembly only to review the Process
led against Mr. Heriot before the Presbytery of Dalkeith; and not to enter upon
any new Process, or upon Petitions extrinsick to that process: Wherefore also
when some of the Parishoners of Dalkeith offered a new Additional Lybel against
Mr. Heriot, the Synod refused to take notice of it; so that the Synod gave
equal measure both to his party and to his opposits. 2. It was utterly
impertinent for Mr. Heriots party, instead of a Petition, to offer to the Synod
an attestation of his Innocence; and the Synod acted rationally in slighting
such insignificant Testimonials; for there is no guilty person sifted before
any judge, who could not procure a company of his own stamp to attest his
honesty, and petition for him, if that could avail to hinder the Judges
cognoscing upon the Cause, and passing Sentence upon clear evidence: neither
would Mr. Heriot (I suppose) have used this unwarry and supitious way of
vindicating himself, if he had remembered the old Scots Proverb about such Cases
3. Something of an Answer to this his first Reason may easily be gathered from
what is formerly said about some men's verbal Testimony for Mr. Heriot and
disowning of his Lybel before the Presbytery. Supra.. Of this Answer to the
Information. 4. If this Petition he lays so much weight upon, were worth the
enquiring after, I suppose sufficient evidences would be found of its being
first drawn up betwixt Mr. Heriot and his Associats, and then subscriptions
gathered through the Town of Dalkeith, and even from some persons very young.
5. The Subscribers of the pretended Petition could attest nothing but according
to their own knowledge or Judgment (which in some of them at least was not
very considerable) and if others of the Parrishiners were conscious of Mr.
Heriots unfaithfulness, it were hard for the former to attest the Negative. All
which make it evident that his first Reason of Appeal from the Synod has no
weight, nor relevancy in it, but Savours of a bad Cause.

15. His 2 d Reason of Appeal is because when he craved a Copy of the
Additional Lybel, and that the Depositions of the Witnesses might be read
before him and made patent to him, yet this was refused by the Synod: and
hereupon he huffs and exclaimes, and tells us by guess that this was contrary
to Law, and undoubtedly (says this Dictator) for this Reason, because the
probation was weak, and might not abide the light nor Trial; for Veritas non
querit angulos. Ans. 1. This is an untruth, for the Synod told him that when
they entered upon the Cause, he would be allowed to hear the whole Process and
Depositions of the Witnesses, if he would stay: yet he would not stay, but
withdrew immediately after he heard his Lybel read. And it is a hard thing for
the Synod to read Depositions before any man who withdraws designedly (as it
seems Mr. Heriot did) that he may have a lie to spread. For that the
Depositions of the Witnesses were read in open Synod, a multitude of Witnesses
can testify: if he declined to hear them, who can help that? But from some men
we may expect any thing except Candor. 2. As for his want of a Copy of the
Additional Lybel, he has himself only to blame, who by his declining of the
Presbytery prevented that: for the Presbytery would not have refused him that,
nor any other thing reasonable, if he had pleaded in Causa before them: but his
deserting the Cause by his Declinature laid no obligation upon the Presbytery
to desert and decline themselves, and court him after his having renounced
them: upon which considerations the Synod could lay no weight upon his
complaint of want of a sight or Copy of the Addition to his Lybel. 3. As for
the Act of Parliament for making depositions of Witnesses patent, which he
cites both in this and in the former Reason of his Appeal, it is answered, 1.
That this Act pertains only to Civil Courts. 2. Whatever that Act of Parliament
calls for, it must be understood to be called for, when the Process is first
led, and not at any time (even after Sentence is past) that the accused shall
please: otherwise there would be a door opened to protract the sitting of
Judicatories as long as any party accused shall think fit. Now it is notourly
known to Mr. Heriot and his Friends, that his Process was not led before the
Presbytery of Dalkeith by stealth, without his knowledge, or in a Corner, but
in the Church of Dalkeith openly; and where Mr. Heriot had free access, yea and
was summoned apud Acta to give in his Answers to his Lybel, to see the
Witnesses, to object against them (if he had ought) and to hear their
Depositions given; and when this benefit and advantage was obstinatly refused,
it is manifest that his design in desiring of the Synod to hear the Depositions
of the Witnesses, and to have them made patent, was but to gain time, and to
frustrat the Synods procedure, which uses not to sit at any time above one
week: and this his design was also bewrayed by his wilful withdrawing from the
Synod, after he was allowed to stay and hear the Depositions of the Witnesses
read: so that it appears, he was not willing to hear them. Thus the Depositions
having been made patent to him (if he had been willing to have heard them) both
at the Presbytery of Dalkeith and Synod of Louthian and Tweddale; I suppose,
the Act of Parliament he cites is abundantly satisfied, which does require only
the making, not the keeping of the Depositions of witnesses patent as long as
every Tergiversator pleases. Besides, he may know that the Law requires the
Testimonies and Depositions of Witnesses to be sealed up, after Sentence is
past. 4. As for his Latin which he adds in the close of this reason; as it is
impertinently alleged, except he reckon both the Presbytery, and the full and
open Synod to be but Corners, so he might have considered that although Veritas
non quaeret angulos (and it has not sought them in this Case in hand) yet
oftentimes pelliture in angulos; and he may know and remember by whom it is,
and has been frequently so handled, and this case is also supposed Isay. 30.20.

16. The third Reason of his Appeal from the Synod is that he was informed that
the only Article proven against him, was his Dancing about a Bonfire, October.
14. 1688. Which he instantly redargued, as a thing that could not be true,
because October. 14. 1688. Fell upon a Sunday, and all Dalkeith knows that they
never had any Bonfires upon a Sunday: And yet the Synod had no regard to it,
but proceeded to censure him: and here again he insults, rails, and censures
both the Witnesses as deponing falsely, and the Synod as proceeding against him,
out of prejudice and design, upon whatever was alleged, though without
probation, or upon redargued probation: and with his wonted confidence, adds
that this is evidently manifest. But he must sober himself and take his Answer
1. Whatever come of this Article about his Dancing, yet there are Articles
enough of his Lybel clearly proven, whereupon the Synod might and did proceed
to censure him. 2. Even this Article it self was better proven, then he seems
to be aware of: For 1, There was no mistake nor disagreeing of the Witnesses as
to the thing, and matter of fact deponed against him, but only as to the
circumstance of the time: which the Synod did duly consider and weigh: and
Lawyers and Canonists do tell us, that this circumstance in is not so material,
as that a small difference among Witnesses about it should invalidate their
Testimony as to matters of Fact. And Mr. Heriot might have known that
Conclusion of Law. In Scandalo nil refert de die, modo constet de crimine and
Corpore delicti Therefore also as to the Circumstance of time (year or day) the
Presbytery Judged is not so material, as to enquire Critically after it, and
some of the Witnesses did not advert to it: But by the 14, of October, They
meant the day of Rejoicing for K James's Birth, which was kept yearly during
his Reign upon that day: So that Mr. Heriot has no reason to Triumph and insult
over the witnesses, Presbytery and Synod (as he does) because of a small and
easy mistake of some of the witnesses in such a part of the Circumstance of
time. 2. As to the matter of Fact, it was both clearly deponed by three
witnesses, and many others know it, were they willing to tell the Truth: And it
can yet be proven by other Witnesses, that upon one of their Bone Fire-Dayes,
he did with Pipe and Drum Dance about a Bonefire, and Drink a Health upon his
Knees. 3. Further to clear this matter, and to stop his mouth as to this, let
him know that all the three Witnesses did, and still do agree even as to the
time of this his Dancing, that it was on the first of these Solemnities that
was kept for the Birth of the late K. James, after he became King (which we
know was October, 14 1685) though this Designation of the year was not
enquired, nor required of them, when they first deponed; yet they have since
declared it before many Witnesses, and also given it under their hands, though
some of them did not advert to the year when they were deponing. And this deed
of Mr. Heriots is notour enough through the Town of Dalkeith.

As to what he says, that this Article of his Dancing about a Bone-fire was,
as he is informed, the only Article of his Lybel that was proven. Answ. 1. It
seems his Informers have been Liars, like his own Printed Information: They
speak, and he writes and Prints, Lies, and who can help it? Their Tongues and
Pens are their own. Qui vult decipi, decip^^^^. But none of the Presbytery or
Synod, not any that are acquainted with the Process and Depositions of the
Witnesses, have said that this was the only Article of the Lybel proven against
him. 2. The Synod by reviewing the process found that more Articles than that
last mentioned were proven against him: and the preceding narrative of the
process, and of the depositions of the Witnesses, makes it evident, that there
were six or seven other material Articles proven against him.

17. We come now to his fourth Reason of appealing from the Synod, which has
three Branches. The first is that he had appealed from the Presbytery; and that
they were his Party. Answ. 1. This is false, as has been plainly shown already:
He never appealed from them. 2. If it had been true, what would it be to his
purpose here, as a Reason of his Appeal from the Synod. I have appealed from
the Presbytery: Ergo I must Appeal from the Synod too (and that before the
Trial of the Process either in Presbytery or Synod it seems this is a good
Argument in Mr. Heriots Logicks. 3 If their be any seeming strength in this
reasoning of Mr. Heriots, I think it mostly is this, that the Presbytery is my
declared party, and have Sentenced me, and they belong unto, and are a part of
the Synod: therefore (says Mr. Heriots arguing) I must Appeal from the Synod
also. But if this Argument be good, it will oblidge him to Appeal also from the
General Assembly, because both the Presbytery and Synod do belong unto it, and
help to make it up by their delegated Commissioners: and who can but see the
absurdity of such reasonings?

The 2 d Branch of his 4 th Reason of his Appeal from the Synod, is, that the
Presbytery of Dalkeith, and Alexander Calderwood interrupted him, and reasoned
against him as Parties, in the face of the Synod, and that even in his
presence, and before he was removed. Ans. He should have said, not the
Presbytery but one or two of the Members of the Presbytery of Dalkeith, if he
had been willing to speak truth: and then how little will this make against the
Presbytery? And far less against the Synod; and least of all as a Reason of
Appeal from the Synod. 2. Was it any wonder that some of the Members of that
Presbytery spoke some thing then and there, while he was uttering such things
as we have heard and answered supra. Should his lies make men hold their peace?
and when he mocketh, shall no man make him ashamed? Ought he not rather to have
thanked them for their Friendly freedom in letting him hear something of his
own case that he was ignorant of, and was of his concernment to know, seeing
they bad then the opportunity of his presence, which was a great delicate to
them, though he their near neighbor. 3. If they be Parties as he calls them,
why then should they not be heard in the Cause as well as he? And that whether
he be present or not? Had they not Reason to vindicate themselves in his face
from the invidious calumnies and manifest lies, which he charged them with. Is
he such a pillar in the Church that no Member of a Judicatory may speak. in his
presence, but all men must give ear, and wait and keep silence at his Counsel,
and their tongue cleave to the roof of their mouth? I doubt whether the old
Gentleman at Rome himself be so arrogant in such Cases? 4. particularly
Alexander Calderwood (a Ruling Elder and a Member of the Presbytery and Synod)
had Reason to say something for his own Vindicacation; because Mr Heriot*
according to his wonted modesty and veracity) branded him in the face of the
Synod with suborning of Witnesses.

The 3 d Branch of his 4 th Reason of Appeal, is, that notwithstanding of all
that he had said, yet the Presbytery of Dalkeith and Alexander Calderwood, were
not removed, but got leave to sit still as his Judges, against all Law and
Justice. Ans. 1. How did Mr. Heriot know this? By some good Informer, no doubt,
whom he trusted so far as to Print the story for the Information of the
ignorant World. But how could this (if true) be a Reason of his Appeal, which
he gave in to the Synod before this alleged crime was committed; although the
Copy of the Reasons of his Appeal was given in after the Trial and Sentence? By
what Spirit could he know, when he Appealed, that the Synod would not remove
the Presbytery of Dalkeith. Is he not a man of a deep reach and great
foresight? 2. Briefly, this Reason of his Appeal declares Mr. Heriot to be a
man of superabundant confidence, for he positively Asserts, and that in Print,
several Weeks after that multitudes (and perhaps himself) knew it to be a Lie,
that the Presbytery of Dalkeith were not removed, when the Synod proceeded to
judge of his Case and process: For all the Synod, and a great many more, do
know, that when Mr^ Heriots process came to be judged and cognosced upon, not
only all the Members of the Presbytery of Dalkeith were removed out of the
Synod, but also the Ministers who had been delegated from other Presbyteries to
assist that of Dalkeith, were removed: And this, not because they were
suspected as partial and Parties against Mr. Heriot, but because their own deed
came to be judged by the Synod. But how Mr. Heriot could be ignorant of so
public and Notour a matter of Fact, wherein he was so much concerned, seems to
have some Mystery in it, not worth the enquiring after. Sure I am, if his
patience and humility had prevailed so far as to make him stay but a little
while after he gave in his Appeal, he would have seen the Presbytery of
Dalkeith removed as well as himself: But it seems, Mr. Heriot having in haste
given in his Appeal, he gets quickly away that he may get leisure to seek,
find, or make Reasons for what he had done: And in his search and Consultation
about this matter, he found that the not removing of the Prebytery of Dalkeith,
would be a pretty plausible Reason for his Appeal from the Synod: And therefore
he would needs put it in (whether true or false,) among the rest of his
Reasons: And it had been a pity we had wanted it.

It may be he, or some of his Advocats will object, that though the Presbytery
of Dalkeith were at last removed, yet they were not removed together with him,
and as soon as he, but had leave to sit still after he was gone out, and to
discourse in the Cause. But I Answer, 1. Notwithstanding of this Answer and
Objection. yet the falsehood of Mr. Heriot's reason remains conspicuous, for he
plainly says, that the Presbytery of Dalkeith were not removed, but sat to
judge him. 2. Mr, Heriot removed sooner then he needed or ought to have done;
yea when he was desired to stay and hear the process and depositions of the
Witnesses Read: And the Presbytery were not bound to follow him close at the
Heels, except his steps had been better ordered, 3. There was no reason why the
Presbytery of Dalkeith should be removed as soon as he. Why should they not be
suffered to speak for their own Vindication, as well as he for his? Is their
Reputation nothing worth in comparison of his? And why might not their Brethren
detain them a little after Mr. Heriot had removed, to get some further
Information from them about the matter of Fact; and it was but a very little
time they stayed after his Removal. 4. Has not every Judicatory power to
examine and question the several parties contending before them, either
together or apart as they see Cause? And is it not very needful and necessary
often times, that the parties be questioned and heard apart? What need then of
this vain Clamor about the Presbyteries staying a little behind Mr. Heriot in
the Synod? If he must needs dictate Church-Policy, and Law, he has need first
to learn them better himself. 5. Seeing Mr. Heriot in his Paper talks so big
about Law and Justice, and so often charges both Presbytery and Synod with
partiality, walking contrary to Law and Reason, Unjustice, Oppression, and many
other hard words, which he heaps up against them, upon very weak and false
pretenses; I would fain know of him, what kind and measure of Justice this is,
that he metts out unto the Presbytery of Dalkeith? For in one and the same
Reason of his Appeal, he storms and exclaims against them for presuming to
speak in his presence, and debate in his Affair, while he was before the
Synod, and calls it Interrupting him; and again in the same Reason, he Storms
and Quarrels with the Synod, for letting them sit and speak, when he is
removed: And if they may not speak for themselves, neither when he is present,
nor when he is not present, then let him inform them by his next Information,
when they shall speak: For till Mr. Heriot reconcile these contradictions. I
cannot guess at the Season of their speaking, but can guess pretty well by the
Language of this his fourth Reason, what Justice they might expect from him, if
he were their Judge.

18. His 5 th Reason of Appeal is that several members of the Synod did
interrupt him while he was Vindicating himself etc. And here again he makes a
great noise and Clamor about this, as a thing without example in any
Judicatory, and as an open discovering of their prejudice, design and
resolution to proceed against him, although without just cause: And alleges
that when he was craving a sight of the Additional Lybel, and Depositions of
the Witnesses, some of them cried out, that the same should not be granted to
him, as if every one of them had had a decisive Voice. Ans. 1. He talks here as
if he were reproving a Company of Schoolboys, and like and Infallible Doctor,
able to dictate to all the members of Church Judicatories how they should
behave in Judgment. But withal he shows gross Ignorance of the Constitution of
Church Judicatories; for really every member has a decisive voice protanto
(when it comes to a Vote) and all have equal power both to consult and
determine in the free Courts of Christ: And the Decision of matters is not
referred to a Prelate or his deputy; which yet Mr. Heriot would like best; for
he speaks of every members having a decisive voice, as a great absurdity: So
that by this and other things he shows that he understands very little or
nothing of Church Power. 2. As to the few words dropped in his presence by two of
the Members of the Presbytery of Dalkeith, I have answered already. 3. If any
other of the Synod presumed to speak a word while he was speaking, or that any
of them cried, or yet spoke these words It should not be granted to him, I do
not remember, but doubt it much; and I dare not now take it upon Mr. Heriots
Printed word, after such proof of its fallibility, even in matters of Fact and
Memory: And though the matter alleged be but small, yet I must have another
Witness (which hitherto I have not found) before I believe it. 4. Giving, but
not granting, that some one or other Member of the Synod contradicted him, or
spoke something that was not smooth and soft enough for his tender Ears; then
upon this supposition, I Answer. 1. As it is no great Crime, so I will not
Justify it altogether: It may be passed as a piece of easily pardonable and
tolerable precipitancy: And Mr. Hertot ought not to have exclaimed against it,
at an intolerable rate, as if it were a thing without example in any
Judicatory, and to make such a Sputter about it as he does. I can tell him
where, and when, there were far worse examples in the most eminent of the
Prelatick Judicatories, and far greater disorder and confusion amongst them,
notwithstanding of all the power of the Prelate to keep them in order. 2.
However it can be but a very weak Reason of Appealing from the Synod, because
one or two of its Members spoke a word not to his mind, while he was there:
must he therefore Appeal from the whole Synod, because one or two of them spoke
something that did not please him? Is not this to be a delicate Man indeed? 3.
If he had spoken and behaved as it became a Man in his Coat and Circumstances,
it is like no Man would have so far transgressed the good order and form of
Judicatories as to have given him any disturbance: but when a Man comes before
such a Judicatory with a mouth full of Lies, and utters them with confidence,
its a hundred to one, but one or other of such a company of knowing Men, will
in a plain and clear Case, drop a word before its full season. 4. If any
contradicted him, the Reasons by them at that time given for their so doing,
should have been set down by Mr. Heriot and answered, before he had made this a
Reason of an Appeal from the whole Synod. 5. In short, this Reason amounts to
this: That he Appealed from the Synod, because while he was before them he got
not all the talk and discourse himself alone: and thus videas quantum valere
potest.

19. His 6 th Reason of Appeal from the Synod, is because several Members of
the Synod did speak and deal with him to dimitt, or that otherwise they would
depose him: and hence he confidently, but rashly and causelessly concludes, that
the Synod saw weakness in the grounds they had for deposing him: and here again
pro more suo he exclaims and rails, Answer. 1. This, if true, yet is not at all
a ground of Appeal from the Synod: for if any of its Members did without
Commission from, or knowledge of, the Synod, give him such a friendly advice,
why should he blame the Synod for it, and that so highly as to Appeal from
them, as not fit nor worthy to judge of his affair? 2. We may here see what may
be expected from such as Mr. Heriot, when men deal freely, friendly and
ingenuously with them. If Mr. Heriot having made his application privately to
some Members of the Synod, and solicited them for their advice; or, if some of
them did of their own accord and out of a superfluous excess of compassion and
charity toward him. offer such an advice; it is most base, uncharitable and
unjust for him to construct the worst that malice can devise of their freedom
with him: if he had judged heartily of their Counsel, he would have concluded
that his Dimission was advised for his relief from the danger and probable
hazard of a Sentence of Deposition: But ill Doers are commonly ill Deemers. 3.
That these Members of the Synod said to Mr. Heriot that they would depose him,
if he dimitted not, I utterly deny to be true: for this was more than they
could then well know; whatever probable guess, fear or foresight of it, they
might vent to Mr. Heriot in an officious friendly communing with him. 4.
Whereas Mr. Heriot adds for confirmation of this his last Reason of Appeal,
these confident and empty words and there is nothing more certain than that
they would never have dealt with him to dimitt, if the probation against him
had been good. I answer, that there is nothing more uncertain; and if I should
say, there is nothing more false, I would have come nearer the truth, than he
has in this point. 5. To prove what he had last said, he adds these charitable
words. Their malice to the Regular Clergy being such as that they would rather
depose them for Immoralities and Errors in Doctrine to publish them, than to
suffer them to dimitt etc. But for answer. 1. It is a malicious Alledgance; and
it will be time enough for me or any man else to believe it, when he proves it,
which I know is impossible for him to do. 2. When or where were any of these
Irregular Men whom he miscalls the Regular Clergy) hindered to dimitt? And who
can hinder them to dimitt, if they please? 3. He hints here that when any of
them are deposed for immoralities and Errors in Doctrine, It is done out of
malice, and consequently not out of Zeal for the Glory of God, and conscience
of that great duty of purging the Church of Christ from that great and
Soul-destroying plague of a corrupt, Scandalous, Worldly, Carnal, Lifeless
Ministry: but there is a day coming when Sinners must give an account of such
hard Speeches.

As for what he adds to the sixth Reason of his Appeal ( viz. attesting his
consciousness of his own Innocence, his hoping that God will vindicate him, his
renewing his protestation against, and Appeal from the Synod. etc. These things
might well have been spared, and need no other answer than what is suggested to
every man's Conscience, from the General Rules of Christian Charity. Again in
the close of that Section, he makes a clamor about the additional Lybel and
Depositions of the Witnesses, and dictates several things to the Synod about
the business, which he might have spared: the Synod know their duty, and need
none of his advice, till he grow wiser: however he needs not fear that the
Principal Copies of the Depositions of the Witnesses shall be put out of the
way; they will (according to his desire) be preserved and not put out of the
way, but produced at the next General Assembly, if need be.

20. To return to his Information; he complains that notwithstanding of the
foresaid Appeals (he should have said Appeal, for there is but one of them) the
Synod proceeded and deposed him from his Ministry. Ans. 1. I suppose the man
may know that an Appeal is not enough to sist and stop procedure to a Sentence:
otherwise Judicatories would never be rid of them, and the most notoriously
guilty would not spare to Appeal again and again, if they could thereby gain
but a small delay of their Sentence. 2. He might also have known that he had no
place to appeal from that Synod, who were in his cause clothed with the power
of the General Assembly, and Acted as their Delegats, as was formerly said. 3.
He is grossly mistaken in his saying, that his Appeal does preserve his right,
and keep all in Statu quo, the time of the Appeal, while it be discust. Indeed,
if he had had place to Appeal, and his Appeal had proceeded upon plausible
grounds, it would give him access to another hearing of his Cause before the
Superior Judicatory to which he had Appealed; but it does not in the mean time
stop all further procedure of the Inferior Judicatory, nor keep all things in
reference to him in statu quo prius, as he imagines: Especially when the case
in question is sufficiently clear; for then the Inferior Judicatories proceed
and Act as they will be answerable to the Superior: But when the Case is Dark,
Dubious, and Difficult, it is the wisdom of the Inferior Judicatory to forbear
further procedure after an Appeal. Yet if every Appeal were sufficient to sift
the further procedure of inferior Judicatories, I am confident that the most
Scandalous Person in all Scotland, who bears the name of a Minister would not
be deposed except by a General Assembly.

21. He complains that the Eldership of the Parish was invaded, and some few
(severals of them scarce worth to be noticed as Residenters) have usurped the
power of Elcting Elders, and have elected many more than the number formerly
used, purposely as they think, to make the greater figure, although but of the
most inconsiderable of the Paroch; and of design to call, impose and obtrude a
Minister upon the rest against their will, contrary to the Laws of Charity,
practices of Christian Churches, and profession of Presbyterians. Answer. 1 How
like is this man to him of whom it is said, As for all his Enemies he puffs
at them? He still speaks contemptibly of his opposites, and of every thing that
does not please him. Projicit ampullas and sesquipedalta Verba: and seeing he
does not keep himself Intra moderamen inculpatae Tutelae, he must blame himself
if his Antogonist answer him sometimes according to his Folly. Why should he
here and elsewhere through his Paper, Rant and Exclaim against the
Presbyterians, as if he were still dancing about the Bonefire: For though they
have been long and often as the Deaf that heard not, and as the Dumb in whose
mouth are no reproofs, yet he should not think that it will be always so with
them, especially when such as he provoke them sore to retort the bitter verity
upon their unwary Adversaries* 2 To come more close to the matter in hand, I
say as to the alleged invasion of the Eldership, that where there is no
possession there can be no invasion; and Mr. Heriot had no Eldership: For the
Ruling Elder is a Church Officer disowned in the Prelatick Government, which
owns no other Officers than these, Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans,
Archbishops, Bishops, Arch-Deans, Deans, Prebends, Rectors, Vicars, Priests,
Deacons, Curats, Churchwardens, Sides-Men, Sextons, and the rest of the
Apocriphal Tribe of Mr. Heriots Regular Clergy, which he again and again talks
of in his Information: And I needed not to have omitted the Pope: for he
belongs to the same Tribe; and diverse of the Prelatick Protestants do own him
as the first Bishop, that is to say, the Head of the Clan: And for my part I am
content that all go together, as birds of the same Feather. 3 As to the
alleged inconsiderableness of these Elders chosen by the more regular party in
Dalkeith, they are nothing inferior to Mr. Heriots nominal Elders, in any thing
that is good and considerable: And for their number, they exceed not what they
were wont to be in times of Reformation. 4. As for their design to obtrude a
Minister upon the Parish, contrary to the profession of Presbyterians. etc.
Ans. 1^ Is it not pleasant to see Mr. Heriot teaching Presbyterians their own
Principles, and pleading for them? Who can but laugh at it, especially if they
consider how ill he has learned either his own or theirs, as we have seen
Supra? 2. The Prelatick principles and practices are in this thing too well
know to be so soon forgotten: And Mr. Heriot seeming to plead for the power of
Ruling Elders, and the liberty of the Parish in choosing and calling a
Minister, shows him to be no true Prelatist, and consequently neither good Fish
nor Flesh. It may be, he will say that this was but his Argumentum ad Hominem:
But then let him take the Answer here given both ad hominem and ad rem; that
his Argument is really ad neutrum. 3. It is also well known, that Presbyterians
deny no member of the Congregation liberty to object against the Intrant, and
if their objections bear weight, and be found just and relevant, they are
regarded; if not, rejected: And if this course had been observed all along,
it may be questioned whether Mr. Heriot would have got entrance there 4. It may
very easily and rationally be supposed that the present Eldership of Dalkeith
(with the advice and concurrence of the Presbytery when needed and desired) may
have as good skill of choosing a fit Minister, as Mr, Heriot and his Party.

22. Mr. Heriot (not being content with all the insolent Language and usage he
has given to the Church Judicatories) goes yet farther, and ventures upon an
untroden Path that he may rid himself of all Church Judicatories; and by a
Salius quite extra oleas betakes himself to the Lords of their Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council, and supplicates them (upon the matter) utterly to
overthrowthe Government of the Church (and the Laws establishing it) and to
take upon them to judge and pass definitive Sentences in causes merely
Ecclesiastic: For he and his Party have petitioned their Lordships to
discharge the calling of a Minister, while the Appeal be discust, and that in
the mean time he may be restored to the exercise of his Ministry, etc. Answer.
1. By this trick of Mr. Heriot's (if it pass into an approven example and
precedent) he has cut out abundance of new work for the Honorable Lords of
Council, I may say, for all the days of the year, not excepting even these
days which Mr. Heriot calls Sundays: But their Lordships are wise enough to
foresee what a vast deal of their precious time it would require, to concert
and adjust all these differences that arise through the Kingdom about the
settling and unsettling of Ministers: I suppose, their Lordships would soon
weary of it: and truly Mr. Heriot in his betaking himself unto their
Lordships, seems not to have been sufficiently sensible of the greatness of
their work otherwise: but it is like Mr. Heriot thinks himself and his concern
so considerable, that it deserves time and place amongst the most weighty
affairs of the Kingdom; and therefore he puts their Lordships in mind, that he
is not only deposed from his Ministry, but likewise from his Benefice, which is
his Livelihood and Maintenance: and herein tandem aliquando he speaks
ingenuously, and brings forth the great Gravamen and quarrel, which has
occasioned all the clamor and noise we have heard: Oh, it is the grand lose of
his Benefice, Livleyhood and Maintinence! Quis taliu fando, temperet a
Lachrymis? But who lamented the case when several hundreds of a better
character, were for smaller faults turned out of their Livelyhoods? Surely,
none of his party. 3. This device of Mr. Heriots seems to aim at, and tend unto
nothing less (in some men's apprehension at least) than the overthrow of the
Civil Government it self: for (upon the matter) he supplicates the Council to
invade the late Claim of Right, and bring back again that Supremacy, which the
Convention of Estates claimed, to be abrogated, as one the grievances of the
Nation. And in prosecution of this wicked design, he cites an antiquated and
abrogated Act of Parliament (of which more anon) and suggests (falsely and
ignorantly) that by the Churches enjoying her wonted and just liberties and
privileges, there would be Regnum in Regno, and a liberty for the Church to do
wrong at her pleasure without control. But we may easily know whose heifer he
plougheth with here; this is but a new towt in an old horn; our worthy
Ancestors have solidly and learnedly answered and anticipated these
suggestions: and because their Testimony and judgment may perhaps have but
little weight with Mr. Heriot, I would mind him of the Judgment and practice
of some of his more sound and honest Brethren and Fathers, viz. Those seven
Prelates who were put in the Tower of London in the time of the late King
James, for their Legal adherence unto, and asserting of the Churches power and
privilege, and that in a strain far contrary to this of Mr. Heriots: and it
were easy to adduce other instances of more learned and sound men of the
prelatical way than Mr. Heriot, as to this head of Church Power: But I suppose
it is needless: neither are the Honorable Lords of their Majesty's Council so
easily imposed upon, as to be cheated by such a silly Cavil, as this which Mr.
Heriot here suggests: for they know that Church Officers do not deny, nor
refuse, the Allegiance of Subjects, nor does their power reach men's persons
further than what is necessary for suppressing of wickedness and Scandal (which
Mr. Heriot and his Advocats seem to reckon a doing of wrong without control)
nor does the Ecclesiastic power, claimed and exerced by Presbyterians, reach
men's properties any way at all. 4, What if there be the hand of some Joab in
this contrivance of disturbing the Honorable Privy Council with a business of
this nature? What if some greater Headpiece than Mr. Heriot has hood-winked
him, and put him upon this desperate Course, and that on purpose to do some
greater mischief to Church and State, than to protect or relieve Mr. Heriot
from a deserved Church-Censure? There that are wiser than I, may enquire into
this, if they please. However, when persons manifestly disaffected to the Civil
Government, come to plead for the enlarging and streaching of the limits
thereof, some of these Honorable Governors will be in hazard of remembering
the saying of the old Trojan Politician quicquid id est, timeo Danaos, and Dona
ferentes.

23. Amongst others of Mr. Heriots falsehoods and calumnies, I suppose that is
one he has in this paragraph I am now answering, viz. That severals of the
Presbyterian Ministers who have seen the Lybels and Depositions, affirm that
there is nothing proven but the Dancing about the Bonefire: for I am sure that
no rational man, after he has read the Depositions, will say that there is
nothing proven but his Dancing: so that these Persons be speaks of, must either
not have seen the Depositions, or not have said and spoken so as he alleges:
and I am sure that both Statsemen, Lawyers, and Ministers, after sight of the
Process and Depositions, have said that the Presbytery might well have deposed
him.

24. Whereas Mr. Heriot does again and again make a horrible clamor about
making the Depositions of the Witnesses patent and their persons known, that
they may be insisted against. etc. Here he discovers plainly his malicious
design in demanding so often the making patent to him the names and Depositions
of the Witnesses, viz. Not that he may Answer and vindicate himself (though
sometimes he pretends to this impossibility) but that they may be insisted
against and that he may pursue them for telling the Truth: and that even after
they have sworn it, according to the best of their knowledge, and conscience.
And let all rational persons judge if there be any show of Candor or Honesty
here, in his threatening to pursue the Witnesses merely for their declaring (and
that upon Oath, when called to it) what they and others saw with their Eyes,
and heard with their Ears: does not this sort of threatening course, warrant the
Church Judicatories before whom the Process lies, to demand of Mr. Heriot and
his party in Dalkeith, that they give sufficient security to the Magistrate, of
their good and peacable behavior toward these Witnesses, before the whole
Process can be Printed with safety to the Witnesses: especially considering
what violence has been already executed upon, and is yet farher threatened
against others, by diverse of Mr. Heriot's party in Dalkeith. Here also the
Reader may percieve a satsfying Reason, why in the preceding short Narrative
of the Process, the names of the Witnesses are not expressed. However Mr.
Heriot may remember (for he does know it) that some of these Witnesses have
avowed and asserted to his face, even that Article of his Dancing about the
Bonfire, and other things too; and that even since he emitted his threatening
and lying Information; and although there were unworthy and indirect means and
menaces used by his party to daunt the Witnesses, and drive them from their
Testimony. To all this may be added, that the Authentic Depositions of the
Witnesses were by the Presbytery given in to the General Assembly to have been
publicly seen and read there; as they were afterward again and again before
the Synod; which shows that the Presbytery were no ways Jealous of their
validity and sufficiency, for probation.

25 Toward the end of his Information, he supplicats the Lords of their
Majesty's Privy Council, to take notice of this as a further evidence of the
unjustice of the Sentence; that in the first Lybel there are many Articles,
which are not Relevant, and yet the Presbytery by their Sentence found the
Lybel relevant and proven, which must be understood (says he) as to the hail
Articles of the Lybel complexly, than which there is nothing more false (these
last words are his, but the Reader may take them as the true Answer to what he
has said and he aggravates this, as a very great miscarriage, and boldly
alleges that both Presbytery and Synod have Acted contrary to express Law, and
have done open, and manifest unjustice, whereof all that heard of it, are
convinced and sensible. etc. Ans. 1. Bona Verba. These things need no
confutation, they are so evidenty false, and ridiculous: What need was there
for Mr. Heriot to proclaim himself in Print, to be a Child in Ecclesiastical
affairs? How does he affront the Honorable Lords of Privy Council by proposing
such Stuff unto them, as this and several other things in his Petitions? He
quarrels and challenges the Presbytery for sustaining the Lybel as Relevant,
because (as he says) there are many Articles in it which are not Relevant:
this is rare Reasoning indeed: Does he not know, that if there had been but one
Article in the Lybel Relevant, and other twenty in it not of that weight; yet
the Lybel is Relevant notwithstanding? For these other lesser Articles, do no
hurt to the Relevancy of the main Article, and consequently of the Lybel: and
has he forgotten the old Proverb, Et quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant?
But the Reader may judge of the Relevancy of the Lybel by the preceding
Narrative. 2. As to what he adds that this Acting of the Presbytery and Synod
against him, is such an open and manifest unjustice, as that all that heard of
it are convinced and sensible of it. This is such a gross and manifest lie,
that I doubt whether he can make a greater, except he have taught his Tongue an
extraordinary skill in that Art. Is it not time to leave and let him alone,
when his rage and impudence is arrived at such a hight.

26, Yet before I let him go, it will not be amiss now in the close of this
Paper, after having got such a taste of his skill in Divinity and
Church Government, to consider his skill in Law and Acts of Parliament, and I
trow this Informer will be found no happier in the Law-part of his Paper, than
he was in the Ecclesiastic part thereof.

1. He says, It is pretended that the Lords of Privy Council, are not Judges
competent to the Sentence of Ecclesiastic Courts, and that as they cannot
place, so they cannot displace or depose Ministers. But he Answers that by the
first Act, 8. Parliament. Ja. the 6 It is statute that the King and Council
shall be Judges competent to all persons spiritual and temporal in all matters:
and he says, that to affirm that the Council is not Judge competent to the
Sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, is to give these Courts an Arbitrary power
to do wrong at pleasure, without remeed or control. Ans. To this it is replied,
that in a matter that has been so much debated, and is now so well understood
it is strange that any man assuming to instruct others, should so much darken
counsel without knowledge: For. 1. To make a Court sovereign, is not to make a
Court Arbitrary: and yet this is the Informers only Argument why no
Ecclesiastic Court can be Sovereign in the matter of Censures, Because then it
would be Arbitrary. 2 The highest Asserters of the Supremacy before the Act of
Parliament, 1669 (Which is now rescinded) did never affirm that the King or
Council might by themselves reverse or redress Censures purely Ecclesiastic;
but the outmost by them acclaimed was, and is, that, all remedy by Church
Judicatures failing, the King or Council might with advice of the sanior pars
put a stop to the procedure for some competent time, and recommend a review
till better order might be re-established. But 3 ly. The Informer might have
found the Act of Parliament that he cites, thereafter plainly interpreted and
restricted, viz. By the first Act of Parliament. 12. Ja. 6. Entitled,
Ratification of the Liberty of the true Kirk, whereby it is expressly declared
that the Act cited by the Informer shall no ways be prejudicial to, nor
derogate any thing from the privilege, that God has given to the spititual
Office-bearers in the Church, concerning the collation or deprivation of
Ministers, etc. But this last Act the Informer did not, or would not think on:
And certainly to understand the former Act so laxly as he does, and to apply it
to a case so plain and obvious as Mr. Heriot's Deposition, were no less then to
overturn the Church, and introduce confusion,

2. But in Answer to what is said, viz. That the Council cannot put in
Ministers, and therefore cannot meddle with Sentences deposing them, the
Informer tells us, that though the Council has not the power of Admission and
Ordination, yet if a Presbyrery should refuse without cause to admit and
ordain a Minister having a lawful Call, Letters may be direct to charge them
to do it; multo magis in the case of Deposition is the Council the most proper
Judge to restore, against the oppression of an unjust Sentence. Ans. But 1. The
Informer forgets that the Council Power to charge, in the case he supposes, was
allowed to fortify the presentation of the Patrons, when in use, and so to
maintain that mixed Right, partly Civil and partly Ecclesiastical, which they
pretended to: But now that presentations are abolished, and that the matter of
Calling and of Entering Ministers is by the late Act of Parliament referred to
the Determination of the Presbytery of the bounds, to be by them concluded; the
remedy, in case of difference upon a Call, must no longer be by Letters of
Horning, but by Appeals to the Synod, and from the Synod, to the Assembly, to
be there ultimatly determined. And 2 ly. There is, besides this mistake in the
case supposed, a great disparity and inconsequence in the Argument thereon
founded: For Esto that the Lords of Council may put the Presbyteries to do
their duty, it does not therefore follow that in case they refuse, the Council
may do it for them; which yet must be the Informers inference, or otherwise he
concludes nothing: But all the Magistrate does in such a case, is to bring the
matter before some Superior Ecclesiastic Court, that may supply the fault of
the Inferior; which without the Magistrate's interposing, has through Mr.
Heriots importunity, been done in this case, once and again, much more than was
necessary.

3. But why in the matter of an ordinary Sentence of Deposition, judged and
rejudged by the judicatories of the Church, should the Informer bring things to
these extremes as if we were in the case of some great and important matter,
about which the Church it self was divided, and the Magistrate oblidged to
interpose, for preventing some ruining prejudice: Certainly, if such clamours
be allowed on every occasion of this kind, the excellent Establishment, which
we have lately by Law obtained, is of little or no use, and both King and
People must be in perpetual disquiet. For can the Informer upon the smallest
reflection think, that his clamor should preponderate with the Magistrate to
the Sentence of the Presbytery, ratified over and again by the Synod and the
Assembly, whom God and the Law have entrusted with the final Judgment of such
matters: So that were the Sentence even doubtful (as it is not) yet its very
Authority should oblidge to an acquiescence: How much more is the Informer to
be blamed, who notwithstanding of Mr. Heriot's undeniable contumacy and several
gross Immoralities proven against him, whereof almost any one is sufficient for
Deposition, does upon some ill applied notions of form and other bold falsehoods
and calumnies in point of Fact, ofter to make such a stir and noise, which yet
no wise man regards.

Finally. To what is said, I add a few words more. 1. This
Juridico-Theologaster might have remembered (if he had not forgotten his
Logicks) that two Powers, as well as other things, may be so far distinct, as
to be neither Co-ordinata, nor Subordinata, but Disparata: And I take it
neither to be Heterodoxical, nor Paradoxical, to say so of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Power; for it has been asserted by no mean men; yea, sometimes
before the Supreme Judicatory of this Kingdom, and that upon the highest peril.
So that Mr. Heriot might very well have spared his idle and ignorant Story of a
Regnum in Regno.

2. Mr. Heriot by his heterogeneous Appeal has made way for farther
extravagancy of this kind: For some of his sort I have s^umb^ed upon a rare
kind of Appealing from the Presbytery to the Synod, Commission of the Church,
General Assembly, Council of State, and the King, all at once, simul and semel:
and thereby (if this sort of saltus come in fashion) do enervate, and render
all Judicatories, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, in a great measure useless,
and would bring all to the Kings personal and immediate determination, when
ever any party finds, or but fancies that he is wronged by any Judicatory: and
what the consequences of this ridiculous sort of Appealing would be, some men
will not have the fear, and cannot have the wit to foresee.

3. As to the particular case in hand; What ever the Civil power or Supremacy
may be, or is, according to Law, I thought it had been reserved for greater and
better uses and ends, than the sheltering of a Scandalous Curate from the
moderate, just, Legal and deserved Censure and Sentence of Judicatories acting
according to the established Laws: and if either Civil or Ecclesiastical
Judicatories, suffer themselves and their legally settled order to be
disturbed, by such groundless, bold and false clamours and alledgeances as
these of Mr. Heriot, they may be sure of disturbance enough for this and the
following Generations: But they are wise enough to foresee and prevent this and
other evils designed by the common Adversaries.

POSTSCIRPT.
SInce the preceding Answer to Mr. Heriots Information was drawn, I have had a
sight of a second Edition of that Paper, which has these words in the close
added to the former.

And whereas, some persons have: strongly asserted to the Lords of their
Majesty's Privy Council and others. 1. That Mr Heriot was never refused a sight
of the Lybels and Depositions, but that they were given him. 2. That the
Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood were removed out of the Synod upon Mr.
Heriots Declinator against them. It is answered 1. That he did many times and
with great earnestness crave a sight of the Lybels and Depositions, both in the
Assembly and Synod; which was refused, as a hundred persons who heard him will
witness, and none of the Clerks of the Assembly, Synod, or Presbytery (in whose
hands and custody the Lybels and Depositions are) will dare to affirm that ever
they were given to Mr. Heriot to see. 2. Mr. Heriot at his first appearance
before the Synod, declined the Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood from being
his Judges, they being his parties: and before Mr. Heriot gave in his Appeal,
he was four times removed, while the Synod considered the defenses he made for
himself; and none of the Synod can affirm, that the Presbytery and Alexander
Calderwood were removed with him; but at his return after the several Removals,
he found them always present; and the said Alexander Calderwood, and several
others of their number, did in face of the Synod debate against him, when he
made his Legal defenses: Which the Synod having unjustly repelled, he thereupon
Appealed, and immediately came away: so that there is nothing more certain, than
that the Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood sat as his Judges after
Declinatour. And it was upon these two grounds among the rest, that Mr. Heriot
Appealed from the Synod; Because they refused him a sight of the Lybel and
Depositions, which Law allowed him; and that the Presbytery and Alexander
Calderwood sat as his Judges, albeit they were his parties, which is certainly
true. And albeit after the Appeal, and Mr. Heriot's going away, the Presbytery
and Calderwood were removed, at the time of the Vote of Mr. Heriots
pre-determined Deposition, it does not take away the truth of the Reason of the
Appeal.

And whereas beside the false Alledgeance of Dancing about a Bonfire, there is
now other Articles suggested to be proven. Mr. Heriot makes no Answer thereto,
because of the uncertainty thereof, hoping that the Lords of their Majesty's
Privy Council, will in their Justice, and conform to Law, Ordain the Lybels and
Depositions of the Witnesses to be seen, and then Mr. Heriot can openly clear
himself, from whatever shall appear to be proven against him.

But to this Crambe long and often raecocta, I reply, 1. In general to the
whole of it. 1. This is but a very sorry Coronis, which here (after long study)
he adds for confirmation or covering of his former lies, which he should rather
have retracted, than thus have patched them so pitifully: But Raro vidi
Cleticum poenitentem. 2. What discretion on deference Mr. Heriot has herein
used toward the Lords of their Majesty's privy Council, in reprinting with new
Additions, a Paper once presented to their Honorable Board, in an other form,
and in tabling so many lies before their Lordships, belongs to another enquiry
than this, and is alterius fori to determine. 3. As he has here said no new
thing, so the Judicious Reader, will easily gather a sufficient and satisfying
answer from what has been formerly said, partly in the Historical Narration of
the matter of Fact, and partly in the preceding answer to his Information: to
which therefore I refer the Reader.

2. Yet lest Mr. Heriot complain that we do not consider his learned Defenses;
I shall (for his satisfaction) speak a little more particularly in Answer to
this his second and Additional Information, which is a kind of Additional Lybel
against the Synod and Presbytery.

1. To his old and again new clamor about his being refused a sight of the
Lybels and Depositions, I Answer, there is more falsehood than truth in this
clamorous complaint of his: For 1. He got a Copy of his Lybel hard and fast in
his own hand at his first and only compearance before the Presbytery of
Dalkeith. 2. He never yet fought a fight of the small Addition that was made to
his Lybel, nor of the Depositions of the Witnesses; this he never yet sought in
time, place, or manner, convenient. 3. There is neither Law nor Reason
(notwithstanding of all his Stentorian clamor about it) why he should be
indulged a sight of the Depositions of the Witnesses 1. After he had declined
the Presbytery as no Judicatory and having no power: for then what had they
more ado with him? Was it not time for them to shake him off as he had shaken
them off? 1. After Sentence is past, both in the Presbytery and Synod. 3. After
he has (even in his Print) threatened the Witnesses, and some of his party have
executed violence upon some of them. 4. After he was allowed, if he had
pleased, to hear both the Lybels and Depositions of the Witnesses read before
him, by the Synod: but he would not stay. 5. Before he give sufficient security
for his own and his parties good and peaceable behavior toward the Witnesses.
6. Before he quit and leave his old Huffing, Hectoring, Threatening, Lying and
Railing Style and Humor, which would have spoiled a good cause, whatever it
may do to his bad one.

2. As to his renewed Clamor about the Presbyteries sitting still in the
Synod. 1. He says, that it is certainly true, and there is nothing more
certain than that the Presbytery of Dalkeith and Alexander Calderwood sat in
the Synod as his Judges after his Declinator given in against them. I Answer,
that notwithstanding of his redoubled confident assertions of it as most
certain, yet it is certainly false that they sat there and then, as his Judges:
for they had no Vote there in his Case, and no judgment past upon it while
they were there: and they were in due time removed. 2. He objects, that they
were his Parties, and were not so soon removed as he. I Answer, because they
were his Parties, therefore they ought to have been heard as well as he, and so
behooved to stay a little, after he was gone, especially seeing he took it not
well that any of them offered to drop a word in his presence, and foolishly
calls it an interrupting of him: he thinks that he alone should speak, and none
of his opposites must Answer him, neither before his face nor behind his back;
and that then he would win the Cause and carry all before him. Eta! 3. Whereas
he says that though the Presbytery and A. Calderwood were removed at the time
of the Vote, yet this takes not away the truth of the reason of the Appeal,
that they sat as Judges before the Appeal. I Answer 1. They sat not as Judges
in his affair then and there, and passed no Judgment nor decisive Vote
therein, but were in all due time removed. And this takes away both the truth
and the Relevancy of the Reason of the Appeal. 2. I suppose Mr. Heriot would
have had better manners than to have spoken contemptibly of his Aged and (for
ought I know) his best friend, if he had remembered, Isa. 9.15. Which text alone
(not to mention many others) would have better informed him, who are and who
are not to be respected, and also Who are the true and real Faces Populi. 4.
That expression, the Vote of Mr. Heriots predetermined Deposition, is malicious
and false, except perhaps he mean, that it was predetermined in Decreto Divino;
in this sense it is true indeed, yet nothing to his purpose, and let him take
what comfort he can from it, and make his best of it: But otherwise I would ask
him when, where, how and by whom his deposition was predetermined? I know not
how be can make sense of this loud Lie, except he say that the Voting Members
of the Synod had before their Vote predetermined in their own minds to depose
him; for there neither was, nor could be any other humane predetermination
before the determining Vote: Now this predetermination was not and could not,
be long before their Vote: because Mr. Heriot does here say that the Synod
removed him four times while they were considering his Defenses; from whence it
follows, both that he was fully heard notwithstanding of all his clamours about
alleged interruption, and also that the Members of the Synod considered his
defenses before they voted: So that the Synods Crime must be, that after
hearing and considering his Defenses four times, they did yet notwithstanding
of all this, predetermine in their own minds his Deposition, before they voted
it. But this rare Crime I may timeously enough Apologize for, after that Mr,
Heriot by his next Information has informed me, how they could possibly Vote
either his deposition, or any thing else, before they had determined it, every
man in his own mind. Formerly we heard him storming and quarrelling again and
again, because some of the Members of the Synod and Presytery presumed to
speak in his presence: and here by this objected, new and unaccountabl
predetermination, he quarrels the Synod for presuming to think before they
spoke when they voted, Macte! Is not this a rare Reason of appeal? and if it
hold, will it not be a sufficient ground of appeal from all Judicatories in
Church or State, and from all Judges who come not in an exact Aequilibrium and
as a Tabula rasa, without either light or affection for the one side more than
the other, either to cognosce upon or vote in the cause of any Criminals, who
come before t^em? I see Mr, Heriot grows more and more Sublime in his
Defensive Notions: and its like that in his third Apologetick Information he
may soar quite above all ordinar reach and capacity: and then he may deserve
and get a Longum Vale.

Other things in this Addition to his Information have been already
anticipated, or answered; and there is no need of multiplying any more words
about it.

The candid and serious Reader is desired to excuse the seeming levity of some,
and tartness of other Expressions in this Answer! For in dealing with such a
Huffing and Absurd Antagonist, it is hard to forbear both Anger and Laughter:
Yet I have chosen rather to Laugh than Rage and Storm as he does, although I
think he is such a Person as with whom if a man con^^nd, whether he Rage or
Laugh, there is no rest: And therefore I have been the less curious as to the
manner of handling him: seeing I have little hope that any sort of humane
dealing with him shall be very successful. However let the impartial Reader now
judge, whether Mr. Heriot had any just Cause or Occasion given him to exclaim
so Wickedly and Horribly against the Presbytery of Dalkeith and Synod of
Lothian and Tweddale, as he does all along in his false and Virulent
Information.

Finally, this Examination of Mr. Heriots's Paper, is humbly submitted to the
Censure of the Presbytery and Synod concerned, and more especially to the
consideration of the Members of the next ensuing General Assembly: Many of whom
may perhaps upon the bare Reading of such an Apologetick Information (though no
Answer had been annexed to it) get such a Character of the man's Spirit and
Temper, as will sufficiently clear and convince them, that he not only deserves
all that he has met with, but something more.

FINIS.
ERRATA
Page. 8. Lyn. 11. Read Seven. p. 9. l. 8. and p. 10. l^ 14. r assistants. p.
11. l, 4. r. Nicol. p. 19. l. 25. r. condescend. p. 20. l. 8. r. prevented. p.
30. l. 28. Dele in. p. 40. l. 33. r. they.


