AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE TWO HOUSES of PARLIAMENT now assembled in
England and Scotland, AND THE WHIGGS DECLARATION in Scotland.
Together with Argile's DECLARATION at large, as it was published by him and
his Accomplices.
Friday May 22.
THE first thing the two Houses did was to resolve to return their most Humble
and Hearty Thanks to His Majesty for his most gracious Speech and Declaration.
And the House of Commons taking into consideration that part of His Majesty's
Speech which relates to the Revenue, Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the
Revenue which was granted to the late King, be settled on his present Majesty
for his Life, and that a Bill should be brought in for that purpose.

In the Afternoon the two Houses attended His Majesty in a Body in the
Banqueting House at Whitehall to return their Thanks to His Majesty.

This day the House of Lords resolved to make the following Address to His
Majesty,

His Majesty having graciously imparted to this House, That he is informed that
the late Earl of Argile attainted of Treason, with diverse other Rebels, are
Landed in Scotland, and are in Actual Rebellion. It is ordered by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That this House do wait upon
His Majesty at Five a Clock this afternoon in the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, to give his Majesty their humble thanks for having imparted the same
to this House; And do humbly offer to assist his Majesty with their Lives and
Fortunes against the said Rebels and all other his Ene^ies whatsoever.

The House of Commons likewise after Reading of Argiles Declaration mentioned
in his Majesty's Speech. Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That this House will
stand by and assist his Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes against Archibald
Campbel the pretended Earl of Argil^ and his Ad^erents, and all Rebels and
Traitors, and all others whatsoever that shall assist him or any of them. And
that this House will in a body attend his Majesty with this Vote.

And this afternoon the two Houses accordingly attended his Majesty severally
in the Banqueting House with the said Addresses and Votes.

The Bill for settling the Revenue on his Majesty for his Life, was this day
Read the first time; and is to be Read again on Momday next.

Edinbugh, May 9. Yesterday there passed two Acts in Parliament; The one
declaring, That whereas the obstinacy of the Fanatical party, notwithstanding
all the Laws formerly made against them, do pe^severe to keep their House and
Field Conventicles, which are the Nurseries and Rendevouzes of Rebellion.
Therefore his Majesty with consent of his Estates in Parliament, does Statute
and Ordain that all such as shall hereafter Preach at such Fanatical House or
Field Conventicles, as also such as shall be present as Hearers at Field
Conventicles, shall be punished by Death, and Confiscation of their Goods.

The other declaring, That the giving or taking the National Covenant as
explained in the Year 1638, or of the League and Covenant, so commonly called,
or writing in defense thereof, or owning of them as lawful or obligatory on
themselves or others, shall infer the Crime and Pains of Treason.

Edinburgh, May 13 This day the Parliament passed the following Act.
An Act and Offer of a new Supply to His Majesty.
THE Estates of Parliament calling to mind the many great Blessings they have
and do enjoy under the protection of the Royal Government / and especially by
the many deliverances from the Rebellious Insutrections and des^gns of
Phanatical Traitors / from whom they could expect no less than confusion in
Religion / Oppression in their Estates / and Cruelty against their Persons and
Familes; And that the Terror of His Majesty's Forces has been very
instrumental for procuring our present Security: But considering that not only
these Enemies continue their inveterate hatred against King and People / but
that their frequent disappointments have heightened their malice to despair; And
that the present Forces may be too few to undergo all the Fatigue which His
Majesty's Service / or the protection of the Country does require; And to
demonstrate to all Seditious men that this Nation is resolved to bestow all
they have in the Kings Service / rather than to be exposed to the least of
their Insults: Do therefore for themselves and the Nation represented by them /
make a hearty and dutiful offer to His Majesty of Two hundred and 16 thousand
pounds yearly / payable at two Terms / viz. Whitsonday and Mertimas each year /
beginning at Whitsonday next 1685. and so forth termly / and that over and
besides the five Months Cesse already imposed on this Kingdom by the third Act
of Parliament 1681. whereby there will be four Months Cesse payable at each
Term hereafter / beginning at Whitsonday next 1685. And as a farther Evidence
of their entire affection to the Sacr^d Person of his present Majesty / they
humbly and heartily offer a continuation and prorogation of the said four
Months Cesse termly from the said Term of Whitsonday 1685, inclu^^ve / during
all the Terms of His Majesty's life time / which God Almighty long preserve /
that being the greatest of our e^^^^ly wishes / as it is the chief of our
Temporal Felicity and Glory.

Edinburgh, May 18. The late Earl of Argile, and with him some other Rebels
having in Holland made provision of Arms and Ammunition, set Sail from the Vlye
on Saturday the 2 d Instant in thre^ small Ships. On the 5th he appeared before
Orkney, where having sent his Secretary and Surgeon on shore, they were
immediately seized by the Inhabitants of that Island, and are sending hither
with all diligence to the Privy Council. From thence he Sailed for the West
Coast of Scotland, and arrived the 13th Instant at Danstafnage in Lorne (a
ruinous Castle which formerly did belong to himself) and put a Garrison
therein. The Highlanders, and all His Majesty's Forces on the Confines of that
Country, are marching with all possible diligence for suppressing these Rebels;
Who have emitted two Traitorous Declarations, whereof the first (a long one) is
entitled thus: [The Declaration and Apology of the Protestant People, that is,
of the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Commons of all sorts, now in
Arms within the Kingdom of Scotland, with the Concurrence of the True and
Faithful Pastors, and of several Gentlemen of the English Nation joined with
them in the same Cause, etc] By which they impudently and irreligiously set
forth the great advantages the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad, had
by the Success of the Horrid Rebellion against King Charles the First, which
Success they now impiously ascribe to the Blessing of God upon the Goodness of
their Cause: They cry up the Loyalty of the Scotch Covenanters, who after they
had delivered up the Father to be barbarously and inhumanly Murdered by their
Brethren in England, had yet admitted of the Son to Reign upon certain terms
and Conditions (absolutely inconsistent with Monarchy) by which they pretend to
prove that all that was done by his Late Majesty since his Happy Restoration,
was Ungrate, Illegal, Arbitrary and Tyrannical; And that all the Oaths imposed
by Law since the rescinding of the Solemn League and Covenant have been
Perjury, and the Government it self a continued Apostasy. And they accuse the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms for rescinding the pernicious Laws made during the
Rebellion, and those of Scotland in particular, for making of Laws by which
Protestant Blood (as they pretend) is shed, whereof they give for instance the
late Marquis of Argile Condemned in Parliament; and also for turning out the
Noncon formists Ministers. They accuse the Government of putting men to death
contrary to Law; and desolating the Churches, changing the Ordinances of God to
the Inventions of Men; conniving at Papists; keeping up of Standing Forces,
which they call the Bane of Civil Government. They declare against the Kings
Supremacy; And all the Wars against the States General of the United Provinces.
The Execution of those Miscreants, who make it their Profession and Practice to
Murder Loyal Subjects upon the pretense of Religion; and the Torture of Spence
and Carstares, by whom was made so great a discovery of the late horrid
Conspiracy; as also the Forfeiture of the late Earl of Argile. They likewise
declare against the Enquiries that were made into the Rebellion at Bothwel
Bridge by the late Circuit Courts, all which (so necessary for the peace and
quiet of these Kingdoms) they call Tyranny and Popery twisted together. They
declare against his present Majesty, (whom they call James Duke of York) his
Ascension to the Throne, as being Excluded from it by the Commons of England.
They declare likewise against the present House of Commons as Packed and
Caballed and returned by Fraud and Injustice. For all which pretended reasons
they declare that they totally throw off all Bonds of Subjection, and do take
up Arms against his present Majesty (whom they still call James Duke of York)
and all his Accomplices, s^iling them the most unnatural and wicked Enemies;
for those pretended ends. First The restoring and settling what they call the
Protestant Religion. Secondly, The Suppression and perpetual Exclusion of
Popery, and its bi^^^-Root and Spring, Prelacy. Thirdly, The restoring of all
who have been Sufferers upon the account of adherence to their Partly, for the
pulling down of this present Government, and setting up another suitable to
their designs; And they declare that they never will enter into any
Capitulation, Treaty, or Conditions with the King; but on the contrary
prosecute the War wit^ (...) reality, constancy and vigor, until they shall
attain their ends; and that they will assist and maintain one another,
especially their Brethren in England and Ireland, who shall pursue the same
ends. And lastly, they promise Indemnity to those who have been formerly their
Enemies, upon their sincere repentance, joining with them and vigorously
assisting them against a Persecuting Tyrant and an Apostate Party, for so they
call His Majesty and his loyal Subjects, ending their Declaration with great
Promises of Assistance from God to their Party, and of Confusion to their
Enemies. This being the substance of their long and Canting Declaration, the
other lesser is here set down at length.

The Declaration of Archibald Earl of Argile, Lord Kintyre, Cow all, Campbel,
and Lorn, Heritable Sheriff and Lieutenant of the Shires of Argile and Turbett,
and Heritable Justice General of the said Shires, and of the West Isles, and
others; with his Order to his Vassals and others in the said Shires, and under
his Jurisdicton, to concur for Defense of their Religion, Lives and Liberties.
I Shall not mention my Case published in Print in Latin and in Dutch, and
more largely in English, nor mean I to repeat the printed Declaration emitted
by several Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others of both Nations now in Arms; but
because the Sufferings of me and my Family are therein mentioned, I have
thought it fit for me to declare for my self; That as I go to Arms with those
who have appointed me to conduct them, for no private nor personal end, and
only for those contained in the said Declaration, which I have concerted with
them, and approve of; so I do claim no Interest, but what I had before the
pretended Forfeiture of my Family, and have sufficient right to.

And that I do freely, (and as a Christian) forgive all personal Injuries
against my Person or Family to all that shall not oppose, but join and concur
with us in our present Undertaking, for the ends mentioned in the said
Declaration. And hereby I oblige me never to pursue them in Judgment, nor out
of Judgment; And I do further declare, That obtaining the peaceable and quiet
Possession of what belonged to my Father and my self before our pretended
Forfeitures, I shall satisfy all Debts due by my Father and my self, as any
Heir or Debtor can be obliged.

And as my Faithfulness to his late Majesty and his Government, has
sufficiently appeared to all unbiassed persons void of Malice; so I do with
Grief acknowledge my former too much complying with and conniving at the
methods that have been taken to bring us to the sad condition we are now in,
though God knows never concurring in the design.

I have now with Gods Strength suffered patiently my unjust Sentence and
Banishment three years and a half, and have never offered to make any Uproar or
Defense by Arms, to disturb the Peace upon my private concern; But the King
being now dead, and the Duke of York having taken off his Mask, and having
abandoned and invaded our Religion and Liberties, resolving to enter into the
Government, and exercise it contrary to Law, I thinkit not only Just, but my
Duty to God and my Country, to use my outmost endeavors to oppose and repress
his Usurpations and Tyranny.

And therefore being assisted and furnished very nobly by several good
Protestants, and invited and accompanied by several of both Nations to lead
them, I resolve, as God shall enable me, to use their assistance of all kinds,
toward the ends expressed in the said Declaration.

And I do hereby earnestly invite and obteste all honest Protestants, and
particularly all my Friends and Blood Relations, to concur with us in the said
Declaration; And as I have written several Letters, so having no other way
fully to intimate my mind otherwise, I do hereby require all my Vassals any
where, and all within my several Jurisdictions, with their Fencible Men within
their Command, to go to Arms, and to join and concur with us according to the
said Declarations, as they will be answerable at their peril; And that they
obey the particular Orders they shall receive from me from time to time.

Dublin, Printed by Joseph Ray, for John Bentley, 1685.


