THE ARTICLES OF GALWAY Exactly Printed from the LETTERS PATENT: WHEREIN They
are Ratified and Exemplified by Their Majesty's under the Great Seal of ENGLAND.

monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
JE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Published by Authority.

Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook, Assignee of Benj. Took, Printer to Their
Majesty's on Ormonde-Key.

The ARTICLES OF GALWAY.
GVilielmus and Maria Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulamentum quaerundum Literarum patentium de Confirmatione
gerenda and apud Westmonasterium decimo Septimo die Februarii, ultimo
Praeterito in Curia Cancellaria nostra Irrotulata ac ibidem de Recordo
remanente in haec verba.

WIlliam and Mary by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come Greeting:
Whereas certain Articles bearing date the One and Twentieth day of July last
past, were made and agreed upon by Our Trusty and Well-Beloved, Robert Baron de
Ginckle, Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief of Our Forces in Our Kingdom
of Ireland, and the Constable and Governor of Our Town of Galway in Our said
Kingdom, whereby Our said General promises that We should Ratify these
Capitulations within the space of three Months from the date thereof or sooner;
The Tenor of which said Articles is as follows, vizt.

Articles Granted to the Town and Garrison of GALWAY by Lieutenant General
GINCKLE Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces, the One and Twentieth day
of July, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety One.
1. THat the Town and Fort of Galway shall be given up to his Excellency or
such Officer as he shall appoint on Sunday Morning next by 6 of the Clock,
together with all the Stores of Ammunition and Provision and Mazagins of all
sorts without embezlement, and that immediately upon the signing these Articles
such Person as the General shall appoint have leave to inspect them. 2. That
all Deserters that are in the Town shall be given up. 3. That immediately after
signing these Articles all the outworks of the Town shall be delivered to such
Officers as the General shall appoin to take possession of the same; and that
the Governor shall withdraw all the Cannon from the Wall. 4. That 'till the
Town is surrendered as aforesaid the General may order such works and Batteries
to be made as he shall judge convenient, provided he does not bring them within
3 yards of the Wall: nor the Guns within 10 yards of the Batteries; and that in
the Town they shall not proceed to work to fortify the same any further. 5. In
consideration of the said Rendition his Excellency gives leave to Lieutenant
General Dusson, Monsieur Metset Commissary of War, and the rest of the French
Officers and Soldiers and others of that Nation now in Galway to go to Lymerick
with their Arms, Bagg and Baggage, whether they shall be safely conducted the
nearest way; and in case that the said Lieutenant General Dusson shall want
Horses to carry his Equipage thither the General will furnish him with them. 6.
That such of the Garrison as desire it may remain in Town or go to their
respective Homes and enjoy the benefit of this Capitulation, and the rest shall
march to Lymerick with their Arms, 6 pieces of Cannon, Drums beating, Colors
Flying, Match lighted, Bullet in Mouth; and as much Ammunition and Provisions,
as each Officer and Soldier can carry with him; and that they shall be
furnished with Draught, Horses and Harness for the Guns if they want them;
which said Guns they shall have Liberty to choose: Provided they take none
above 12 Pounders. 7. That the wounded and sick Officers may stay in Town 'till
they are cured, and that then they shall be sent to Lymerick with a safe
conduct, and in the mean time shall be provided in Town with necessaries for
their Cure and subsistence. 8. That the Governor, Constable, Mayor, Sheriffs,
Aldermen, Burgesses, Freemen and Natives of Galway, and the Inhabitants
thereof, or the Reputed Ones by any former Charter, or reputed Charter of King
James the second granted before his Abdication, or any of his Ancestors shall
have a general pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons, Felonies,
Premunires, and all manner of Offenses committed since the beginning of the
Late King James's Reign to the date hereof. 9. That all and every of the
Garrison Officers, Governors, Constable, Mayor, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Burgesses,
Freemen and Inhabitants aforesaid, shall enjoy and posess their Estates real
and personal, and all other Liberties and Imunities, as they held, or ought to
have held, under the Acts of Settlement and Explanation; or otherwise by the
Laws of this Kingdom freely discharged from all Crown-Rents, Quit-Rents, and
all other Charges to the date hereof. 10. That the Names of the Roman Catholic
Clergy of the Town of Galway be given to the General on or before Tuesday next,
and that they as well as the Layety of the said Town; shall have the private
exercise of their Religion; and that the said Clergy shall be protected in
their Persons and Goods. 11. That the Gentlemen of Estates now belonging to the
Town and Garrison of Galway shall have Liberty to keep a Gun in their Houses
for the defense of the same, and wear a Sword and case of Pistols if they think
fit. 12. That all the Roman Catholic Lawyers of the said Town, shall have the
free Liberty of Practice; that they had in King Charles the Second's Time. 13.
That such of the Officers, belonging to any of the Regiments, that are now in
Galway and not present at the Signing these Capitulations; shall have the
benefit of the same: Provided they shall submit within three weeks to the
Governor of Galway for the time being; who shall be appointed to the General:
or that they shall have a safe conduct to go to Lymerick in the manner as the
said Garrison has. 14. That such other Persons now in the Town as desire to go
out with the Garrison, or such part thereof as goes to Limerick shall have
liberty to do so, and carry their Families and Goods along with them, and that
such Officer's Wives belonging to the said Garrison as are there or in any
other part of Connaught may at the same time depart with their Goods, or at any
other convenient time afterward: particularly Colonel Edmond Ryley's Wife
Mother and Family, the Lady Evagh and her Daughter and Lieutenant Colonel Luke
Ryley, his brother Philip Ryley their Wives and Families. 15. That immediately
all Acts of Hostility shall cease on both sides, and that if it shall happen
that any provokeing Language shall pass between the Soldiers, they shall be
Punished by their respective Officers for the same, and not permitted to Fire
one upon another. 16. That for the due performance of these Articles the
Governor shall immediately give the persons undernamed for Hostages, Earl of
Clanricard, Lord of Inniskillin, Colonel Dominick Brown, Lieutenant Colonel
Bodkin, Major Dillon.
Lastly the General promises to have these Capitulations Ratified by their
Majesty's within the Space of three Months from the date hereof or sooner if
possible.

Signed and Sealed the day above mentioned by the Commander in Chief of Their
Majesty's Forces and the Constable and Governor of the said Town
interchangeably. Barron de Ginckell.

And whereas the said Town of Galway has been since in pursuance of the said
Articles surrendered unto us! Know ye that we having Considered of the said
Articles are graciously pleased hereby to declare, that We do, as far as in us
lies, Ratify and Confirm the same, and every Clause, Matter and Thing therein
contained. And as to such parts thereof for which an Act of Parliament shall be
found to be necessary We shall recommend the same to be made good by Parliament
and shall give Our Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills that shall be Passed by
our two Houses of Parliament for that purpose.

Provided always, and our Will and Pleasure is that these our Letters Patents
shall be Enrolled in our Court of Chancery, in our said Kingdom of Ireland
within one Year next ensueing. In Witness etc.

Witness our Self at Westminster the Seventeenth Day of February.
ANno Regni Regis and Reginae Guilielmi and MariaeQuarto, per breve deprivato
Sigillo. Nos autem tenorem premissorum predict. at requisitionem attornati
generalis Domini Regis and Domine Regine pro Regno Hiberniae duximus
Exemplificandum per presents in cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras
fieri facimus Patentes

Testibus Nobis ipsis apud Westmonasterium quinto Die Aprilis, Anno Regni eorum
Quarto. Bridges
Examinant. per nos

S. Keck Lacon Win Child

In Cancel. Magistros


FINIS.

