ARTICLES CONCERNING THE SVRRENDER OF WORCESTER.

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, A. D. 1646.

Articles of Agreement for the Surrender of the City and Garrison of
WORCESTER, and the Forts belonging there unto, concluded July the 19th 1646.
Between Col. Thomas Rainborow on the behalf of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, and Col. Hen.
Washington Governor of Worcester.
THat the city of Worcester, with all Forts, Ordinance, Stores and Provision of
War thereunto belonging, shall be delivered without wilful spoil and
imbezlement, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax, or to such as he shall
appoint to receive them, upon the 23. of this instant July, at ten of the
Clock in the mornin, in such manner, and with such exceptions as are contained
in the Ensuing Articles.

2. That on the Twenty third day of July, The Governor, and all Officers and
Soldiers of the Garrison, with all other Persons therein that will, shall
march out of Worcester, with their Horses, Arms and Baggage properly belonging
to them, to any place within one Mile of Worcester which the Governor shall
choose, where all their Horses and Arms, except what are allowed in the ensuing
Articles, shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax
shall appoint, all the Soldiers shall be disbanded, and all such both
Officers, Soldiers, and others as shall engage themselves by promise never to
bear Arms any more against the Parliament of England, nor do any thing
wilfully to the prejudice of their Affairs, shall have the benefit of these
Ensuing Articles.

3 That all such as shall desire to go to their own homes, or private friends,
shall have the Generals Pass and Protection for their peaceable repaires and
abode at their several places they shall desire to go unto, the Governor to
pass with all Horses, Arms, and Baggage properly belonging to him, each
Colonel to pass with three Horses, each Lieut. Colonel, and Serg. Major with
two Horses, each Captain Lieutenant and Coronet with one Horse, and every
person not under the degree of an Esquire with three Horses, and all of them
with their Arms and Goods properly belonging to them to be carried on their
Horses, and all Soldiers with their Swords, and such Baggage as properly
belong to them, which they carry about them.

4 That all Persons which are to have the benefit of the preceding Articles,
shall if they desire it, have Passes to go beyond Seas: provided they depart
this Kingdom within two Months after the surrender of the Town.

5 That the City and Garrison of Worcester, and all the Inhabitants thereof,
shall be preserved from all Plunder and violence of the Soldiers.

6 That Sir William Russell now residing in Worcester be exempted from any
benefit of these Articles.

FINIS.

