AN ACCOUNT OF THE Seducing of Ann, the Daughter of Edward Ketelbey, of Ludlow,
Gent. TO THE Popish Religion, With some very Extraordinary Passages relating
thereto, PARTICULARLY, Of the gross Prevarications, and insolent Boldness of
the two Popish Bishops Leyborn and Gifford in the Management of it.
Humbly Presented to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, now
Assembled in Parliament.
MR. KETELBEY being often from home, particularly in the years 1696. and 1697.
with his Wife and part of his Family, leaving only his Daughter, of the Age of
Nineteen, and Servants at home, a Popish Family coming Strangers into the Town,
and Living near him, obtained Leave of the Daughter to walk in the Garden being
pleasant for Air, and by this means two young Ladies of that Family insinuating
themselves into the Daughter's Acquaintance, with the assistance of one
Windsor, a reputed Popish Priest, living with them, (who pretends to Practice
Physic now, but in King James his Reign showed himself more open) Seduced her
to the Popish Religion; but Instructed her of what dangerous Consequence it
might be if discovered, both the Seducer and Seduced being punishable with
Death; which made her for a long time disown and forswear her Conversion to
Popery.

The Mother coming first into the Country, found her Daughter's Temper and
Humor Changed, disowning her Mother's Power and Authority over her, and
denying to do several Things she Commanded without the Advice of her Friends,
meaning the Papists that had Seduced her; And they having also Corrupted some
of the Servants, after the Mother came home they gave Intelligence, whereby
those Papists often Conversed with the Daughter in private, as it is believed,
and Conveying Books into her Hands, settled her in that Religion. But the
Mother, for some time after she came down, knew nothing of her Daughters new
Friends, till coming one Morning early into her Chamber, the found her Reading
in a Book in Bed; at which the Daughter being surprised, let it fall into the
Bed, and denied that she was Reading, or had any Book; but upon search, it was
found to be a Book wrote by Parsons the Jesuit; which so startled the Mother,
that upon Searching the Daughter's Closet afterward, she found other Popish
Books, Pictures, Papers, and other Things relating to Popery; with very
Familiar, and Indulgent Letters from one Mrs. Berrington, and a Daughter of the
Lord Gerrard's of Bromley, who had been at Ludlow for some time before, but
altogether Strangers to Mr. Ketelbey and his Family.

By these Letters, and other Things, the Mother found the Daughter had Changed
her Religion as well as Manners; Yet did not think fit to publish the Matter,
but Imparted it to some particular Friends, and sent her out of Town; Nor did
she at first acquaint her Husband with it, who was then in London; only sent
him General Complaints of his long Absence, whereby his Family suffered, and
desired his speedy coming down. Whereupon he sent down his Son, who soon
discovered his Sister's Change, and Imparted it to the Father: He soon after
coming down himself, found it too true, and his Daughter full of Equivocations,
and Lying Stories, and even denying that which seemed to be the most apparent
Truth, as to the Circumstances of her Change, the Method of her Seduction, and
the Persons who Seduced her, affirming, that she was a very good Protestant,
and gave out that there was nothing in it, but her Mothers Unkindness, who
never Loved her from a Child, and Fondness to her Brother, which brought that
Scandal and Reproach upon her of her being a Papist, on purpose to deprive her
of her Father's Favor; and she was ready to give him all the Satisfaction he
should desire of her Sincerity in the Protestant Religion. To make this better
believed, she came constantly to Church, to Prayers, and the Sacrament; and
upon her Examination by the Doctor of the Parish, and other Protestant Divines,
they thought her Steadfast therein. She framed her Story so well, being Seconded
by the Popish Gang, who seemed to disown her, that it became a Reflection upon
her Parents for their Jealousy, and supposed Severity toward their Daughter,
in charging her designedly with what they knew to be false: The Doctor himself
often saying to the Papists, and others, that he believed her as good a
Protestant as himself: So soon had she learnt the Art of Popish Dissimulation.
But she would never confess how she came by the Popish Books, only saying, that
some of them she found in Ludlow Castle; and the Servants being of her Party,
owned some of the Books to be theirs, which the Daughter pretended she had only
a Curiosity to Read, that she might be able to maintain an Argument, and to
Ridicule the Papists.

The Father being afflicted at this great Misfortune in his Family, and full of
Fears and Jealousies, in November School. brought his Family to London, to get
the Assistance of able Divines; and particularly had her under the Care of the
Reverend Dean of Windsor, who Examined her several times, and believed her to
be a good Protestant; Yet her Father would not be satisfied unless she would
Consent to Abjure the Popish Religion before a Judge, or some Magistrate,
according to a Form which was drawn up in these Words.

I Ann Ketelbey, the only Daughter of Edward Ketelbey of Ludlow in the County
of Salop, Gent. in the presence of God, do in and by this Writing, under my own
^and, solemnly and sincerely profess, testify and declare, that I do believe,
That in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is not any Transubstantiation
of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at, or
after the Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever, and that the
Invocation or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used and practiced in the Church of
Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous.

And also, That the Doctrines of Purgatory, Praying for the Dead, Justification
by Works, Denying the Cup in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to the Layety,
having Divine Service performed in an unknown Tongue, as taught and practiced
in the Church of Rome, are dangerous Errors, and no way warranted by the
Scriptures, which are the true rule of Faith and Manners, and ought to be my
Guide in Divine Matters, containing all things necessary to Salvation.

And I do hereby in the presence of God, further also solemnly prosess and
testify, that I do make this Declaration, and every part thereof, and intend
the same in the plain and ordinary Sense of the Words herein contained, as they
are wrote down with my own Hand and as they are commonly understood by
Protestants, without any Evasion, Equivocation, or Mental Reservation
whatsoever, and without any Dispensation already granted me for this purpose by
the Pope, or any other Authority or Person whatsoever, and without believeing
that I am or can be acquitted before God or Man, or Absolved of this
Declaration, or any part thereof, although the Pope, or any other Person or
Persons, or Power whatsoever should Dispense with, or Annul the same, or
Declare that it was null and void from the beginning.

And I do hereby further also profess, in the presence of Almighty God, who
knows the Secret of all Hearts, and whom I call to Witness against me if I
declare not the Truth, That I make this Solemn Declaration voluntarily and
freely, without any Compulsion, Constraint or Fear, or in hopes of any worldly
Interest, Benefit or Advantage, or otherwise then for the Satisfaction of my
Parents, and other Relations and good Friends, to whom I have given just
Occasion of Fears and Jealousies touching the Truth and Sincerity of my
Religion, which I do hereby seriously profess to be in all things agreeable to
what I understand are the Doctrines of the Church of England as now by Law
Established; and which I do fully purpose for the future continually to Adhere
to, and no other, and not to give my Friends any further Occasion of Suspicion,
by Consorting my self, or Corresponding with Papists, or such whom I suspect to
be Popishly Affected, further then to give them the Common Civility and Respect
due to their Persons upon a transient view, or by an occasional or accidental
Meeting, and not to make their Company and Conversation my choice, or equal to
others of the Protestant Persuasion; nor read any part of a Popish Book or
Letter from Papists.

And whereas I do intend upon the next Lord's Day to receive the Blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at the Parish Church of St. Clements Danes in
the County of Middlesex; I do hereby further Declare, That as I hope it will
tend to the Eternal Good and Comfort of my Soul, so I shall take it as a
public Testimony of the Truth and Reality of this my Solemn Declaration made
the 4th day of March in the year of our Lord School.

By me, Anne Ketelbey.
In the presence of Greg. Hascard. Edward Ketelbey. Abel Ketelbey.


This she refused to Swear to, but Transcribed it with her own Hand; and after
a distinct reading it over her self aloud in the presence of the said Dean, her
Father, and Brother, declared she believed it to be true, and at the same time
signed it readily, and agreed to receive the Blessed Sacrament as a further
Testimony of the Truth thereof, and of her Sincerity in what she had therein
declared: And the worthy Dean and her Parents giving Credit to what she had so
Solemnly declared; the Father, Mother and Daughter, did accordingly receive the
Blessed Sacrament the Sunday following, March 5. School. at St. Clement's Church.

The managing of this Affair thus far took up at least Three Months time; In
the mean while the Papists at Ludlow got an Information where the Daughter was,
and of her Circumstances, and by Bribes, as it is supposed, given to the
Servants of the House, and to one Mrs. Relfe who had long been a Lodger in the
same House, who was afterward discovered to be a great Jacobite, often
declaring that she would never go to Church till King James returned; And
notwithstanding all the Care and Circumspection used by the Parents, they, or
some of their Friends, as it is supposed, furnishing her with Money, and other
Assistances, the said Mrs. Relf Conveyed her thorough a private Yard out of her
Fathers Lodgings, at four of the Clock in the morning, on Monday the 13th of
March. and carried her down to her own House in Surrey.

Note, That before she came away from Ludlow, she had frequent Letters sent
her, and privately put into her Hands as she went along the Str^et with her
Mother, by Persons unknown, and without any Name, signifying that they
understood she was Inclinable to the Popish Religion, which they Encouraged her
to proceed in, saying, that if she lost some few Friends by it, she should gain
many, who would take care of, and provide for her, and much to that purpose,
and particularly one of these Letters she showed her Mother.

At her going away, she left two Letters, the one for her Mother in these words,

March the 12th. Ever Honored Mother,
NOw I have done all I can to satisfy my Father and you, that I am no way
inclined to Popery, I think it my Duty to remove that troublesome Object which
has been the Cause of all this uneasiness; since I know if I don't it will be
renewed again with much greater force than ever: You know the height of my
Father's Passions, and the danger I have been in of my life; I am sure my Sight
has been imperfect ever since the blow I received at Ludlow: Therefore I hope
you will pardon me, and believe that nothing but Self-Preservation could make
me without your leave, resolve never to see Ludlow more till my Father is cured
of his Jealousy; though, I think, I could resign my Breath to Serve either my
Father or Your Self: And though fear will not let me tell you where I am going;
yet it is my Duty to assure you, that it is to a good Protestant Family; where I
will make it my business to Inquire after your Health and my Fathers; and if
ever I can be serviceable to either, you shall find me ready at Command with
all Duty and Obedience: In the mean time, by the help of Almighty God, I will
Endeavor to get my own living; and ask no more of you nor my Father then these
Books, which I have taken, and your Blessings and Prayers, which I hope you
will never deny to your unfortunate, but really,

Dutiful Child, till Death, Anne Ketelbey.
I will find a time to write to my Brother.




And the other for the Dean of Windsor, in the words following;

March the 12th.
I Humbly presume most Reverend Doctor, to beg the Favor that you will not
believe any false Reports of me, till you receive my Reasons for leaving my
Father and Mother, which I shall trouble you with in a short time, And lest
your admitting me to the Blessed Sacrament should give you any uneasiness, I
hold my self obliged both by Duty and Gratitude, to assure you, that I came
with all the sincerity in the World, and that what I promised, I will perform,
till the Death of her that is engaged ever to be,

SIR, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, Anne Ketelbey.


And as a color for her pretenses to the Protestant Religion, she took with
her a Common Prayer Book, and a Book upon the Sacrament.

Her Parents, immediately after her Deserting them, put it in Print, with
offers of a Reward to those who would discover her, and bring her back to them;
declaring also they would receive her kindly. After this they were in search
and pursuit of her all manner of ways, both in London and the Country, and
waylaying the Stage-Coaches, and watching the Roads and Seaports all this
while, not in the least mistrusting Mrs. Relfe, who had left the Lodging some
days before upon pretense of going into the Country, but had only removed her
Lodging for that time, as appeared afterward to avoid Suspicion. And the
Parents afterward having received an Information that Relfe and his Wife were
met not far from their own House on foot, with the Gentlewoman described in
Print, the same day she went away; they immediately sent down thither, and by
the Assistance of a Neighboring Justice of the Peace of that County, who
granted a Warrant, Relfe's House was searched; but the Daughter could not be
discovered, being hid in a secret Closer, as has been since Confessed.

All means hitherto proving ineffectual for discovery of their Daughter, the
Parents Inquiring out Mrs. Relfe's new Lodgings in London, (she coming often to
Town) at the first opportunity they could get, took up Mrs. Relfe by a Warrant
from Justice Marshal; who upon her Examination Swore that she knew nothing of
their Daughter, nor had seen her in several days before she went away. But she
owned that she believed her to be a Papist, and that she had desired her
assistance to Convey her away from her Parents, that she might have the free
Exercise of her Religion, which she the said Relfe had refused to do, and knew
not where their Daughter was, though at the same time she had the poor deluded
Creature in her own House. But nothing being made out against her, she was
discharged for that time.

Mrs. Relfe and the Daughter, some time after, thinking the Storm was over, and
all things quiet, came to London, where she was placed in a private Lodging:
But her Parents never resting, upon the loss of their Child, tried all manner
of ways to recover her; and at length by the Assistance of some of the Popish
Party, had again an Information of her, and understood that she had frequent
Recourse to the Lord of Montgomery's, the Lord Stafford's, and other Popish
Families, and never staid long in a place, but had changed her Habit to prevent
a Discovery: And that a Collection was made for Clothes, and other Necessaries,
to carry her away beyond Sea to a Nunnery. Whereupon her Parents applied
themselves to several Popish Priests, and some of the most noted Papists about
Town, giving Gratuities: and promising greater Rewards, and sometimes
threatening them what should be done if their Daughter were not returned back.
By this means the Parents came to be informed, that she was well, and in good
and safe hands in a Protestant Family, as they pretended; but no further
Inquiry was to be made, nor Questions asked then what they were willing to
discover, nor the Name of the Person who made this Discovery; who often came to
the Parents Lodgings about Eleven of the Clock at Night, and stayed about half
an hour, where he was received kindly, and with promise not to Trapan him,
being as he confessed, under some dangerous Circumstance himself; for he said
he was a Jacobite Protestant, and Conversing often with Priests, and the Popish
Party, had heard them Discourse of such a Convert, and said he would do all the
Service possibly he could by Conveying of Letters to her, though he had never
seen her nor knew where she was.

Frequent Letters were by this way Conveyed from the Parents to the Daughter,
and Answers returned, for a Month together, and Terms proposed for her return
to her Parents, on Condition they were Signed and Agreed to by the Father,
Mother and Brother, which Terms being not Consented to by the Father, he made
his Proposal in the words following: That if his Daughter would come home, she
should be Received and Treated by her Parents with as much Kindness as if she
had all along continued a Protestant; That she should have no Restraint,
Violence or Passion used toward her upon the account of her Religion, but have
the free Exercise of it; only with this Limitation, that she should admit at
any time any of our Protestant Divines to Discourse with her of Matters of
Religion; and she should hearken to the Admonitions and Instructions of those
who should endeavor calmly and mildly to persuade her to return to the
Protestant Church; That she should not Tamper with, nor Endeavor to Seduce any
Servant of theirs to the Popish Religion; That she should not have any Popish
Priest come to her in her Father's House, nor into any place thereunto
belonging, but in case of Sickness, and that with her Parents Leave; That her
Father would not be obliged with Men and Horses to carry her to Mass; but that
she should give an account to her Parents when and where she went, and continue
in the Dutiful Subjection and Obedience of a Child, and that her Parents would
not prosecute any Roman Catholic for what had already passed.

These Terms being rejected by the Priests, the Treaty dropped, or at least was
at a stand, and the private Messenger no more appearing, the Parents fearing
their Child would be sent beyond Sea, if not speedily prevented, made their
Application to the Popish Bishops, and attended Bishop Leyborn and Bishop
Gifford at their Lodgings in Queenstreet, in the month of June, and produced
the Abjuration, and acquainted them with the whole matter. They denied that
they knew any thing of her, farther then that they had heard of such a Convert.
They said that she could not go to a Nunnery before they had Confirmed her,
which was not then done, neither would they do it without her Parents Consent;
and promised to Summon their Clergy together, and when they knew in whose Hands
she was, her Parents
should have Notice: But afterward they returned an Answer, That no such
Person was amongst any of them: But they said they had nothing to do with the
Regulars, who were Governed by their own Provincials. And they added, That if
she was Reconciled to their Church, they believed it was done by some Foreign
Priest, for that no English Priest durst do such a thing: Yet notwithstanding
all these Professions, they Lied unto them; for the Daughter was Confirmed by
them, both the Bishops being present, as she has since Confessed.

The Parents willing to leave no Stone unturned for the Recovery of their
Daughter, made an Interest to the Portugal Envoy, who not only Examined his own
Servants and Domestics, Whether any such Person had fallen into their Hands,
but prevailed for the same favor from the other Foreign Ministers; and sent
for the several Provincials before him, who sent to the Priests of their
several Orders, but could get no Intelligence of her; so that the last and only
proper means, and most effectual as it proved in this Case, was to apply
themselves to the Government. The Parliament
was sitting all this time, which made the Action appear the more Bold and
Daring; and the Father drawing up a State of his Case in Writing, communicated
the same to His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor,
the Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, the Secretaries of State, to
some of the Judges, and to several of the Members of the House of Commons;
whereupon a Warrant was Granted by Mr. Secretary Vernon, to take up several
Persons, particularly the said Mrs. Relfe; and by threatening to prosecute her
for High Treason, for carrying away and Seducing their Daughter to the Popish
Religion, and Charging it home upon her, she after many Doubles and Shifts, not
knowing but the Daughter was come in, and had charged her with this, at length
confessed the Matters of Fact, which before she had denied upon Oath; namely,
How she her self, and her Husband had carried the Daughter down to their House
in Surry, and had Concealed her upon the Search: Nay, she consessed, That the
Daughter was in her House at the same time when she Swore before Justice
Marshall, That she knew nothing of her. After this Confession, she fell upon
her Knees to ask Pardon, and to beg the Injured Parents to Intercede for her,
promising their Daughter should be returned to them, if possibly she could
procure her, being then out of her Power; and, as she feared, gone beyond Sea.
But she desired leave with the Messenger to go to the Lord Montgomery's, the
Lord Stafford's, and some other Popish Houses, where she knew the Daughter
used, which were searched accordingly, and some Persons taken up, who were
Examined in the Secretary's Office; but the Daughter was not found all this
time.

Some of the Politic Papists finding the Government engaged in the Business,
and Incensed against their Proceedings, did think it now the best way for
themselves, and the safest way to get their Friends discharged out of Custody,
and to allay the Storm which they saw coming upon them, to deliver up the Child
to her Parents, who had made a considerable Interest, and a fair progress in
order to a severe Prosecution against the whole Party. Therefore the Popish
Bishops and Priests, not daring to appear themselves in the matter, gave Notice
to the Portugal Envoy of the Persons Name, at whose House she was, and that she
should be delivered up to her Parents such a Day, if he would Interpose, and
make Terms for her and them: And they insisted upon the Terms following, (viz.)
That she should have the free Exercise of her Religion, and Papists to come to
her; and that she should not be perplexed with Protestant Divines further than
she desired: That she should be received as a Child, and be allowed
40 s. a Year to buy Popish Books; and that if she did not like to stay at
Home, her Father should allow her 40 l. a Year to maintain her in some Popish
Family: Which Terms her Father utterly rejected.

However some time after the Portugal Envoy giving Notice to the Parents, That
he had Intelligence of their Daughter, they waited upon him at a Portugal
Merchant's House by Appointment; where after some time the Daughter was brought
to her Parents, and received by them with Joy from the Hands of some Priests
who brought her thither, and with Thanks to the Envoy for his Assistance
therein; who at the same time waved the Proposals formerly made, and only
insisted, That she
should have the free Exercise of her Religion, and that all Persons then in
Custody upon the Daughters Account, should be Discharged, and no further
Prosecution against the Papists at Ludlow.

Since her coming Home, she has confessed, That the Clothes were made for her
and another Young Woman, to be sent beyond Sea to a Nunnery; and that after
they had tried the Clothes her Companion was sent away, but she was stayed, to
be delivered up as a Peace Offering against her will, for fear of a
Prosecution. She owned that she was put for some time into the Nunnery at
Hammersmith, to try how she liked such a Life; and that they had showed her all
the Popish Places about the Town. When she came Home, she was well furnished
with Popish Books, but these her Parents took from her when she came to Ludlow;
and have since permitted no one to come near her but Protestants. But she
continues Obstinate, refusing to hearken to a Protestant Divine, though many
Ingenious Men have been often with her, insisting upon the Infallibility of the
Popish Church, and that there is no Salvation in any other: She refuses also
to read any Protestant Book but the Bible; and is so little fond of that, that
she says, if the Priests had enjoined her the contrary; she would never have
looked into the Bible, but that they have not yet forbidden her that.

Since the Daughters coming Home, she has made several Attempts to get away
again; and by opening a Lock with another Key, did once get away in a Servant's
Habit of the Family, but could not get off; and now she is suffered to go no
further than her Mother goes with her. But she continues very Stubborn and
Undutiful, declaring, That she had rather sweep Kennels for her Livelihood,
than Live as she does amongst Protestants; and has wrote several Complaining
Letters to her Friends in London, as she calls the Papists, of her Father's
Correction, burning her Books, and other cruel and severe usage; and several
Messages and Threats have been sent to her Father upon that Occasion, which
Complaints are all false, she being under no restraint at all from her Father
further then what is herein before mentioned; and that is
only in order to the Confinement from Papists, which he resolves to continue
till he has tried the utmost with her; desiring the Prayers of all good
Protestants, That God will be pleased to touch her Heart, and to Enlighten her
Understanding, that she may see the Snare wherein she is taken, and the
Mischiefs both of Body and Soul, which must Inevitably fall upon her, if she
continues in this deluded Condition.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by J. Nutt near Stationers' Hall. 1700. Price
Threepence.


