

I thought on my ways etc.

Ps. 119.59v. Thoughts well Employed; OR, THE DUTY OF Self Observation, IN THE
Care and Regulation OF LIFE, According to the ROYAL PATTERN.

I thought upon my Ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies,

Psalm. 119.59. By EDM. ARWAKER, Rector of Drumglass in Ireland.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Warren for Francis Saunders at the Blue Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange. MDCXCV.

TO Her GRACE THE DUCHESS OF ORMOND.
May it please your Grace,
IN Circumstances which put Men beyond the possibility of returning Benefits,
it is a Felicity that they are not as well deprived of means to testify their
Gratitude.

And were it my Happiness, that the Dedication of this Book could contribute to
produce as kind an Effect for me, Your Grace would be entitled to it by a
manifold Claim and Right: Since as I began my growth in a Seminary of Learning
planted by the late Memorable Duke of Ormond, so I have continued it under the
benign Influences of his Family, and the House of Beaufort, in YourGrace's
Service; and to the Advantages I have received from that, owe the All that I
pretend to.

But, Madam, I could never hope that so mean a Present as this Treatise, should
find Acceptance with Your Grace, as a Testimony of my profound Respect and
Gratitude, did not your eminent Practice of the Duty which it recommends, give
me the assurance that a Subject so agreeable to your Inclination, will prevail
with you to excuse the weakness of my Performance, and that I am as happy as
just, in my Application to your Patronage.

For, Madam, the refined Purity of your Life, which renders it the Subject of
our Praise, as well as a Pattern for our imitation, confirms us, that your
Thoughts have been successfully employed in the Care and Regulation of it; and
that, because you want no Admonitions to remind you of a Business so pleasing
and familiar, you will encourage those Endeavors that tend to make it as much
the World's, as it is Your Grace's Practice.

By this Piety, as exalted as your Quality, you make as glorious a Figure in
the Church as in the Court, and are equally the Blessing and the Ornament of
those Illustrious Families from which you are derived, and to whicd you are
united; but Your Grace is withal so studious to avoid the Applause which you
deserve, that unless I could as easily excuse my self to your Modesty and
Humility, as those and your other Virtues would justify me to the World, I
must not attempt your Character, but pass in silence the Perfections which
endear you to all who have the Happiness to know you, and make them as zealous
to divulge your Excellencies, as Your Grace is to conceal them.

And though thus I seem unjust to Your Grace's Merit, I shall best consult my
own interest, by this means; since the most successful Measures I can take to
obtain your Pardon, and Acceptance of this Address, will be not to mention the
extraordinary Qualifications that require it from,

MADAM, Your Grace's Most Dutiful Chaplain, Edm. Arwaker.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1
FIRST HEAD.
What the Ways are which must employ our Thoughts, viz. The Way of The Heart.
The Tongue. The Actions.
16, 17
SECOND HEAD.
What it is to think upon our Ways. 19
THIRD HEAD.
What we are to think on in our Ways, viz. 1. The quality of our Ways, whether
good or evil. 23
This distinguished by four Characters, viz. 1. Opposing close as well as open
sins. 24 2. Care to destroy sin in its very conception. 27 3. Regard to the
manner of performing religious Duties, as well as to the matter of them. 4. Not
acquiescing in any present seize of Grace. 33
The second thing to be thought on in our ways is their Tendency, viz. whether
we so run our Race, as that we shall obtain the Prize. 37 The third thing
considerable in our ways is their Equality, viz. 42 1. How they suit with God's
Dispensations to his Church and People. 43 2 How they agree with God's Ways and
Dispensations toward our selves. 48 3. How correspondent our present course of
life is with the primary Actings of Grace and Holiness in us. 54 4. How
consistent our ways are with our hopes. 59
The fourth thing considered in our ways is their safety, viz. whether they are
such in which we may acquiesce. 66
FOURTH HEAD.
What are the most seasonable Times for the Exercise of our Thoughts in this
Employment, viz. 1. When we fear some Judgment. 72 2. When we feel the Rod. 75
3. When we implore God's favor. 78 4. When others are inconsiderate. 83 5. At
all times and seasons. 87

FIFTH HEAD.
What Motives and Inducements oblige us to think upon our ways, viz. 1. Because
God is a strict Observer of them 89 2. Because Satan is a curious Inquisitor
into them. 94 3. Because wicked Men take notice of them. 103 4. Because we
shall repent the neglect of this Duty, which will be insupportable. 107 When we
think on the Happiness of those who performed it. 108 When we call to mind for
what we forfeited our interest in Heaven. 110 When we consider that our lost
Happiness can never be recovered. 113 When we find we shall live unpitied in
our misery. 114
5. We must think upon our ways, because we may be deceived in a wrong
Estimate. 118
No Age excused from this Employment. Not the young. 125 Not the old. 131
Obstacles that divert our thoughts from this Employment, are 1. Unworthy
constructions and improvements of God's Patience. 137 2. The difficulty and
trouble we find in reforming our ways. 140
Two Considerations assist us toward this Work, viz. 1. The Enemies with whom
we engage, cannot give us any long disturbance. 143 2. It is more advantageous
and honorable to fight withCourage now, than to be condemned to everlasting
Torments for Cowardice. 144

SIXTH HEAD.
The result of this Employment of our thoughts must be the turning our feet
unto God's Testimonies. 146 By which is meant, 1. Our examining and judging of
our ways, by comparing them with God's Commandments. 148 2. Our amending them,
by making them conformable to those Directions. ibid.
In this Turning consists the whole business of Repentance to Salvation. 149
ERRATA.
PAge 17. lin.. 4. for were read was, l, 8. r. thoughts, p. 32. l. 6. r. ardor,
p. 48. l. 18. r. so we have, p. 86. l. 25. r. one to another, p. 89. l. 21. put
V in the beginning. p. 96. l. 7. r. accuse, p. 113. l. 14. r. unpassable.

Thoughts well Employed: OR, THE DUTY OF SELF-Observation.
The Introduction.
AS God, by creating Man after his own Image, did manifest, a design of
exalting him to the participation of his Bliss; so he furnished him with means,
and chalked him out a way to arrive at the Sublime Enjoyment.

And lest the Everlasting Pleasures at God's right Hand, should not prevail on
Man to entertain his Appetite with its proper Object, and persuade him to
employ his time in the pursuit and acquisition of it; What in itself was his
Interest, became his Duty too by a Divine Sanction, and was enjoined him under
the severe penalty of Miseries to punish his disobedience, as great and lasting
as the Joys that were to reward him for obeying.

But Man, though assured that his eternal Happiness, or Ruin in a future
state, depends upon the ordering his Conversation, or as it is in the Original,
the disposing his Way aright, in this present World, which alone can qualify
him for seeing the Salvation of God; is yet, too often, so stupidly
inconsiderate, and brutishly insensible, that he never makes any inquiry into
his course of life, never takes his Ways into serious Consideration, or at
best, very rarely thinks and reflects upon himself, what he does, and in what
rode he travels, whether his feet are in the Way of Life or Death, or whether
Heaven or Hell will be his Journey's end, and happiness or misery his Portion;
but goes on still without looking back upon his past life, or forward to that
which is to come; thus he walks in darkness and knows not whither he goes, and
while like Solomon's Fool, his eyes, which should be in his head, are employed
in the ends of the Earth, he is a stranger at home, and unacquainted with
himself.

This Inconsideration and Incogitancy occasioned that assertion of the
Psalmist, Man that is in Honor and understands not, is like the Beasts that
perish. Ps. 49.20. Nay it degrades him to a state below the level with Brutes,
since the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but the unthinking
animal Man does not consider.

Of this lethargick temper and condition, we have a lively representation in
the Prodigal Son, St. Luke 15. He demands his Portion of his Father, not
considering that it was in better hands, where it would be managed to most
advantage, and that he could not trust it with a worse Steward than himself; he
leaves the ease and plenty of his Father's House, not foreseeing what different
usage he shall find in a Stranger's Family; he takes his journey into a far
Country, not caring how he shall return; and consumes his Substance in riotous
living, regardless whence he shall receive supplies: Nay, he takes up at last
with the sordid and despicable employment of feeding Swine, without observing
how like his charge he was, or rather more filthy and detestable. And had he
been admitted to their Mess, and allowed to fill himself with the husks that
were thrown to them, he had perhaps continued in that wretched state, without
hope, or design of altering his condition. But when Hunger pinched him, and no
man offered to relieve him, and he could not among all those Whorish Women, who
had reduced him to want a Morsel of Bread, find one to entertain him with that
poor repast; this brought him to himself, to reflect on his folly and his
misery, to think how many hired Servants of his Father had meat enough and to
spare, while he perished for want of necessary food, and yet was forced to a
most Servile drudgery to earn what would not satisfy a moderate Appetite. This
remembrance of his Father's House, begets in him a resolution to be no more a
stranger to himself, or that; but to arise and return thither; to acknowledge
his transgression, and beg his Father's pardon, and readmission to his favor,
and his family, though in the capacity only of a menial Servant.

This return met with success beyond his expectation, he no sooner came to
himself, and within his Father's sight, but the indulgent Parent took
compassion on him, fell on his neck and kissed him, called for the best Robe to
cloth him, ordered a Ring to be put upon his finger, and shoes upon his feet,
and killed the fatted Calf to entertain him, to rejoice and make merry for his
recovery.

And if we pitied his misery, we cannot but congratulate his good fortune, our
grief to see him among the Swine, must be turned to joy to find him at his
Father's Table. And then if a worse stupidity than his, has not invaded us, we
shall learn to go and do likewise, to think upon our ways, inquire and look
into our selves, that making a timely discovery of the errors and corruptions
there, we may seriously address our selves to reform and cleanse them, by an
early application of the most apposite remedies. For sure the great danger of
neglecting this duty, of Self-reflection, and the as great benefit of putting
it speedily into practice, will prevail on us not to dismiss it to another
opportunity, but awake and rouse us from the sleep of death, if we would be
turned from darkness, into light, from the power of Satan, unto God. If we
would no longer continue in the impiety, nor incur the punishment, of close
Hypocrisy, or unmasked profaneness, but triumph in the Virtue and the Reward
of righteousness and true holiness; we must think upon our ways, and turn our
feet unto God's Testimonies.

This is the Bethesda to which they, whose Souls are under Spiritual
declensions, must come, to lift up the hands which hang down, to confirm the
feeble knees, and to strengthen the things that are ready to dye; that shaking
off their laziness or formality in holy duties, they may be quickened in
righteousness, and recover their former vigor and activity, nay the benign
light and influence of God's Spirit; which by alienating themselves from him,
they had provoked him to withdraw.

Thus by making straight paths for their feet, that which is lame shall be
healed, and no more turned out of the way.

This was the course and method taken by the Man after God's own heart, as we
have it from himself, Ps. 119.59. I thought upon my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy Testimonies. What the ways were that employed his thought and
recollection, we may learn from his wish that they were made so direct, that he
might keep God's Statutes ver. 5. Meaning an exact adjustment of his life to
the perfection of that Rule, from which he had never greatly swerved, but in
his injurious dealing with Vriah; since the sacred Oracles have given him this
Character, that he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned
not aside from any thing that he commanded him, all the days of his life, save
only in that matter, 1 Kings 15.5. which we find to be the chief Subject of his
complaint, and the penitential acknowledgments of his frailty, with which the
Psalter does abound.

He took no care to make a Covenant with his Eyes, or desire God to turn them
away from beholding Vanity, but from the roof of his Palace saw Bathsheba
washing herself, and finding the Woman was very beautiful to look upon, feasted
his sight with the unlawful object, not foreseeing what a penance it should
undergo for that excursion.

Nor were his eyes more eager in looking, than his tongue in inquiring after
Vriah's Wife, and he takes her to his House and Bed, without considering how
injurious he was to God, his Neighbor, and himself, by his lascivious
dalliance there, or that the Scene would soon be changed from that diversion,
to water it with his tears.

And when the effect of his unchaste embraces was ready to discover the
Adultery, he adds Murder, to prevent it, not considering how much of his ease
and quiet he must Sacrifice to expiate the guilt, and still the crying of
Vriah's blood. But when Nathan, in a Parable, had brought him to a sense and
abhorrence of the injustice and impiety of such doings, and to pass sentence on
the Offender, and then informed him that he was the guilty Person, whom his own
mouth had condemned to dye; then he began to make a sharp reflection on
himself, and cry, I have sinned against the Lord; and then he receives this
Absolution, the Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye, 2 Samuel
12.13.

But, alas! what would it have availed him to think upon his ways, unless that
reflection had produced the happy result of turning his feet unto God's
Testimonies? he might think upon them, and be never the farther from persisting
in them; nay, he might think upon them so as to repeat in his thoughts the
impiety of his actions, and feed his lustful fancy by chewing the Cud with
pleasure; but it was not so he thought upon them, not slightly or
superficially, not with complacency and satisfaction; but he thought upon the
great wickedness, and the fatal destructive consequences of them; he thought
upon them with sorrow and regret, with detestation and abhorrence, and with
resolutions of forsaking them, and taking better courses; and as soon as he
conceives the thought, he puts it in execution, and turns his feet unto God's
Testimonies.

Here then we have a pattern for our performing the great duty of
Self-reflection, so absolutely necessary and so hugely advantageous, that
without it, we cannot be approved in this World, or rewarded in the next.

And indeed such is the general corruption of our ways, so filthy and
abominable are we become, in vain and extravagant thoughts, in light and
unseason'd Speeches, and in sinful and wicked Actions, that the complaint may
be as seasonable now, as ever, there is none that does good, no not one. Ps.
14.3. So that unless we will run on in sin, to ruin and destruction, with the
same irrational rage and confidence that makes the horse rush into the battle,
we must think upon our ways, and understand and seek after God. That famous
celebrated saying, Know thy Self, was not without reason said by Iuvenal to
have come down from Heaven, and is worthily recommended to Mankind, to be
deeply impressed upon our Memories, and frequently revolved within our thoughts.
For this intimacy and familiarity at home, will not only show us what is amiss
and out of order with us, and lead us to reform and rectify it; but will
prevent our future failings, and inlist us in the number of the Wise, who fear
and depart from Evil; but without it we shall be assimilated to the fool, who
rages and is confident; who like Balaam not seeing the error of his ways, nor
the drawn Sword pointed at his breast, presses forward to his ruin: Whereas
did we take the Wise man's counsel, and in every thing remember the end,
Eccles. 7.36. we should not go astray.

This would not allow us to entertain such thoughts as would accuse us to our
selves, and which afterward we should strive in vain to banish; nor to utter
inconsiderately any words, which we should endeavor to recall, but
insuccessfully; nor to be guilty of such Actions, as we should too late begin
to wish undone.

This reflection and care of themselves Moses wishes Israel would undertake, as
an argument of their prudence, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they
would think on these things, that they would consider their latter end!

An unthinking Person is a term synonymous for a Fool, and such a one is by the
Psalmist herded with the beasts, nor is he injured in the comparison, since he
is transformed into their resemblance, while being honored by God, above other
creatures, with the endowments of a rational and immortal Soul, he remains as
insensible of these advantages, as if they were never granted him, or that he
never had received the means of knowing them; and like a Brute, is so intent on
the present poor enjoyments, of this life, suited to his sensual Appetite, that
he never looks forward to the unspeakable felicities of a better, designed for
the satisfaction of his more refined desires; nor thinks in what a dangerous
path he treads, but makes himself a slave to those Lusts and Passions which it
is his Right to govern, and so slights the true and lasting Good, for the
possession of counterfeit and transitory Pleasures, and is punished for his
neglect, with endless sufferings and torments that are ineffable.

Now it is an unpardonable ignorance for a man to have acquainted himself with
foreign Nations, and never take notice of his native Country; to be curious to
impertinence in prying into other men's lives and actions, and yet never make an
inquiry into his own, which is of more importance to him. This our Savior
resembles to spying a Mote in another's Eye, while the Beam in our own escapes
our observation, St. Matt. 7.3. and advises us to look at home, and clear our
own sight first, before we attempt our brother's cure or reprehension. Now we
should truly look into our selves, and think effectually on our ways, would we
inspect our selves as nicely as we do our Brethren, if we would dismiss that
partiality in our self-love, which shows us our own failings through the reverse
of the Perspective, where they seem minute and distant; and look on them
through that end, that brings them nearer to our view, and represents them in
their just dimensions.

For while we are lovers of our selves, we are unfit to be judges of our
actions, it is the difference in our affection that makes a difference in our
Judgment, between our own ways and our Neighbors, and such diverse Weights and
diverse Measures are an abomination to the Lord. But if we would as impartially
judge our selves as we are apt to censure others, we should escape being judged
by him.

It is one of the Choicest rules in the Golden Verses of Pythagoras, and has
not the least contributed to gain them that Splendid Epithet, That we should
not give way to sleep, or close our Eyes to rest at night, before we examine
our selves* and enter on a strict inquiry how we have lived the preceding day,
what evil we have committed, what good we have left undone, and wherein we have
performed our duty as we ought. For hence we shall receive these benefits, that
as by the frequency of this practice, our judgments will become unbyassed, and
we shall not partially overlook or extenuate our failings; so we shall find a
sweet complacency in reflecting on our good deeds, for our encouragement to
perseverance in well doing; and a remorse for our evil actions, to deter us
from repeating them. As Job pleased himself with the declaration, that the
blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him, and he caused the
Widow's heart to sing for joy. Job 29.13. Or as St. Paul exults and triumphs in
the knowledge that he had fought a good fight, and finished his course, and
that there was laid up for him a Crown, 2 Timothy 4.7. While the Wicked lie down
in their shame, and their confusion covers them because they have sinned, and
not obeyed the voice of the Lord their God. Jer. 3.25. While, like Ephraim,
they smite upon the thigh and are confounded because they bear the reproach of
their Youth. Jer. 31. 19. And when we find the remembrance of our sins thus
grievous unto us, and the burden of them thus intolerable, no privacy shall
tempt us to a wickedness in hope of its concealment, since it cannot escape our
own scrutiny, and we are the severest censurers of our ways; which will make us
blush as much to do evil, by our selves, as in the presence of the most grave,
authoritative Person, and as scrupulous of sinning in our Closets and
retirements, as in the places of greatest resort and concourse; because we bear
about us a strict observator of our actions, whose clamorous reprehensions we
can neither silence, nor avoid; which will not suffer us to make a wrong
estimate of our selves, and rejoice to do evil, through an opinion that all we
do is well, because we do not consider and think upon our ways; which is the
reason that our hearts are in the house of mirth, when they should be in the
house of mourning, and we go cheerfully on in our wickedness without saying
what have we done? and thus is our strength devoured, and we know not of it.

But if we would consider in our hearts, that God remembers all our wickedness,
we would be more wary and circumspect, would think upon our ways and turn our
feet unto his Testimonies. And for our better encouragement to employ our
thoughts in this weighty business, and to this great advantage, we have a Royal
Example given us, and it were to be wished we would be as ready to imitate this
King in so good a Work, as we are to follow others, in things not so
commendable.

And for our better help in going through this Employment, let us exercise our
thoughts on the following Considerations.

First, What the ways are on which we must employ our Thoughts.

Secondly, What it is to think upon our ways.

Thirdly, In what respect our thoughts must be employed: what we are to think
on in our ways.

Fourthly, What is the most seasonable time for undertaking this Employment of
thinking upon our Ways.

Fifthly, What are the motives and inducements, that oblige us to this duty; and

Sixthly, What must be the result of our performing it.

I. What the ways are that must Employ our Thoughts.
The Holy Ghost does frequently in Scripture veil our conversation upon earth
under the Metaphor of a Way, to inform us that here we have no abiding place,
but are only Strangers and Sojourners in this Vale of Misery, and during our
continuance therein, are traveling the road to another country, in search of
an Eternal Rest. This is the way which all flesh had so corrupted upon earth,
that God repented he had made a Creature so rebellious as Man proved, and sent
a deluge to destroy, what he once created with delight. This is the Way of Man
upon which God's Eyes are still intent, and of which the Psalmist says, thou
compassest my path, and art acquainted with all my ways. Psalm. 139. 3. meaning
his course of life and conversation, and that in the several particulars of it,
his thoughts, words, and actions. For ver. 2. he says, thou understandest my
thoughts afar of, and ver. 4. there is not a word in my tongue but thou
understandest it altogether, and ver. 2. thou know my down-sitting and my
up-rising.

So that by our ways is intended, First, the Way of the heart, our thoughts,
purposes and intentions, it being part of the corruption of Man's way, which
occasioned the flood, that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart (...)
only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. And this Holy David calls the way within, when
he desires God to search him and know his heart, to try him and know his
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in him. Which teaches us that all
our appetites and affections, all our desires and inclinations, are our ways,
and the proper objects of our thought, which will find it no easy task to
observe the multitude of devices in our deceitful hearts.

Then there is the way of the Tongue, to which the Psalmist said he would take
heed, to avoid offending with it, Ps. 39.1. So that our discourses, words and
expressions are our ways too, and to be seriously thought on and remarked, that
we may keep our tongue from evil, and our lips that they speak no guile, since
by our words we shall be justified or condemned.

Thirdly, There is a way of the actions, as we find it in Job 34.11. the work
of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according to his
ways. For which reason we are exhorted to make our ways and our doings good. So
that all our performances, deeds, and actions are our ways, and fall equally
under our care and thought; if we would obtain the blessing promised to him
that is undefiled in the way.

Now we find mention made of a twofold way, the way of the Righteous, and the
way of the Ungodly, Ps. 1.6. and these, with respect to our thoughts, are
called the perfect way, and the way that is not good. Thus David says, I will
behave my self wisely in a perfect way, Psalm. 101.2. which he explains
immediately by adding, I will walk with a perfect heart. And in Psalm. 36.4. he
tells us, the wicked devises mischief upon his Bed, which he calls setting
himself in a way that is not good.

In reference to our Words, they are called the way of Truth and the way of
Lying, the one of which David declares he has made his choice, and desires to
have the other removed from him, Ps. 119.29, 30.

As they regard our Actions, they are called the way of peace, and the stubborn
way. Thus in Isaiah's account of the evil doings of the Jews, that their works
were works of Iniquity, and the act of violence was in their hands, that their
feet did run to evil, and made haste to shed innocent blood; he comes to this
conclusion, the way of peace have they not known. Isa. 59.8. And in the history
of their Impieties under the Judges, it is said, they ceased not from their
evil doings, nor from their stubborn way, Judge. 2.19.

And now, being informed what is intended by our ways on which we are to employ
our thoughts, let us proceed to consider,

II. What it is to think upon our ways.
This will occur to us from the several Scripture-Phrases that are expressive
of this duty. Such as considering our ways, Hag. 1.5. Searching and trying
them. Lam. 3.4. cleansing them, Ps. 119.9. taking heed to them, Ps. 39.1. and
in the Text, thinking on them. The force of which expressions will appear from
their general use and acceptance in the Sacred Writings. As in Job's
affirmation, that God knows vain men, he sees wickedness also, and will
consider it, Job 11.11. Which implys that God looks critically on the World,
and imports more than a bare sight and knowledge, even a weighty and judicious
observation. For too many live without God in the World, regardless whether
their ways tend to life or death, and therefore inconsultly run into any way
that is before them, especially if there is an appearance of pleasure or
advantage in it. Nay though they see the evil of their doings, and know the way
they walk in is the high road to Destruction, and that they who do such things
are worthy of death, yet are so far from having their own wickedness correct
them, or their backslidings reprove them, so far from thinking seriously on
the hazard, nay the certain ruin of their Souls, that they not only do the
same, but have pleasure in those that do them: Which argues them of the number
of those fools who make it not their business to consider, whose ways are right
in their own Eyes, and therefore they go on and perish in them.

So that it is not a slight superficial knowledge, a transient cursory view of
our conversation, but a laying it to heart, that is required; and accordingly
the Command given by God to Israel to consider their ways, is in the original
and all the readings and criticisms, apply your hearts and minds to them. So
the Wiseman sends the Sluggard to be instructed by the Ant, to consider her
ways, and be wise, Prove. 6.6. and the question God put to Satan, have thou
considered my Servant Job? is in the Hebrew, Have thou laid him to thy heart?
and the word there used, is observed to be very comprehensive, including the
mind, the understanding, Will and Affections, the study, counsel, motions, and
the very strength of the heart. Which argues that this thinking on our ways is
to be the business of our Souls, that we must be intent upon it, and not
satisfy our selves with a glimpse of our ways in the glass of our reflection,
and immediately forget what the representation was, for then our goodness will
be but as a morning cloud, or early dew; but we must search and try them, that
is, make a strict scrutiny and judicious examination of them, as the words
import. And when upon this inquiry, we find we have contracted any sullages or
pollutions, then we must cleanse them from that filth, and take heed to them,
that is, keep a continual watch over them, and be still upon our guard, that we
be not surpised by any new Temptation, or enticed after we have been washed,
to return to the mire again.

And to this end we must think on them, call them often to remembrance that by
reveiwing our past miscarriages, we may shun all occasions of them for the
future; and if we take our selves in the act of Deviation, wandering from the
commandments, that we presently refrain our feet, and return into the right
way, and walk in it with greater diligence and Accuracy. The conclusion of all
which is, that this employment of our thoughts, or thinking on our ways, is a
judicious observation of our selves, which induces us seriously to weigh and
intensely to regard our course of life; to ponder and meditate on our thoughts,
words, and actions; to inspect them nicely, and with discerning apprehensions;
since the deceitfulness of the heart, requires our utmost diligence and most
penetrating judgment, in making a true discovery of it; and since the Tongue,
though but a little member, is yet such an unruly one, that the taming it is a
task not easily performed, and we are generally more eloquent in condemning its
exorbitancies, than successful in reforming them. Lastly, since our actions are
so light and petulant, that they oftentimes escape our greatest caution and
advertency, and therefore had need of such a Guardian to restrain and check
their numerous irregularities.

For this considerate thinking on our ways, separates and discriminates things
that are confusedly huddled up together; it gathers and collects those that are
scattered and dispersed; it traces and finds out truth; examines likelyhoods
and appearances; and discovers and explores pretenses that are feigned and
varnished. This is it that preordains what is to be done, revolves what is
already acted, governs the Affections, restrains excess, and betters and
improves our lives in all respects.

So that if we take the measure of this excellent Christian duty and employment
of thinking on our ways, we shall easily perceive its vast extent, that it is an
Act of the practical understanding, whereby it surveys and dwells upon its own
intentions, and comparing them with the rule by which they are to be directed,
lays a command on the Will and Affections to put them in execution.

Now from the knowledge of what it is to think upon our ways, let us pass on to
enquire

III. What it is that we are to think upon, and consider in them.
And we shall find our thoughts are to be exercised about these four
particulars.

First, The Quality Of our Ways. Secondly, The Tendency Of our Ways. Thirdly,
The Equality Of our Ways. Fourthly, The Safety Of our Ways.
By the quality of our Ways is meant their being good or evil; we are to
consider our Conversation, whether it is in Heaven or on Earth, whether our feet
run the way of God's Commandments, or stand in the way of sinners. Now, the way
of the Just is the way of Vprightness, says the Prophet, Isa. 26.7. And if ours
are such, we shall discern them to be so by four distinguishing Characters.

First. We shall vigorously oppose not only those sins that are more gross and
heinous, more open and bare faced, and have such a loathsome deformity in
themselves, that we are frightened by the ugly Visage from committing them; but
we shall as heartily strive and labor against those which admit of
extenuation, and are more close and latent, nay which with fair and specious
appearances, allure us to be fond, and dote upon them.

Some Sins lie open and exposed to the view of all men with whom we are
conversant in the World, others admit no witnesses, but God and our own hearts;
those being committed in the face of the Sun, are made a public subject of
discourse; these, concealed within the privacy of a Closet, or some close
retirement, or severed from the grossness of an external Act, escape the
Observation, and the Censure of Mankind.

Now a principle of Moral Prudence is sufficient to engage us against those of
the former rank; for either a tenderness of our Reputation, and a regard to
that Credit and Esteem, which we have acquired, or at least aspire to in the
World; or if not that, yet a dread and apprehension of the cognizance and
severity of the Laws, will restrain us from the guilt of Actual Theft,
Adultery, or Murder, lest we come within the reach of the Sword of Justice, and
betray our selves to such rigors as will add corporal punishment to reproach,
and force the blood out of our backs, as well as bring it into our faces. But
it is a noble and more exalted Principle which shall enable a man to sit in
judgment on himself, severely to observe his own failings, remark and criticize
upon his imperfections, and pass an impartial condemnatory Sentence upon the
pride and haughtiness of his own heart, and the lewd dispositions of his Soul
to vicious and unbecoming practices, which are liable to no scrutiny but that
of his own Conscience and the all-seeing Eye of Heaven.

We know the Pharisee could boast, even at the Altar, and to God's very face,
that his life was free from the notorious blots and scandals that stained the
conversation of other men, and made them black and infamous, and while he
pleased himself with the thoughts of his being no Extortioner, or Adulterer, he
overlooked the Pride and Arrogance that sat enthroned within his Soul; and had
swollen him to that excess of Vanity, and made him forget that he was
endeavoring to recommend himself to Heaven, by the same methods by which the
Angels lost its favor; and that the more he exalted his own perfections, the
more he should be abased; and the nearer he justled up to the Altar, God would
behold him the farther of.

But the true Candidate of Heaven, the Soul that desires to be espoused to its
Savior, will not take so much care, or be so solicitous for garments of
Needle Work and Embroidery, as to appear to him all glorious within; will be
busier to cleanse and purify the heart, than to wash the hands and platter,
and no more indulge Spiritual, than carnal vices and corruptions. For such a
one knows that though the one may make him more infamous among men, the other
will render him as criminal and as hateful in the sight of God, who does not
see as Man sees, but tries the very heart and reins, and through the Varnish of
a painted Sepulcher, discerns the rottenness within; and hates the Impostor
that would abuse him with a specious outside only, and obtrude the Devil upon
him in the resemblance of an Angel of light.

And for this reason it was, our Savior told his Disciples that their
righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if
they would not fall short of Heaven.

A Second evidence of the Righteousness of our ways will be our care to destroy
sin, even in its very conception; or if lust has already conceived, to prevent
as much as we can, its bringing forth. We shall think our selves disloyal and
unjust to God as well as injurious and cruel to our Souls, if we favor the
growth, and do not oppose the increase of the greatest enemy to both. We shall
not divide our service between God and Mammon, nor give up our selves to
Heaven, like Naaman, with reserves. Nor shall we, like Saul, disobey his
positive commands, under a pretense of Sacrificing to him, when indeed it is to
our lusts.

Should Sin assume Lot's plea for Zoar, in its own excuse, and urge its
littleness, we shall be ready to remember that the Majesty against whom it is
committed is great, and so will its punishment be (...); that the cloud whose
first appearance was no bigger than a hand breadth, before time had much
increased its age, was so enlarged, that it became a Vizard on the face of
Heaven; And the Devil who tempted the Woman in the less terrible resemblance of
a Serpent, proves a Dragon in the Revelation ready to devour her offspring.

Nor need we have recourse to any thing, but our own reading and experience to
inform us what consuming fires are kindled from little sparks, or how a whole
lump of dough is soured and tainted by a piece of Leaven. And therefore we
shall call with the Spouse to take the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, Cant.
2.15. knowing how great the danger is of indulging petty sins; for a child
received into a house may open the door to those that are adult in villainy, as
well as years, and while we are tender of giving a repulse to sin in its first
address, we do not consider by what insensible approaches it may gain upon us,
and engage us beyond the power of giving it a Divorce. Nor do we know when once
our feet begin to slip, and we are going down the precipice, with what an
impetuous motion we shall fall, and how unable we shall be to stop till we are
at the bottom, and from a leisurely gradation in sin at first, be hurried on in
time to commit all impiety with greediness.

When the man of God told Hazael with tears what evil he would do to Israel, he
replied, Is thy Servant a Dog that he should do this great thing? and then
abhorred the thought of what soon after he had no reluctance to act, 2 King.
8.13. And there have been many whose chaste ears would be grated with the sound
of an immodest word, and yet afterward have not only listened to, but took
delight in such discourses, and fallen into a practice of debauchery, till they
have vyed Lewdness with the most common Prostitute.

Now would such but think upon their ways, look a while into themselves and
consider what an alteration they find there, they would be astonished to
discover from what modest and virtuous beginnings they have arrived at such an
extreme of Impudence. Of this we have a deplorable Instance in King David, had
he strenuously opposed this Sin in its infant weakness, when it betrayed it
self only in a wanton glance on naked Bathsheba, he had not proceeded to defile
Vriah's Bed, nor his own Soul, by an adulterous Act; he had not stained his
hands, nor made his Conscience foul, with the guilt of blood; he had not
entailed a Sword upon his family to succeeding generations; nor been the
unhappy example to caution, and inform the world how far Sin will improve its
conquests, and our yielding to Satan's first temptations, give him a power over
us to lead us Captive at his will.

If then we would preserve our liberty, and maintain our Innocence, we must
keep us far from an evil matter, and shun not only the occasions, but the very
appearances of Evil. But if we cannot keep at so desired a distance from sin,
as to be exempt from a sense of its first motions in us, yet let us believe our
selves obliged as well to dash in pieces the Children of Edom as to encounter
with the mighty Sons of Anack.

A third Character of the Righteousness of our ways, will be, that when we are
employed in holy Duties and the Service of Religion, we have not only regard to
the matter of it, but the manner too, in which we should perform it. That we do
not content our selves with the labor of our lips when we pray, and so honor
God only with them, while our hearts are at a distance from him: but that we
pray with all humility and devotion, considering our addresses are made to an
Omnipotent Being, whose seat and residence is in Heaven, and who knows our
thoughts as perfectly, as he sees our actions; that we endeavor therefore to
add faith and fervency to our prayers, that being raised upon those wings they
may be able to ascend to the Throne of Grace; that we pray as those who have a
deep sense and feeling of the necessities with which we are pressed, and are
weary of the burden under which we groan; as those that know the inestimable
worth of Souls, and value them in proportion to it; that we put up strong cries
and earnest supplications, as knowing that while we are in our journey to the
spiritual land of promise, we have a Sea and a Wilderness to pass, thirst and
hunger to endure, and enemies, and those Giants too, to conquer; since we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers*
against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, and against Spiritual
Wickednesses in high places, and therefore must not rely on our own strength
and abilities, but should interest Heaven in the quarrel, which of our selves
we are not able to maintain. Or when we come into the house of God, to hear his
Sacred Oracles delivered, that we give our attention to them with affection and
hearty Zeal, having our Souls exalted to meet the pleasing Embassy for which
they thirst, with such ardor and allowable transports, as are fit for the
reception of a message sent from heaven, and of the greatest importance to our
selves; a message wherein we are invited to participate of the joys and glories
of life Eternal, and called to the possession of an inheritance with the Saints
in light.

And as in praying and hearing, so in all other duties of Religion, we must
take care to worship God in Spirit and in truth; but if we only render the sum
and number in our devotional performances, without endeavoring after sincerity
of intention, heat and vigor, life and strength in their discharge, this is
not worshipping God in truth* but mocking him with a false appearance. For
externals in Religion, the labor of the lip and lungs, are all dead works, if
separate from that holy frame and temper of mind which animates and enlivens
them, and prayers though offered with the tongue of Men and Angels, are as
insignificant as the noise of sounding Brass, or tinkling Cymbals, without the
fervor of divine Charity to actuate and inspirit them.

The fourth Character of the righteousness of our ways will be our not
acquiescing in any present seize of Grace, or the height and measure we
have already reached, but that forgeting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth to those which are before, we press forward toward the mark,
for the prize of our high calling in Christ Jesus.

Men too frequently betray a canine insatiable appetite in the pursuit and
acquisition of the things below, they are Greedy Dogs that can never have
enough: nor is it strange, since the increase of their enjoyments, serves but
to render them more Ravenous. We find many, who, like the rich Fool in the
Gospel, want stowage for their abundance; but few or none that even then think
of taking Rest, but are as anxiously busy and solicitous as ever. Such is
their impatience and eagerness to add field to field, and enlarge the bounds of
their possessions, that no Geometry can measure the vast extent of their
desires.

Were it possible to find a man so satiated with pleasures, so glutted with
honors, as to own he had enough, the world could not present us any thing so
strange and rare, so worthy of our admiration; But we find many of his temper,
who thought the limits of the world too narrow for him, and wept that they did
not allow him to extend his conquests farther: and it is not novel to hear
others rail at Nature, and vainly spend their time in quarrelling with the
shortness of it, as serving only to tantalize the Appetite with a view of
pleasures not to be enjoyed; to give them a Pisgah prospect of the Land flowing
with Milk and honey, but to cut them off before they arrive to taste it.

And shall such empty vanities, calculated only for a day, like Ionah's Gourd,
and which perish in the using, put our thoughts upon the tenters, and rack our
desires with restless and unsatisfied longings, while we easily content our
selves with the minutest portion of Grace, and never are at the trouble of
endeavoring to increase our stock? Shall we think all the mean, ignoble
methods of acquist neither too many, nor too difficult to procure some little
wealth that does impoverish, or some petty honor that enslaves us; and yet
believe a lazy wish, a faint and languishing velleity, to be a prodigal
expense, an unreasonable price for Heaven? The path of the Just is as the
shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.
The good man is ever in progression, bettering himself, improving his Graces,
and advancing daily toward the height and Meridian of Christianity, he gives
diligence to add to his faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and so goes on
from strength to strength, till he grows to a perfect man, and attains the
measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ. He cannot allow himself to be
a Stationary in his Christian Race, and believes he is retrograde, if not in a
progressive motion. But apply's Seneca's expression of Philosophy to Grace, and
thinks there is no difference between intermission, and forsaking, since from
the moment of its interruption, it will recur, like a Spring, to its first
state.

We should be modest to impiety, to suffer others to outstrip us in this
course, the very example of whose speed, should teach us to mend our pace, and
follow in our own proceedings, the pattern we receive from theirs. And by so
running, we shall obtain the Crown that is set before us.

But if we loiter by the way, we shall not reach the Goal, for our Christian
Course is not limited, like the Sea, with bounds which it must not exceed, nor
are there any fixed terms prescribed to the magnitude of the Spiritual, as to
that of the Natural Man; because Spiritual Habits and Graces, if they do not
increase by exercise, will decrease and dwindle into nothing by desuetude and
discontinuance.

And if we consider at what an incredible distance they are from Perfection,
who have made the nearest approaches to it, we shall find room enough for the
utmost of our endeavors, for the way is long, the journey is from Earth to
Heaven, and besides other inconveniences, it is a narrow and rugged path, nor
do we know how little time we have allotted us to go this Pilgrimage, and
cannot think that we have leisure to mis-spend in standing idle, when we should
be in greatest haste.

Neither do we know but that if we stay to look back to Sodom, when we should
escape for our lives to Zoar, we may be arrested in the instant like her that
did so, and not permitted to go farther. There is this advantage gained by
aiming at the height and (...) of perfection, that though we fail of success
in our attempt, and fall short of the lofty flights of Virtue and Religion; yet
by endeavoring to reach them, we shall soar to a pitch above the common Sphere
of Men, and shall find a recompense for our labor, like him that dug his field
in expectation of a treasure, who, though he mist of that, was enriched by the
cultivation of his ground. Besides, we must consider, that though the meanest
degrees of Grace want not their share of the divine approbation, yet they are
only the more exalted measures that receive applause, and are crowned with
extraordinary Encomiums.

And this consideration should make us still dissatisfied with our present
state of Grace, and that dissatisfaction should put us upon the search after
more sublime perfections; for if we once think we have enough, we shall cease
from endeavoring after more, and, like the Reubenites, take up our rest on the
wrong side of Jordan, short of the promised Land.

From the Quality of our Ways and the Characters by which we may discern it, we
come to the second considerable,

Their Tendency, that is, whether we so run our Christian Race, as that we
shall obtain the Prize, or instead of a Crown meet ruin and destruction in the
end.

This is a matter of no trivial consequence, but of weighty moment and
importance, a matter that deserves our most serious thought and consideration,
for without this we may be miserably mistaken in our course, and disappointed
of our hope, since that way may seem right to us, the end whereof is the way of
Death. Now that we may not be deceived, the Holy Ghost has set before us life
and death, and good and evil, he has chalked us out the direct road to
happiness, and made it so plain and discernable, that unless we will, we cannot
go astray. Nay we have him always telling us, this is the Way, and exhorting us
to walk in it, and as he encourages us in our journey to keep the right way,
and quickens our speed, by the glorious prospect at our journeys end, so he
cautions us to avoid the Path that leads to Death, by a dismal representation
of the misery to which it tends, assuring us that the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, and who they are, appears in that black list the
Apostle gives us of them, 1 Cor. 6.9. Fornicators, Adulterers, Idolaters,
Thieves, Drunkards, Revilers, Covetous Persons, and Extortioners. These he
tells us shall be excluded from Heaven, and that we may not mistake, or be
abused in a business of this consequence, he ushers in his assertion with a
cautionary admonition not to be deceived; of which we are in continual danger,
both by the deceitfulness of sin it self in imposing on us, and of our own
hearts too, in consenting to the cheat. For we are not so much fooled and put
upon by the specious pretenses and delusory appearances of sin, as by our own
easiness and credulity; we would have it to be that pleasing agreeable thing
which its fallacious insinuations render it, and therefore readily give credit
to them. Nor could we be so soon betrayed, if we were not conspirators against
our selves, the Tempter has no better instruments to prevail upon us than our
own vicious inclinations, which he employs on that design, as he made use of
the Woman that was taken from Adam's side, and finds them like her, too forward
to assist him in his attempts to ruin us; for we become unfaithful to our
selves, and by discovering, as Sampson did, wherein our strength consists, the
Devil comes upon us, and having deprived us of the only defense we have against
him, condemns us to a drudgery worse than Grinding in the Philistine Mills. Nor
is it likely we should avoid it, since though we so readily incline our ears to
his suggestions, we stop them, and are as deaf, as the Psalmist's Adder, to the
voice of a better Charmer: and though the positive Declarations of God's Holy
Word have denounced heavy curses against the workers of iniquity, such as
exclusion from the joys of Heaven, and not only so, but a perpetual
condemnation to the miseries of Hell; though the Oppressor hears a dreadful Woe
thundered against his injustice; though the Drunkard is assured that death is in
the pot; though the Reviler is informed that his religion is vain, and that
sharp arrows of the Mighty, with coals of Juniper, are what his Tongue
deserves; though the Adulterer is told that he forfeits his claim to Heaven,
and is of that unhappy company whom God will judge; and though we have
sufficient warning given us, that these courses have a direct tendency to
everlasting ruin, and will bring our Souls under the just wrath of an incensed
and angry Judge, and the irrevocable sentence of damnation; and that whoever
has his feet in such paths, shall, without a quick and seasonable return, fall
into so steep a Precipice, a pit so fatally deep, that he must never hope to be
delivered from it: yet notwithstanding this, we are so brutish and selfwilled,
to prefer our own conceptions, though never so wrong and false, before the
Sacred Word of Truth it self, and to gratify the lustings of our flesh, to the
apparent hazard of our Souls. To prevent whose ruin, and make better provision
for their safety, it would be prudence, in all our ways, to revolve often in
our thoughts, something like the Inscription over the door of the Roman
Senate House, to make us as provident for our Souls, as that Assembly was for
the Commonwealth, to see that they receive no damage.

And this we should not fail in regard of their greater excellency and worth
above all other things that have relation to us, in respect of their original
and duration.

Their descent was from above, from the Father of Spirits and of Lights, it was
he breathed into us that breath of life without which our bodies are but
insignificant lumps of earth, and have nothing to discriminate them from those
of Beasts that perish; for they shall equally return to the dust from whence
they derived their beings, and lie undistinguished in their heaps of ruin.

But our Souls are subject to no such frailties, nothing can destroy their
perpetuity, nor is any Republic so long lived, much less our Bodies, or the
more fading pleasures that indulge them, to the prejudice of our Souls; yet we
are so nicely tender of those mortal parts, which must be captive to the grave,
and a prey for corruption to devour, that we will not expose them to a gust of
air that may impair their health, or hasten their dissolution: how much greater
reason then have we to be rather apprehensive of what may endanger our more
inestimable Souls, and to manifest a suitable caution for their safety, since
he that neglects his body is only careless of a frail and perishing house, that
is not worth his care, but he that is regardless of his Soul, is truly wanting
to himself?

From the Tendency of our Ways, we come to the Third thing considerable in them
to employ our thoughts, and that is their Equality, by which is meant, their
consonancy and agreement with those things which ought to influence and direct
them.

We are apt to call the Way of the Lord unequal, when the inequality is only in
our own, and it seems so to us (as a stick held in a River appears crooked) not
through a defect in them, but in our judgment and apprehension. Now to make a
right estimate, and pass a just censure on the Equality of our ways, we must
consider them in four respects.

First, How they suit with God's dispensations to his Church and People.

The Church is the body of Christ, of which, if we have any part in him, we are
all fellow members, and should have the same care one for another, so as to
sympathize in each others sufferings, and rejoice in each others honor. That
our brethren may not upbraid us with our careless disregard to their
circumstances, that they have piped to us, and we have not danced, and when
they mourned to us, we did not weep.

It was a memorable generosity in Vriah, to refuse the necessary, as well as
allowable conveniences of his house, the refreshments of food and sleep, while
the Ark, and Israel, and Judah abode in Tents, and the General and the Servants
of the King, were encamped in the open fields, exposed to all the injuries of
the Weather, and harrassed with the fatigue and hardships of a Campaigne. 2 Samuel 11.11. And when good Nehemiah heard the tragical Narrative of Ierusalem's
desolation, the afflictions of his Soul were visible in his face, and the King
read in the sadness and solemnity of his Conntenance, the legible characters of
that grief that possessed his heart, and he justifies the Mourning in his
Visage, by repeating the sad occasion, thinking no signs of grief could be
condemned in him, when the City, the place of his Father's Sepulcher lay waste,
and the Gates thereof were consumed with fire. Neh. 2.2, 3.

When the Elders of the daughters of Sion sat upon the ground, who could blame
the Prophet for making it matter of complaint? nor did they unreasonably affect
that posture of sitting there, since the lofty Walls and stately Towers of Sion
were levelled with it. Or was Isaiah in the wrong, when foretelling the day of
treading down in the Valley of Vision, which he calls the day of trouble and
perplexity from the Lord God of Hosts, he thinks no expressions of grief too
pathetick to bewail the calamity, and that he had reason to weep bitterly, and
forbid all attempts to assuage his sorrows, because of the spoiling of the
Daughter of his people. Isa. 22.4, 5.

If we look on Israel in Captivity, by the Rivers of Babylon, we shall find
them weeping at the remembrance of Sion, and it was a becoming sorrow suited to
their unhappy circumstances; but how little decorum do they observe, and how
unsuitable are their ways to God's in his dispensations to his Church and
People, who lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches;
who chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent themselves Instruments of
Music; that drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
Ointments, but are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Amos 6.4, 5, 6.
Well do they deserve a Woe, who are thus at ease in Sion, while the Lord has
covered it with a Cloud of his fierce Anger. And are like Ahashuerus and his
favorite Haman who sat down to drink, while the City Shushan was perplexed. A
blamable circumstance in their behavior, and an unseasonable allowance of
themselves in mirth and jollity, and unlike his temper, who is afflicted in all
the afflictions of his People. Whose example Christians should imitate as
persons of public Spirits, and have so quick a sense of the calamities and
sufferings of their brethren, as to be able to say with the Apostle, who is
afflicted, and I burn not? 2. Cor. 11. 29. It is not a season for men to seek
great things for themselves, when God is laying waste, breaking down what he
had built, and plucking up what he had planted. He who sits an idle unconcerned
spectator, when his neighbors house is on fire, may soon have occasion to
employ his greatest industry to save his own, and therefore ought to give his
best assistance to suppress the flame, before it comes near enough to do him
any prejudice. And if we are insensible and have no stirrings of compassion for
our Brethren in distress, this unbecoming disregard may provoke God to make us
sharers in that misery for which we had no sense of pity, while it was foreign
to us. We are told that to every thing there is a season, and a time to every
purpose under Heaven, Eccles. 3. 1. a time to weep, and a time to laugh; and
sure the time to weep must be the time of adversity and tribulation, and he
that laughs in the house of mourning, is guilty of rudeness and inhumanity, as
well as of folly and inconsideration. What censure then do men deserve, who
have no concern for the Schisms and breaches in the Church of Christ, and can
look on its divisions without any thoughts of heart? who see War and desolation
threatening to invade their Country, while homebred discords weaken and expose
it, and yet care for none of all these things. But instead of endeavoring to
compose the differences, foment and cherish them, instead of cementing the
breaches, widen and enlarge them? Who while their brethren are jeoparding their
lives in the high places of the field, abide among the Sheep folds, to hear the
bleating of the flocks! who feast on the days appointed for humiliation, and
instead of imitating Israel in hanging up their Harps, call loudest for them,
and entertain their ears with the voice of melody?

They must sure be putrid and corrupted members that have so little sense of
what the body feels, and have no more relation to it than a Glass Eye or a
Wooden Leg, nor serve half so much for use or ornament.

But though it is nothing to these men, what is done to God's Church and
People, and they pass by as regardless of the affliction wherewith the Lord
has afflicted Sion in the day of his fierce anger, as the Priest and Levite
did of the wounded Travellor; It is our duty not to forget Jerusalem, our Souls
must cleave to the dust, when we find her honor laid in it, our tongues be
dumb, and our right hands forget their cunning, if we pray not for the peace of
Jerusalem, if we prefer it not above our chief joy.

The second thing we are to think on in the Equality of our Ways, is their
agreement with God's ways and dispensations toward our selves. Which are
visible in his Mercies and his Judgments.

It was the Psalmist's inquiry what he should render to the Lord for all his
benefits, Ps. 116.12. and it should be our consideration, what returns we have
made, how answerable to God's dealings with us, the mercies with which he has
embraced us on every side, whether spiritual or temporal. If, as he has
bestowod his Talents liberally on us, we have made as large improvements of
those plentiful receipts, and as we have been furnished with various, excellent,
and continued means of Grace; so have happily grown, and made a successful
progress in it, not neglecting the opportunities vouchsafed us.

Or if, as he has set us up as so many living monuments of his mercies; so we
have not been backward to celebrate and proclaim them, to declare what he has
done for our Souls: Again, If as we have been the subjects of many unexpected
deliverances and as Brands snatched out of the fire of that calamity wherein
others have been consumed; so we have made a due acknowledgment of praise and
obedience: And lastly, if, as he has prosper'd the works of our hands upon us,
and blessed our substance with increase, we have bin rich toward him, in works
of Piety and Charity, the Sacrifices with which he is pleased: then our ways
have been equal in their suitableness to his. Now if we search the Chronicles
of our own History, we shall find all these benefits upon record, and surely
when these favors and this goodness of God are there represented to us, we
shall not pass them over, without inquiring, as Ahasuerus did upon hearing the
account of Mordecai's good service, What has been done to him for this? Esth.
6.3. have we given him the honor due unto his name? have we taken the Cup of
Salvation and called upon it? have we offered him the Sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and paid our vows unto him? Such returns he looks for from us,
and if we do not improve to advantage the Grace and goodness which his bounty
has richly dispensed to us, we frustrate his design, and disappoint his
expectations, who requires a plentiful Harvest where he has been a liberal
Sower, and that we should put his Talents to the Exchangers, and return him his
own with Usury, Mat. 25.27.

When he had fenced his Vineyard and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choicest Vine, he looked that it should bring forth Grapes;
and when he found that it brought forth wild Grapes, was it not reasonable that
he should take away the Hedge thereof, and let it be eaten up, and take away
the Wall thereof, and let it be trodden down! And when God has set a hedge of
protection and preservation about us; when his hand has been no way straightened
toward us; but his favors have been renewed upon us as constantly as the
several moments of our lives have succeeded to each other: he waits for
something from us that may answer his care and pains. But if we prove like the
Fig Tree in his Vineyard, when he came and sought fruit thereon, and found
none; shall he not sentence us to be cut down from cumbering his ground? What
can we suppose to be the reason why we were brought out of darkness into his
marvelous light, but that we should by an extraordinary splendour of our lives,
enhanse his glory who vouchsafed us that illumination? By instating us in the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, he intended we should be so far sensible
of that freedom, and value it at so just a rate, as not to repeat the
Captivity, and enslave our selves again to our own lusts, nor be anew entangled
in that intolerable bondage.

But if in times of light and splendour under the Gospel, we live in darkness,
and continue in the practice of such immoralities as would put a heathen to the
blush; if we grope our way when the Dayspring from on high has visited us;
and stumble when it is made smooth and plain before us; we are guilty of a
baseness which we censure and condemn in our fellow creatures, while we think
our selves defrauded of the benefit which we might in justice have expected
from them.

Thus if we have planted a tree in a fertile soil, where its roots may spread
themselves abroad in the fattest earth, and have the vicinity of refreshing
Streams to promote their growth; and notwithstanding these advantages, we find
it does not bring forth fruit in its due season, and only clothes its branches
with useless leaves; we concludes it deserves the Axe for mocking our care and
industry. Or if we meet with the leanness of Pharaoh's Kine upon those which we
keep in our choicest Pastures, are we not vexed at the disappointment of our
hopes, and ready to deafen every ear with our complaints? and what do we else,
while we become thus querulous, but condemn our selves out of our own mouths?
and indeed if we find the same unfruitful leanness in our selves, though seated
in the same advantages, we should be very partial not to pass an equal censure
on a cause no less deserving it.

And as Spiritual, so Temporal mercies require the grateful acknowledgment of
our lives in obeying and praising the Author of them, because it is a return
which he expects. When he expostulates with David by his Prophet, for despising
the commandment of the Lord, and doing evil in his sight, he enumerates the
great things which he had done for him, the anointing him King over Israel, and
delivering him out of the hand of Saul, the giving him his Masters House, and
his Masters Wives into his bosom. 2 Samuel 12.7.8. and he reminds him of his
bounty not to upbraid him with it, but to make him sensible how that should
have influenced his actions, and restrained him from offending a God, who had
so obliged and loaded him with benefits. And we find it recorded for an
aggravation of the Israelites base ingratitude, that when God delivered them
out of Egypt, and prepared a table for them in the Wilderness, and fed them
with a diet that was neither spare, nor mean, for he gave them meat enough, and
filled them with the bread of Heaven; yet they murmured while it was in their
mouths, their desires were more to the fleshpots of Egypt, than to the food of
Angels, and they prefered the slavery of the Brick-Kilnes for the sake of the
Leeks and Onions, before the freedom of God's Service with all its advantages
and rewards.

By the inequality of Isreal's ways in this particular, we may take measure of
our own, and perhaps we shall find our carriage as reproveable in circumstances
of a near affinity with theirs, that though we have been freed from our
grievances and oppressions under a King that knew not Joseph, and sit every man
under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, enjoying the Liberty and
Property we admire, and have no leading into Captivity among us; yet we do not
cease from unjust complaining in our Streets, and slight the blessing of being
in such a Case, the happiness of having the Lord for our God. We may justly
fear that such neglects may provoke him to recall his mercies, of which we are
not worthy, and pour his judgments, which we rather deserve, upon us. And if we
shouad at any time feel the lashes of his Rod, which is proper for the backs of
such inconsiderate fools, our punishment must work that wisdom and amendment in
us, which our good usage could not effect. But if we turn not unto him that
smites us, neither seek the Lord of Hosts, if he has stricken us, but we have
not grieved, if he has consumed us, but we have refused to receive correction;
but have made our faces harder than a Rock, and have refused to return; will it
not be truly said of us that we are poor, that we are foolish, that we know not
the way of the Lord, nor the Judgment of our God? But if we return to him, and
repent of those impieties for which we were chastised, our ways will be equal
and acceptable to him, and we shall receive this advantage by their being so,
that as he has torn us, he will heal us, as he has smitten us, he will bind
us up.

The third particular in which the Equality of our Ways is to be discerned, is
the correspondency of our present course of life, with the primary actings of
Grace and Holiness in us.

When first God brings Men's Souls out of Prison, and they find the Shackles of
their Spiritual Bondage broken, and the fetters of that dismal Captivity newly
fallen from their feet; when they are lifted out of the mire in which they once
stuck fast, and from an Egyptian darkness are brought into the light of Goshen;
and when the sense of this loving kindness of the Lord lies fresh upon their
Souls, they are like the fountain of the Sun in Jupiter Hammon's Temple, at the
first eruption of the morning light, warm with love and gratitude, but, like
that, abate of their fervor, as the heat of the day increases. These men run
well at their first setting forth, and are eager to obtain the prize, but the
esteem of it lessens by the way, and they grow faint and weary in the middle of
the Race.

Now we must take heed that this be not our condition, we must remember the
days of old, and if we find there was once a time when we could welcome all the
sufferings which we endured for the sake of Christ, and counted them a new
addition to our honors; when we believed the trials of cruel mockings and
scourgings, yea moreover of Bonds and Imprisonment, the greatest illustrations
of our Virtue, and proofs of our being such, of whom the world was not worthy;
a time when our hearts were ready to echo to every command from Heaven, and
cry, lo I come to do thy will, O God: when our love was so refined and perfect,
that it retained no mixture, no allay of fear; when no difficulties or dangers
could make us start aside out of the way of righteousness, but we took
patiently the spoiling of our goods, and all imaginable injuries and
indignities for the sake of the Gospel, and were ready to part with our dearest
pledges and enjoyments, to follow our Savior to his Cross: And if we do not
now perceive those holy fires still flaming in our breasts; if the love of
Christ has not still such a constraining power, that many waters cannot allay
the ardor, much less quench the fire of our affection toward him; we shall
have reason to conclude that we are fallen into the inconstancy of the Church
of Ephesus and have left our first love, Rev. 2.4.

But we are in no wise to allow our selves to be thus altered from our original
perfection, and instead of excelling the pattern we set our selves at first,
fail in our imitation of it. And therefore we are to remember from whence we
are fallen, and endeavor to retrieve our selves and regain our primeval
Character by doing our first works.

And to this end we must enquire by what means it comes to pass, that our Zeal
cools, and our desires run in a lower chanel; that our activity and strength in
the exercises of holy living, is enfeebled and benumbed, into a Spiritual
lasiness and debility: How we have been bewitched to forsake the Truth, and
divide our affections between God and Mammon; and why, having begun in the
Spirit, we should go so far out of our way, to end in the Flesh, as if that
could make us perfect. And when we have found the weight that hinders us to run
as well as we did at first, let us lay it aside, and the sin that does so
easily beset us, and run with patience the Race that is set before us.

We must think on the unreasonableness of our desisting from a work in which we
have engaged upon such grounds and inducements as are still as strong and as
encouraging as ever.

Why should we turn back since in our little progress in holiness, we have not
met with any thing to raise a suspicion in us that we have mistook our way, or
to make us repent of our former forwardness? Are not the Service of Jesus
Christ, which is perfect freedom; the continual feast of a good Conscience; the
dwelling under the defense of the most high, and abiding under the shadow of
the Almighty; as profitable and pleasant, as safe and desirable, as they have
been represented to us? Is the Sample we have seen of the Clusters of Canaan,
such as gives us occasion to despise the Land, or bring an ill report on that
which is indeed so good?

Let it not be said of us that we have changed our glory for that which does
not profit, or forsaken the Fountain of living Waters, and hewn out to our
selves broken Cisterns. Have we seen no form or comeliness in our Savior,
during our small enjoyment of his presence? or could we perceive no beauty in
him, that we should desire him as we have done heretofore? Why should we give
him occasion to expostulate with us as he did once with Israel? O my People,
what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee. Testify against
me. Mic. 6.3. and if we can put him in remembrance of his dealing so with us,
when we plead together, it behooves us to declare it; that we may be justified.
But he has not pressed us to impossibilities; nor exacted our usual tale of
Bricks without giving us proportionable allowances of Straw; he has not
oppressed our shoulders with heavy burdens, which he has not enabled us to
bear; his Commandments have not been grievous, nor have the meanest of our
Services met with disproportionate rewards; But he has prevented our wishes,
and done abundantly for us above what we were able to ask or think. And if we
seriously consider this, we shall be ashamed to remit of our endeavors, or
slacken our former diligence in the ways of Piety, but gird up the loins of our
minds, and finish our course with the same alacrity, which we showed in our
beginning it.

And now we come to the fourth and last thing wherein we must think upon the
Equality of our Ways, and that is how consistent they are with our Hopes.

And truly our hope is even in God, that when our house of this earthly
Tabernacle is dissolved, we shall have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens.

That there we shall receive a Crown of glory that fades not away, and have an
easy entrance into the joy of our Lord, that fullness of joy which is in his
presence, and those pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore. These
great, these inconcievable Blessings, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
nor have entered into the heart of man, are the object of which our ambition is
directed: our aspiring thoughts, and towering hopes all aim at this perpetual
felicity. And these, one would think, should have a sufficient prevalency to
engage us in the right methods of arriving where we hope to be. The Apostle
tells us that every one that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all
things, 1 Cor. 9.25. Meaning thereby not only his continence, or abstinence
from things hurtful, but a competent use of things necessary to increase his
strength, and those too obtained by a continual exercise. Now they of whom he
speaks, took this pains to obtain a corruptible Crown, and shall not we be more
indefatigable in our endeavors for one that is incorruptible? Here we have no
abiding place, the little satisfaction which they, who make this world the
center of their happiness, find in it, argues that God never intended it for
their repose. The vaniety of their desires meets with vexation of Spirit in all
things, and they are still upon the inquiry, who will show us any good? though
in all their search after what is substantially so, they meet with nothing but
some shadows and faint resemblances of it, which are not only delusory
phantasms, that cannot satisfy them, but malignant Specter, that invite them
to their ruin. So that all the discovery they can make of happiness, is, that
it is not to be found on earth.

Now the reason why we can find no real satisfaction, is because instead of
striving for mastery over the Enemies of our Nature, we fight against our own
Souls, and are as well the managers, as the seat of that war that is waged
against our selves, not considering that God has intended higher things for
us, a Victory over, and not a Slavery to such Vanities, and rewards our
Conquest not with a fading Chaplet made of leaves, but with an immarcessible
Crown of Glory. This is the Prize for which we strive, the Goal to which we
run, and the exercise of Grace must be both the Race and Path. There is no
arriving at Happiness, but by such means, whose purity shows they are of the
same nature with their end, as the light that directs us to see the Sun, is
congenial with the Sun it self.

He that would find Heaven at his journeys end, must take the way that leads to
it, must have his conversation there, and make Grace his road to Glory. But if
we embrace a dunghill, who pretend to have been brought up in Scarlet; if we
walk in darkness, who claim an inheritance with the Saints in light; the
degeneracy of our actions from our pretensions, will discover us to be
Impostors, and we shall not be allowed of for the Sons of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ, because we neglect to do the works which alone can justify our
relation to him.

St. John representing to us what we already are, and what we may expect to be,
shows us also what an influence that hope ought to have over our conversation;
that now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be,
but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see
him as he is. And every one that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even
as he is pure.

The promises of happiness are made upon this condition, without holiness no
man shall see God. He that would be translated to reign with him in Heaven,
must like Enoch, walk with him on Earth. There will be no participation of his
glory allowed to them who have not a resemblance of his purity. Nay the object
of our hope, the felicity which consists in seeing and enjoying God, is lost to
the impure. His Spiritual perfections cannot be discerned by them, the purity
of his Essence is not liable to their apprehensions, he will seem to them no
better than one of the Gods of the Heathens, whom they represented in their own
figure and similitude, and rendered them subject to the passions and infirmities
that were predominant in themselves.

For as it is impossible for men to raise their notions of any thing above what
they understand; so wicked men have mean conceptions of God's holiness, because
they make an estimate of it by their own, and therefore think him such a one as
themselves. But could they be admitted to the beatifick Vision, and allowed a
clearer sight than the dark enigmatical view they have at present, what
pleasure, what enjoyment would they find in it? alas none: for a Spiritual
object can be no way agreeable to a carnal faculty, nor can the contemplation
of God's purity, be a happiness to those whose delight is in uncleanness.

Wherefore, as the promise of this reward is an incitement to the love of
holiness, so the expectation of it can be satisfactory to none but those who
are pure in heart. And for this reason God makes the perfection of holiness
hereafter, the recompense of its initiation here. So that this will be a matter
very well deserving the employment of our thoughts and serious reflection,
whether we take the right way to obtain the accomplishment of our hope, and lay
aside all those defilements and pollutions which may obstruct it. For this
cleansing our selves from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, is that
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, which alone can entitle us to his great
and precious promises: because nothing that is unclean can have admittance into
his presence, nor shall any impure thing continue in his sight, for he is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, and there is as little fellowship between
Christ and Belial, as communication between light and darkness; the new Heaven
wherein dwells righteousness, can be no proper habitation for the workers of
iniquity. They therefore who look for such a Heaven, must be diligent that they
may be found without spot and blameless, the only qualification for it. 2 Pet.
3.4. It is our duty, if we would entertain a reasonable hope to partake of
God's illustrious purity in Heaven, to make as near approaches to it as we can
on Earth, by purging our selves from sin, and extirpating our vices and
impurities, that so we may become Vessels of Honor, sanctified and meet for
the Master's use. Nor will it suffice us to be transformed into the resemblance
of our Lord only in what relates to his more exalted State, but we must be
assimilated to him in his humiliation and abasement, upon all occasions for it.
If we would receive a Crown of Glory from his hands, we must submit our heads
to be crowned, like his, with thorns; and not startle at his Cross when it is
laid upon our shoulders, but bear the burden as cheerfully for his sake, as he
carried it for ours. We must despise the shame and ignominy of it, for the joy
that is set before us, or else we must not hope to sit down with him at the
right hand of the Throne of God. For if we refuse to endure the hardships to
which his service sometimes exposes us, we have no pretense to its rewards: for
the way to accompany him in his triumphs, is to follow him in his sufferings;
and when we have thus born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the
Image of the Heavenly. St. Paul tells us, that only when tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, that is the certain
hope, which makes not ashamed, Romans 5.3, 4, 5. for it is a well grounded hope,
and shall not be disappointed: but what ever hope we entertain which is not the
consequence of that Climax, which is not begot by those degrees, is the hope of
Hypocrites, which shall perish.

We come now to consider the Fourth thing to be thought on in our Ways, and
that is, safety of them. By which is intended their being such in which we may
acquiesce, and think our selves secure, and be willing to be found in them at
that day when we must pass an examination of them.

We know that we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give an
account of all things done in the Body, whether good or evil. Now doubtless it
imports us to consider whether our ways are such as will endure this Test,
whether we have supplied our selves with Oil, and trimmed our Lamps against the
coming of the Bridegroom; or like the foolish Virgins, in the Parable, lose the
opportunity of going in with him into the Marriage-Chamber, while we are
seeking in vain to buy; and whether we have got on such a Wedding Garment, as
will privilege us to sit at the table with the other guests, or have neglected
to provide one, and for that reason shall be excluded thence, and cast into
outer darkness. St. Paul who had declared of himself that he was touching the
righteousness which is in the Law blameless, Phil. 3.6. yet desires to be found
at the last day in Christ, not having his own righteousness which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ. He was able to challenge
the World, as our Savior did, to convince him of Sin in the breach of the
letter of the Law, and yet durst not rely on his own righteousness, to be found
in it at the day of Accounts.

He knew that God does not see as Man sees, that men are too superficial in
their expositions of the Law, and more in their obedience to it, and would
overlook many failings and infirmities which could not escape the sight and
sentence of that discerning God, whose Eyes are on the Ways of Man, and to
whom, both his inward thoughts and heart, be they never so deep, are open. He
knew that no man, how good, how innocent soever, could escape condemnation in
that Judgment, if he should be called to a strict account for the most
inoffensive day of his whole life, without the Merits and Righteousness of
Jesus Christ to plead for and excuse him.

And if this great Apostle found in his very righteousness, in his whitest
innocence, and most unerring state, something which he durst not stand to, what
confidence shall weaker Christians have in their own performances? and if the
Righteous scarcely be saved, where then shall the Ungodly and the Sinner
appear? What shall become of them, who from their tender infancy have been
employed in the drudgeries of Satan, and bending their course to Hell? whose
unrepented sins shall at that day attend them in their crimson liveries, and be
rendered heinous indeed by all the aggravating circumstances, whereby sin is
capable of being made exceeding sinful? What then shall the Adulterer do, who
durst not venture on his darling sin, without the favorable shelter of the
twylight, or the kind concealment of a disguise; when his deeds of darkness
shall be brought to light, and his nakedness made a spectacle to Men and
Angels? If the morning was to him as the shadow of death, and a discovery bred
strange confusion in him; then what guilty blushes shall overspread his face,
what anxious apprehensions shall terrify his Soul; when he sees his secret
filthiness, which he took such care to hide, made public, and Hell fire
prepared as a suitable punishment for his burning lust? What then shall the
prodigious Swearer do, who bids defiance to Heaven with horrid Oaths and
Blasphemies, and treats his Creator more contemptibly than he would use one of
his inferiors, when he finds that God will not hold him guiltless for taking
his name in vain? In vain indeed, since it redounds so much to the dishonor of
his Maker, so much to the prejudice of his Soul, without any the least
procurement, nay prospect of advantage, even in his temporal interests?

What refuge shall they find, who avowedly declare against all religion,
denying God with the very breath he gave them, and employ that reason by which
he exalted them above all earthly creatures, to represent him lower than the
meanest? Would the Drunkard be found sitting at his Cups, with his
understanding drowned in his liquor, when the woe denounced against them that
are mighty to drink Wine, shall be ready to be put in execution? Would he who
has greedily gained of his neighbor by extortion, be taken with the spoil of
the poor in his house, when the Lord comes to enter into judgment with him?
Would the Perjurer be surprised with a false Oath in his mouth, and the reward
of wickedness in his hands, when a severer curse than that represented by the
flying Roll: Zech. 5.2, 3. shall be sent to consume, not his house, alone, but
himself for ever? Or would the Murderer be caught in the inhumane act, with the
stains of reeking gore upon him, in that day when God shall make inquisition
for blood? Let the Hypocrite, who embraces but the shadow of Religion, or the
Atheist, who derides the substance, say if they think they could consent that
Judgment should overtake the one, imposing upon Heaven, or the other setting it
at defiance; when the one shall be clothed with shame, for insincerity in
professing religion, and the other condemned for impiety in not professing it
at all? when the last Trumpet's sound shall summon the dead to arise to
judgment; when the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth and all
the works that are therein shall be burnt up; would we willingly be found
living in a destructive course of vice and wickedness, and not rather in the
commendable practice of true piety, addressing our selves to Heaven by
continual devotions, and qualifying our selves for it by all holy Conversation
and Godliness?

There is none so brazen-faced and shameless that shall then endure to look
upon his Judge, or be seen by him; no one so hardened in iniquity, that shall
hear his Sentence without horror, without begging the Mountains to fall on him
and the Hills to cover him from the face of him that sits on the throne. For
when the great day of his wrath is come, who shall be able to stand? When our
Sins on one hand, shall stand ready to accuse us, and the Devils wait as
officiously on the other, to torment us; when Hell shall open its dreadful
mouth to swallow us, and an angry Judge condemn us to it; when we shall see the
World in a flame about us, and feel our Consciences burning us within; Ah
whither shall we fly, where it is impossible to be concealed, and intolerable
to appear! where we shall seek refuges as vainly as we spent our lives, and the
punishment of our sins shall be as unalterable as our inclinations to them were.

And if our ways do not prove such, when we have thought upon them, as we may
expect safety in at this great and terrible day, we ought to endeavor quickly
to make them so, that when our Lord shall appear, we may have confidence, and
not be ashamed before him at his coming. These are the things about which we
are to employ our thoughts, in the consideration of our Ways; from which we may
proceed to what must be their business in the Fourth place, viz.

IV. What is the most seasonable time for the exercise of our thoughts in this
employment of thinking upon our Ways.
This is a duty of such weighty consequence and universal obligation, that we
cannot be instant in it out of season. Yet there are some critical times, when
the practice of it is more especially requisite, some times that call aloud on
us to exert it.

First, When our Eyes wait upon the Lord, not, as the Psalmist's did, in
expectation of his showing mercy, but with apprehensions of his executing some
impending Judgments on us. It Is true, they are at present far above out of our
sight, and our circumstances, in respect of most other Nations, discover more
of Heavens indulgence, than its anger, and that God has not so much a
controversy with our Land, as a kindness for it.

While most other people are deafned with the alarms of War, within their
borders, and have the Sword unsheathed among them; we, God be praised, only
hear the rumors of those hostilities by which they perish, and are without the
reach of the Weapons that depopulate their Countries: While the Earth opens its
mouth upon some of them, and swallows thousands as greedily as it did Corah and
his Company; we live in as much safety on it, as if we were preserved for its
replenishment: While the Sea, not brooking its usual bounds, makes violent
encroachments on the Land, and overwhelms multitudes, as it once did Pharaoh
and his Host, we are secure amidst its waves; and like Israel, owe our
protection to them: And while the Heaven brings its auxiliary forces from
above, and the fire of God destroys what these had spared, as it once did
Sodom: We are a brand rescued from that consumption, and live to hear in safety
the dreadful Narrative of these Calamities. But may we not apprehend that the
evil day of our affliction is not so far from us, as it seems, or we would put
it, since it is greatly to be feared that we are as far from a just sense of
the mercy that exempts us from this destruction, as we have been from perishing
by it? or else what means the noise of those crying sins that are generally in
vogue amongst us, and have debauched our conversation. That professed Atheism
in scoffing at Religion, and despising the Wisdom of fearing God, as the
greatest stupidity and foolishness; that close hypocrisy in useing Religion
for a pretense to promote our Interests, or cloak our Villainies? That profane
swearing and blasphemy; that common drunkenness and riot; with a long Catalogue
of other iniquities, which ought not to be once named, and yet are daily
practiced among us? When we think on our unsuitable returns for former
deliverances; our misimprovement of present mercies; our falseness to our
professed end, and declared intentions, our cleaving to our old lusts, and the
general depravation of our manners, with that irresolution and double-minded
wavering, that makes us instable in all our ways: When we lay all these
together, and represent them to our serious thoughts, we may justly fear that
the clouds over us are filled with the Vials of God's wrath, ready to be poured
upon our heads, and that the less visible the approach of his vengeance is, the
more sudden it will be in surprising us, and that the longer it is deferred, it
will fall the heavier.

For where the Harvest is so ripe, it is time to thrust in the Sickle.
Therefore before the decree bring forth, and the fierce anger of the Lord pass
upon us, it will be very opportune to think upon our Ways, and humble our
selves after the example of Ninivie, that the event may be the same to us, and
that God seeing our works, that we turn from our evil ways, may repent of the
evil thought upon, and not execute his vengeance on us, or may hide us in the
day of his anger.

A Second Season that should put us in remembrance of our Ways, is when we feel
the lashes of the Rod and our heavenly father's hand is heavy on us. When his
Judgments are in the earth, it is time for the inhabitants of the World to
learn righteousness. And though we now enjoy at home all the ease and plenty of
a settled Peace, yet we have a destructive War abroad; we have enemies to
encounter, who are not only envious at our prosperity, and would disturb our
quiet, but whose contrivances and attempts are numerous, and restless to
subvert our happy Government, and quench the light of our Israel, our excellent
Religion. Who would enslave our Bodies to an Arbitrary Power, and our
Conscience to an Implicit Faith. And is not this a time to think upon our Ways,
to see that we do not join with our enemies against our selves, and become
accessory to our own destruction.

The Signal and Exemplary Piety of those to whom God, for the consummation of
our happiness, has committed the Supreme Authority over us, has often
summoned us to this duty, by injoyning several public solemn humiliations
through the Land; the necessary work and suitable business of which days, is to
examine and inquire into the errors of our ways, the many transgressions and
enormities of our lives; and thereupon to arraign and pass judgment upon our
selves before the Lord. This was the voice of God's people in times of
suffering and calamity, let us search and try our Ways, and turn to the Lord
our God, Lam. 3.40. When he slew them they sought him, and turned them early,
and enquired after him. When we are involved in trouble, our thoughts are busy
in contrivances to extricate and free our selves, as when Ephraim saw his
sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent
to King Iareb. Hos. 5.13. We leave no human means untried, but alas! in vain we
seek to remove the effect of a continuing Cause, we do not find the source and
true original of our afflictions, for we enquire for them abroad, when we
should look for them at home; and therefore do not take right measures to
remove them. The best and properest remedy is prescribed by the Holy Ghost,
Eccles. 7.14. in the day of adversity consider. that is, we must consider, that
our destruction is of our selves, and that while our spiritual whoredoms are
many and notorious; we enquire in vain for peace, which is not the portion of
the Wicked: And therefore it is no wonder if we are overtaken with a Storm,
while like Jonah, we are flying fom the presence of the Lord. Solomon informs
us, that the best means of obtaining peace from God, is, by pleasing him in our
ways, Prove. 16.7. for then he will make all our Enemies to be at peace with us:
We shall have peace with God, our Neighbors, and our selves; the Wrath of God
shall be appeased, the fierceness of Men restrained, and the clamours of
Conscience silenced. So that in our Personal or National Disquietudes, we must
not fly to the Creature, and seek Redress from external Succors, but turn our
Eyes inward upon our selves, and think upon our ways, that we may discover what
Idol-Lust it is to which we pay our homage, that makes God jealous and
incensed. And when we have observed from whence our Afflictions have their
natural rise, we must then employ our Industry, and look diligently, lest any
root of bitterness spring up to trouble us: And we must take the same course in
our Domestic trials.

If God blows upon our Estates, and wastes them with a secret Curse, and an
invisible Consumption, so that we sow much, and bring in little; we eat, but
have not enough; we drink, but are not filled with drink; and he that earneth
Wages, puts it into a Bag with holes; Then we must think upon our ways; this
is the best Prescription can be given for our Relief: And if Disappointments
blast our Hopes, and frustrate our Expectations: If Relations prove unnatural,
and Friends grow cold; if our Father and Mother forsake us, and our Kinsfolk
stand afar off, we need not fear: But if we commit our ways unto the Lord, he
will bring our desires to pass, and will take us up, if we think upon our ways,
and turn our feet unto his Testimonies.

A third Season that requires this Duty, is, when we implore some special
Blessing, and would obtain some signal Favor at God's hands: the Prophet tells
Israel, That their sins had withholden good things from them, Jer. 5.25. And
among other fatal Consequences of their Iniquities, it was one, that they had
separated between their God and them, Isa. 59.2. Nor is it strange that Sins
that cry aloud should have as much power as a Whisperer, to separate chief
Friends. He that walks in the counsel of the ungodly, estranges himself from
God; he goes like the Prodigal into a far Country, and has reason to expect
that God should pursue him with Vengeance, rather than follow him with Mercies:
for he draws nigh to none, but such as make humble and devout Approaches to
him, unless it is for their Destruction. He that has thrown off his filial
Obedience, cancels the Bonds of Paternal Love: He that renounces his professed
Allegiance, forfeits all Pretenses to Protection; in such cases, we cannot
rationally expect that God should cherish us as Subjects, or feed us with the
Childrens Bread: No, our own Hearts will rather prompt us to conclude he should
punish our Undutifulness and Rebellion. If therefore we would be situate in the
enjoyment of Mercies temporal or spiritual; if we would be the Subjects of
God's Bounty, and so privileged with Blessings of the Right Hand and the left;
the most compendious way of obtaining both, is to think upon our Ways, so as to
turn our Feet unto his Statutes. Would we be honored with the inhabitation of
God's Presence, we must prepare our selves for his Reception; and when our
Hearts are clean within us, he will not take his holy Spirit from us. But we
cannot expect the King of Glory should come into those places, where the Gates,
instead of being lifted up, are shut and made fast against him. Nor will our
Sins only withhold spiritual good Things from us, but temporal Advantages too:
For God declares, that if his People had hearkened unto him, and Israel had
walked in his ways, he would soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned his
hand upon their Adversaries. And if we will so much befriend our selves as to
think upon our ways, and walk in God's, we shall have no Enemies, or at least
conquer those that are so. God will then engage in our Quarrel, to plead our
Cause against them that strive with us, and fight against them that fight
against us; he will array the Celestial Hosts in our defense, and lead the
Stars to battle, to fight against our Enemies. Nor is this the sole Advantage
we shall reap from the faithful discharge of our Duty, in thinking on our Ways,
for we shall quickly find him open the Windows of Heaven, and make his Clouds
drop fatness on our Dwellings, and pour out so large a Blessing, that there
shall not be room enough to receive.

Such was his liberal dealing with Solomon, because he asked the Thing that
pleased him, 2 Chronicles. 1.12. He not only granted his request of Wisdom and
Knowledge for himself, but added Riches and Wealth, and Honor for an Overplus;
and we shall not find his Arm shortened, or his Bounty contracted toward us, if
our Desires are as agreeable to him. In a word, we have been long in
expectation of a blessed Peace, and we have sometimes thought the Dove just
hovering over us with the welcome Olive Branch in her Bill; but our hope has
been deferred, even to the making our Hearts sick, and our pregnant
Expectations have miscarried, because we have put our trust in Chariots and
Horses, and have not remembered the Name of the Lord our God, to call him to our
help against the mighty, to pray for the Peace of our Jerusalem; which is not
to be obtained only by a bare Address to Heaven, but by duly qualifying our
selves to become acceptable Petitioners at the Throne of Grace, that we may
receive a favorable Return of our Supplications. In order to which, we must
cleanse our Ways, be Holy, Just, and Good, that the Works of our Hands, and the
Meditations of our Hearts, may gain acceptance for the Words of our Mouths
before him: for we know the Lord is so far from hearing Sinners that their
Prayers are an abomination to him, Prove. 15.8. and that which should prevail
for Audience, makes him Deaf and Inexorable. And how shall the Wicked sue for
Peace, to whom God has declared there is no peace? How shall they obtain his
Pardon for their Sins, when even the Prayers that beg it, help to increase
their number?

But if any man be a Worshiper of God, and does his Will, him he hears: And
it is only by such means that we can hope to perform our Duty acceptably, to
solicit Heaven with such success, as to procure the Nations Peace, as well as
pray for it; and we should think seriously on our Ways in this particular,
because it is a Duty we owe our Country as our Political Parent, and we cannot
fail therein, without incurring the censure of being of the number of those
foolish Sons, who are a heaviness to their Mother.

And indeed if we make a diligent search after the true Cause why the War is
continued abroad, with the little success that makes us querulous and unquiet;
we may trace it home to our own Doors, and shall find it lodged within our
selves; that our Unthankfulness for the great Advances which God has made
toward the establishment of our Happiness, and our repining at his Goodness to
us, as if we envied our own Felicity, and not any neglect, or want of Care or
Tenderness in those Powers, which God, by his extraordinary Protection has
declared to have been ordained of him, has been the only Obstacle that they
have not as happily finished, as they gloriously began the Restoration of our
Peace.

A fourth Season for thinking on our Ways, is, When we find others generally
inconsiderate, and negligent of theirs.

This is the Tenor of St. Paul's Exhortation to the Ephesians, that they
should walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as wise, redeeming the time,
Ephesians. 5.16. And the Reason he alleges as a cogent Argument, for their
observing his Direction, is this, Because the Days are evil: The Corruption of
the Age in which we live, must be a Motive to our greater Goodness: While
others like Fools are prodigal in the expense of their precious irreparable
Minutes, it must be our Wisdom to redeem the Time, by making the best
Improvement of it; and while they turn Libertines in a loose Latitudinarian
course of Life, we must walk circumspectly, accurately, and exactly, keeping to
the nicest Rules, and aspiring to the most elevated heights of Christianity.
That Advice to Timothy, 2 Ephesians. 4.23. is much of the same nature, with this to
the Ephesians; Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine: And the Apostle
assigns this Reason for his Charge, because the Time will come, that Men will
not endure sound Doctrine, but will turn away their Ears from the Truth, and be
turned to Fables.

The Evil of the Times should incite good Christians to an extraordinary Care
and Diligence, that when they see a decay of Piety, they become most earnest to
encourage and promote its Restoration; that when the Light of Religion is
darkened, they may, like the Worshipers of the Moon, in an Eclipse, be busiest
to defend it from the Fascinations of Impiety that darken it. When the
Preaching of the Gospel, that is the Wisdom of God unto Salvation, seems
Foolishness to Men, and the Messengers of those good Tidings meet an unkind
reception; when there is an Apostasy and falling back from the Truth received:
This Negligence and Irreligion should quicken our Care and Devotion. Then is
the time for Rivers of waters to run down our Eyes, when Men do not keep God's
Law, then is the Season that our Zeal should even consume us, when they forget
his Words.

And when, because of Iniquities thus abounding, the love of many shall grow
cold, then ours must be most fervent, because it is then most requisite, as
greatest Fires are most seasonable in Frosty-weather.

And when we do not follow the multitude to do evil, nor run with other Men
into excess of riot, we are not to be concerned that they resent our
Singularity, and take it ill to want our Company in that Carriere, or speak
Evil of us for refusing it: For as Jewels cast the greatest luster in the dark*
so Religion appears most amiable when surrounded with Impiety, whose deformed
Visage is a Foil to its transcendent Beauty. And they who are blameless and
harmless, who prove themselves the Sons of God, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation: shine as Lights in the world among them. The rarity of
Things is a great enhansement of their Value. Lot had not been so eminent for
his Righteousness in any other City, as in Sodom; where there were not Ten more
of the same rank and level in Righteousness to be found. What an illustrious
Figure did Obadiah make in the Court of Ahab, or the Saints in Nero's House?
and what a singular Character was it of Noch, that he was a perfect man in his
generation, when the World was so corrupt and foul, that the Deluge could
sooner drown than cleanse it? The Memory of Job is sweeter than all the
Aromatic Scents that perfume the Air of his Native Arabia, and the World will
be for ever as loud in celebrating Athanasius, as he once was in opposing it:
Nor had it so much reason to admire its universal Arianism, as this single
Oppugner of that Heresy. And when we find St. Paul advising Timothy to drink
no longer Water: We must admire such Temperance among the Ephesians, who lived
in all the Luxury of Asia, and are said to have banished Hermodorus for being
Sober and Abstemious.

It is a memorable Scripture, which may be to us instead of all Examples, That
when men called the Proud happy, and said, it was in vain for them to serve the
Lord, Mal. 3.16. in that height of Impurity. They that feared the Lord spoke
(...) to another, and a book of remembrance was writ for them. God was so
strangely pleased with their exemplary deference to Religion, that he made it
his own care to have the Names of those pious Men recorded, that he might
select them for his own, in the Day when he made up his Jewels.

Among which the Church of Pergamus would not be in least esteem, since God
himself declares, He knew her works, and that though she dwelt even where
Satan's Seat was, yet she held fast his Name, and had not denied his Faith;
even in those Days wherein Antipas, his faithful Martyr, was slain, Rev. 2.13.
Here was a noble Instance of true Piety, to adhere to God, and assert his Power
in the midst of Satan's own Dominions; to hold fast his Name, though they
parted with their Lives, and not to deny his Faith, though they had before them
in the Martyred Antipas, a dreadful Argument of the danger of professing it.

But though there are these special Times that require our thinking on our
Ways, there is not any time wherein we can be excused from the performance of
our Duty in this Employment; for every present Minute of our lives, is a proper
season for it, and indeed requires it, because we have no assurance of a future
Opportunity. For besides the uncertainty of our enjoying Life, there is as much
of our obtaining Grace, to put it into practice. Wherefore it is the Apostle's
Annotation on the Text, Psalm 95.7. To day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts: That God limiteth a certain Day, and that it does not exceed
the present Time, Heb. 4.7. And indeed it is more necessary every Day than
other, because the more our Days increase, the longer time has been neglected,
and the less remains to be employed about it.

We cannot launch into the Ocean of Thought and Self-reflection, till we are
carried by the motions of the Spirit, and that Wind blows only where it
lists; and if we neglect its favoring Gales, it will shift to another Point,
and leave us becalmed in our inconsideration, till the Tempest of unthought of
Death makes Shipwreck of our Souls, and sinks us into Hell.

Shall we then be, like Antipater, not at leisure, when our Thoughts would
present us with a Treatise of the Way to Happiness? Such procrastination may
expose us to the Fate of Archias the Theban, who neglected reading the Account
that was given into his hand of a Conspiracy against him, till it was put in
execution. What an unreasonable method is it, when God commands us to think
upon our Ways to Day, to suspend our Obedience till Tomorrow; and though that
is a time of our own appointing, it happens, that when we live to that
Tomorrow, our Thoughts, instead of reaching it, are by one Days journey
farther off. And can we hope that after such resistance against the Influence
of God's Holy Spirit, he will put it into our power again to show our spite,
and grieve him with a second refusal?

It is a Maxim, that in War there is no allowance for a second Oversight,
because the first false Step usually puts things beyond recovery; and he that
has once neglected the Opportunity of thinking on his Ways, may never have it
in his power to repeat the Fault. The sense of this made our Savior weep over
Jerusalem, to find that the things belonging to her peace, were hidden from her
Eyes, because she would take no notice of them in the Day when they were laid
before her.

Now having considered the Season for performing this Duty, let us enquire into
the Motives and Inducements that oblige us to it.

And one Reason why we should think upon our Ways, is, because God is a strict
Observer of them. He looks from Heaven, he beholds all the Sons of Men, he
fashioneth their Hearts alike, and considers all their work, Psalm 33.13.15.
And it is not strange that he who fills Heaven and Earth, and is present in all
places, should have a knowledge of all things, since he searches and tryes them
out: Not that God can be thought to enquire or search after any thing, as being
unknown to him, but that he knows all things as perfectly and exactly as it is
possible to do by the strictest scrutiny: there is nothing so minute in us, no
Action so mean and indifferent, such as the motion of our Bodies, our
down-sitting and up-rising, but God takes notice of it; there is not a word in
our Tongues, but he knows it altogether; not a syllable we utter, but he
understands it; nay the thoughts and intentions of our hearts, are so far from
being a secret to him, that he is better acquainted with them, than we are our
selves; he understands them afar off, even before we have conceived them: and
there is a powerful Reason for it, since he has fashioned us behind and
before, he has possessed our reins, and our substance was not hid from him
when we were made in secret; for his Eyes saw it, yet being unperfect in the
Embryo. And it is no wonder that he should be acquainted with the Work of his
own Hands, that he should know us better than we do our selves, since we are a
Wonder to our selves, the Structure of our Bodies, the use and service of every
particular Vessel, with the Artifice and Powers of Sense, are things beyond our
Capacity to explain or understand; much more, if we consider our nobler part
the Soul, by what secret and mysterious ties it is united to the Body, by what
power it actuates and enlivens our mortal Clay; such knowledge is too wonderful
for us, we cannot attain unto it. But with God it is no more than for a
Workman to understand what he has wrought when his Work is finished. It Is in
vain therefore to think of concealing our selves from our Creator, in whose
sight and presence we continually remain; we cannot hide our selves in secret
places where he shall not see us; nor is there any refuge, where we may shun
his Spirit, or avoid his Presence: If we ascend to Heaven, he is there; if we
make our bed in Hell, he is there also. Not that he follows us to either, but
is already there before us. And if neither of these can shelter us, much less
can the utmost parts of the Earth, or the depth of the Sea conceal us: Neither
can the Darkness cover us, for that and the Light to him are both alike: So
that he sees all things where he is, and he is in all places, in several
respects. As first, by his Essence, the extent whereof is no more to be
measured by our notion of place, than the duration of it, which is eternal, by
our account of Time. It was a right Notion which Virgil had of God's essential
Presence, and good Divinity, though misapplied to Jupiter; that all things were
full of him, that his Nature was not to be circumscribed by our narrow
Apprehension, and that he might with as much reason be totally excluded from
all the Universe, as from the least part or angle of it. Nor is he present only
as an idle Spectator among his Creatures, or employed in doing them any injury;
his Goodness is as largely extended as his Presence, and more communicative of
it self. Which will appear, if we consider, Secondly, that he is every where by
his Operation and Influence; that in him we live, and move, and have our being.
And thirdly, That he is every where by his Providence; that care which he
continually manifests for the Welfare and Preservation of his Creatures, in
filling them with plenteousness, which makes the Eyes of all things wait upon
him.

But how little soever we may think our selves concerned in these respects of
God's Omnipresence, there is another which we must consider; and that is, his
being every where, and always present with us as a Witness of our Actions.

He sees our Ways, and counts all our Steps; if we have walked in vanity, or
our Feet have hasted to deceit; if our steps have turned out of the way, and
our hearts rambled after our eyes; he weighs us in an even balance; and there
is no darkness nor shadow of death where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves, or their wicked deeds from him: For he is concerned to have his
Laws obeyed, and to do an impartial Justice, by rewarding all the Observers,
and punishing all the Transgressors of them; and therefore is present with
every one, and strictly notes his Actions, whether good or bad, that he may
know his Integrity, and not fail to give him a suitable Recompense. Now the
Judgment that is made of any Action, depends chiefly upon the Actor's design
and intention in it; the sincerity or insincerity of which, is not easily
discernable by Man; since by subtle Reserves, we keep our little World
incognito, and free from the Discoveries of Men; and therefore it is requisite
that, as we have nothing, but what we have received from God, so we should have
nothing, but what should be liable to his Observation; that we may be punished
and rewarded by him, not according to the appearance, but the reality of our
Deserts, which can never be truly understood by Men, or recompensed by humane
Laws, but can as little escape his fight and animadversion, to whom all Hearts
are open, and from whom no secrets are hid. And since no place of retirement,
can conceal us, no cunning disguise us from his knowledge: and since he is a
Judge to punish, as well as a Witness to remark our Ways; how ought this
Consideration to put a restraint upon us from entertaining wicked thoughts
which are an abomination to him; from uttering idle words; for every one of
which we shall give an account in the Day of Judgment; and from working
Iniquity, which will be our ruin, in so agust and terrible a Presence?

How shall we dare to attempt or design any thing that is ill, if we will give
our selves leave to think, that how private soever we are, how closely soever
secured from the Eyes of Men, yet an avenging God stands by and sees us; a God
who will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing? He must be a
bold Thief who would venture to steal before a Judge; and there are no Men so
prostigate and rude, into whom the Presence of an earthly Prince would not
strike an awe, and deter them from the violation of his Precepts to his Face.
Nay, the company of some grave serious Person, to whom an unwilling deference
is paid, shall restrain the lewdest and profanest Wretches, and confine them
within the bounds of Modesty and good Manners: And shall we have a greater
Dread and Reverence for a temporal and momentany Authority, and respect frail
man merely on the account of his God-like Power and Qualities, more than him
who is the Author of that Power, and the Original of those Perfections? If we
are afraid to have our Fellow Creatures conscious of our Crimes, why do not we
stand more in awe of the most effectual Witness, God himself? Is it because we
think he will keep our Counsel, and never publish or divulge our Secrets? Let
not that unhappy Mistake abuse us, it would be well for us indeed, if the
reason of God's continual Presence with us, were only to be informed of our
Doings, and to satisfy his Curiosity; and that he would be content with making
Remarks upon our Actions, without giving us any farther trouble; but we may be
sure the end of his Presence with us, and Knowledge of us, is, that he may do
us justice, which he does not always defer till the Great Day of General
Accounts, when the secret of all hearts shall be disclosed: For we see often,
the closest Sinners, who have committed their Wickedness with the greatest
secrecy imaginable, and thought themselves secure, because no mortal Eye could
detect or ^^cuse them; have been discovered purely by Providence: And the most
exquisite Hypocrites have in time had their Vizards taken off, by the hand of
an overruling Power; whose Wise Disposal is never more conspicuous, than in
giving such Dissemblers and Triflers their due reward. But if none of these
extraordinary events should happen, yet is not the Vengeance of that Day in
which he will judge the world with righteousness, to be at all revered and
dreaded? Is not that shame and confusion of face, which will then come on all,
especially secret Sinners; over and above the sentence of Eternal Punishment,
to be regarded in the least, when our secret Sins shall be laid as open in the
presence of Angels, Men, and Devils, as they were to God before? When
whatsoever has been done in secret shall be proclaimed upon the housetop; and
we shall find too late, that all our dissimulation served only to expose us the
more at last.

If then we would gain Esteem and Credit in the World; if we would escape
Contempt and Ignominy both here and before the Great Tribunal, if we would
prove our selves true and faithful Servants of our Master; the only way is to
have this Thought always in our Minds, that whether we are allured and tempted
to any Evil by privacy and opportunity; or whether we are moved to any Good,
whether public or private; we are in God's sight, who sees in secret, and will
reward us openly. It is certain we do not neglect to think upon our Ways, on
this account, for want of being reminded of it; for God complains of our little
regard to his taking notice of our Ways, that we consider not in our Hearts,
that he considers all our Wickedness, that they are before his Face, Hos. 7.2.
He cannot but admire that we should forget what he remembers, especially when
our remembering our Sins, is the most effectual means to make him think on them
no more; or that we should never look back to that which is still before his
Face, as if that which will expose us to his Fury, were not worth our concern
or regard. If then our Ways are considered by him, who raised us out of the
Dust, and can with a Frown reduce us to our primitive Nothing: Nay, if he, who
cannot only kill the Body, but cast both Body and Soul into Hellfire
eternally; sets our Misdeeds before him, and our secret Sins in the light of
his Countenance: Sure this is reason enough to prevail with us to stay awhile
and peruse some few Lines in the Volume of our selves, to employ our Thoughts a
little in reflecting on our Ways, lest by the neglect of that, we come to
suffer for them.

A Second Reason for our thinking on our Ways, is, because Satan is a curious
Inquisitor into them: For by his Answer to the Question which God propounded,
Have thou considered my Servant Job? It is very easy to collect, that Job was
no stranger to his Observation: He could familiarly recount what Disbursements
the Bounty of Heaven had made in favor of him, and repeat the whole Catalogue
of the Mercies he had received; how he was incircled in the Arms of Providence,
and seated in a Confluence of Enjoyments. For compassing the Earth, and going
to and fro in it, is his perpetual business, and the design of all his Travel
is to make Discoveries of what he may devour. Now we know he is our professed
Adversary, there is an irreconcilable Enmity between the Seed of the Woman and
the Serpent, which puts him upon unwearied undertakings to destroy us: For as
he delights in Sin, because it is repugnant to God's Holiness, and abominable
in his sight; so he hates us on God's account, because we bear his Image and
resemblance, which is not so wholly defaced in Man as in himself. It Is his
design therefore to destroy the least Representation of that Image, where he
finds it; and this he endeavors, first as a Tempter, to entice us to commit
Wickedness, and then as an Informer to betray us; for it is his whole business
to render us as odious to God, as he has made himself. We have an Instance of
this in Job; for though God was pleased to declare the Satisfaction he had
concerning the Vprightness and Perfection of that holy Man, yet the Devil's
Malice and Impudence was so great, that he pretended to know more of him, than
God himself; and he undertook to discover an Evil in him, which was undeserved
by his All-seeing Eye. So that to execute and indulge his Malice in our Ruin,
he is never idle, but still enquiring into our ways, to find how he may
endanger us: And he meets no difficulty in the undertaking, the Temperament,
Composure, and Natural Disposition of our Bodies, lie more open to his View,
than to the Knowledge of the most exquisite Physician; he can interpret the
silent language of a Blush, and shrewdly guess at the true Original of a Sigh;
and the Source of our Tears, though to others, as undiscoverable as the Head of
Nile, is easily found out by him. By the disturbances of our Sleep, and those
various Agitations whereby we do almost render our Dreams intelligible, he is
able to make very near Conjectures, by what Methods he may best ensnare us, and
lays those Baits before us, which he finds most agreeable to our Appetites. He
is a critical Overseer of our Performances, and either endeavors to vitiate
and corrupt, whatever he sees good, or accuses us to our selves and Heaven, for
whatever he finds amiss. If he beholds Fervency and Devotion in our Prayers, he
fills us with wandering Thoughts to cool and interrupt it; if he perceives in us
a religious Observance of God's Laws, and a conscientious Diligence in the
performance of our Christian Duty, he persuades us to believe that it is
needless, as he once did our first Parents; and that though we remit of the
exactness of our Obedience, we shall not surely die; and then if he prevails
upon upon us to eat any forbidden Fruit, to transgress the Commandments of our
God, he presently gives us the shameful Prospect of our Nakedness, possesses us
with Dread and Trembling, and makes us hide our selves from the Presence of the
Almighty. Or if for awhile he lets us please our selves in a belief, that we
are become as Gods, when indeed we are nearest to the state of Devils; yet, he
will at some time set our Sins before us, perhaps when we are weary of his
bondage, and begin to look toward Heaven, to make us despair of reception
there; or, if not when we would part with him, yet when we are taking a farewell
of the World; Then he, who before sewed Pillows to our Elbows, will stuff our
Deathbeds full of Thorns, and fill our Souls with the torturing recollection
of our Wickedness, making us to remember our own evil ways, and our doings that
were not good; so that we shall loath our selves in our own sight, for our
Iniquities, and for our Abominations. Our abuse of God's Mercies, our neglect
of holy Duties, our deafness to the Overtures of Grace, our disregard of
Threatenings, our incorrigibleness under Judgments, our profuse expense of Time,
our breach of Vows and Resolutions of Amendment, and our Wickedness and
Rebellion of every kind, will be the frightful Topics to furnish him with
Arguments to make us conclude against our selves, that we are lost for ever,
and that our Life and Hope is perished from the Lord.

And if he shall not thus be able to affright and drive us into Despair, or rob
us of our Spiritual Consolations; yet the sense and satisfaction of them will
be much lessened and allayed. Nor can we doubt the extent of this our
Adversary's Knowledge, to be thus vast, or his employing i^ to this pernicious
end; if we consider his Nature, that he is a Spirit in respect of his Essence,
and by the Sublimity of that, arrives at his extraordinary Knowledge, besides
the acquired Experience of long Practice. So that by his Power we find that he
is great, and of the Rank of the first Creatures: But he is an evil Spirit too,
fallen from the highest Degree of Eminency, to the lowest Abyss of Misery, and
fraught with an inveterate Malice against the Glory of his Creator, which he
can vent no otherwise, but in the ruin of his most endeared Creature Man, that
so he may affront God in his Representative. And if it seems strange to us that
the Eye which runs through the whole Earth, and surveys in an instant the
largest extent of all Things, should require, or allow the help of an Informer;
we shall find it designed for our Advantage; that the fear of such an Enemy,
might make us the more cautious of our Ways; since it is requisite for our
safety, to have Enemies to upbraid, as well as Friends to instruct us: And if
we are wise, we shall make an Advantage of the Devil's Enmity; and the roaring
of this Lion should make us learn of the Beasts of the Forest, to tremble and
be afraid to commit any thing, that will give him opportunity to increase his
noise against us, or get us into his power.

A Third Reason why we should think upon our Ways, is, because Wicked-men take
notice of them.

The Psalmist tells us, that the wicked watches, (the Latin Translation is,
considers) the righteous, Psalm 37.32. for Wicked-men have a near resemblance
of their Father the Devil; and, as if they were fond of proving themselves his
Sons, are exact Imitators of his Works: For as the Devil goes about as a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; so the wicked lies in wait secretly
as a Lion in his Den, to catch the poor. They watch for our Souls, not as our
Spiritual Teachers are said to do, but as God threatens Israel he will do, for
evil, and not for good, Jer. 44.27. with the same diligence, and no less ill
design, that made the Prophet complain, his familiars watched for his halting,
Jer. 20.10. for the Wicked are delighted at the Failings of the Just, and
pleased to find occasion of sharpening their Reproaches against them. Which
made David pray, to have his Eyes enlightened, that he might not sleep the sleep
of death, lest his Enemies should say, they had prevailed against him, and
those that troubled him should rejoice when he was moved, Psalm 13.3, 4. Nay,
such is their Malice, that where they have no real Objection, they will invent
Pretenses, and make a way to blast us where they do not find one, according to
their dealing with the Prophet, who cried, Report, and we will report it. They
hope that a bold Calumny will gain belief, or if it cannot ruin the Credit of
good Men in the World, yet it may at least bring their Innocence into
suspicion. Nor is this all, their Hatred has a farther aim; for the Reproaches
that seem directed against the persons of the Righteous, are as well designed
against their Profession, and Religion is wounded through the sides of its
Adherents.

When the Holy Ghost by his miraculous Descent on the Apostles, inspired them
with the Gift of various Tongues, to speak the wonderful things of God: How
ready were the Jews to impute it to excess of Wine and Drunkenness? And even
the spotless irreproachable Life of the Holy Jesus, that immaculate Lamb of
God, could not escape the evil Eye of the Pharisees, who observed and watched
him, not to take example by him, but to traduce and vilify him, to find an
occasion of bringing an Accusation against him, and mis-representing him to the
World. For the Righteous are not of the World, and therefore are hated in it;
and the ground of this hatred which makes the Wicked lie in wait for them, is,
because they are not for their turn, but directly contrary to the ir doings,
they upbraid them with their offending of the law, and object to their infamy,
the Transgressions of their Education, Wisd. 2.13. As the Piety of a good Man's
life, has no communication with the Wickedness of the Ungodly's Ways; so it is
a silent Reproof of their Irregularities and ill Conduct, and they hate the
Light of those holy Performances which discovers the Impurity of theirs:
Wherefore they watch his Goings, that if he slips, they may reproach him with
it, in hope that the aggravating his errors, will help to extenuate their own.

And while as the Psalmist speaks, They set their mouth against the Heavens,
Psalm 73.9. We cannot wonder their Tongue should walk through the Earth, to
defame the Candidates of Heaven. But the less occasion they have for their
Malice, the less trouble it will give us; and while their Endeavors are
employed to blacken and expose us, let ours be as busy to defeat and
disappoint them. Thus we shall tire their Spite, put their Ignorance to
silence, and make them at last ashamed, having no evil thing to say against us.
But if we find that we have given occasion for their Accusations, we have the
greater reason to think upon our Ways, and look into our selves, that we may
remove the Cause of an Effect so intolerable to us. And thus our Enemies may
be-friend us; nay Malice it self be as advantageous as the greatest Kindness,
and by upbraiding us with our Errors, prevail with us to correct them sooner
than perhaps we would at the instance of our most endeared Associates. As
Readiness design to ruin David, by putting him upon dangerous Enterprises, made
him more beloved in Israel, and his Name precious through the Kingdom: So we
shall be exalted and illustrated in the Piety and Eminency of our Conversation,
by the Endeavors of Wicked-men to lessen and eclipse us; their nicer
Observation will discover to us those Blemishes in our selves, which have at
any time escaped our own Inspection; and while they wait for us to destroy us,
they will send us to consider God's Testimonies.

A Fourth Reason for our thinking upon our Ways, is, because there will come a
time when we shall heartily repent the neglect of it, and wish our Thoughts had
been so employed. These things thou did (says God to the Wicked) Psalm
50.21. and I kept silence, but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order
before thee. God's silence will not last for ever, there will be a time for him
to speak and to reprove, when he shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his
Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips shall slay the Wicked: for though he be
a righteous Judge, strong and patient, a God that will not always be chiding;
yet to be provoked every day, to be continually made to serve with our sins,
and wearied with our iniquities, will turn his Patience into Wrath and
Indignation; then he shall arise as one out of sleep, and as a Giant refreshed
with Wine: then he shall bring Distress and Anguish upon us, and we shall eat
the fruit of our own ways, and be filled with our own devices. Will it not be a
terrifying Scene, when God opens the black Catalogue of our Sins before our
Eyes, and calls it over in our hearing; when he taxes us with Sins of Omission
and of Commission, with secret and with open Perpetrations; with Sins of
Ignorance and Inadvertency, and with wilful and deliberate Transgressions? Then
we shall be severely punished for the evil of our Ways, because we would not
think upon them time enough to amend them.

Now the neglect of employing our thoughts in the consideration of our Ways,
will be insupportable to us upon several accounts.

First, When we think upon the happy Condition of those who faithfully
performed this Duty, and had their Sins ever before them, to reform them. Our
Savior tells the Jews, that there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing
of teeth among them, when they shall see Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and be themselves thrust out, St. Luke
13.28. What an aggravation of our Misery will it be to see some who have been
our Fellow-Citizens on Earth, made Denizons of the New Jerusalem, while we are
excluded the Society? How shall we afflict our selves, when we see some of our
own Family received into the Household of God, while we are not allowed to tarry
in his sight? what Heat will it add to the unquenchable Flames wherein we burn,
to look on some who have been our Familiars and Intimates, invited into endless
Joys, while a sad separation, as distant and remote as Hell from Heaven, is
made between us, and we shall be sentenced to depart into everlasting Fire?
shall not the Sorrows of our Hearts be enlarged, as the Rich-man's were in
Hell, to see Lazarus comforted, while he was tormented; and happy in Abraham's
Bosom, while he was miserable in the Flames? Then we shall condemn and bewail
our Folly and Negligence, that we did not think upon our Ways, nor see them in
the valley of Tears, but went on in the way of Sinners, which though it was
made plain with Stones, had the Pit of Hell at the end thereof.

When we hear the Hymns and Allelujahs, the Praises and Acclamations of Angels
and Saints, and Spirits of just Men made perfect, with which Heaven resounds,
we shall lament and howl, as loud as they rejoice, and add Horror to the
Regions of Darkness, by our Yellings. When we consider what a Glorious Liberty,
what a Harmonious Quiet, what a Full Felicity the Souls of the Blessed enjoy; and
that it was once within our Option, and might have been our Portion too; when
we see what great Things the Lord has done for them who thought upon their
ways; who set them up Way-marks, and set their Hearts toward the highway to
Heaven: And with what Rigours he pursues those who did not hearken to that
voice which cried to them, stand in awe, and sin not, commune with your own
hearts: Ask for the old way, where is the good way, and walk therein, and you
shall find rest for your Souls: We shall then be exceeding sorry that we did
not walk therein, that we did not hearken to our God.

Secondly, When we call to remembrance for what it was that we forfeited our
Interest in Heaven, we shall repent that we did not think upon our imprudent
Courses, to turn our feet from every evil way. When we perceive with what
infinite Treasures we have parted, how we have sold an Inheritance unspeakably
great, and yet have nothing in our hands to show. Will not our Affliction be
suited to our Loss? The happy State of our first Parents is a Topic that
affords us Arguments to condemn their Folly in forfeiting their Interests; that
being great in the Command of Eden, and greater in their Innocence; so that
they were as free from the Inclination to, as the Commission of an Ill, their
Minds like their Dwelling, did abound with variety of Delight, and wanted
nothing to render their Joys equal to those of Paradise; yet they would, for
the inconsiderable satisfaction of Tasting the Fruit of one forbidden Tree, not
only divest themselves of the Privilege they enjoyed, of using whatever else
was in the Garden, but throw themselves out of that happy Seat, and the Favor
of their God. And yet we daily split upon the same Rock, for want of thinking
on our Ways.

But when, like them, we see our Nakedness, when we find the specious
appearances of Sin prove a loathsome Deformity to affright us; when we see our
Riches have found their Wings, our Pleasures disappear, our Honors drop away;
when we find that we have made Esau's Bargain, and sold our Birthright for a
morsel of Meat, and shall, like him, find no place for Repentance, though we
seek it carefully with Tears: Then we shall nauseate and abhor the Vanities
that seduced and alienated our Affections from the Ioys above, and made us
mispend our time, and wander out of our way, in pursuing Shadows, when we
should have been employed in searching for the Substance; When we consider that
we have parted with the Pearl of price for Trifles, and with a Kingdom, and
that of Glory too, for a Dungeon, shall we not take up the Prophet's Wish, That
our Heads were Waters, and our Eyes so well supplied with Tears, that we might
weep Day and Night for the Ruin of our Souls. But alas! we need not wish what
will be a main part of our punishment.

When we are condemned to the Regions of Misery and Horror, what showry Eyes,
and mournful Looks shall we cast back upon the amiable Dwellings of the Lord of
Hosts; the glorious Mansions of the Righteous, which we never would believe
were worth our seeking, till they were past our finding, and then perceived too
late, they were as much above our Admiration, as our Reach? Had we divested our
selves of that Light with which the Saints are clothed, for Nakedness or a suit
of Fig Leaves only, even that had been a matchless Folly, an unparalled
Madness; but to be clothed with Shame and Confusion, and vested with scorching
Flames besides: to part with all the Joys of Heaven for Stripes; which, like
Ioseph's Irons, will enter into our Souls, and whose Smart will continue to
Eternity: To assign a Name to this, or to express it fully, is above the reach
of Invention, and beyond the power of Eloquence.

But thirdly, When to the Thoughts of our lost Happiness, we shall add the
dismal consideration, that it can never be recovered; when we see no prospect
of a Restoration, no offer of any terms for Heaven; but find our selves, nay
our very Hopes shut out, by the interposition of an unpass^ble Gulf; when we
feel our Condition so extremely miserable, that it is imposs^ble to increase our
Sufferings, and yet as impossible to lessen them: This will make us roar for
the very disquiet of our Souls. The sense of this will corrode our Vitals, and
prove the never-dying Worm to gnaw and torture us eternally. Could we, amidst
these Terrors, find any ground to hope in the day of evil, or foresee any
likelihood of an end to these our Labors, though never so remote; this would
alleviate the pain and misery of them: Or were we condemned to any Flames but
those that are unquenchable, confined to any Prison but a Hell, whence there is
no redemption; if our Access to Heaven was prohibited by any other
Intrenchments than that of Impossibility; or could we be freed from the worst
of all the Fiends that torture us, Despair: This would prove a Relaxation of
our Sufferings, and give us ease amidst our Torments; would make us endure
Hellfire, with Scevola's Resolution, and bear its Violence with an Apathy
above the Precepts of the Stoics. But Damnation has no such kind allay to
mitigate its Rigor, and render it less formidable; there is no such
comfortable glimpse of Light arises in the Regions of eternal Darkness. When we
are once consigned to this wretched state, there will be no deliverance from
it; though we die daily in it, we shall never die so happily, as to come to a
period of our Sufferings; and what expectation can we cherish of an end of
other things, where even Death it self becomes immortal?

And then fourthly, If such infinite Misery can receive an addition, it will be
one, that we shall live unpitied in it. Heaven that only can relieve us, will
be deaf to all our Cries, and that Compassion that does never fail, will not
however extend it self to us. There will be no sounding of God's Bowels, or of
his Mercies toward us: And to which of the Saints shall we turn? Abraham will
be ignorant of us, and Israel will not acknowledge us. Not all the rich
Glutton's Oratory could move the Father of the Faithful to a Sense or
Commiseration of his Torments, all his Entreaties could not prevail for a drop
of water to cool his Tongue, and allay the intolerable Heat that forced it to
complain, and yet rendered it unable; for how could he expect to find
Compassion, who himself had none? Or was it not just, that for want of showing
Mercy, he should have Judgment without Mercy? Had he thought upon his Ways in
time, he would not have stopped his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, nor denied his
Crumbs to Lazarus, because he would have foreseen the fatal Consequence of such
an Uncharitableness, the Punishment it brought upon him, that he should also
cry, and not be heard.

Our Friends, who in this vale of misery, sympathize in all our Sorrows, who
pine when we are sick, languish when we are weak, and weep when we are
afflicted; who feel our Sufferings, and resent our Sorrows as their own, will
put off all that Tenderness in the other World, as they do Mortality, they will
quit their Affection with their Flesh, in which alone we are related; and
retain no Concern, no Pity for us in that state where we shall want it most.

Even the fond Mother, by whose Indulgence God is sometimes pleased to
represent his Love to Men, and for whom he supposes it almost impossible to
forget her Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb;
She may, nay she will there forget him. Not the bearing on her Knees, or the
Suckling at her Breast, will make her Bowels yearn, or her Eyes shed one kind
Tear to quench the Fire that torments her miserable offspring.

For if our Friends are happier than we, and have their Residence in Heaven,
there all Tears are wiped away, and neither sorrow nor crying shall be heard.
It is inconsistent with the Felicity of that Place to admit of any diminution,
and though the Conversion of one Sinner, makes an addition to the joy, as well
as to the number of the blessed; the damnation of ten thousand will not lessen
it.

And if our Friends are of that number, and condemned to the same deplorable
circumstances with us; they will be so employed in bewailing their own Misery,
that they cannot be at leisure to consider ours. Nay, perhaps our sharing in
their Torments, may rather lessen than increase them; for they will have ill
nature enough to be pleased at the Tortures we endure, as well as at their
having Fellow Sufferers. At least it is sure the Saints in Heaven shall rejoice
at our Destruction, when it comes as a whirlwind, and laugh at our Distress
and Anguish; and when they see us rooted out of the land of the living, shall
mock and say, Lo, these are the men that made not God their strength, but
strengthened themselves in wickedness: These are the Men that would not think
upon their Ways, to refrain their Feet from every evil way, and to guide them
into the way of peace. Thus shall they triumph at the Glorification of Divine
Justice, though in the ruin of their nearest Relations, and praise God for ever,
because it is his doing. And can we think upon these doleful Consequences of
our Inconsiderateness, and not be frighted into a speedy Examination of our
Ways? What though when we rake the Dunghill, we find nothing but Nastiness and
Stench; when we draw the Scene, we discover nothing but Guilt and Horror; is
it not better to endure this for awhile by choice, than to be condemned to it
for ever, and suffer it by compulsion? Is it not more eligible to bestow a
little time in this Employment, with some prospect of Advantage, than to be
forced to it always, with as little hope of mending our Condition, as of
reforming the Ways that brought us to it?

This Work is now our Duty, and upon the right performance of it, will become
our Advantage too, and prove its own Reward: but the neglect of it will be
severely punished, in the ruin that will infallibly attend it; and surely the
not thinking at all upon our Ways, must be very destructive, since we may be
deceived, and make a wrong Estimate of them, when they do employ our Thoughts.

Which is a Fifth Motive to induce us to make the Inspection of our Ways the
great Business and Employment of our Thoughts.

Solomon, who gave his Heart to seek and search out by Wisdom, concerning all
things that are done under Heaven, discovered in his Survey, a Way that seems
right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove. 14.12. So
that we may be in a way of which we may entertain a good Opinion, and sing a
Requiem to our Souls, through a confidence of our Security therein; but upon
better search, and more strict examination, we shall find it dangerous and
destructive: the way to Hell, and the descent to the Chambers of Death. Nay,
it is our Misfortune, that as there are many means to take us from the World,
and but one to bring us into it; so there are several Ways to deprive us of
Eternal Life, and but one that can conduct us to it: And if we consult the
Proverbs, we shall find that every way of a man is right in his own Eyes, Prove.
21.2. The Adulterer thinks his stolen waters sweet, and his bread eaten in
secret pleasant, and knows not that the dead are there, and that the guests of
that Vice are in the depths of Hell. The Libertine rejoices in his youth, and
walks in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes, and considers
not, that for all these things God will bring him into judgment. The rich man's
wealth is his strong City, and as an high Wall in his own conceit, and he is
wise in his own eyes, in preparing thus for his security: But alas, his riches
will not profit him in the day of wrath, and he that trusts in them shall fall.
And these are not the only Persons under a mistake; there is a just man too
that perishes in his righteousness. But though Men may be deceived, who too
often look no further than the outside and appearances of things, God who
pondereth the Heart, discerns their Error: He knows we are partial Judges of
our own Transactions, and may be bribed and corrupted to pass a favorable
Sentence in an ill Cause wherein our selves are interested: He sees those
Failings and Corruptions in us, which we overlook, and does not so well
approve, is not so fond of us, as we conceit. So that, as nothing is more
common and familiar than this Cousenage of our selves, so nothing is more
dangerous; especially when the mistake lies in the Opinion of our Ways.

What a dismal thing is it for us to be journeying to Ruin and eternal Misery,
and yet go cheerfully on, in a belief that we are still at a greater distance
from it; to conclude our selves just at the Gate of Heaven, and find at last
that we are upon the Confines of Hell. We have in holy Writ, many deplorable
Instances of Men pleasing themselves in their conceited Safety, when their
Danger was imminent; When marrying and giving in marriage, was the Business of
the World in the days of Noah; as if by the increase of their Posterity, they
designed it should remain for ever, to inherit their Possessions to Eternity;
who expected that they should be swept away by a sudden Deluge, and their
places know them no more?

When the Sun was risen upon the Earth in the day of Sodom's Overthrow, who
could have believed that he was then to take his Farewell of that City, that
those were the last Smiles his Beams should cast upon it, and that its Glory
should decline before his setting? There was nothing discernable in the Face of
the Sky, from whence they could presage the approaching Storm. Which made Lot's
Sons-in-law, as much trifle with the Predictions of their Father, as they
thought he did with their belief; they could not fear that a Day introduced
with such a glorious Prologue, and whose first Scene opened so delightfully,
should have such a Tragical Catastrophe. But while they and their
Fellow-Citizens, were pleasing themselves, as David did in his Prosperity, with
the fancy of an unalterable Establishment, and thinking on nothing but Peace
and Safety, behold a sudden Destruction came upon them, when it was not in
their power to escape, and too late they bewailed the Punishment, who made a
mock at the Sin that had occasioned it. Thus unhappily do Men, like the
effeminate Agag, flatter themselves with an Opinion, that the bitterness of
Death is past, when it is just at hand; and with the rich Fool in the Gospel,
promise themselves many Days, when they have not a Night to live. These are
Tragical Relations, but we may find a more Melancholy Account of Persons
deceived in a Concern more considerable than this transitory Life; even in the
important matter of Salvation and Life eternal. Of this number were the foolish
Virgins, St. Matthew. 25.11. they expected Entrance into Heaven, and doubtless
had fairer Pleas for it, than many of us can make.

They had Lamps, which argued some Light and Heat in their Conversation; they
accompanied the Wise with the same Design of meeting Christ, which implied
their being of the Communion of Saints on Earth; and therefore, came very
confident of Admission into that in Heaven, and cried, Lord, open to us, as if
they were injured to be kept out at all, and that the Gate must immediately fly
open on the notice of their Arrival. But they found themselves mistaken, the
Bridegroom disowned them, and declared, He knew them not. Thus were they
disappointed of their Hope in respect of there Final Estate and Station, and
that through a confident Opinion of their Safety. For what Seneca says of
Wisdom, is as true of Happiness, it would be easily attainable, if Men did not
hinder their enquiry after it, by thinking it their own already; for they who
are thus whole in their own Opinions, will never be persuaded that they have
need of a Physician, nor consult his Skill, till they are past its help. Our
blessed Lord tells us of many who in the last Day, will come to him for
Entrance into his Kingdom, and allege that they have prophesied in his Name,
and in his Name cast out Devils, and in his Name done many wonderful works: But
all the return they shall receive, will be this profession, I never knew you,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity. With what Confusion can we think these
Men will be seized, to find themselves so deceived in respect of their eternal
Welfare; That neither the Excellency of their Preaching to others shall secure
themselves from being cast away: Nor their Prophetic foresight of Events,
prevent their impending Ruin; nor their working Miracles, help to effect their
own Salvation; nor their casting out Devils, tend to dispossess Satan of his
Interest in their Souls? That no regard shall be had to their exquisite Parts,
their enlightened Apprehensions, profound Judgments, and Eminency in the World:
But that notwithstanding these Pretensions, and their being no Strangers to the
Name of Christ; when they come to plead their Acquaintance, and to knock at
Heaven, they shall be sent away ashamed, and not prevail to have the Claim they
judged so plausible, admitted? What then may we think will become of us, who
have no such Arguments in our behalf, if Men of these Qualifications can
miscarry? Should not we think all the Time and Consideration we are Masters of,
too little to employ in thinking on our Ways; and that our most deliberate
Thoughts would be too cursory and transient, as well as all our Days too short
and fugitive, for the performance of a Duty that will everlastingly concern us?
Is it not then time that we should with all Seriousness apply our selves to
reduce these Rules to practice, to think judiciously upon our Ways; and while
we are employed in working out our Salvation, by this means, to do it with fear
and trembling, lest we should take wrong measures in it; and by mistaking the
means, fail of obtaining the end: and while we think our ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all our paths are peace, go on unapprehensive of the Danger
and Destruction to which they tend?

And now, having gone over the Motives obliging us to the Performance of this
Duty; that no Age may think it self excused from this Employment, in which the
young and the old are equally concerned; let the following Section be a
Remembrancer to both.

The Psalmist implies a necessity for a young man to cleanse his way, in
prescribing, his taking heed thereto, as the means and best Cathartick, Psalm
119.9.

And indeed this is a Work very suitable to their Age, because it ought to be
begun betimes. As therefore they are to remember their Creator, so they must
think on the Correspondency of their Ways to his Commands, in the days of their
youth, when the Reflection will be most easily made, as having but a little
time to look back upon, a short History to recollect; and when it will be most
advantageous too, in an early precaution, directed to prevent their wandering in
the Journey which they have before them. But perhaps this may not relish with
those whose active Blood finds a free Circulation in their Veins, whose quick
and lively Spirits labor under no Oppression, and therefore think themselvas
in an Age fitter for Action, than Deliberation; and that it is a properer Season
to crown their Heads with Rose-buds, than to trouble them with Cares, and
believe they have Time enough in store to allow many Days to Mirth and Youthful
lusts, and yet leave a sufficient Space for being Serious and Considerate.
These think they are early at their Duty, if they settle their Thoughts when
their Blood begins to stagnate, and become grave and serious, when they grow
dull and heavy, and that the fittest Season for thinking on their Ways, will be
when Age has rendered them unfit for any but such Melancholy Entertainment. But
alas, what Security can they give themselves of arriving at that Time? What
Office is there to Assure their Lives to such a Period? Is Youth any more proof
against Mortality than Age? Nay, is it not rather more subject to it? We know
Flowers are with greater ease nipt in the Bud, and broken from their tender
Stalks; than when they are full blown, and an addition to their Age, has
withal increased their strength. And every Charnel-house will present us with
as many Skulls, that still retain their Hair and Teeth, as that had lost those
Ornaments, before they saw Corruption. For there are those who die in their
full strength, or as it is in the Hebrew, in the strength of their perfection;
with their Breasts full of Milk, and their Bones moistened with Marrow, as well
as those who go sapless to the Grave, and are Skeletons before they die. The
Life of Man hangs upon very slender Filaments, and a thousand Accidents, which
no Wisdom can foresee, no Power prevent, are always breaking them. He that
rejoices in his Youth, may like Diagoras, be stifled with his Laughter: Nay,
the Passions he indulges may be mortal to him. Fear may kill him, as it did
Herrennus. Grief may strangle him, as it did Plautinus, and he may like Sylla,
vomit out his Blood and Soul together, in a Transport of immoderate Anger.

Nay Death armed with no other Weapon, than a Grape-stone, the Bone of a Fish,
a Fly, a Hair, or his own Spittle; may take him from the World before he has
had any Enjoyment of it. So that there is nothing so feeble and contemptible,
but may be as fatal to him, as if the Poles should crack, and bury him in the
Ruins of the Universe.

But if he escapes these Casualties, he has an Enemy within, much more
pernicious to him; the Constitution of his Body, which consists of such
Materials as are always jarring and at variance among themselves; and in this,
as in all other civil Discords, which ever Faction gets the better and becomes
predominant, the whole Republic is a Sufferer, and the Conqueror, like
Sampson pulling down the Philistine's Palace, is himself involved in the
general Destruction.

It Is therefore a necessary Caution, that we should not boast our selves of
Tomorrow, because we know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1.

We know not with what Births the Womb of Time may be pregnant, or of what
Events a few Hours may be delivered. And when we are not secure of a Day, nay
cannot command an Hour, or arrest a Minute to wait for us; shall we promise to
our selves length of Days, and increase of Years, even to old Age?

If they who depend upon Tomorrow for the improvement of their Worldly
Fortune, fall under reproof, Iam. 4.13. What rebuke do they deserve, who defer
to employ themselves in thinking on their Ways, to a remoter Day, and talk as
confidently of futurity, as if it were at their disposal? Whereas they ought to
say, If the Lord will, we shall live and think upon our Ways. For Faith
unfeigned and sincere Repentance are not Things that grow within their own
Enclosures, they are not their Menials, that they should be so well commanded
to go and come at a word, like the Centurion's Soldiers. These are part of
God's Prerogative, to dispose of as he pleases, and Men cannot determine the
time wherein they will believe and repent, and withal be sure to find
acceptance. Can we think it reasonable that we should consume the Blossom of
our Days in the Drudgeries of Sin and Satan, and reserve our withered decrepit
Age for the Service of God, or that he will be contented with it? Shall
theStrength of our Parts and Spirits, the best of our Time and Substance be
spent in riotous living, and God only be thought on, when we can sin no more?
When our Liberty is restrained by some bodily Distemper, and our Power
suspended by some enfeebling Languishment? When the whole course of our Lives
has been a Carriere to Hell, will the short Reflection which our remnant of
Time will give us leave to make, suffice to think effectually on our Ways, and
exercise our selves aright in a Duty which we have so rarely practiced? Habits
are the source of Humane Actions, and a habit, the Schoolmen tells us, cannot
be contracted, but by repeated Acts, and there is only one Help and Succor
against a vicious Practice, and that is the contrary Custom; and then what will
become of him who has not time for second Thoughts, and a review of his past
Life? If any one shall object the Case of the penitent Thief; there are Answers
as obvious as the Instance which will supersede the trouble of reciting them;
and we may as well urge the necessity of being in his Circumstances, as to the
manner of his Death; as argue for the Acceptance of a late Penitent from the
time of his Conversion.

It will be more beneficial to consider how many Souls have miscarried upon
this account, than to trust to it.

While they have adjourned the Session of their Thoughts for examining their
Ways, Death has often interposed, and called them to another Inquiry, before
they had begun their own: While they have hovered in suspense between their
Resolves and the execution of them; like St. Paul in his straight between Life
and Death, the fatal Night wherein no man can work, has put a stop to their
Proceedings, and shut them up in endless Darkness. And thus they have become
like one who falls hastily to his Meat, with design to crave a Blessing after
he is filled, but is choked with the first Morsel, for a punishment of his
neglect. But we must not think to deal with our Lives, at Tully did with his
Orations, and leave that part to the last, which should first employ our
Thoughts, for it will be with different success; and though he received
Applause, we shall incur a Check. Let it then be our Wisdom, to know in our
present day, the things belonging to our peace, lest they be hidden from our
Eyes before the next. Let us think upon our Ways while we are young, and we
shall have the less to do when we are old. And all such young Men who shall
conscionably set about the practice of this great and necessary Duty, shall
find the Word of God declaring his Approbation of their Doings; and that their
being thus sober minded, in thinking early on their ways, will be more their
Glory, than all their Strength and Vigor.

But if this Employment is so much the Business and the Ornament of Youth, it
is more requisite and becoming in Age. If the uncertainty of living should
hasten young Men to perform it; the certainty of dying soon, should oblige the
old not to defer it. Their having been long Travelers in the way of all the
Earth, gives them reason to believe they are near their Journeys end. The
untiling of the Roofs, the decay of the Windows, the failure of the Pillars,
and the general impairing of the Fabrics of their Bodies, are sad Prognostics
of their speedy fall; and sure it will be high time to provide other
Habitations for their Souls against their earthly Tabernacles are dissolved;
high time to think in what Way they are going, because if not quickly done,
they will be past the advantage of it, and lose the Opportunity of reforming
their Error, if they find they have gone wrong.

Besides, their Parts have been long upon the Theater of this World, and they
have more to think upon, than those who made their Exit sooner, which makes it
a greater Task to look so far behind them, to their first entrance, and think
considerately on all the Excellencies or Miscarriages in their Action all the
while, wherefore they must begin this Business quickly, lest they should want
leisure to dispatch it; and the rather, because this is probably the time of
their own prefixing for this Work; for either they resolved never to think upon
their ways, or to do it now at least: and indeed now their Hindrances are not
so great or many as in their youth; the weakness of the flesh betrayed them
then to sin, but now withholds them from it; the Vanities of the World, have
now lost their alluring Charms; so that nothing but the third Enemy of Mankind,
the Devil, can dissuade them from this excellent Employment, and even he has
not so much to work upon, nor can lay so many Baits as formerly, to withdraw
and divert them from it.

Since Man at his best estate is altogether vanity, and the whole course of his
life is walking in a vain shadow, should he not desire to know how frail he is?
Should he not consider his many Failings and Deviations, and whether he has
already begged God's pardon for them, and reformed his Errors, or has it yet
to do? If he has already dispatched that Business, with what Complacency and
Satisfaction will he review the History of his Life; when either he finds no
Act of his upon that Record, which can justly bring a Blush into his Face, and
observes no Day of his Life that he could wish forgotten, but takes as much
delight in reflecting on his past-time, as he did in spending it, or where he
had committed any Faults, sees the Pages wherein they were registered, blotted
over, and no remembrance of them preserved to his disadvantage; will it not be
time well spent in so satisfactory an Employment of his Thoughts? Or if he
finds his old Iniquities still chronicled, the stains not washed away with
penitential Tears, nor the Score wiped off by God's forgiving Hand; will not
this remembrance of his Ways make him ashamed, and fill him with Confusion?
Will it not send him immediately to the Throne of Grace to sue his Pardon out,
and never let him be at peace within himself, till God is pacified toward him
for all that he has done: And sure the guilt which was the business of many
years to contract, will cost some time and labor in its removal, and he who
has at most but a few minutes left to perfect that mighty work, ought not to
mispend a moment, but husband well the poor remainder of his days, which is the
All he has to trust to, and while he enjoys a Being upon earth, employ it in
the pursuit of a better life in Heaven. He should trim his lamp while it is
burning, that if it be possible, what has hitherto cast but a dim and languid
light, may expire in a glorious blaze.

And if it has not been his care to have lived well in his youth, he must be
the more industrious to amend his life, that he may dye well in his Age; and
that at last by following the righteous in their ways, he may overtake them, in
a resemblance of their latter end. It is not for us to persist in our
negligence, because we have slipped the fairest season; but we must rather redeem
the time by greater industry, that though we go forth weeping for our lost
opportunities; yet if we sow good seed in the residue of our days, we may
return with joy, and bring our sheaves with us.

Nor should the oldest non-proficient of us be ashamed to begin to learn this
Duty in his age, unless because he did not earlier apply himself to the task;
but if he has not practiced it from his youth up, he will find the greater
reason to be studious in it, when he is old. Since the hoary head is a Crown of
glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness. But for those who are men in
years to be babes in Christ, and (when for their time, they ought to be
Teachers) to have need of being taught, this is an ignorance, than which
nothing can be more unpardonable, but the persevering in it; for shame shall be
to him that refuses instruction, but he is in the way of life that keeps it:
and therefore we must make haste to take fast hold of it, before our flesh and
bodies are consumed, lest we mourn at last for the omission.

So far are we from having occasion to seek refuge in excuses for our late
beginning to addict our selves to this excellent employment of thinking on our
ways, that it would be inexcusable to defer it longer.

The man who has spent most of his days in folly and extravagance, if at last
he grows serious and reserved, has no reason to blush at his coming to
himself, but at his being so long insensible. Such a folly and madness is a
course of sin, and if by a serious reflection on our selves, and a
manifestation given us, by the true light, of the reproveable impertinencies in
which we are engaged, we awake out of our sleep, and arise from the dead; that
is, forsake our sinful ways, and put away the evil of our doings; nothing will
be liable to objection in our amendment, but it is not bearing a more ancient
date.

But at what time a sinner thinks upon his ways, and turns his feet unto God's
testimonies, there is a Jubilee in Heaven, and the farther he is gone in a
wrong course, and the more likely to be irreclamable, the more abundant is the
Joy: and God's extraordinary satisfaction to find a Son that was lost, will
obliterate the remembrance of his undutiful departure. The Prodigal was young
when he left his father's house, but he had consumed much of his time as well
as substance in living from it, and yet he was not discouraged in his age, to
return to that place which the folly of his youth had tempted him to forsake;
but as soon as ever he came to himself, he put on resolutions to go home, and
we find he was not upbraided for his late submission, but the extravagancies of
his youth rendered it more acceptable. To conclude this point, since the days of
old men are but few, and their weaknesses have been great and many, let them
endeavor to recover strength before they go hence, and are no more.

Now that neither young nor old may be hindered in the right performance of
their Duty in thinking on their ways, let us, if we can, make a discovery of
those obstacles and impediments that divert our thoughts from that employment:
and so we shall be the better able to remove them, and we shall find we are
hindered partly through these following means.

First, through unworthy constructions and improvements of God's patience and
forbearance, whose great design and end is to encourage us to this duty, and to
lead us to repentance* but the wicked make not such a profitable use and happy
advantage of it, but because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore their heart is fully set to do evil. Because the Atheist
blasphemes Heaven, and is not blasted with its Lightning; because the Swearer
takes God's Name in vain, and is not immediately struck dumb; because the
Drunkard is not indeed turned into a beast, for making himself like one, in his
excess* because the Adulterer does not always find a Phine^s to stab him in the
midst of his unchaste embraces; hence it is that men become so bold in sinning,
and so daring, or at least so inconsiderate and foolish, that they dally with
damnation, and play upon the mouth of Hell, as fearless as the sucking child on
the hole of the Asp, and the weaned child on the Cocatrice den, as if they
should not hurt nor destroy in the ways of sin, any more than in the holy
mountain. And while they live as if there was not a God, and do not find his
Vengeance in the punishment of their impieties, they are confirmed in a
disbelief of his Existence. But if while we are boasting of our selves, and
glorying in our abilities, while our hearts are lifted up, and our minds
hardened in pride; we should like the King of Babylon, be checked by a Voice
from Heaven, and turned to feed among beasts; if when we provoke God, the Earth
should swallow us up, as persons unworthy to live upon it; such Judgments would
teach others caution, and they would no longer be high-minded, but fear, they
would not venture upon sin, when they found it the way to ruin, and that by
indulging it, they made court to their own destruction. But because God is slow
to anger, and of great compassion, they are ready to demand, Who is the Lord,
that they should obey his voice. Because he does not willingly afflict the
children of men, therefore they think he does not see, and that there is no
knowledge in the most High.

We find his silence made the wicked conclude him an Accomplice with them, and
fancy him such a one as themselves, and because he deferred his coming, there
were Scoffers that asked, Where is the promise of it? Because in the
administrations of his wrath he remembers mercy, and makes many pauses, because
he whets his sword, and bends his bow, and makes ready his arrows, and bestows
so much time in preparing the instruments of death, we are apt to flatter our
selves, that he is not in earnest, and has no design to use them. But if we
had the least mixture of ingenuity in the temper of our Souls, we should fly to
the embraces of those arms which have been so long stretched forth, and not put
that patience to a farther trial, whereof we have had such repeated proofs. God
forbid we should incline to so accursed and dangerous a Principle, as to
continue in sin, that Grace may abound, for if we refuse when he calls, and
regard not when he stretches out his hand; he will execute his fierce wrath
upon us, and laugh at our calamity under it.

A second thing that obstructs our thinking on our ways is, because we find
some difficulty and trouble in reforming them. The pains of resisting Satan,
and grappling with Corruption, are harsh and disagreeable to flesh and blood.
When we are enjoined to mortify our earthly members, to subdue our lusts and
passions, we think the Command no less severe than that for Abraham to
sacrifice his Son, and have not so near a relation to him, that we can
undertake it with his readiness; when we come to show our faith by our works,
it scarce appears equal to a grain of mustard seed. To be sober and vigilant,
that we be not devoured; to watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation;
to keep a guard upon our thoughts, our words, and actions, that they do not go
astray, or offend in any thing; seems a task so toilsome and laborious, that we
soon grow tired of the employment, become remiss and carless in it, and cry
with the Jews, behold what a Weariness it is? Mal. 1.13. and for this reason,
instead of a pure offering which God requires, we sacrifice corrupt things to
him, the torn, the lame and the sick, which instead of finding acceptance,
bring a curse upon us. The strictness and severity of a Christian life, is the
Lion in our way, that hinders our proficiency in it; we cannot confine our
selves to the restraints it lays upon us, nor comply with the mortifications it
injoyns; we look on it as a Yoke, without considering its easiness, and we
cannot bear it, though light, because it is a burden. The thorny rugged path to
Heaven offends and galls our feet, and we will not advance a step toward it,
unless we may have liberty to pass through the delightful ways of an Earthly
Paradise. Fasting is an unpleasant entertainment to those, who have used
themselves to fare deliciously every day; and a garment of Camels hair would
but ill agree with the softness and effeminacy of those who have known nothing
courser than purple and fine linen; so that, we go on without interruption, in
a sensual course of life. And while we dare not think upon our ways, to reform
them for the future, we are more afraid to think upon them, to repent of what
is past. For there we find nothing but a melancholy, hideous prospect, that
fills us with anxiety and terror; to be rid of which, we dismiss our thoughts
from that employment, and betake our selves to our merry inconsiderate life
again, to divert our minds from the remembrance of what so much disturbed them.
But why should we look so much at the hardships in our way, as not to mind the
pleasures at our journey's end? Why should we be more terrified with the
difficulties and hazards of the Combat, than encouraged by the Triumphs that
attend the Victory? If we look to the Joy and the Crown designed for our
Reward, we shall not be weary nor faint in our minds, nor fall under the
Ephraimites disgrace of turning our selves back in the day of battle. We shall
then fight, not as those that beat the air; and run, not as uncertainly; but
keep under our bodies, and bring them into subjection, which will be the only
way to make them and our Souls too, free indeed. And when the sense of the
acute pains, and extreme throes in travail, nay the very remembrance of them
too, is lost in the satisfaction that a man child is born into the world; shall
not the contemplation of our being born again to an inheritance in Heaven,
enable us to go cheerfully through all that is uneasy and pungent in our
regeneration.

And we have the assistance of these two Considerations toward the work.

First, That the enemies with whom we are to engage, cannot give us any long
disturbance. Our death will free us from all their attempts, and the
disquietudes they occasion. Our sins shall be buried in our Graves, beyond the
hope of a Resurrection. Whereas we shall rise from thence as clear from the
spots and scars of that nauseous Leprosy, as Naaman was after his ascent from
Jordan. Then we shall have no more rebellious passions to subdue, no more
unruly lusts to curb; no more obdurate hearts to vex us, no more unreasonable
appetites to distract us, but having obtained a total victory, nay being more
than conquerours, we shall be at perfect peace.

For with our flesh we shall put off all the failings and infirmities of it,
that predisposed matter, which was so easily wrought on to our prejudice; and
drop our earthly inclinations, as Elijah did his mantle, when we are translated
from this world. And whatever has been troublesome to us, and an impediment to
our pilgrimage in this life, shall not retard our journey to the next, nor
interrupt our pleasures there: for whatever defiles, or works abomination,
shall in no wise enter into our possession, the City of the living God. Let
this thought therefore strengthen and inspirit us, to undertake the Combat
resolutely, and to fight under our Savior's Banner with the cheerfulness and
bravery of those Soldiers who perceive Victory declaring in their favor, and
their enemies preparing for a speedy flight, and disabled for evermore to take
the field against them.

Secondly, Let us consider, that it is more advantageous, as well as more
honorable, to fight with courage now, where the Battle will not continue long,
than to be condemned to everlasting Torments for our Cowardice, and have them
that hate us made Lords over us. It Is better to enter into life halt and
maimed, than having every part and member whole and unhurt, to be sentenced to
eternal death: for this dismal punishment is decreed for those, who not
regarding the illustrious Original of their Souls, meanly condescend to
increase the Devil's triumph by yielding themselves his Captives. Is it not
better then to strive and take some pains in giving a repulse to his assaults,
than by tame submissions to become sharers in his condemnation? Is it not our
interest to encounter him here, though we are sometimes bruised and wounded in
the unequal congress, rather than let him carry us to that perdition, to which
he is sentenced irrecoverably? The world has not wanted instances of men who
have chosen an honorable death before an ignominious life; who amidst their
Tortures would not accept deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And shall not we, being compassed about with such a cloud of
witnesses, who have led the way, follow their great Example, and wax valiant in
this fight, since we know we shall turn to flight the armies of the Aliens?
Have not we reason to prefer the toil and hazard of such a Conflict, before a
life more intolerable than death in all its terrors? But why should we
apprehend the hardships of this spiritual Warfare, which will vanish by
degrees, and as they grow more familiar, become less formidable? The Soldier
by frequent use of Armor, grows insensible of its weight, that galled and
wearied him at first; and tedious Marches, hungry meals, short sleep, and
sudden Alarms, which once fatigued and harrassed him, are at last his
diversion, and he cannot live out of a Camp, who once thought it death to
continue in it. We think it now a Herculean labor to deliberate on every
action, to inquire into every thought, and to examine every word; to question
all our motions, whence they come, and to what end they tend, before we sign
their Passport; but if we will once try (and the Experiment is safe and
harmless) we shall find there is not any sensual pleasure comparable to those
sublimated Joys the Soul extracts from the knowledge of its sincere endeavors
to recommend it self to God, by obedience to his Will. And nothing is more
necessary and conducive to this work, than to employ the reflex and direct acts
of our Souls in thinking on our ways: that we may discover our past errors,
and through a just sense and abhorrence of them, avoid all future wanderings.
For if we do not think upon our ways, we shall live at random, and run into a
Labyrinth of Absurdities, and pursue our own destruction: from which nothing
can deliver us: but

VI. The result of this Employment of our thoughts, The turning our feet unto
God's Testimonies.

And for our better performance of this Duty, let us consider what it is to
turn our feet unto God's Testimonies.

As the Sacred Writings have couched our life and conversation under the
Metaphor of a Way, so they comprehend our appetites, inclinations, affections
under that of Feet, they having in the performance of our actions the same
office that feet bear in the motion of our bodies, and carry us forward in all
our ways. Thus the Prophet in the description of the wickedness of Israel*
gives it for one part of their Character, that their feet were swift to shed
blood.

That is, their desires and inclinations had an eager bent to Murder: and that
saying of the Spouse* I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Cant.
5.3. implies her having cleansed and purified her affections, after which they
ought not to be again sullied and polluted, by any inclination to impiety. Now
the Testimonies of God are his Commandments, those holy Sanctions that have
informed us what is good and agreeable to him, and what wicked and displeasing,
and injoined us obedience to his Will in the practice of the one, and a total
abstinence from the other, adding promises of large rewards to encourage us in
the performance of our Duty, and threatenings of severe punishments to deter us
from neglecting it. Thus the Law which Moses set before the Children of Israel*
is called the Testimonies, and the Statutes, and the Judgments which he spoke
unto them, Deuteronomy. 4.45. And in David's charge to Solomon on his deathbed, the
first and principal injunction is, Keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk
in his ways; to keep his Statutes and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and
his Testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, that thou may prosper
in all thou do, and whither soever thou turnest thy self, 1 Kings 2.3. From
all which we shall perceive, that by turning our feet unto God's Testimonies,
is meant;

First, Our examining and judging of our ways by comparing them with God's
Commandments.

Secondly, Our amending them, by making them conformable to those directions:
the word Turning being expressive of both these notions. And indeed if we turn,
as God commands us, to the Law and to the Testimony, we shall find it a light
unto our feet, and a lanthorn to our paths, in each of these respects: for the
Commandment is a lamp, and the Law a light, directing us to the knowledge and
discovery of Sin. By the help of this instruction, we shall think effectually
on our ways, we shall see how exactly we have walked by the rule of life
prescribed us, or wherein we have swerved and varied from it. His Testimonies
will be Evidences of his pleasure and our obedience: they will show us whether
we have walked Godly, righteously and soberly in this present world, in respect
of him, our neighbor, and our selves, or have broke loose from the restraints,
and over-leaped the fences of Religion, in impiety, injustice, or intemperance.
And if we turn our feet unto God's Testimonies in this sense; we shall quickly
turn them in the other. We shall make haste and not delay to keep his
Commandments, that is, to pay an entire obedience to them for the future in
doing all that they require, and abstaining from whatever they forbid.

Now in this turning consists the whole work and business of repentance unto
Salvation, such a repentance as will need no repenting of: for this includes
Aversion and Conversion, the necessary qualifications of it; for Repentance (as
the Original word imports) is a change of mind for the better, such a change as
prevails upon the actions to accompany it, for the Greek Verb signifies to be
wise after the commission of an error, upon due reflection and serious
thinking on our ways, as David declares he was. We know repentance has
properly its operation, where there has been the habit of some sin, and in a
mind, if not wholly, yet in some sort averse to Virtue and Religion, insomuch
that it does not apply it self to the practice of it, nor exert it in any
action; but on the contrary, rather gives it self up to be governed by
appetite, and to follow its own inventions. Now when we think upon our ways,
and the reflection represents to our minds the evil of such doings, and takes
off the affection and tendency we had to them, making us put on resolutions to
forsake them; this is properly a turning from them; and the Psalmist means it
as one part of the result and consequence of his thinking on his ways, that he
turned his feet from the evil of them. This is the term from whence we are to
begin our progress in the ways of Godliness, the considering and turning away
from all the transgressions that we have committed, Ezekiel. 18.28. But then there
must be the term to which we are to move our repentance from dead works, must
terminate in serving the living God, and make his testimonies our delight and
our Counselors to direct our ways.

And when we are in this good and right way to Salvation, we must go vigorously
on; for if we once stand still, it will be in the way of sinners, and we shall
quickly go astray again among those whose ways are crooked* and they froward in
their paths. Nor may we at all look back upon our former ways, as Lot's Wife
did on Sodom, with a fondness and kind remembrance of them, with concern and
reluctance for quitting them; for this will be an argument that we are not
truly turned unto God's Testimonies, and if our thoughts and affections are not
in a direct Act, looking toward them, our Lord will no more receive us than
the Samaritans would our Savior, because his face was as though he would go to
Jerusalem.

The Word and Law of God is the Rule that must guide our ways, if we desire to
walk humbly and acceptably with him; he has shown us in it what is good, and
revealed his whole counsel to us. And if we have respect unto these his ways,
in the guidance and direction of our own, we shall be sure not to be mistaken
in them. For the Law of the Lord is perfect converting the Soul, and his
Testimony is sure, making wise the simple. The keeping his Precepts made David
wiser than the aged, and gave him more understanding than his Teachers. And his
Statutes must needs rejoice our hearts to see our selves in such a certain way
to Happiness, when his Commandments have enlightened our eyes to find it. And if
we would be acquainted with all, even our secret faults; and keep back from the
dominion of presumptuous sins; and live innocent from the great Transgressions;
from the Testimonies of our God we shall receive these benefits, we shall be
warned by them from our iniquities, and in keeping them we shall find great
reward.

But because the way of man is not of himself, neither is it in him to direct
his steps, but his goings are of the Lord. We may very well put the question,
How can a man then understand his own way? Prove. 20.24. But the Answer is as
ready, that it must be by applying himself to him that gives wisdom, and out
of whose mouth comes knowledge and understanding, Prove. 2.6. for the
preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the
Lord, and he will direct his work in truth.

Let us beseech him therefore who knows all our thoughts, so to direct and
guide them in the knowledge and discovery of our ways, that no past evil in
them, may escape our observation and repentance; and that no inadvertency or
neglect may suffer them to be corrupted by future errors; but that he will
please so to order our paths by the influence of his holy Word and Spirit, that
he may delight in our ways, and we obtain Salvation by them, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

