REMARKS ON THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Commissioners For putting in Execution The
ACT past last Sessions, For Establishing of a Land-Bank.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1696.

REMARKS, etc.
AMongst all the Methods and Contrivances (since the present War) to supply the
Government, that none should prove ineffectual or useless, except the Fund
given for establishing a Land-Bank, seems something strange when considered:
For since we live in a Country seated under the best of Climates, productive
of all the Necessaries of Life, whose Native Commodities are the Foundation of
the greatest Trade and Commerce under Heaven, whereby numerous Families daily
arrive at great and plentitul Fortunes: I say, for the Proprietors of such a
Canaan as this, either not to know, or if known, not to be able to establish
their Interest, must argue the greatest Stupidity, or the least Industry
imaginable. And it is plain to any intelligent Man, how the extraordinary
Interest of Money has been like a Gangreen to many Estates, and has reduced
them to a very mean condition; and the difficulty of mortgaging Land is now so
great, that besides the Legal Profits, (if the Sum to be borrowed be
considerable) the Lender must have a Present made him, before he will
condescend to look at the Title. This was a melancholy prospect to Men of good
Understanding, and good Estates, and therefore it needs not remain a Mystery to
so many, why the Parliament should be so fond of a Land Bank, as to refuse this
Fund to the Bank of England, and give it to them, since the former is the most
beneficial thing to the Landed-man that ever was projected, and the other
profitable only to a few Traders, who no doubt will confederate and unite their
strength to oppose any Contrivance which is likely to advance the Interest of
the Landed-man, and to lessen their own; for had the Land-Bank succeeded, it is
evident that the Interest of Money must in a litte time have been reduced to 3
l. per Cent. and Land consequently have risen in purchase proportionable to the
fall of Money, which the monied and trading Men could not endure to think of,
much less to have it brought about; for what could be more ungrateful than the
thoughts of consuming double the time in their Trade, to accumulate that
Wealth, which when purchased, will acquire but the same Estate of Inheritance,
as what is gotten in half the time, at the rate as Land and Money goes at
present: For now it is every days experience, that a few years success in Trade,
renders Monied-men Masters of so much Wealth, as enables them to purchase the
most considerable Estates in the Kingdom; so that at this rate in some few
years, the Traders will invade the ancient Gentry, and take away their Place
and Nation. These, and such like Considerations, were the cause why the
Land-Bank met with so little Encouragement, and so strong opposition, for when
the Gentlemen of the House of Commons would by no means be induced to lay aside
a Proposition, so apparently advantageous to all Landed-men in the Kingdom,
then an Exchequer-Bank was invented, either to hinder the other, or at least to
protract time, and therefore the Projectors of it did not desist from pressing
that forward, 'till it was twice cast out by a division of the House; and
notwithstanding they were first beaten from their Outworks, yet they had a
reserve still, hoping that if a Bill passed in favor of a Land-Bank, to get a
millstone to be tied about its Neck that would not fail of sinking it, by
providing that the Exchequer might issue out their Bills immediately for 150000
l. and for the rest if the Bank did not raise it. And though this was readily
consented to by the House of Commons, that his Majesty might have all Reserves
for raising the Money, yet the consequence of this proved to be a dividing the
Interest as well as the Money, and made those who were so fond of a Bank under
the Exchequer management, to be very little concerned whether the other had
success or not; and then they who saw further into the Millstone than others,
gave it out in a modish whisper, that the Bank would never come to any thing,
which discouraged hundreds from subscribing, which no doubt was the intent of
the Parties. Another difficulty was the requiring so vast a Sum as 1282000 l.
before they could be a Corporation; for if the subscribing 500000 l. would have
done, they would not have been obliged to ask nigh so large a Premium as they
did, which (by the way) was not so extravagant as their Enemies represented it
to be, considering the scarcity of Money at that time, when most Men valued a
milled Crown as if it had been an ancient Medal of one of their Ancestors;
neither did they themselves (whatever they pretended,) think it so, since they
were of Opinion, that had it been complied with, the Money could not have been
raised; but it is an easy matter to find a stick to beat a Dog. All Scruples,
though never so dark and nice, must be laid hold of, and all the weak Sophistry
they were Masters of, must now be furbished up to attack the Land-Bank; but
that imprudent and unreasonable demand (as it was called) was not so bold as
welcome to some, who were glad of that or any other occasion to deny the
Land-Bank; and had their Demands been but a fifth part of what they were, it is
likely they would have been thought unreasonable, for every Molehill seemed a
Mountain, and they were looked upon as such as intended to raise a Rebellion
rather than Money: And it was something strange, to see such an indifferency to
those who endeavored to bring in such a Mass of Wealth; but it could not be
the Money that was disliked, but the Method of raising it; for the grand Debate
was, Whether these Chimera's and Idols of Fancy, called E -- Bills must do it or
not, which at last being resolved in the affirmative, 5 l. per Cent. for the
first payment, which (by the way) is but 25 s. per Cent. for the whole Sum) is
thought sufficient, and to spare, for such as shall subscribe their Money to
the Land-Bank, (less than ever was offered when the base Money was current,
which People parted with without any consideration of the Security) that one
would think that Proposal was rather made by way of Mortification for their
former extravagant Demands, than the utmost that could be afforded on such an
Occasion. And it is Observable, when this gracions Offer would not bring forth
one Penny, (as it was not likely it should) the Commissioners were again sent
for, and it was the Opinion of most that were present, that heard the Questions
proposed to them, and the Answer they gave, that there would be an Agreement,
when as the Event showed there was nothing less intended, and that they were
sent for, imagining them illiterate enough to make illegal Demands, as asking
their Premium upon the Salt-Fund, or to have Guineas taken at above 22 s. at
last the gracious 5 l. per Cent. is again offered, with a Ne plus ultra tacked
to it, this Method served to get time, and was like throwing out a Barrel to a
Whale to play with, whilst the Ship escapes; for by this dallying the
Commissioners were diverted from thinking of any other means to raise the
Money, which without doubt was the thing feared by some. And I cannot omit one
Question that was asked, and not being answered to their satisfaction, (as was
pretended) was then alleged the reason they could not comply with our
Proposals, and that was, What Security we could give of raising the whole Sum?
a very pretty Question, and which would without doubt put the Rogues to a
Nonplus, and ought to be answered Poet Bays his way, after a little-pausing
and scratching ones Head, to say, I gad I will not tell you; for if they should
have drawn out four or five of the stoutest Fellows amongst them, each worth 40
or 50000 l. and sent for a Public Notary immediately, and went forthwith to
Noverint Universi, it is ten to one they would not be satisfied, or thought the
Security sufficient. I dare say they would not have taken the two Northern
Crowns, nor any other brace of Princes in Europe for Security: And it was
utterly impossible to comply with this Demand, unless that Question had been
put in time, that the East India Company, (who designed to subscribe part of
the Money) might have prevailed with the great Mogul to give Security to raise
the Sum: Yet many People are of Opinion, that the best Security for the Money,
had been to have given such terms, as it had been the Peoples Interest to have
subscribed it; but every things runs counter when a thing is predestined to
Ruin and Destruction, the Project was hatched under an unlucky Planet, and was
born like many other foolish things in Nature, only that it might dye, and we
ought to rejoice it fell so honorably, having so many great and powerful
Enemies against it.

Another reason is given why the Land-Bank was unfortunate, and that is,
because it was conceived in sin, and therefore that matter ought to be
examined, for if so, it is no wonder it throve no better: And to prove this
it is alleged, That the Parliament having incorporated a Society of Men, by the
Name of The Governor and Company of the Bank of England, (mark the exclusive
Particle The) had debarred themselves of the Power of setting up another Bank,
and therefore after the Bank of England had advanced their Money for the
public Good, (without any consideration for their own Interest) and have ever
since their incorporation been so useful to the Government, not only by lending
their own money, but every bodies else they could lay hands on, to erect
another Bank in prejudice of such a one, and upon the breach of the public
Faith too, must certainly be an ungrateful and wicked Action.

Now if this be a Crime, it is not the first that Parliaments have been guilty
of in that nature, having served the Church of England the same sauce before,
which all People must allow was by Law established, and was as much the Church
of England as the other is the Bank of England, taking the word The in its
utmost latitude. Neither can it be denied, but that the Church of England has
been as serviceable to the Government as the Bank, and is much better
calculated for so being, than this or any other Bank can possibly be.

And in truth, the Bank has been rather serviceable to the Subjects than the
Government, for if we reflect on the Proceedings of the Bank for this last six
Months, we must take the People to be in their minority, and to have chosen the
Bank for their Guardians. It is well known, that the desire of living above our
Fortunes, has been an Epidemical Distemper to the People of this Kingdom, and
especially to the Gentry: Now the cure of this Disease is totally owing to the
Bank, for their Pious and Paternal Care ought never to be forgotten, in
diligently enquiring into Men's circumstances, when they came for their Money,
viz. What Family they had? what Children? what servants? and what other
Necessary Expenses they were obliged to support, and supplied them not
according to their own extravagant demands, but with what was convenient for
the Necessaries, not for the Luxury of Life. Now to do any thing against the
interest of these our Spiritual and Temporal Benefactors, must argue the
highest ingratitude. But the Bank may be contented to run the same Fate with
the Church, since it was as much the Intent of the Legislators to have but one
Faith as one Bank.

But here it will be said by the Directors of the Bank, that although the
Consequence of the Toleration will be setting up as many Churches as there are
different Opinions amongst Mankind, yet the Directors of the Church of England
put all other Churches under Contribution, and receive Tithes from all, like
the City Council, who must be fee'd though you make use of others. To this may
be said, that the Church have a Legal Right to Tithes, and can force People to
pay them, which the Bank (to their Grief) have not, to force People to deposite
their Money; but if the payments of Tithes had been as voluntary as putting
Money into the Bank, it had been no more unlawful to establish a Toleration
than it is now.

But here perhaps they will Object, that if the Church were really as ill used
as the Bank, yet that is an Aggravation of the Crime rather than an Excuse,
which is very true; but I deny that either have been so ill used, or the
public Faith broke to either; for nothing passes in an Act of Parliment, but
what is given by express words, or something necessarily employed. I suppose the
Bank does not pretend that another Bank is excluded by express words; and it is
the most unreasonable thing in Nature to make the particle The such a Monster,
as to carry in its belly all the Cash in the Kingdom, and to be destructive to
all future Corporations and Bodies Politic. But I dare be bold to affirm, that
if the Parliament had suspected this Particle to have imported but the 20th.
part of what is by some suggested, they would have sent 100 Miles for a word,
rather than have used it; and therefore it can be no Crime, in foro
Conscientiae, to set up another Bank.

And though the Directors of the Bank of England were not blameable, for using
all their Interest to hinder the Act from passing, yet when (notwithstanding
all the opposition that could be made) the Act passed, and the King's Affairs,
and the Affairs of all Europe in a great measure depending upon the Success of
it, then, I say, to appear so vigorously against it, and to strain so hard as
to bankrupt themselves, rather than the Land-Bank should rise, savoured rankly
of Malice and Self-interest. Neither can the Directors of the Bank of England
be taken by any intelligent Man to be such Patriots as they would have the
World suppose them to be; but I will detain you no longer in the Porch, but
proceed to the Objections made against the Gentlemen that proposed and
prosecuted the Land-Bank.

First, That they undertook the raising 2564000 l. at 7 l. per Cent. perpetual
Interest, redeemable by Parliament.

Secondly, That contrary to their first Proposals, they insisted upon an
Extravagant Premium of 300000 l.

Thirdly, That they were not able to raise the Money upon the Premium they
desired, nor could give any Security to do it.

Fourthly, That they ruined the Credit of the Bank of England.

I propose to answer these Objections, and then to show,

First, That the Bank of England, through their Covetousness and want of
Understanding, ruined their own Credit.

Secondly, If this Fund had been given either to the Bank of England, or the
Exchequer alone, it could not have been so easily raised as by a Land-Bank.

Thirdly, That there is no way to restore Paper-Credit but by a New Bank.

The First Objection is, That they undertook the raising of 2564000 l. at 7 l.
per Cent. perpetual Interest.

To this I Answer, That neither the Gentlemen concerned in the Land-Bank, or
any Person, or Body of Persons in England, did, or could undertake so great a
Sum; but when Methods were proposed in the House of Commons for raising this
Money, they offered their Opinions, that it might be raised by a Land-Bank, and
that 7 l. per Cent. was sufficient Encouragement, as the Treasury and Courtiers
thought it might be best raised by an Exchequer-Bank, and others by different
Methods; and if they were mistaken, (as I shall endeavor to show they were
not) it is what the Treasury were in their Exchequer-bank, and what any one
else in probability would have been, considering the different circumstances of
the Kingdom when the Proposals were made, and when the Money was to be raised.

Second Objection. That they insisted upon an extravagant Premium of 300000 l.

To this I Answer, They were obliged to it.

1. By the Discouragement and Obstructions they met with in the House of
Commons, in the passing their Bill.

2. The Condition of the Kingdom in relation to Money and Credit was very
different when the Proposals were made, and when the Money was to be raised,
and therefore they were obliged to enlarge their Demands.

First, The Difficulties they met with in passing their Bill were these,

First, The Members of the Bank of England were excluded from subscribing.

Secondly, They were not to be Incorporated upon a less Sum than 1282100 l. by
which Discouragement not one in ten would subscribe 'till they were assured of
being a Corporation, esteeming that Privilege to be half their bargain, and
fearing the Subscriptions might not amount to that Sum; whereas if the
Subscribers had been qualified to be a Corporation upon the subscribing 500000
l. that Sum had been subscribed in three days, by the Commissioners
themselves, and the Members of Exeter-Exchange; and if they had been once
entitled to a Corporation, there could be no doubt but the whole Money would
be subscribed afterward, since it would be then a greater Encouragement to
come in at Par than upon 20 per Cent. Premium before.

Thirdly, When they offered a Clause to their Act, to naturalize such as would
subscribe 500 l. and had reasonable Assurance from the Foreigners upon the
Exchange, that such encouragement would bring in 400000 l. that clause being
thrown out, the stock of the Bank of England advanced, and their Wagerers upon
the Exchange offered odds against the Success of the Land Bank.

Fourthly, Their Bill was delayed so long by the opposition it found, that they
could not get their Commission passed before the 4th. of May, by which means it
was left in the power of the Treasury to refuse or take the fourth part of
their Subscriptions in clipped Money, which was a particular hardship upon a
great number of People, who avoided putting in their clipped Money upon other
Funds, in hopes of subscribing it, and making their first payments with it in
this Bank; and reasonably hoped since they paid to the recompense, to have
their clipped Money made good to them as well as to others.

And I believe it has been every ones Observation, that several Gentlemen of
the Bank of England, and others, Opposers of the Land-Bank, would often insult
over them upon their Success in the House of Commons, and ask them what was
become of their Bank, though now they call them Jacobites, and threaten to
impeach them, for not doing what they themselves rendered impossible for them
to do.

The second Reason I gave, was, the different Circumstances of the Kingdom when
the Proposals were made, and when the Money was to be raised: As,

1. Guineas were taken at 30 s. and it was not known whether the Parliament
would bring them down or no.

2. Paper-Credit was good, and the Bank of England and the Goldsmiths paid
their Bills punctually, whereas at the time this Money was to be raised, both
refused.

3. Tallies were equal, or better than Money, whereas afterward they were 20,
30, and 40 per Cent. Discount, by which means People could make a much greater
advantage of their Money, and therefore would not subscribe it upon the same
terms as they thought before reasonable.

4. It was hoped at first not above 60 per Cent. would be called in, whereas
afterward by the Universal Fall of Credit, and want of Money, no one thought
of paying less than the whole Sum subscribed.

5. There was an actual want of Money in Specie in the Kingdom, seven Millions
in and out of the Exchequer being rendered useless, by which means the
Commissioners saw it impossible to get the Money subscribed, and paid in
Specie, and therefore designed to take Tallies, good Goldsmiths Bills, and Bank
Bills, and clipped Money by weight at a high rate for Subscriptions, and so asked
300000 l. Praemium, believing it would cost them full as much to Discount the
several Species aforesaid for Money, which they proposed to pay to the King.

It is to be Observed here, (1.) If the 300000 l. desired, had been granted to
the Land-Bank, their bargain had not been so great as the Bank of England's;
for the Bank of England having 100000 l. per Ann. for 1200000 l. they gave but
12 years purchase for their Fund; besides, they had allowed them 4000 l. per
Ann. for their Charges: Whereas, if 300000 l. had been deducted out of this
Fund, the remainder had been 2264000 l. which divided by 179000, the Interest
they were to receive makes near 13 years purchase; and I believe the scarceness
and goodness of Money considered, when the Bank of England was raised, and when
the Land-Bank was to be raised, any one but themselves will believe that the
latter deserved at least equal Encouragement; and it is probable the Parliament
would have given it, if they had forseen the Difficulties that have since
happened.

2. That the Comissioners did not ask the 300000 l. out of the Salt-Fund, but
upon the Exchequer in general, which could not be paid them but by the Consent
of the Parliament, and so they left themselves to the Parliament whether they
deserved it or no.

3. At the time they asked those Tallies on the Exchequer in general, it would
have cost 40 l. per Cent. to discount them, which reduced their Demands to less
than 200000 l.

4. If their Terms had been complied with, the greatest part of the
Subscriptions would have been made in clipped Money and Plate, which would have
been coined to increase our Species of Money, and it is probable would save the
Nation next year near as much in the recompense for clipped Money, and
Encouragement for bringing in the Plate as the Sum demanded.

5. The Exchequer has not borrowed any Money so cheap since.

The Third Objection. That they were not able to raise the Money upon the
Premium they asked, nor could they give any Security to do it.

This Objection justifies them in asking the Premium refused; for it is very
unjust to tax them for asking too much, and yet to confess it was not enough to
induce people to subscribe the Money. However, I offer these Reasons that it
would be subscribed.

1. They Proposed they might open their Books for Private Subscriptions, not
doubting within three days they might bring Hands for near the Sum to be
raised, which was not thought fit to be granted to them, it being Objected it
would be a Disencouragement to the real Subscriptions.

2. When they were sent for to attend the Lords Justices, and were asked, What
Security they could give of raising the whole Sum? They Answered, That they
computed the Commissioners themselves, and the Members of Exeter-Exchange,
would subscribe 700000 l. that they believed they should be able to bring in as
much more by their Interest and dequaintance, and they thought it reasonable to
suppose the whole Kingdom would subscribe the rest.

3. That they thought the Nature of the thing would admit of no other Security
than what they offered, since it could not be expected that any number of
Persons would enter into Recognizances to raise the Sum.

4. It was solely to their Disadvantage if they did not subscribe to be a
Corporation, since by the failure they would only entitle themselves to 7 per
Cent. in the Exchequer, which no one would give 70 l. for, and therefore it is
to be presumed they would take such care for their own sakes, as not to lose 30
per Cent. of their Money; which if they did not, it would solely redound to the
advantage of the Projectors of the Exchequer-Bank, who would have the Money
that was subscribed to circulate their own Bills.

5. When they became a Corporation, it cannot be doubted but the whole Money
would be quickly subscribed, since then the advantage of subscribing would be
much greater, (as I said before) and it was not in the power of the
Commissioners to hinder any one from subscribing that thought it his Interest;
but admitting the Subscriptions would have stopped when they were qualified to be
a Corporation, I believe most People are of Opinion now, that 1282000 l. would
better serve his Majesty's occasions, than nothing, though the Arithmetic of
that time was, that half was less than none.

The Fourth Objection is, That they ruined the Credit of the Bank of England:
and here these worthy Patriots make bold with the Parliament, and say, they
broke their Faith with them, in setting up another Bank. I Answer,

1. There are no words in the Act of Parliament, that directly or indirectly
exclude the Parliament from setting up another Bank: The Act only incorporates
a Body of Men to sue and be sued, which if it should amount to a prohibitory
Clause, excludes King and Parliament ever hereafter to grant a Corporation,
since every Corporation, single person, or number of persons in England, may
lawfully do what these Gentlemen pretend to have the Monopoly of.

2. The Land-Bank was excluded from discounting Bills of Exchange, lending
Money upon Pawns, dealing in Bullion, etc. and every thing else, but lending
upon Land, and to the Government, and therefore could possibly be no
disadvantage to the Bank of England, who do not pretend to lend upon Land.

3. If the other Bank had taken effect, it is probable the Bank of England would
have had more Cash left with them than before, since it would have been the
Interest of both Banks to have agreed, and then without doubt they might have
divided the Goldsmiths profits between them, and so each Bank have more
Deposites than the Bank of England had before.

4. If the setting up a Land-Bank would be a Disadvantage to the Bank of
England, it was no injustice to establish them, since the Parliament gave no
Warrant to the contrary, and their bargain was great enough notwithstanding;
and greater than they thought was fit to be granted to the Land-Bank, who were
to raise more than double the Sum, in less time, when the Difficulties were
greater, and the Coin better; they had but 7 l. per Cent. excluded from many
Advantages the Bank of England had, and were obliged besides to lend 500000 l.
per Annum, at 3 l. 10 s. 0 d. per Cent. Interest.

5. If the establishing the Land-Bank did increase the Demands upon the Bank of
England, it was caused by the unreasonable opposition they gave to it; which
failing of the Effect they proposed, gave them that Disreputation that always
attends those that are overcome, for the World had reason to believe they
understood their own Interest best; and when they seemed to wind up their whole
happiness in defeating the Land-Bank, and miscarried, it is not to be wondered
if other People thought their Condition to be worse then it was.

That the Covetousness and want of Understanding of the Bank of England was the
Occasion of their loss of Credit; To prove which I shall show,

1. That they left undone those things which they ought to do.

2. They have done those things, which they ought not to do.

1. To the first, They ought to have foreseen, that after the 4th. of May the
Demands upon them would be greater than before, for admitting the World had as
good an Opinion of their Credit as ever, yet the necessity of People must call
upon them for Money, for the whole Silver Species of England being sunk in a
day, they might be assured all People would want Money for their ordinary
occasions; and whatever opinion they had of their Security, would call for it
when they had demands, and therefore they ought to have made Provisions to
answer them.

2. They should have called in as many of their Bills as they could, whereas
they issued out Bills till the 4th. of May, and how many since they stopped their
payments is best known to themselves.

3. They might have bought Guineas for Tallies and clipped Money, when Tallies
were par, and clipped Money current, and Guineas playing between 22 s. and 24 s.
which they were three Weeks or a Month.

4. They might have called in their 40 l. per Cent. either before or
immediately after the 4th. of May, and not kept Money in their Pockets which
they owed to other people.

5. When they could not pay all their Demands, they might have allowed the
difference which their Creditors gave to discount their Bills, since it is more
reason the Debtor should pay it than the Creditor.

6. They might have allowed the Interest they received, or at least Legal
Interest, when they were not able to pay the Principal.

To the last they Object, That they offered Tallies to any that demanded them,
which was the Security they had. I Answer,

1. It lies upon them to prove, they ever offered any Tallies payable within
three Months, but only such as it was worth 30 l. per Cent. to discount.

2. If they had offered such Tallies, it had not been sufficient, since their
Creditors did not trust the Exchequer, but them, and expected their Money upon
demand, as the Bank is liable by Law to pay it, or otherwise they would rather
have put their Money into the Exchequer for Tallies themselves, and have
received the Interest from the beginning, than let the Bank receive the
Interest of their Money till they call for it, and then give them but part of
that Security which they might have had at first, and upon such Funds as the
Bank thought fit to spare, whereas themselves might have chosen their own Funds.

If these Methods would not have fully answered their Creditors, at least it
would have given them the Characters of honest Men, and of doing all that they
were able to do.

Next I am to prove the Bank of England have done those things which they ought
not to do.

1. They extended their Credit beyond 1200000 l. and by that means run in debt
more than they were able to pay, whereas it is very evident the Act of
Parliament designed to confine their Credit to 1200000 l. which their Fund was
answerable for, by obliging them not to issue out a greater Sum upon it; not
imagining that they would evade the Act, by issuing out Notes, which bound not
themselves, nor was any ways Security to those that accepted them. For it is
not to be conceived the Parliament designed they should borrow any Money, but
what they could give Security for, and not under the shelter of an Act of
Parliament deceive innocent People, who do not know a Corporation is not bound,
but under their Common-Seal.

2. When they had thus evaded the Act, and were afraid to be called to account
by the next Parliament, to sweeten the Contrey-Gentlemen they promised to lend
Money upon Land, to any one that offered them good-Security, which I hope they
have more modesty then to say they have performed, and by that means have
justly raised the indignation of the Nobility, and Gentry against them, who
hoped to be eased from the Extortion of Scriveners and Usurers.

3. They undertook a foolish Bargain, to return Money for Flanders, by which
they have lost a Sum best known to themselves, whereas it might have done
better by the Merchants, whose Business it was, and who unstood it better. They
allege, they did it to serve the Government, but I think it will be hard to
satisfy the World, that they were contented to lose 80000 l. to save the King
20000 l. and therefore it will be rather accounted their Folly than Zeal.

4. Within few days before the 4th. of May, they gave Bills payable upon demand
for clipped Money, whereas it is probable, the same persons would have been
contented to have taken them payable six Months after, or else they need not
have given them at all.

5. By their unreasonable Opposition they gave to the Land-Bank, they rendered
the raising of the Sum proposed ineffectual, and consequently disabled
themselves, by not receiving so much Money as was appropriated to their own use
out of that Fund.

6. Qry. Whether they did not address themselves to the Treasury, to have their
Bills refused in the Customs? if so, it was a great diminution to their Credit.

7. To finish their ruin, they lent 200000 l. to the King, when they paid but
5 l. per Cent. of their Debts, and some say to hinder the Land-Bank Propasals
from being accepted.

Here I am aware I shall be answered, that they did it out of Zeal to his
Majesty, and to serve the Government; this they think will justify all their
Miscarriages, and protect them for acting against the Rules of Justice and
Prudence, therefore it ought to be examined. They have served the Government, I
grant it, but it was to serve themselves; a Miser would be as good a Friend;
they have lent the Government Money, but upon as great Interest as the
Parliament allowed, and greater than they could get elsewhere.

They have lent other Peoples Money, and not their own, and at the same time
refuse to pay those to whom it belongs; whereas if their Zeal for the
Government had been as great as they pretended, they would have raised Money in
their private Capacities, and so lent what was their own, or at least given
their Creditors the Interest they received, but instead of that they keep part
of their principal Money in their hands, and what they have already called in
for, they pay 6 l. per Cent. to themselves, though they deny it to their
Creditors.

I will put them two Questions.

1. If a Man robs another of his Money, and lends it to the Government, will it
justify this Robbery?

2. Whether detaining a Man's Money from him, and lending it at Interest,
without giving the Interest received, be not in foro Conseientiae as bad as
taking it from him?

I believe if the Scene were changed from Grocers-Hall to Lumbard-street, we
shall all be of an Opinion.

I leave with a Goldsmith 1000 l. he gives me his Note payable upon demand, I
go to him six Months hence, and ask him for my Money, he tells me the
Government was in great distress, and he lent them my Money; I tell him I gave
him no such Commission, but finding my self remediless, I ask him to allow me
the Interest he receives, he refuses it; I then ask him to give me his Bond,
and Legal Interest, he refuses that; I fancy if I should pull him by the Nose,
I should be justified by most of those Gentlemen that are of another Opinion,
in the case of the Bank of England.

The next thing I have to prove, is, that if this had been given to the
Exchequer alone, or to the Bank of England, it would not have been so easily
raised as by a Land-Bank. And first for an Exchequer-Bank.

1. The Projectors themselves propose 400000 l. always to lie still to
circulate their Bills, (which is to be used to no other purpose whatsoever)
which must be wanting upon the Salt-Fund, to answer His Majesty's Occasions, or
else must be raised upon another; and so 400000 l. must be raised
extraordinary, whereas the Land-Bank asked but three.

2. If the Demands upon the Exchequer should exceed the 400000 l. which it is
likely they would, (every Body knowing their Stock) the Exchequer will be
broke, and the Credit of the Government sunk; whereas the Land-Bank may be able
to answer all their Bills; or if they should not, the Government will suffer no
discredit by it.

3. If the Exchequer should refuse Payment, the Creditor has no remedy, but
upon 7 l. per Cent. which he will not value at 70 l. whereas if the Bank should
refuse Payment, he would have Remedy for his whole Money.

Note, If the Exchequer-Bank should have Credit, Interest upon Land must be at
8 or 10 per Cent. For it is not to be imagined any one will lend upon Land at
the usual Interest, when he can have it upon demand, with 4 l. 10 s. running
Interest; and therefore such a Bank cannot be of as great Advantage as a Bank
that would raise the Land, and lessen the Interest of Money; for an
Exchequer-Bank can be of no use to any one, but such as have the management of
the 400000 l. which may be made use of to lend his Majesty upon Funds, and to
circulate the Tellers Notes, which some say has been a common practice, since
they have set up the Trade of Banking.

2. That the Bank of England could not have raised this Sum as well as the
Land-Bank; to illustrate which it must be examined, which way they could have
proposed to raise it, and that must be either 1. By issuing out Bills upon
their Credit. 2. Or by opening their Books for New Subscriptions.

As to the first: I suppose they will not pretend to say, that issuing out two
Millions and a half of Bills more, payable upon demand, would enable them the
better to answer those that were then out; and if they had opened their Books
for New Subscriptions, they must have let the New Subscribers come in at Par,
with their Original Stock, or not; and it is not likely they would do the
former, since by the passing a Bill in their Favor, their Original 60 l. being
then valued at 90 l. might have been stock-jobbed to 150 l. And the letting New
Subscriptions come in upon equal terms, must have reduced their stock to its
Original Value; for no Man would buy it at more, if he could subscribe at par;
and if they had opened their Books for Subscriptions, according to the Improved
Value, no one but would rather subscribe his Money to a New Fund, where he
might come in upon equal terms, than adjoyn a real value with an imaginary one.

3. But admitting they would have so much Self-denial to accept Subscriptions
at par, yet by the Money they raise they must pay their Bills that are out
already, as well as the 2564000 l. whereas the Land-Bank are to pay no more
than they receive.

4. Most People would rather subscribe to a New Bank, than one that has lost
its Credit.

Therefore I infer, if it could not be raised by a Land-Bank, it could not be
raised by this Fund.

The next thing I have to show, is, That there is no way to restore
Paper-Credit but by a New Bank.

I shall take it for granted, that Paper will never go for Money, but when I
can have Money for it upon demand; for no Man will part with ready Money for a
Note, or take a Note for Money upon any other Consideration, and therefore
Paper can never be restored, unless the Bank of England and Goldsmiths pay
their Notes, or else another Fund is set up that can.

1. The Bank of England if they were disposed to pay their Debts, cannot
possibly do it; their Money as it became due from the Exchequer, is not enough
to answer 5 per Cent. of their Debts, and they can never have any Credit till
they can answer all Demands, which must require greater Sums then they have,
or can possibly get.

2. If they had Money enough to answer all Demands, it is probable it would be
all called from them; for Reputation is so nice a thing, that if it*s once
blown upon, it is rarely recovered, especially in a matter that so nearly
concerns us, as parting with our Money; for it will be a hard matter to induce
me to trust one, that through Indiscretion or Design has deceived me.

3. It cannot be imagined that any one will bring in Money to be deposited with
them, for that is to pay in 100 l. and get 5 l. with a Weeks trouble when I
want it again.

4. The giving them a New Fund, is enabling them to cheat more People, for by
the Moneys that rise upon it, they must not only purchase their Fund, but
answer the Bills that are out before; and if their Creditors should not be so
good natured to stop their Demands, they must their Payments. As to the
Goldsmiths reviving Credit, I suppose no Man expects Reformation from them, or
that any thing will make them honest but a Catch-Pole: And of the
Exchequer-Credit we have had an Essay already, which with what I have said of
it before, is sufficient, therefore I argue, that Paper Credit can be restored
by no other means, than by a New Bank, and settling a Fresh Fund of Credit.


