An Account of the Sentence which past upon TITUS OATS (Upon Conviction of
Horrid Perjuries) At the Kings Bench-Bar, Saturday May 16th. 1685. ALSO, A
Relation of his Behavior in the Kings Bench-prison ever since his Convictions,
(viz.) May 8, and 9.
YOu lately had some account of his Convictions for Perjury, and also the clear
proof that was against him; But here (together with an account of his
Punishment,) is a true Relation of his Behavior both Then, and since, (viz.)
He was first brought by Coach from the Prison with a strong Guard, and carried
to the Sun Tavern in K. street, where he staid till the Court sat; then to the
Hall where (during the whole Trial) he behaved himself most impudently: Then he
returned to the same House, and refresht himself; From thence he took Coach for
his return to Prison, but the Rabble soon espied him, and followed him with
huge Exclamation, crying aloud, Hang the Rogue, let him go no further; O the
bloody Villain that has been the death of so many Innocent Men, besides the
Ruin of so many poor Families; and so continued till they came to Ivey bridge
in the Strand, where they began to abuse the very Officer that guarded him from
their Fury, insomuch, that with hazard of their own lives; they got him out of
the Coach, and clapped him into the next Boat, and so got him safe to the Prison;
where he no sooner came, but he again began his old way of Railery against the
King and Government, and was in so great passion, that for that Night he slept
little; And the next morning being brought up by Water, (for they would not
venture themselves by Land,) and catry'd to the same House, he still retained
his old Impudence, and carried it along with him even into the very Court, as
appeared by his impertinent Questions, and Reflections upon those worthy
Persons who gave Testimony against him. Upon the second Conviction, he withdrew
again to the Sun-tavern, where, to avoid the tumult, they staid somewhat late,
then slipped him into a Boat, and so conduct him safe to the Prison; where he
remained very sullen, and more abusive than ever, his old Cronies hardly
escaping his ill language, etc. He held up his Table daily to Two good Dishes,
and a plentiful supply of good Liquors, often saying, They shall never make him
refrain his Meat and Drink, etc. He is grown very malicious, insomuch that they
watch him every night, least he may have hid a remnant of the Poison he gave
the Keepers Dog; But as for the 35 Fathom of Rope, That is reserved for him,
against he has occasion to make use of part of it.

On Saturday the 16th. instant, this famous swearing-master was again brought
by Water to the Sun-tavern, and as soon as the Court sat, was brought in; where
he seemed somewhat abated of his former Insolence, and pretended Four several
Errors, (as he would have them) and begged time for 3, or 4, days to Argue them;
But was Answered he had longer time than the Court usually allowed; Then he
begged till Monday, but that the Court did not allow, being altogether
Impracticable; Then the L. C. J. most Learnedly set forth the Sin of Perjury,
as also the dreadful Consequences, and Dire Effects it lately wrought upon
these 3 Kingdoms; telling them, that in former Ages, Perjury was present Death;
But after (for some Reasons,) was mitigated to cutting the Tongue, etc. But
since That, it was again mitigated, not but the Crime was as great as ever; It
never being supposed that any Person could be so damnably Impudent, as falsely
to swear any Man out of his very Life, or Estate. When this was ended, they
pronounced Sentence, which was thus, (viz.)

That he should for ever be Degraded, and forthwith stripped of all his Priestly
Habits.

That he should stand in the Pillory before Westminster-hall-gate on Monday the
18th. instant, one hour, (between the hours of 10 and 12,) with a Paper on his
Head, writ, Perjury, Perjury, twice; and walk round the Hall with the said
Paper on his Head.

On Tuesday the 19th. to stand an hour in the Pillory, (between 11 and 1)
before the Royal Exchange, with the same Inscription over his Head.

On Wednesday the 20th. to be Whipped from Ald-gate to Newgate.

And on Thursday the 21th. to be Whipped from Newgate to Tybourn.

On Friday the 22th. to stand in the Pillory at Tybourn, with the same
Inscription of Perjury over his Head, his Face toward Tybourn.

And for these Two Perjuries to pay a 1000 Marquis for each Perjury, and to
abide in Prison.

And when he has performed this Ceremony, he is to stand in the Pillory Three
times Annually, (viz.)

On the 9th. of August, at Charing Cross, with his Inscription, etc.

On the 22th. of September over against the Templegate, with the same
Inscription over his Head.

On the 24th. of April at Westminster-hall-gate, with the Inscription over his
Head, etc. Perjury, Perjury, etc.

Note, He is to perform these three last shows Annually, and be kept a close
Prisoner during Life.

Printed for A. Banks, at Charing Cross, Anno Domini, 1685. Edinburgh,
Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty,
Anno Dom, 1685.


