(...) ^^^^UNT (...) ^HE ^everal PLOTS, CONSPIRACIES, and Hellish ATTEMPTS of
the Bloody-minded PAPISTS, against the Princes and Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, from the Reformation to this present Year, 1678.

AS ALSO Their Cruel Practices in France against the Protestants in the
Massacre of Paris, etc.

WITH A more particular Account of their Plots in relation to the late Civil
War, and their Contrivances of the Death of King CHARLES the First, of blessed
Memory.

LONDON, Printed for J. R. and W. A. 1679.

Plots, Conspiracies and Attempts of Domestic and Foraign Enemies, of the
Romish Religion, against the Princes and Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland, etc.
THose which make descriptions of large Countries in small Tables, offend not
against truth, though somewhat against quantity, so Pliny tells us.
Notwithstanding with much convenience, case to the beholder, and truth of
observation, things are presented to our Eyes in those little Draughts, that
the very places themselves being viewed with great Trouble and loss of Time,
cannot yield more benefit to the most diligent, oftentimes not so much.
Wherefore especially, because the Argument cannot be now unseasonable (for the
abridgment of the Commentaries of large Histories, is not unlike Maps of
Kingdoms) I have here collected out of diverse Authors, which have severally
handled parts of this subject, into one, The chief Conspiracies and Attempts
against the Kingdoms alone, and immediately of great Britain and Ireland, or
else mediately through the sides of the Princes of these Countries, by Traitors
at home or abroad, of the Romish Religion, or foraign Enemies, by treacherous
courses of those of the same bloody superstition. The beginning I make the
first-time of Reformation of Religion here in England under Queen Elizabeth,
and the extent unto this present Year. I begin no higher than Queen Elizabeth,
because the Reformation of Henry the eight was but in part, and the other of
King Edward, was an interrupted one, by the sudden succession of his Sister
Queen Mary; the rather, because, for ought we know, there was no great matter
plotted against this hopeful young Prince, that was not rather from Ambition,
(if there was any such) than from a desire of subverting Religion. Not but that
the Enemies of our Religion and Kingdom, had us then in their Minds, but other
ways there were, before bloody and desperate Practices were to be taken in
hand, to be first entered into, of less difficulty, and more hopeful success.
And these are the steps the Adversaries of our Religion use to tread, who
thirsting after England, labor first to bring us back to Rome, by striving to
make our selves hate our own Religion, and leave that God which brought us out
of the Land of Egypt, bewitching us with glorious Idolatry of the golden Calves
of Rome, introducing Ignorance and Blindness, that we may when our Eyes are
out, patiently grind in the Mill of Slavery. If this course fail, the next is
by Poison, Murdes, and force of Arms, to draw us to Sodom and Egypt.

The Reformation of England and Ireland fall under one time, and because that
of Scotland also differs not many years in age, they may all be brought in
one account. With the Plots are jointly handled the Deliverances, which in some
respect or other may very well be called great, either in regard of the Misery
we had fallen into, (if God had not prevented them) of the slavery of Soul and
Body, and this agrees with all: Or else for the strangeness of the discoveries
of their mischiefs, (sometime almost miraculous) before they have come to their
birth, or disappointing them of their purposes, when the Authors have put them
in practice; and these two respects, the one or the other, which may well
denominate God's goodness to us, in disappointing them to be great, may be
found in all likewise. So that for these Mercies received, we ought to ascribe
to our Deliverer that which is due unto him, the praise of his own Work, and
continual thanks for his Mercies, which even to this day, is from those
Deliverances of the days of old, extended; we should have bin then betrayed,
but we had now bin Slaves, both we, our selves and ours; one Plot, had it
succeeded, had bin the betraying of England at once to them, who love themselves
too well to have it lost easily, and are so wise, that they endure no Traitors,
but for themselves, nor can endure any that loves his Country but a Spaniard.
We may learn also to trust in him, even now particularly, who is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, nor is his hand shortened that he cannot
save, nor his Ear heavy that he cannot hear those that call upon him, lifting
up pure Hands in sincerity of Heart: although the Sins of our Nation in
general, may justly provoke our God to punish us by them that hate us, for that
cause, that instead of extirpating Popery and Superstition (a thing not hard to
be done in human Reason, if the Children of Papists were carefully educated
under Protestant Tutors) we think their Religion tolerable, and nothing so
dangerous to Soul or Body as some Men seem to make it. Should we not detest and
abhor the Religion of such a Generation, as count they do God good service by
killing us? witness the bloody Persecution under Queen Mary, and the damnable
Plot of the Gunpowder Treason. Yet some there are that would seem Protestants,
and yet deny that their cruelty was such, as the Author of the English
Martyrology makes the Marian Persecution to be. Others of no small esteem in
the Church of England, instead of acknowledging Foxes History a Monument of
Martyrs, call it a Book fraught with Traitors and Heretics. And for the
Gun-Pouder Conspiracy, some affirm it the deeds of a few Malcontents, far
from the approbation of the Catholics; others as falsely, that there was no
such Treason intended, but that it was an invention of him, whom in reverence I
forbear to name. But yet this may encourage us, that God will still preserve
us, for their sakes that have now and heretofore stoutly defended God's true
Religion, and that in very many places of this Land, we have had those that
with all their power have opposed the very beginnings of Popery. But wonderful
it is, and scarcely credible, that any should so much have forgotten the
Gunpowder Treason, as to say, that they would rather trust a Papist than a
Puritan; as if they believed not there was any such Treason, or had forgotten
it; or that they thought that those whom Men call Puritans, were traitorously
minded, and bloody Persons. In the most Reverend and Judicious Assembly of this
Kingdom, a Member of that Assembly, declared in particulars, how the best Men
have bin branded with the name of Puritan, (it was where any Man might freely
have spoken) yet no Man contradicted him. If it be given sometime to the best,
without question those ordinarily called by that bie-name, are none of the
worst; because from likeness at least diverse Men have one Name. We will
acknowledge Hypocrites among them, but because one is such, no Man will conclude
they must be all so. No Man of us almost abhors the Name of Protestant to be
given him, and yet of these, some will Lie, others will Steal, and a third sort
will do worse. Since this Parliament (perhaps I imagine the time, and reason
aright) the Jesuits and Jesuited have invented a strange Name for such Men,
and let fall the r^^roach of Puritan. They call them by a figurative Name,
which is ignorantly spoken by most, falsely by all; and as the roundest Figure
is of the largest Capacity, so they have shaped them a Name, which is larger
than Precisian, Brownist, or the like, surroundeth every one, that thinks it
not a just thing to rail against the Parliament, to curse the Fathers of his
Country. But I desire not to be called, but to be to^us terres atque rotundus.
So much by the way; to fall upon the business now.

The King of Spain offers Marriage to the Queen.
AT the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Philip the second of Spain
sought to win her to him by Marriage, not doubting to procure a Dispensation
for the Incest, but was as wisely answered, as he wickedly and craftily
intended, that the Queen could not so soon forget her Sisters death, she
knowing it to be a part of discretion to keep in hope so potent an Adversary,
if he should be incensed by a denial (her own Kingdom, by reason of the change
of Religion, and the depriving of many Popish Bishops, which the blinded People
had in some esteem, among many other alterations, being of doubtful Affections)
till she could better provide for her own Security. The Spaniard in the mean
time perceived that his suit was not like to succeed, when the thought of
uniting England to Spain by the Marriage of Queen Elizabeth, if like her Sister
Mary she proved not barren, was taken away, he took hold on the next occasion.

The practice of the Guises with the Queen of Scots against England.
MAry now Queen of Scots, Daughter and Heir apparent unto James the fifth, and
Wife unto Francis, Dauphine of France, Daughter of Mary of Lorrain, who was
Sister unto the Duke of Guise, She, after the death of Queen Mary of England,
being encouraged thereunto by the Guises her Uncles, usurpeth the Arms of
England, uniting them to the Arms of Scotland, on her Plate, in the Windows of
her House, and on her Servants Coats, declaring her self thereby Queen of
England. Her meaning was well understood, and this (it is very probable) in the
fourth year of Queen Elizabeth, made Arthur Poole and his Brethren, descended
of George Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward the fourth, and Anthony Fortescue
their Brother-in-Law, with their Confederates, to conspire secretly to fly unto
the Guises in France, and thence, and with their help, to come with an Army
into Wales, and there to proclaim the Queen of Scots Queen of England, and
Arthur Poole Duke of Clarence. God was pleased in a very good time to discover
this Plot. For had they gone thither and discovered their intents, it had (if
God had not powerfully opposed it) not only animated the Guises to have
seconded them, and furnished them with Men and Money, but having returned into
Wales, they would have gathered great Forces to augment their Numbers, and put
the Queen to the incomparable Trouble and Danger of a Civil War. Beside all
this, she had at this time on every side, Enemies abroad, the French King, the
King of Spain, the Guisian and Popish Faction in Scotland. The Loyal People of
Scotland were so unable to help her, that they stood in need of her help. The
Low Countries were under Spanish Tyranny, and a convenient place from whence to
annoy this Kingdom. The Conspirators confessed that they did not intend to put
in practice this thing, during the Life of our Queen; for indeed they were made
believe by Predictions of Popish Astrologians, that Queen Elizabeth could not
live above one year. The good Queen notwithstanding pardoned their Lives, after
Sentence of Death upon them, from their own Confession.

And how zealously the Guises endeavored to invade England, may appear by the
inclination of Sebastian Martigius sent into Scotland, by the counsel of the
Guises (for about those times their alone Counsels were principally followed)
with Horse and Foot, to assist in the Civil War of Scotland, who could hardly
be restrained from invading England presently, and first of all, presuming (no
question) on the aid of Papists in England, from intelligence held with them
here. For otherwise what could 1000 Horse, and not very many Foot do in respect
of conquering all England? Now was the Queen of Scots in France, and although
the Regency of Scotland was put into the hands of the Marquess of Hamilton, yet
the power of the Queen Dowager with her French Faction did so increase, and on
the other side the authority of the Marquess Regent so abate, that after the
promise from the French King of 12000 Crowns by the Year, and Duchy of
Castle-Herald, to which was added the preferment of all the Marquiss's chief
kindred, the Marquess resigned his place into the hands of Mary of Lorrain
Queen Dowager; a thing for a Woman to be Regent in Scotland but once before
known. She had made many promises unto the Scots of the freedom of exercising
the Protestant Religion, but being now settled in the Regency, she discovered
her mind wholly bent to alter Religion. She told her Friends in plain terms,
that though the Ministers whom she named should preach more honestly, or (as
she called it) more sincerely than they had done; yet they should all be
banished. She expressed at the death of a young Man, whom she seemed to bewail,
being slain, for that his Father had not rather excused him, being a stout
defender of the reformed Religion, that she was cruelly minded toward the
Professors thereof. Easter also was commanded to be celebrated after the Romish
Custom. For these and diverse other of her overtures, Messengers were sent unto
her, to desire her to be good to the Protestants, and to remember the many
Promises she had made unto them to that end. But all in vain. She told the Earl
of Glencarn, and Sir John Campbel, who were sent unto her; That performance of
Promises was to be expected from Princes, no farther than stood with their
profit. Upon this they told one another that they then renounced all Obedience
and Duty toward her. Violence now with Art was to be used for effecting her
Purpose touching Religion.

Hereupon advice was given by Labrosse a French Commander in Scotland, to put
to death all the Nobility of Scotland, for that the People being bereaved of
their Heads, would after be easily brought to undergo any Yoke; but that things
might appear with a more pleasing Color, there was a show, as if the Queen had
labored, and would endeavor to convince her Adversaries in Religion, by no
other way, but by Arguments. Into Scotland were sent three Sorbon Doctors with
the Bishop of Amiens. But with what safety might any Man dispute with them,
when he that did so was in the midst of his armed Enemies, and there was
greatest fear of violence from the Disputers themselves. For the Bishop of
Amiens counseled the Queen Regent, that if any there were which should be
found to dispute against the Romish Decrees, he should be put to death, yea
even those who but seemed to be of another Mind only. We are not informed that
the Queen Regent put in practice the foregoing counsels, perhaps the time was
not altogether seasonable, nor do we take every single action, which might
conduce to the subverting of Religion, to be a Conspiracy: but we may well
esteem by the Queens Words, the Counselors and Commanders Intents and
Purposes, the placing of such a Regent, all this to be a continued Conspiracy,
to strangle in the birth the Church of Scotland, having yet scarcely taken
breath in the World. Not long after the Queen Regent dies, and although it
will perhaps be said, there was no discovery of any Conspiracy which was in
acting (as to put to death all the Nobility, or all that would dare dispute
against the Bishop or Doctors, could be no easy task to go about; the latter,
because the death of their last Martyr Walter Mill did seem so grevious unto
them, and if any more should suffer, how would such a thing be taken by
Frenchmen, People of another Nation?) It may be objected from the above named
Arguments, that there wanted no endeavor. After the death of the Mother, the
Daughter returning into Scotland, was married unto Henry Lord Darnley, who
being of the same Religion with the Queen, and they both a Brothers and Sisters
Children, did strongly maintain Popery, against the Protestant Religion. We
cannot imagine here that any thing should be contrived against the lives of
those Princes by a Popish Party to overthrow Religion. For, to subvert
Religion, no way could be found better, than by maintaining in life and honor
such Princes as these two were, who professed and maintained Popery; as
contrarily to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties and the like, the best means
are through the sides of such Kings and Queens as are Projectors and
Maintainers of them. So the holy Scripture declares by Word and Example, I
will smite the Shepherd and the Sheep shall be scattered. For this Queen was
so far from furthering the establishment of Religion, nay from connivence at
those who should go about any such matter, that she professed she would follow
the example of her Cousin, Queen Mary of England, which was no other thing than
maintaining in her Dominions the Pope and Popery, and punishing the contrary
minded as Heretics. It will not be thought (I suppose) that either the Papists
at home in Scotland, or those in France, or elsewhere, would go about to take
away the lives of such Princes, whose lives secured their Religion. For what
was attempted against the Life (and most unhappily succeeded) of the King, was
not any way to subvert Popery; because the deed was committed, and the Plot
chiefly laid by Papists. It rather was undertaken against the Life of this
Prince, by some, to make way for their own Family to inherit the Crown of
Scotland; by others, to get the Kingdom, and admit any Religion. But those that
look farther into Matters, judge this act to be committed against a Professor of
the Romish Religion, that he being taken out of the way, another might succeed,
which had greater Power and Friends to bring to pass, what King Henry the
Queens Husband, had a Mind, but not Power enough to do. And that made those who
were no Enemies to the King in point of Religion, not dislike the Treason, for
the Ends sake. I cannot be of their Minds altogether, who judge that of the
Queen of Scots, being now in restraint in England, not long before married to
Earl Bothwell, and presently to desire a Devorce from him, and to require that
he should be summoned within the space of a very few days, to return into the
Kingdom, to make answer and defense to the Queens Suit of Divorce, to have
proceeded from the changing Fancy of the Queen, not so much from Conscience.
For it was as well known before her departure into England, as after, that Earl
Bothwell, had a Wife living when he married the Queen; insomuch that at the
publishing the banes of their Matrimony, one stood up in the Church and forbad
them. It was generally thought that it was, that a way might be open for the
Duke of Norfolk, who then made Suit unto her. He indeed was such a Man, as
being of great Wealth, mighty in Friends, and singular Abilities of Mind, could
better bring about what was desired, than a Man of no great riches at any time,
but was now in extreme Poverty and Disgrace in the Dominions of the King of
Denmark, and notoriously infamous for his Crimes in Sctoland.

The Rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland.
AT this time the King of Spain wrote unto the Duke of Norfolk, to join with
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, to riase a Rebellion in England,
and to the Earl of Ormond to do the like in Ireland. These Letters were shown
unto Queen Elizabeth by the Duke and the Earl; that from hence at least might
appear their Loyalty.

Nevertheless, whether by the advice of the Bishop of Roast, who lay as
Ambassdor at London for the Queen of Scots, and one Rodolf a Florentine, going
in the appearance of a Merchant Factor, or purposing of himself, whatsoever he
might pretend, he privately sought to marry the Queen of Scots (she being next
Heir to the Crown of England) contrary to his Promise made unto his Sovereign
Queen Elizabeth. The Queen of Scots and the Duke participate of one another
Mind, by Letters written in hidden Characters. Neither was this a matter only
supposed, but the Dukes Secretary, one Higford, who was commanded by the Duke
to burn such Letters as came from the Queen of Scots, but did it not, and hid
them under a Mat in his Chamber, and being under examination, he caused them to
be produced. This was when the two Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland had
secretly complotted to raise Arms, and not long after the Dukes apprehension,
they fell into open Rebellion. One of the Letters which was shown at the Dukes
arraignment was to this purpose: That the Queen was sorry that the said Earls
of Northumberland and Westmerland were in Arms, before the Dukes Forces were
ready. This was undertaken after that Pope Pius Quintus had in Bulls from Rome
printed, and sent to Rodolf, absolved Queen Elizabeth's Subjects from their
Allegiance. The Pope persuaded the Spaniard to assist the Conspirators, that
his affairs in the Netherlands might prosper the better: and the French did the
like, that the Queen of England might be less able to send aid to the
Protestants in France. Northumberland and Westmerland having thus taken Arms,
Supplies and Moneys failing, withdrew themselves into Scotland, Norfolk was
thrown into Prison. Rodulf being in Custody, for whom the Pope had appointed
150000 Crowns to help the Conspirators, was for want of clear proof dismissed.
Rodolf being got out of Prison, afterward distributeth the 150000 Crowns to the
Partners in the Treason. He being with the Pope, is sent by him to the
Spaniard, to press him to give assistance to the King of Protugal also for the
same purpose, He wrote also to the Duke of Norfolk, promising to send him aid.
The Popes Letter to the Spaniard was, That he should send an Army out of the
Low Countries to invade England. And this very thing the Spaniard endeavored.

There was now a difference betwixt Queen Elizabeth and the Spaniard, about
Money sent by him to the Duke of Alva, but was intercepted by the Queen, and
that was one pretense that the Spaniard had, for his dealing agianst our Queen
and Kingdom. But the Duke of Norfolk was put to death. Nor is this the Relation
of an English Protenstant, but of a Papist (a good part whereof had not been
known but for him) one Hieronimus Calena. The Book was printed at Rome, by the
privilege of Pius Quintus, 1588. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland,
seduced by one Morton. a Priest, and at Duresine set up the Mass, thence they
marched to Clifford-moore, where hearing that the Queen of Scots was removed to
Coventry, that the Earl of sussex was sent with strong Forces against them, and
that Sir George Bows was behind them, and had fortified Bernards Castle, that
Scroupe and Cumberland had fortified Carlisle, and had also an Army in
readiness, that the Soldiers of Barwick and the power of Northumberland were
in New Castle, besieged Bernards Casle, and took it on Conditions. Then for
fear of the Earl of Sussex they fled to Hexam, thence by by-ways to Naworth
Castle, from that place into Scotland and from thence was Northumberland sent,
and here beheaded. Westmerland escaped into the Netherlands, where with a poor
pension under the Spaniard, he lived poorly all his Days.

Dacres his endeavor to deliver the Scots Queen.
IN the Year 1569, Leonard Dacres, second Son of William Lord Dacres of
Gillesland, being grieved to see a very great Patrimony go from him to the
Daughters of the Baron, whom the Duke of Norsolk their Father-in-Law had joined
in marriage with his Sons, grew revengeful, and joining with the Rebels,
endeavored to deliver the Queen of Scots; yet a little before being at the
Court, promised to assist the Queen his Sovereign, agianst the Rebels, but
treacherously he undertook to kill the Lord Scroup and Bishop of Carlisle, to
whose custody the Scottish Queen was committed, but he failing in the
performance, took Grastock Castle, holding it as his own, and gathered
Soldiers. The Lord Hunsdon met him with the trained Soldiers of Barwick, and
after a sharp conflict overcomes him, and Dacres fled into Scotland, from
thence into the Netherlands, where at Lovaine he lived and died poorly.

Fitz-Morris raises Rebellion in Ireland.
IN this Year Edmund and Peter Butler, Brethren to the Earl of Ormond, joining
with James Fitz-Morris, of the House of Desmond, entered into a Conspiracy
against Queen Elizabeth; and to further it, came Joannes Mendoza, secretly out
of Spain. The Earl of Ormond going into Ireland, caused them to submit; they
were imprisoned, and for their Brother the Earl sake, not brought to Trial. The
Lord Deputy, and Sir Humphry Gilbert (through Gods assistance) appeased that
rebellion. It is clear enough that this Rebellion in Ireland arose from the
Spaniard as the first mover, for to this end he sent Mendoza, into Ireland, and
had not long before written to the Earl, Brother to the two Rebels, to raise a
Rebellion in Ireland.

Stanleys Conspiracy.
IN the Year 1570, under a color of delivering the Queen of Scots, Thomas
Stanly and Edward, younger Sons of the Earl of Darby, Thomas Jerard, Rolston,
Hall, with others in Darby shire, conspired; but the Son of Rolston, which was
Pensioner to the Queen, disclosed the Conspiracy. All but Hall were imprisoned.
Hall escaped into the Isle of Man, thence by the commendation of the Bishop of
Ross, he was sent into Dunbritan; whence (the Castle being won) he was brought
to London, and suffered Death.

Dissimulation of Don John of Austria.
IN the Year 1576, Don John of Austria coming into the Low Countries as
Governor, sent Gastellus to Queen Elizabeth, pretending a perpetual Edict for
Peace. The Queen, as if ignorant of any bad intent, sent Rogers to congratulate
Don John's Edict; yet she knew that Don John had conceived a certain hope
marrying the Queen of Scots, and of enjoying Scotland and England, intending to
invade the lsle of Man, that from thence he might out of Ireland, the North of
England and Scotland also (where he knew were many Papists) invade England.
This Man to help forward this great design, practiced secretly with the Pope
and with the King of Spain, for the Havens of Biscay. But the King of Spain
neglected him in this desire, accounting England and Scotland, a Morsel litter
for his own Palate.

During this Treaty of perpetual Peace, this treacherous Don treats secretly
with the Scottish Queen about the Marriage: and the better to work his own
ends, took diverse Towns and Castles in the Low Countries by treachery, and
wrote into Spain, that for the invasion of the Netherlands, it would be best to
seize on first the Towns of Zealand, before the more inland places; and that
England might with the more ease be first invaded. The Queen in the mean while
prepares for War: but God cut off this her Enemy very suddenly; before the
fruits of his high thoughts were ripe.

Stucley's design against Ireland.
NOt Long before this time in Ireland, Thomas Stucley, a prodigal riotous and
needy English man discontented for that he lost the Stewardship of Wexford,
breaths out Contumelies against the Queen, and betaketh himself to the Pope,
with whom he treats, and boasts that he will subdue Ireland with 3000 Men,
and burn the Queen's Navy. Pope Pius Quintus, had a great opinion of him. After
him Gregory the 13, and the King of Spain, consulted together to invade England
and Ireland at once. The Pope aimed to get for his Son James Boncompayno, the
Kingdom of Ireland, and the Spaniard chiefly to imitate the course of Queen
Elizabeth (who to keep the Spaniard busy abroad, secretly sent aid to the
Dutch) that he might with draw her help from the LowCountries. But because the
strength of England consists chiefly in the Navy, the King of Spain se^teth
the Merchants of Italy, and the Netherlands a work, to hire the Merchants ships
of England, and so to send them away in very long Voyages, that the Ships being
from home, and Stucley joining with the Rebels of Ireland, the Queen's Navy
might be overthrown by a greater. The Pope gave him very great Title in
Ireland, and sent under his command 800 Italians, the Spaniard paying the
Soldiers. Stucley then went to Sebastian, King of Portugal, to entreat him to
be chief Conductor, but was persuaded by the said King, and the King by
Abdalla's Son Mahomet, to go first unto the African War, where both King
Sebastain and himself lost their lives. And thus God overthrew their wicked
counsels for that time.

Fitz-Morris his second attempt against Ireland.
ANno Domini 1579, James Fitz-Morris formerly having fled into France, being
pardoned for a former Rebellion in Ireland goes now to the Spaniard, and is by
him sent unto the Pope, to consult with him about his request, which was to
reduce that Kingdom by force of Arms unto Popery. The Pope, at the earnest suit
of Nicholas Sunders an English, and Alan an Irish Priest, gave Fitz-Morris some
Money to that intent and sends him back to the Spaniard, from whence with his
Priests, three Ships, and a few Soldiers, he arrived at Smerwick in Kerry in
Ireland, and raises a Fort there. Thomas Courtney an Englishman. presently
supriset the Ships. John and James, Brethren to the Earl of Desmond, join
themselves to Fitz. Morris who was their Kinsman. The Earl of Desmond (although
he pretended the contrary) favored them, drew forces together, and by this
pretense of Desmond, caused the Earl of Clanrickard, who came to oppose them,
to withdraw himself. Fitz. Morris seeing few Irish come to his aid, under
pretense of going in Pilgrimage to the holy Cross of Tipperary, went toward
Conaught and Vlster, to draw Forces together: whose Horses being tired, he took
some Horses from the Plough of William a Burgh his Kinsman, and being pursued
by the Sons of William a Burgh, Fitz-Morris perceiving that, told his cousin
Theobald a Burgh, that it was no time now to fall out about Horses, but to join
with him in the business of Rebellion, for which he was come into Ireland.
These Brethren had bin in a former Rebellion, but now declared unto Fitz-Morris
their sorrow for it, yet now fighting with Fitz-Morris to recover the Horses,
both the Brethren, and some others were slain. Sir William Drury was then Lord
Deputy, who sent for the Earl of Desmond, who made a promise by his Wife to the
Dputy, that he and his Men would fight against the Rebels. He dissembled long;
but after that Malbey had defeated John his Brothers Forces, and had sent for
Desmond to come unto him about Rekel a Town of Desmond, he plainly discovered
his Rebellion.

That Night the Rebels set upon Malbeys Tents, but were disappionted. Afterward
Desmond was sent for (to come in person) by the Lord Deputy Pelham, who
succeeded the deceased Sir William Drury: but excuses himself by a Letter sent
by his Wife. The Earl of Ormond was sent unto him, that he should deliver
Sanders the Priest, the Castles of Carigofoile and Asketton, and to submit
himself absolutely. The prosecuting of him was committed to the Earl of Ormond,
who ruined Conilo, the Rebels only refuse; ^e hanged the Bayliss of Youghall at
his Door, for refusing to take an English Garrison into the Town, besieged the
Spaniards in Strangical, but they withdrew themselves, and after were all
killed; and so hard he pressed Dismond and his Brethren, that madly they
entreated the chief Justice to take their parts. Afterward the Justice sent for
the Nobility of Munster to come to him, and would not dismiss them, till they
had given pleadges that they would assist against the Rebels. They made the
Baron of Lixenaw yield himself, took Carigofoil Castle, killed and hanged all
the Spaniards in it, and the Captain also an Italian.

San Josephus with 700 Spaniards sent into Ireland.
THe next Year, 1580, 700 Spaniards and Italians came to divert the Queens
Forces, rather than to conquer Ireland, they landed at Smerwick, under the
command of Son Josephus and Italian, they fortified it, and called it Fort
Delor; but being followed by the Earl of Ormond, they withdrew thence into a
Valley called Glammingel. Some Prisoners of them were taken, who confessed they
were 700, and that Arms were brought for 5000, and that more were expected from
Spain; that to conquer Ireland, the Spaniard and Pope had resolved; and
therefore sent into the hands of Sanders, Desmond and his Brother John, a vast
sum of Money. That Night the Spaniards and Italians returned to their Fort,
which so soon as Ordnance could be brought, and Winter was returned with the
Ships of War from England, was on every side besieged, and after five days
taken. The common Soldiers Italians and Spaniards, were put to the Sword, the
Irish hanged: only the Captains of the former were preserved. Three Years
after, Desmond wandering like a Vagabond, had his Arm almost cut off by a common
Soldier, before he was known; and after was slain. Nicholus Sanders was almost
famished in the Woods, and died stark mad. This Year 1580, Priests and
Seminaries much increasing in England, severe Laws were enacted against them.
These were for the most part bred in the English College of Doway, founded (by
the procurement of Alan, sometimes a Student in Oxford, afterward Priest and
Cardinal) in the Year 1568. Afterward under Requesenius's Government in the
Low Countries, when the Wars were between England and Spain, the Fugitives were
thrust from thence, and two Colleges erected for them, one at Rh^mes, the
other at Rome, the first by the Guises, the second by Gregory the 13. From
these places rose in England, Hanse, Nelson, Main, Sherward, Priests, who
reported Queen Elizabeth to be an Heretic and so ought to be deposed, for
which they suffered. In the aforesaid Year 1580, Robert Parsons, a Man of
turbulent Spirit and impudent, Campian a more modest Man, both Jesuits; they to
serve the Catholics turns, obtained of Pope Gregory an interpretation of Pius
his Bull against Queen Elizabeth, that it bound the Queen and Heretics always,
but not Catholics, till a convenient s^ason. Compian wrote a Book entitled,
10 Reasons in defense of Rome. Mr. Chark answered him soberly. Parsons wrote
against ( hark virulently but Campian's 10 Reasons were thoroughly answered by
Dr. Whitaker.

Campian and others condemned.
EDmund Campian, Ralf Sherwin, Luks Kerby, Alexander Briant, were taken in the
year 1581, as Traitors to the Queen and State, and condemned for coming into
England to stir up Sedition. Still more and more Priests came into England, and
for their dangerons Doctrine, That Princes excommunicated were to be thrown out
of their Kingdoms; that Princes of any other than the Roman Religion had lost
their Kingly Dignity; that those who had taken Orders were freed from Princes
Jurisdiction, and not bound by their Laws, it was enacted 1582, That it should
be Treason to dissuade any Subject from his Allegiance, and from the Religion
established in England, etc.

Somerviles attempt to kill the Queen.
AN. Dom. 1583, diverse Priests and Jesuits wrote dangerous Books against Q.
Eliz. and certain other Princes excommunicated: which prevailed so far, that
one Somervile a Gentleman, breathing out nothing but Blood against the
Protestants, secretly sought entrance into the Queens Presence, with a drawn
Sword set upon one or two in his way; and being apprehended, confessed that he
purposed to have killed the Queen. Ed. Ardern his Father-in-Law, a Gentleman of
Warwickshire, and Arderns Wife, and their Daughter, Somervil's Wife, and Hall
a Priest, were condemned as guilty of Somervil's practice. After three days
Somervile was found strangled in Prison (for fear of revealing it, as was
thought) where he lay, and Ardern was hanged the next day.

Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, thrust out of England.
IN 1584, some English Gentlemen began to practice the delivery of the Queen of
Scots, Francis Throgmorton, was suspected by Letters written to the Queen of
Scots, and intercepted, Presently Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundel, a
Courtier, left the Land secretly. Henry Earl of Northumborland, and Philip Earl
of Arundel were commanded to their Houses. And there was great cause of
circumspection; for the Papists by printed Books incited the Maids of Honor to
do that agianst the Queen that Judith did against Holofernes. Yet was the
Queens Mercy such, that she caused 70 Priests to be sent out of England. The
chief of them were Gasper Heywood, who of all the Jesuits first came into
England, James Bosgrave, John Ha^^, and Edward Rishton, who presently after
wrote a Book against the Queen. At this time Bernardinus Mendoza, the Spanish
Ambassador, was thrust out of England, for practicing Treason against the
State. He having dealt with Throgmarton and others, to bring in strangers to
invade the Land, as appeared by Throgmorton's action, who being apprehended,
sent one of his Packets to Mendoza: His other Packets being searched, there was
found a Catalogue of all the Havens in England, sit to land in, and another of
all the Noblemen in England, which favored the Romish Religion. And he did not
deny that he had promised his help to Mendoza, and the help of those Nobles it
was fit he should deal with.

A Popish practice against Q. Elizabeth discovered, not without a Miracle, by
Creighton's torn Papers, a Scottish Jesuit.
QUeen Elizabeth, that rare Paragon of her Sex, and that fairly flourishing
Flower, which Traitors (though often attempted) could never nip, nor crop up,
being a Princess both Prudent, Pious, and Pitiful; seeking (therefore) a fair
opportunity and suitable means to set the Queen of Scots (at those Times tainted
with some Treasonable Practices against her Crown and Person) at liberty: And
for that purpose sent Sir William Wade (who was then returned out of Spain) to
confer with her of the means thereunto. And the good Queen was about to send
Sir Walter Mildmay, to bring this aim of hers to further issue. But some
further terrors and fears in the interim brake out between them, which
disturbed that intention; especially by a notable discovery by certain Papers,
which one Creighton a Jesuit, sailing into Scotland, did then tear in pieces
when he was apprehended in the Ship by Dutch-Pirates at Sea, whose person being
by them ^^ised on, he took forth his Papers (wherein it seems the project of a
Traitorous Plot against Queen Elizabeth at that time, was described) tore them
into small pieces, and with all his force threw them into the Sea. But see how
the Lord's good Providence ordered it; as they flew in the Air, the Wind blew
stiffly, by force whereof they were all blown back again into the Ship, even in
a miraculous manner, as the Jesuit himself confessed, when he saw it. Which
Papers were all kept and gathered together, sent to England to Sir William Wade
aforesaid, and with much labor and singular skill so joined and set together
again, that he found they contained a notable new Plot (among many other) of
the Popes, the Spaniards, and the Guise's resolution to Invade England.
Whereupon, and by reason of many other rumors of dangers intended against the
Queen and whole Kingdom of England, a great number of all sorts of Men (out of
common charity, and to show their love and affectionate care of the welfare of
the Queen and State) bound themselves by an Association (as then it was called)
by mutual promises and subscriptions of Hands and Seals, to prosecute all such
(by all their force and might, even unto death) that should attempt any thing
against the Life of the Queen, or Welfare of the Kingdom. Now the Queen of
Scots took this as a thing devised to bring her into danger, and she also was
so continually set upon by seditious spirits, who if they may but have access,
are able to draw the greatest Princes to destruction. And what have been their
practices from time to time, but to bring great Persons, and greatest Families
to ruin? Lamentable experience shows openly the fruit of their malice and
mischievous plots of Treason, which they impiously and audaciously call and
count nothing else but advancing of their Catholic Cause. Now the Scots -Queen
(led on by her blind guides) dealt most importunely with the Pope and
Spaniards, by Sir Francis Englefield, that by all means they would with speed
undertake their intended Business, namely, the Invasion of our Realm. For the
advancing whereof, the Pope and Spanidrd had resolved on these points.

1. That Queen Elizabeth should be deprived of her Kingdom.

2. That the King of Scots, a manifest favourer of Heresy, should utterly be
dis-inherited of the Kingdom of England.

3. That the Scots- Queen should Marry some Nobleman of England that was a
Catholic.

4. That this Man must be chosen King of England by the Catholics of England.

5. That this choice so made, must be confirmed by the Pope.

6. That the Children of him, so chosen, begotten of the Scots- Queen, must be
declared Successors in the Kingdom.

All these things were confirmed to be true, by the testimoney of one Heart, a
Priest. Who was that noble Englishman that should marry the Scots-Queen, was
much enquired after by Sir Francis Walsingham, with all diligence, but not
certainly found out; yet there was strong suspicion of Henry Howard, Brother to
the Duke of Norfolk, who was Noble by birth, unmarried, and a fast favourer of
that Religion, and in great grace and favor with them. All these things were
discovered by this Creighton, the Jesuite's torn Papers, as aforesaid, And all
this their plotting and contriving of France, Spain, and the Pope, against
Queen Elizabeth and King James, for no other cause but for their Religion,
which they had now fairly begun to establish among their People.

Parry Executed for Treason.
IN the year 1585, William Parry, a Welehman, and Doctor of Law, spoke against
that Law, which in the Parliament then held, was Exhibited, and called it a
Bloody Law. Presently after he was accused of practizing the Queen's death. He
confessed voluntarily in the Tower, that having obtained the Queen's pardon for
breaking into the Chamber and wounding one Hare (for which he was Condemned) he
being a sworn Servant to the Queen; from England he went into France, and was
reconciled. Afterward at Venice, in consultation with Beuedict Palmeus, he told
him that he had found out a way to help the afflicted Catholics in England, if
the Pope, or some learned Divines, would approve it as lawful. The Jesuit
Palmeus approved it. Next in France, one Morgan, drew him to consent to murder
the Queen, if it should prove lawful. This Act the Pope's Nuncio, Ragazonius,
commended. Parry afterward having access to the Queen, showed her all, and not
long after Cardinal Come his Letter approving the enterprise. Now he takes a
new resolution to perform it, encouraged especially by Doctor Alen's Book,
teaching that Princes Excommunicated are to be spoiled of their Kingdoms and
Lives. These with many other things, Parry confessed before the Lord Hunsdon,
Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir Francis Walsingham, in Westminster Hall; the
heads of his Accusation being read, he confessed himself guilty. He died in the
Palace-yard before Westminster Hall, not once calling upon the Name of God. At
this time also Henry Earl of Northumberland, for entering into Traitorous
Counsels with Paget and the Guises to invade England, was cast into the Tower,
where he was found dead, being shot with three Bullets under the left Pap, the
Chamber Door bolted in the inside. A Pistol was found in his Chamber, and
himself the author of his own death. Thus from time to time, the most noble
Families of England have been Seduced and Ruined by the false and bewitching
counsels of Jesuits and Seminaries.

Savage's attempt to kill the Queen.
NOw again there was a most abominable Treason conspired, and voluntarily
confessed by the Conspirators. One Gifford, a Doctor in Divinity, Gilber
Gifford, and Hodgeson, Priests, persuaded one John Savage, a bloody Fellow, to
undertake to kill Queen Elizabeth: To hide their mischievous intents more
cunningly from the Queen's Council, who were very careful to foresee all
Danger, they wrote a Book, in which they advise the Papists in England, not to
go about to hurt the Queen. For they were to use no other Weapons against their
Prince, than the Christian Weapons of Tears, Fasting, Prayers, and the like:
And most cunningly also these Foxes spread a Rumor, that George Gifford, one
of the Queen's Pensioners, had sworn to kill the Queen, and for that cause had
gotten from the Guises a very great sum of Money. The Easter following, John
Ballard, an English Priest of the College of Rhemes, was come into England, who
had been trying the minds of Papists in England and Scotland. He had dealt with
Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in France, Charles Pages and others, for the
Invasion of England. And although it seemed to be a very hard work, yet he had
sworn to use his utmost endeavor in it, and also for the liberty of the Queen
of Scots. At Whitsuntide, in a Soldiers habit, and under the name of Captain
Fortescue, he had a conference in London with Anthony Babington, a young
Gentleman of Darby-shire, Romishly affected, who not long before in France, had
conference with Thomas Morgan, and the Bishop of Glasco, the Scotch Queen's
Ambassador. He was drawn by them, showing him most assured hopes of Honor from
her, to addict himself to them; and by their means had favorable Letters from
her. Ballard and Babington, conferred together concerning the Invasion of
England; but it was not deemed a thing could be done, Queen Elizabeth being
alive. Then Ballard informed Babington, that Savage had undertaken to kill her.
Babington's advice was, that it should not be committed to Savage alone, lest
perhaps he might be hindered, but to six resolute Men, of which number Savage
should be one. Upon this, Babington took into his consideration the Ports, in
which the Invaders should land the Confederates, that should join in the act of
murdering Q. Elizabeth, and delivering the Scots-Queen. In the mean time a
Letter was brought from the Imprisoned Queen to Babington, in a secret
Character, blaming Babington's long silence; but he excused it, because she was
under the custody of Sir Amice Paulet, a severe Keeper, declared unto her, that
which Ballard and he had resolved before, and that himself with one hundred
more would deliver her. The purpose by her Letters unto Babington was
commended: And it was advised that it should be undertaken considerately, and
that nothing should be moved before they were s^^e of External Forces; that
they should make an Association, as if they feared the Puritans, that some
Tumults might be raised in Ireland, while the thing should be done here: That
Arundel and his Brethren, and Northumberland should be drawn to their side;
Westmerland, Paget, and others called Home. The way to deliver the Scots-Queen,
was appointed, to overthrow a Coach in the Gate, or set the Stables on fire, or
intercept her as she rode to take the air, betwixt Chartly and Stafford.
Babington undertook for rewards, to all that should give their help. He had
gotten unto him Edward Windsor, the Lord Windsor's Brother, Thomas Satisbury,
Charles Tinley, the Queens Pensioner, Chidioc Tichbourn, Edward Abingdon, whose
Father was the Queen's Cofferer, Robert Gage, John Travers, John Charnick, John
Jones, Savage, Barnwel, an Irish Gentleman, Henry Dun, Clark of the
First Fruits Office; and one Polly also joined himself, who was thought to
reveal all to Sir Francis Walstngham. Abingdon, Barnwel, Charnick, and Savage,
took an Oath to kill her with their own hands. Babington enjoined, that
whosoever was admitted into the Conspiracy, should take an Oath of secrecy.
They were so confident of the success, that they did not fear to cause the
undertakers of the Treason to be Pictured together, which Picture being seen of
the Queen, she knew only Barnwel, and seeing him a good way off, she blamed the
neglect of guarding her Person. This Fellow afterward gave it out, that if the
Conspirators had been present, the deed might easily have been done. That the
aid from France might not be wanting, leave was obtained for Ballard to pass
over thither for Money, under a false name, and Babington was to follow; who,
that he might the more cunningly work his ends, pretended to Sir Francis
Walsingham, that he had a desire to go into France, to discover what the
Fugitives plotted for the delivery of the Scots-Queen. Walsingham seemed very
much to like the matter, and to commend Babington's resolution, but upon
pretenses, delayed his going. This was known to Walsingham, either out of a
singular faculty he had to find out Treasons, or else by the means of Gilbert
Gifford a Priest, who was sent out of France to encourage Savage in his wicked
resolution, and that Letters might safely be transmitted by him to the Queen of
Scots. Gifford corrupted with Money, or for fear, revealed the Plot to
Walsingham, and promised to communicate unto him all his Letters. Walsingham
kindly used him, sent him into Staffordshire to Sir Amice Paulet, in a Letter
persuading Sir Amice to suffer some of his Servants to be corrupted by him.
Gifford for some Gold prevailed with Sir Amice his Brewer, who conveyed the
letters to and from Gifford, which by Messengers for that end appointed, came
ever to the hands of Sir Francis Walsingham, who coppied out the Letters, and
by the Art of Thomas Philips found out the Character, and by the help of one
Gregory sealed them up, that none could suspect them opened, and then sent the
Letters as they were directed. The Queen hereupon commanded Ballard to be
apprehended, which was done. Babington advised presently to send Savage and
(...) to kill the Queen. Babington entreats leave of Walsingham (...) into
France, and sueth fox Ballard's liberty, who would be of use (...) discovery,
and to avoid suspicion. Sir Francis keeps (...) with delays, and draws him
to his own House. Skidmore, Sir Francis's Servant, was commanded to observe him
strictly, and to go with him, pretending, lest he should be taken with
Messengers. This Letter being read (for the Command was written) by Skidmore,
was perceived and read also by Babington sitting by him, who Supping with Sir
Francis's Man in a Tavern, pretending to rise to go pay the Reckoning, lest his
Cloak and Rapier, and fled. Then Barnwel, Gage, Dun, Charnick being in the mean
time proclaimed Traitors, fled into the Woods, and after were concealed, fed,
and clothed in a rustical habit, by one Bellamy at Harrow on the Hill. After
ten days they were found and brought to London. Salisbury was taken in
Staffordshire, and Traverse also, Jones in Wales, not privy to the Conspiracy,
but he concealed them, and furnished Salisbury and his Man with a changed
Cloak. Windsor was not found, Gilford was sent into France as an Exile, and
there died.

Sept. 13. Seven of the Conspirators being brought to Judgment, confessed
themselves guilty, and were condemned of Treason; other seven the next day
pleaded not guilty, but were guilty, and condemned. Polly though guilty, yet
for consessing something to Sir Francis Walsingham, was not brought to
Judgments; on the 20th the first seven were hanged and quartered in St. Giles's
Fields, where they used to meet.

The French Ambassador's Plot to kill the Queen.
IN the Year 1587, Obespineus, the French Ambassador of the Guisian faction,
conferred with William Stafford to kill Q. Elizabeth. Stafford refused it, but
commended one Moody, in Prison. Trappius, Secretary to the said Ambassador, in
the absence of Stafford conferred with Moody about the deed, Moody proposed
Poison, or a bag of Gunpowder, Trappius disliked it, and wished rather for
such a Man as the Burgundian, which killed the Prince of Orange; this thing
Stafford revealed to the Council, Trappius was apprehended going into France,
and afterward the Ambassador, Moody, Stafford, Trappius, all accused the
Ambassador before the Lords, who sent for the Ambassador. Stafford ^^ginning to
speak, was interrupted by the Ambassador, saying, that Stafford first proposed
it to him, who if he did not desist, threatened to send him bound Hand and Foot
to the Queen; Stafford upon his Knees with great protestations affirmed, that
the Ambassador first moved it: The Ambassador was admonished to take heed of
such Crimes, and dismissed by Burley, insinuating unto him, that it was more the
Queen's Clemency, than that his Office claimed any such favor.

The Spanish Armada.
IN the Year 1588, was set out by the King of Spain for the Conquest of England
the Invincible (as they called it) Navy. For this purpose the Duke of Parma had
an Army in Flanders, of one hundred and three Companies of Foot, and three
thousand Horse, among which were seven hundred English Fugitives, the Bull of
Pius Quintus, for Excommunicating Q. Elizabeth, is renewed by Sixtus Quintus,
and a plenary Indulgence granted to all, who would join against England. The
Queen prepared a Navy also, and makes the Lord Charles Howard Admiral, and
sends him into the West, to join with Sir Francis Drake, Vice Admiral, Henry
Seymor, second son to the Duke of Somerset, with 40 Ships, English and Dutch,
is appointed to stop Parma's coming forth; upon the Land Southward, were placed
20000 Men, another Army of 22000 Foot, and a 1000 Horse at Tilbury, under
Leicester; another Army guarded the Person of the Queen, consisting of 34000
Foot, and 2000 Horse, under Henry Lord Hunsdon. The Council of War, decreed
that all places commodious to land in, should be strengthened with Men and
Ammunition, which places should be defended with the Trained-Bands in the
Maritime Countries, to hinder the Enemies landing; if he should land, then they
should waste the Country round about, that he might find no more relief than he
brought, and that they should keep him in continual Alarms. To secure the Queen
at Home from Papists, some were committed to Wisbitch Castle. There was in the
mean time a Treaty of Peace from the Spaniards, even till the Fleet was almost
come to the English Coast. The Spanish Fleet consisted of 130 Ships, 19290
Soldiers, Mariners 8350, chained Rowers 2080. Great Ordnance 2630. They loosed
out of the River of Tagus; three of their Ships by the help of David Guin an
English Servant, and the Turkish Rowers, were carried into France, the rest of
this mighty Fleet, was by God's help overthrown and dispersed, with eight
Fireships, made to cut their Cables, weigh their Anchors, and fly confusedly,
and the Admiral Gallyasse was taken; when they began again to gather together,
they were battered and torn, diverse of them perishing in the Sea: So a Navy
three years in preparing, was overthrown in a Month, many of their Men being
slain and drowned, diverse of their Ships sunk and taken (not 100 Englishmen
lost, and but one Ship) driven about Scotland, Oroades, and Ireland, much
Impaired, and returned with shame, God's Name be honored.

Lopez his undertaking to poison the Queen.
IN the Year 1593, one Stephen Ferrera de Gama, which came with Don Antonio,
the expulsed King of Portugal into England, and afterward sought to be
reconciled to the King of Spain, being of inward familiarity with one Roger
Lopez, a Portugues, the Queen's Physician, prevailed with him to promise to
poison Q. Elizabeth. Ferrera writes to Ibarra, the King of Spain's Secretary
at Wars, about the promise of Lopez, and his requiring for the undertaking
50000 Crowns. Ferrera promised him, that there should one come in the habit of
a Mariner to him, who should bring him the value of 50000 Crowns in Rubies and
Diamonds, this was Lopez's own confession; who added also, that it could not be
but that the King of Spain was acquainted with the matter, for the Money was to
come from the King of Spain. He further confessed, that Stephen Ferrera told
him, that if he would offer to the Count Fuentes this great service to poison
her Majesty, he should want no Money; and hereupon he was co^^^nt that Ferrera
should write to the Count Fuentes, or Secretary Ib^^^^, to assure them that the
Doctor would undertake to poison her. This secret was discovered by Letters,
which were intercepted (for all Letters to any Portugues, and every Portugues
coming from beyond Sea, was to be stayed) superscribed to Diego Heruandes, from
Francis Torres; Diego Hernandes, Ferrera confessed to be himself; Francis
Torres, was one Manoel Lowys, who had served the King of Portugal, but remained
now at Bruxels. About Count Fuentes, the Letter was very mystical, and
pretended Merchandise, as that the Merchants on the other side did commend his
Wares, etc. assuring him of good return, etc. and therefore desired him to
continue there some time. They commended the Jewel he sent, and reported how
the Ambet and Musk was highly esteemed, and spoke of Broad-Cloth, Scarlet,
Threads of Pearl, Diamond, etc. which Letter was consessed to be in Answer to
that was written by Lopez, to take away the Queen's life; more Letters there
were to the foresaid purpose from Secretary Ibarra to Stephen Ferrera, and from
the Count Fuontes at Bruxels. Stephen Ferrera told Peter Ferrera his Keeper,
that himself and Lopez had written into Spain, and made offer to give the Queen
poison.

Squires Practice to poison the Queens Saddle.
ANno Dom. 1596, one Edward Squire, sometimes a Scrivener at Greenwich.
afterward a deputy Purveyor for the Queens Stable, in Sir Francis Drake's last
Voyage was taken Prisoner, and carried into Spain, and being set at liberty,
one Walpole a Jesuit grew acquainted with him, and got him into the
Inquisition, whence he returned a resolved Papist: he persuaded Squire to
undertake to poison the Pummel of the Queens Saddle, and to make him constant,
made Squire receive the Sacrament upon it, he then gave him the Poison, showing
that he should take it in a double Bladder, and should prick the Bladder full
of holes in the upper part when he should use it, (carrying it within a thick
Glove for the safety of his Hand) should after turn it downward, pressing the
Bladder upon the Pummel of the Queens Saddle. This Squire confessed. Squire is
now in Spain, and for his safer dispatch into England, it was devised, that two
Spanish Prisoners taken at Calice, should be exchanged for Squire, and one
Rowles, that it might not be thought that Squire came over, but as a redeemed
Captive. The Monday sevennight after Squire returned into England, he
understanding the Horses were in preparing for the Queens riding abroad, laid
his hand, and crushed the poison upon the Pummel of the Queens Saddle, saying,
God save the Queen. Tho Queen rode abroad, and as it should seem laid not her
hand upon the place, or else received no hurt (through God's goodness by
touching it. Walpole counting of it as of a thing done, imparted it to some
principal Fugitives there, but being disappointed of his hope, supposing Squire
to have been false; to be revenged on him, sent one hither (who should pretend
to have stolen from thence) with Letters, wherein the Plot of Squire was
contained, this Letter was pretended to be stolen out of one of their Studies.
Squire being apprehended, confessed all without any rigor, but after denied
that he put it in execution, although he acknowledged he consented to it in the
Piot, at length he confessed the putting it in execution also.

Earl of Tyrones Rebellion.
ANno Dom. 1597, Hugh a Bastard, made Earl of Tyrone by Queen Elizabeth,
pardoned also by her for a Murder, and usurping the Title of Oneal, set on by
the Spaniard, with whom he had lived a Fugitive, assaulted the Fort of
Blackwater, and at that very time when he wrote to Sir John Norris the English
General, that he might be dealt mildly withal, lest he should run on the Rocks
of rebellion, wrote also to Kildare* to fide with him: the Queen desiring to
spareshedding of Blood, agreed unto a conference with him by her Commissioners,
but the Rebel not liking the conditions proposed by the Commissioners, depisted
and spoiled the Country about Black-water, and pulled down the Town of
Dunganon. The Country wasted, and no Victuals to be had, Tyrone presented to
the General a Petition, craving pardon upon his Knees, at the Foot of the
Queens Picture; and in the mean time dealt for aid out of Spains the King of
Spain promised him aid, requiring him to admit of no Articles of Peace with the
English. Hereupon (though there was a cessation of Arms) he burns and
spoileth the Country, then he put on again his old habit of dissimulation and
sues for Pardon. Presently by shuffling or neglect, Conaught and Vlster
revolted, then he fell to Rebellion again, and about the Black-water overthrew
1500 English; then the Earl of Essex coming General into Ireland, he cleared
Munster, thence went into Lemster against the O Conors, and O Neales, whom he
vanquished. He sent thence Sir Conye^s Clifford, against O Rork, himself going
another way, to distract the Forces of Tyrone; but Sir Conyers was slain, and
his Forces defeated. Tyrone coming near to the General, declared, he desired
not to fight, but parley of Peace, which was denied; afterward he obtained
conference with the Lord General, and then another conference, where it was
concluded, that next day Commissioners should meet to treat of Peace. Then was
the Lord General sent for into England, after whose departure Tyrone takes the
Field again. In the time of cessation of Arms, the Spaniard sent him some Money
and Ammunition, the Popes Indulgences, and a Plume of Peacock-Feathers.

Anno 1600, the Lord Mountjoy came into Ireland, as Lieutenant General, and in
diverse small Skirmishes beat the Rebels. The Spaniard to further the Rebellion,
sent Don John de Aquila, with 2000 old trained Soldiers, and some Irish
Fugitives, who landed at Kingsale. There were also at that same time, 2000
Spaniards more arrived at Been haven, Balimore and Castel-haven. The Lord
Deputy encamped near Kingsale, Sir Richard Levison with two of the Queens Ships
blockt up the Haven: and on both sides the Town was battered. Then Sir Richard
Levison sunk five of their Ships. To these Spaniards, O Donel betook himself,
and presently after Tyrone, O Rork, Raymund, Burk, Mac Mahon, Rand^l, Mac
Surly, and Trrel, with the chief of the Nobility, in all 6000 Foot, and 500
Horse. Tyrone on a Hill, not far from the Camp, made a bravado two days
together, as if he would give the English Battle. The Lord Deputy at the foot
of the Hill, chose a convenient plot to fight with him, but Tyrone sounds a
Retreat, whom the Lord General followed, and forced to make a stand in the
midst of a Bog: where, by the Earl of Claurikard, their Horse were routed and
defeated. Alonse O Campo one of the Spanish Generals, and six Ensign-bearers,
were taken Prisoners, and the Ensigns taken by the English, and 1200 Spaniards
slain. Tyrone was forced to fly into Vlster, O Donel fled into Spain, the rest
hid themselves. The Lord General returned to King-sale, and battered it for six
days space, the Enemy attempted nothing against him. Then Don John offered
conditions of surrendering the Town; which propounded, the Lord General (the
English being wearied out with a Winters Siege) agrees with the Spaniard on
certain Articles, and takes possession of the Town, and sends away all the
Spaniards, as well as those in the Town, into Spain. The next Spring the
General pursues Tyrone into Vlster, and spoileth the Country; upon which the
Rebels make haste to come in unto the Deputy, and Tyrone beggeth pardon upon
his Knees. From Dublin, Tyrone should have been carried into England, but the
Queens death-hindred that, and King James pardoned him. Afterward he entered
into another Conspiracy with O Cane: but being sent for with a Process, to
answer a suit which the Bishop of Derry had against him, and fearing he had bin
sent for for his Conspiracy, he sled out of Ireland.

Garnet, Catesby and others, labor to invade England.
IN the last Year of Queen Elizabeth, there was a Plot laid against her by
Garnet, Catesby and others, that the Spaniard should join with the Papists
here, in the Invasion of England. Winter was sent into Spain for that purpose,
and Creswel the the Ledger Jesuit in Spain, Don Pedro Francisco, second
Secretary of State, and the Duke of Lerma, assured Winter, that his Message
would be very acceptable to the King of Spain. Then had Winter an answer by
Count Mirands, that the King would bestow 100000 Crowns toward the expedition,
and at the next Spring at farthest would set his Foot in England. Winter
returns, and acquainteth Garnet, Catesby and Tr^sham with all, and they
others; but before the next Spring the Queen died.

The Gunpowder Treason.
AT the Queens death, Christopher Wright was sent into Spain, and Guy Fauks
also from Brussels by Sir William Stanley, to advertise them there, that King
James was as violent against the Catholics, as Queen Elizabeth, and therefore
urged the Spaniard to prosecute the old design. The Jesuits privately suggested
that they should not admit him into England, as being an Heretic. Catesby
h^ld, that the King being an Heretic, forseiteth his Kingdom before ^^y
sentence pronounced. The Parliament was dissolved the 7th of July, which the
King held, and prorogued till the 7th of February. Catesby at Lambeth broke
with Winter about blowing up the Parliament House. Winter told him that it
struck at the root, but what if it should not take effect? Catesby won Winter
to consent, but first (said be) go over and win the Constable, to obtain more
favor for Catholics; and if you may bring over some confident Gentlemen, as
Mr. Faux. Winter went, met with the Constable at Bergen, and delivered his
Message. The Constable answered, that his Master commanded him to do all good
offices for the Catholics; but he showed the Constable nothing of the matter.
Faux and Winter came both into England. This plot of blowing up the Parliament
House, after an Oath of Secreoy, and the Sacrament received upon it, Catesby
disclosed it to Percy and Winter, and Wright to Faux. Percy hired the House,
Faxn was pretended to be Percy's Man, and names himself Johnson, and kept the
Keys of the House till the adjournment of the Parliament: at which time all the
Conspirators departed into the Country. A House was hired at Lambeth by Percy,
to keep the Powder and Wood for the Mine, to which it was to be conveyed. When
the Plot had taken effect, what should they do? Percy, with two or three of
them, with a dozen more, would seize on the Duke, and carry him away. The Lady
Elizabeth was to be surprised at a hunting near the Lord Harring^ons. They
would save from the Parliament, first Catholics, then some particular Persons.
While they wrought in the Mine, they fed on baked Meats, that they might not go
forth. At Candlemas the Powder is brought over, about which time working in the
Mine, they came against a Stone-wall, when hearing a rushing noise of Coals,
they seared they were discovered; But it was only the moving of Coals to be
sold, which Celler Faux hired: 20 Barrels of Powder they had provided, which
they hid with Billets and Fagots. Faux went into Flanders to acquaint therewith
Stanley and Owen; Stanley was not there; Owen approved it. Percy and Catesby
met at the Bath; and it was agreed, that Catesby should call in whom he thought
best. The number being small, He called in Sir Everard Digby, and afterward Mr.
Tresham. The Parliament was anew prorogued till the 5th of November. Then the
Conspirators all went into the Country, and returned 10 days before the
Parliament, and hearing that the Prince would be absent from the Parliament,
said they would then seize on the Prince; and let alone the Duke. Saturday
before the Kings return (which was on Thursday) a Letter in the Street was
delivered to the Lord Mounteagle's Man, to put it into his Masters Hand. It had
neither Date nor Superscription, and by the Lord Mounteagle was that Night sent
to the Earl of Salisbury, who made acquainted with it the Lord Chemberlain, the
Lord Admiral, the Earl of Worcester and Northampton. The Letter was this.

My Lord,
OVt of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation: Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise
some Excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament: For God and Man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this Time. And think not slightly of
this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any storm,
yet I say, they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they
shall not see who hurt them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it
may do you good, and can do you no harm: for the danger is past so soon as you
shall have burned this Letter, and I hope God will give you the grace to make a
good use of it; to whose holy protection I recommend you.


Friday following the King read it, who considering the Sentence therein
expressed [that they should receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet
should not know who hurt them] and joining it to the Sentence [for the danger
is past so soon as you shall have burned this Letter] did suspect the danger
mentioned, to be some sudden danger of blowing up with Powder. Afterward it was
determined the Lord Chamberlain should view both above and beneath the
Parliament Houses. Which the Lord Chamberlain having done, sound in a Vault
under the upper House, great store of Billets, Faggots and Coals, and casting
his Eye aside, a Fellow standing by, which called himself Percy's Man, that had
hired the Celler. The King supposing that Gunpowder might be hid under that
Wood and Coals, caused a further search to be made. Whereupon Sir Thomas Knevet
went about the Parliament House with a small number, to search more narrowly,
the Midnight next after, where he found Faux standing without Doors, booted
and spurred, and apprehended him; then in search under the Wood and Coals, 36
Barrels of Gunpowder, and about the Traitor three Matches, and other
Instruments fit for that wicked purpose were found: which wicked intent of
blowing up the House, he instantly confessed; affirming, that if he had been in
the House, he would not have failed to blow up both himself and them. In this
Mine wrought Catesby, Robert Winter, Esquires. Thomas Percy, Thomas Winter,
John Wright, Christopher Wright, Guido Faux, Gentlemen; and Bates, Catesby's
Man. Sir Everard Digby; Ambrose Rockwood, France Tresham, Esquires; John Grant,
Gentlemen, and Robert Keys, were made acquainted with the Plot, but wrought not
in the Mine. After Faux's apprehension, the Traitors post away, and pretending
Religion they would fight for, gathered in open Rebellion all they could, which
number never exceeded 80. They wandered through Warwickshire, to
Worcestershire, and thence to the borders of Staffordshire, and having gotten
themselves into a House, they obstinately refused to yield to the Sheriff; but
(through God's Providence) a less quantity of Powder than 2^ pounds, taking
Fire, did so mangle some, disable others, that having begged pardon on their
knees for their crime of God, they desperately exposed themselves to the
peoples ^ury: three of the chief joined Back to Back, and two of them were
killed with one shot, Catesby and Percy; Winter was taken alive. So all of them
were killed, beaten or taken.

The Conspirary of Sir Griffin Mackham, and others.
ANno Domini 1603, George Brook, Sir Griffin Markham, Watson and Clerk Priests,
entered into a Conspiracy against King James (it was said) to surprise Prince
Henry, to keep the King and Prince in the Tower, or to carry them to Dover
Castle, and there to obtain their own Pardons, a toleration for Religion, and
removal of some Counselors. Diverse beside these were accused, and condemned;
but Brook confessed he did it, but by a Commission from the King, to try the
faithfulness of the Kings Subjects; but he could produce no such Commission.
Sir Griffin Markham confessed that he intended foreign Invasion and Alteration
of Religion, but not to destroy the King, as was in the Indictment. Watson and
Clerk, confessed they drew the Gentlemen into the Plot, holding the King for no
King till he was Crowned. Of them all only Watsn, Clerk and Brook suffered
Death.

The Massacre and Treason in Ireland, extracted out of the Irish Remonstrance,
and Irelands Tears.
UPon the 23d day of October, 1641, a most Prodigious and Nefarious Viper,
gnawing the Bowels of its Native-parent Ireland, burst out of the Womb thereof,
and visibly appeared most epidemically destructive to that whole State and
Kingdom. It had lien long (as some of the Rebels reported) undiscovered, but
was all that while hatching by many hot and high-built hopes, both by Foreign
and Domestic Encouragements. The accursed Midwives of this Bastardbirth, were
Popish Priests, Friars, and Jesuits, together with other Firebrarnds and
Incendiaries of that State and Kingdom. Their hideous and hellish hopes were
mightily supported and corroborated by strong assistance from Spain, France,
and Flanders, together with deeply engaged assurance of full correspondency in
England, and an equivalent party in Scotland, besides their great
encouragements by Popish Bulls from Rome, authorizing the speedy and immediate
Surrender of all such places of strength as they had Beleaguered, promising
free Pardon of all Sins whatsoever beforehand committed by any of them,
tending to the advancement of this great Work, Thundering (or rather Roaring)
out Excommunications against any that should refuso so to join with them
therein, terming themselves the Catholick-Army, and the ground of their work
(as all their abominable and bloody Plots are) the Catholic Cause. Their
desperate and most devilish resolution was, therein, not to leave a drop of
English Blood in Ireland, and so consequently not the least spark or glimpse of
Gospel and pure Protestant Religion; giving out in words, and designing in
their hearts, that the Tower of London, the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Castle
of Dublin, were to be surprised by their Faction in all these places all upon
one day. In all which time (this therefore might the more easily have been
done, esecially in Ireland) there was not the least fear or suspicion of
Treachery; yet there were (a little before the day of this Bloody-birth)
secretly gathered together about 400 Irish Papists, elected out of most parts
of Ireland, desperate and damnably bloody-minded persons, designed for this
horrid and hellish Attempt, who had all privately conveyed and sheltered
themselves in several places of the City and Suburbs of Dublin, waiting and
expecting the time and Watchword, when to give the onset. In this Plot all
the Popish Nobility and Men of quality in Ireland were interessed, and it was
professed by that most impious and barbarous Arch Rebel, Sir Philem O Neal,
that what he and they did, was by the consent of the Parliament in Ireland.
Yea, some, of them have been so implously audacious, as to prosess and persuade
othere of their accursed Consederates, to believe that they had Regal Authority
for it, and were so bold as to term themselves the Queen's Army.

And for the more violent prosecution of this their most exorbitant Villainy,
the Conspirators and Traitors entered into a most accursed Covenant (just as our
Popish-Powder-Traitors did in their damnable Design) and bound themselves by an
Oath of Confederation and Secrecy. Roily a prime Popish Priest, and others
(like his Father the Devil) compassing the Earth far and near, to draw into
their Conspiracy such as had not before been therewith acquainted, as also to
satisfy all scruples (if any arose in any of their minds) about the lawfulness
of their Actions; just as Garnet, that old Romish Jesuitical Fox did with his
Powder-Conspirators, 1605. And whereas they falsely have masked this their most
inhumane Treason and Rebellion under the King's Name, pretending his authority,
and all they did, or do, in obedience to his Majesty, and tender respect to his
Royal Prerogative; yet it has been by some others of them professed, that they
intended to have a King of their own, yea, that they had one already; some
saying Tyrone was he, others Sir Philem O Neal, who has been audaciously and
traitorously honored with the style of his Majesty, and that they will (with
the assistance of Spain and France) set footing in England (having completed
their own devilish Irish work) and after that in Scotland, where all things
being settled to their desires, the whole Forces in Ireland in way of
Retribution, and acknowledgment of Gratitude were intended (as has been
confessed) for the King of Spain against the Hollanders. Such mighty and
invincible Conquerors had they made themselves in their own conceits, and most
bold and bloody imaginations. Unto which their horrid Disloyalty, and
unparalleld Treachery and Rebellion, they added most execrable expressions of
unheard of hatred and inhumane Barbarity to the Subjects of the English Nation;
Banishment, or perpetual Slavery were the greatest favors that would have been
afforded them, their general profession being for a general Extirpation, even
to the last and least drop of English-blood from among them. Yea, and that
which transcends all former extents of rage and unpattern'd wrath and
malignity, not so much as an English Beast, or any of that Breed was to be left
alive in that whole Kingdom. And as the Hearts and Tongues of these most base
and abominable Traitors and Rebels, were boundlessly and extremely cruel in
Intention and Profession: So it pleased the Lord for the Sins of his People
there, to permit power unto these Harbarous Rebels, to act with their Hands,
the most accursed and profane Perpetration that ever Christian Eyes beheld, or
Ears ever heard of, both for Impiety against God and his holy Gospel, and
almost unexpressible Inhumanity toward the true Professors thereof among them,
blaspheming our God, stripping his Servants stark naked, and then bidding them
go to their God to be clothed again; breaking into Churches, burning Pulpits,
with extreme hatred to our Religion, and exceedingly triumphing in all their
Impieties. Dragging some Professors of the Gospel by the hair of their Heads
through the Streets into the Churches, and there Stripping and Whipping them,
and with most cruel and taunting Terms abusing them; telling them if they came
to Morrow, they should hear the like Sermon. Yea, so excessively impious was
their hatred to the Gospel of Christ, that they took the Sacred Books of the
holy Scriptures, and cast them into Kennels and Puddles of Dirt and Mire,
treading them under foot, and Leaping and Skipping on them, and (O horrid
Impiety!) causing a Bagpipe to play all the while, and bidding a Plague upon
them; saying, they were the cause of all Quarrels; and Burning some, and saying
it was Hell, fire that was then flaming, and wishing they had all the Bibles in
Christendom that they might use them so.

And as for the most Inhumane and more than Scythian Cruelties of those Irish
Canibals, and most barbarous Blood-sucking Tygres, of whom we may most properly
say, as Jacob did of his bloody Sons, Simeon and Levi, in their Massacre of the
Shechemites, Genesis 49. 7. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their
Wrath, for it was cruel. Yea, certainly more cruel than ever any Eye did see,
or Ear did hear; yea, I say, past the most exquisite historical expressions of
any Ancient or Modern Relations: Witness their stripping stark naked, Men,
Women, and Children, even Children sucking their poor Mothers Breasts; whereby
multitudes of all sorts, Ages, and Sexes, in the extremities of that oold
season of Frost and Snow, have most lamentably perished; Women being dragged up
and down Naked; Women in Childbed, drawn out thence and cast into Prison; one
delivered of a Child, while she was hanging; one ripped up (horesco referens)
and two Children taken out of her, and all cast and eaten up by Swine. One
stabbed in the Breast, her Child sucking. An Infant cruelly murdered, whom they
found sucking his dead Mother, slain by them the day before. A Child of
fourteen years of Age taken from his Mother, in her sight cast into a Bog-pit,
and held under-water while he was drowned. Together with many other yet more
horrible, hideous, and more than Savage or Beast-like Barharities, too terrible
for me any farther to relise, but may be more fully found in that most
lamentable Remonstrance of this Irish Rebellion, and all there proved by
Testimonies on Oath, whereunto I refer the Reader. Which makes me call to mind
that old Observation, proverbially spoken of Ireland, which is, That no
poisonous Serpent will live on Irish ground; which how true in the Historical
meaning, I know not; but now I am sure, it is most false in the mystical meaning
of it: for here it seems that Satan's Serpentine seed, a brood of most
poisonous Native Serpents, Adders and Snakes of Villainy and Cruelty do live,
yea, and thrive there also; but I trust, but for a season: for certainly, the
Lord, the most righteous Judge of all Men, and severe Revenger of all Wrongs,
will not suffer such horrible Impieties and unpattern'd Cruelties to go
unpunished, but will undoubtedly ruinate such a pestilent Generation of Romish
Vipers, and Babylonish Blood-suckers as these are, which he has already most
blessedly begun. First, By his most gracious and timely discovery of their main
Plot, the taking of the City of Dublin, which was indeed the Masterpiece of
their intended Epidemical Mischief, but prevented (I say) by the Lord's great
Mercy and good Providence, in a most strange manner, by a native Irish
Gentleman, one Mr. Owen Mack-Connel, once Servant to that pious and most worthy
Gentleman, Sir John Clotworthy, and this also by a most remarkable way and work
of the Lord's special Providence, as is more particularly and punctually
related in the Preamble of Irelands Tears, to which I refer the Reader. And
secondly, By the Lord's most Glorious and Victorious over-powering the
out-ragious Power and Petulancy of those barbarous Miscreants, now in open
Rebellion, by the hands of a very small remnant of poor Protestants there among
them, who (by reason of the most unhappy Distractions, unnatural Civil-discords
raised up among us in England by the Popish Faction also, and their Pontifician
Abettors) cannot be by us so sufficiently supplied with Men and Arms, as is fit
and much desired; therefore, I say, the Lord of Hosts abhorring and abominating
such atrocious and hell-fomented Blasphemies, Murders, and merciless
Cruelties, makes his just Indiguation and Wrath to prosecute and pursue them at
the heels, giving those small and inconsiderable Companies such admirable and
even almost miraculous Victories over them, as most evidently declare the Hand
of the Lord to be against them, and his gracious Purpose utterly to supplant
and exterminate such devilishly desperate and intolerably barbarous and bloody
Rebels and Traitors, the lively Limbs and Lineaments of that bloody Strumpet of
Rome.

The most bloody Mossacre at Paris, Anno 1572. extracted out of the French
History, truly and briefly related.
ANd now (good Reader) give me leave a little to seem to digress (not so much
from the Matter, as) from the Persons and Places at first propounded, and to
look but a little into our Neighbor Kingdom of France, where. I say, I shall
only vary from Personages, but the subject Matter the same with the former,
setting forth the Bloody Plots and Conspiracies of the Popish Faction among
them also, against those of the reformed Protestant Religion in France, and
especially in that most butcherly and barbarous Massacre at Paris, where it
primarily and chiefly began to be cruelly acted and executed on God's innocent
Lambs, marked out to the slaughter beforehand. And thus it was in brief.

In the years 1571, and 72, Charles the 9th then King of France; the said King,
the then Duke of Guise, and others of the Romish Faction, bearing a most
inveterate hatred (which was crastily concealed) against those of the Religion,
and in especial against the then most renowned Admiral of France, whose Piety,
Prudence, and Prowess was such and in so high esteem of all, both Friends and
Foes also, that whilst he subsisted and survived, the Popish party (maugre
their malice) could do nothing, to any purpose, to the prejudice of the Cause
of Religion. At last a Plot was laid most craftily and cruelly, under the
pretense of a Marriage between the Prince of Navarre, a Noble and Pious Prince
of the Religion, and the King's Sister; by which snare to bring the said
Prince, the Admiral, and the rest of the Heads of Religion, to the Court and
City of Paris, that so these Heads being first smiten off, the inferior
Members thereof might the more easily be destroyed. Under this color, I say,
the King invites the Admiral to the Court at Paris, pretends a fair
Correspondence and Agreement of all matters in Difference betwixt his Majesty
and those of the Religion, especially himself and the Admiral, and a
Reconcilement also between this noble Admiral and the Duke of Guise. In which
interim, one Lignerolles, a French Gentleman, was openly slain in the Court,
for discovering some secrets concerning this Plot against those of the
Religion, and the Cardinal of Chastillon (then in England, and ready to depart
thence for France) Brother to the Admiral of France, was poisoned by one of the
Chamberlains, and died thereof, to the great grief of all his Friends and
Servants.

The most Noble and Religious Admiral on the King's Invitation, comes to Paris,
was (with extraordinary fair shows of love and regal respect) most welcomely
entertained, both he and diverse others of the Religion that came with him. The
foresaid Marriage was not long after Solemnized in Paris, with great pretenses
of joy and content on all sides expressed, in most sumptuous and liberal Feasts
and Banquets, Masks and Dances (the sweet innocent Princes, little dreaming of
such a Dance to be now a leading by the King, Queen Mother, and Duke of Guise,
with the rest of the Romish bloody Faction, as stained, nay steeped all their
dainties in streams of their Hearts-blood) in so much as 'twas admired to see
such a seeming friendly mixture of those of the Religion with the Romish
Catholics, just like so many Lambs among so many greedy Wolves. Now whilst
every one employed himself in such like Mirth and Jollity, diverse that were
sent for by the King, QueenMother, and Duke of Guise, that so they might be
sure to be the stronger party, speedily arrived in Paris; the Catastrophe of
all that follows having been made not long before among them, the Dukes of
Guise and Anjou being the principal Actors openly seen in this wicked Work, who
resolved not to let the Admiral depart out of Paris, but there to dispatch him,
and all such as should endeavor to defend him. Now it so fell out, that one
Morning the Admiral coming out of the Loutre, and going to Dine at his Lodging,
being on foot, and (without least suspicion of any Villainy to be attempted
against him) as he was reading a Petition, one shot at him with a Harquebuss,
the Bullet whereof took away the Forefinger of his Right Hand, and hurt him in
the left Arm; the Villain that shot escaped by flight, a Horse standing ready
to post him away after he had done the deed. The noble Admiral being thereupon
brought to his Lodging, showed most singular Piety, Constancy, and Patience,
under his Surgeons hands, was visited by diverse Lords and Gentlemen of the
Religion, the King of Navarre (now the King of France his Brother in-Law) and
the Prince of Conde. The French King also, though a main Plotter in the work,
craftily complained to these Princes, of the Mischief thus happened, protesting
his sorrow, and swearing revenge and severe execution of Justice on the
Offender, whosoever he were.

The King himself also went to visit the Admiral, making many serious and deep
protestations of his high esteem of his loyalty and fidelity to his Person and
Crown always, and that he held and esteemed him a most discret and valiant
Commander in Arms, and that therefore he much respected him, with many such
like French Complements. Immediately after the King's departure, the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde, were certainly, but very secretly informed of
the intended Massacre on all of the Religion, and advised as speedily as they
could to get out of Paris, and to be assured that that blow given to the
Admiral, was but the beginning of the Tragedy; but alas, good Princes, they so
much confided on the King's Vows and Promises, that they reject this Advise and
Counsel, and stayed there still. About Saturday-evening, being the 23d of
August, 1572. certain Protestant Gentlemen, offered themselves to watch that
Night with the good Admiral, but Teligny his Son-in-Law would not suffer them,
but dismissed them with many thanks, little suspecting (still) any approaching
or precipitating danger on his Father. Night being come on, the Duke of Guises
Lieutenant in this Action, which now at this present was to be declared to the
Duke of Anjou, sent for all the Captains of the Switzers, and companies of
Strangers (which still increased) into the Town; showing them his Commission to
kill the Admiral, and all his partakers; exhorting them to be courageous in
shedding of Blood, and making Spoil of them; and appointed their Troops to be
placed where he thought meetest. About Midnight it was informed to all the
Popish Assemblies in the Town, That the like to this Massacre should be done to
all of the Religion throughout the whole Realm; and that the Watchword of the
general Massacre should be the great Bell of the Palace, which should be rung
at the break of Day, and the Badg of the Executioners should be a white
Handkerchief tied upon their sleeves, and a white Cross in their Hats. The Duke
of Guise with his bloody-minded Associates, had charge to begin at the
Admiral's Lodgings. The mighty noise of Armor, and running up and down with
very many lighted Torches, soon after Midnight, made many of those of the
Religion, that were longed near the Admiral, to come out of their Lodgings and
to go into the Street to enquire of their Acquaintances, what this noise meant
at such an undue Hour, but being anxiously answered, they went on still toward
the Louvre, where the Duke of Guise and his bloody Comrades were attending the
deed, where those innocent Lambs of the Religion were first set upon, and
assaulted by the Duke's guard. Then presently they rang St. Germans Bell in
the Palace, whereupon one Cosseins, a French Fury, perceiving the Duke of Guise
coming with his Troops, knocks at the Admirals Gate, between two and three of
the Clock in the Morning, being Sunday, the 24th of August, 1572. Labonne, one
of the Admiral's attendants, opens the Gate, and was instantly stabbed by
Cosseins; the second Door going up the Stairs, being soon burst open, they came
to the Admiral's Chamber, where his own Guard of Switzers were, one of them was
slain with an Harquebuss. And while Cosseins was jumbling at the Chamber Door,
one Cornatan ran up into the Chamber, and being asked by the Admiral (who had
caused his Men to life him out of his Bed, and in his Night gown, having
assisted his Ministers in servent Prayer, and most humbly commended his Soul to
his Savior Christ Jesus) what all this hurly burly meant: Cornatan, his
Servant, answered, My Lord, It is God that calls for us, the House is entered by
force, and there is no means of Resistance. The good Admiral, then, replied, It
is not long since I disposed my self to Die; save you your selves, if it be
pessible, for you cannot save my Life, and thorefore I commit my Soul into the
Hands and Mercy of God. Presently hereupon his Attendants began to shift for
themselves, and to fly for their Lives, and some of them got up into the top
of the House, and found a Window to issue out of the Roos and so into Gutters;
but most of them were slain in the next Houses; but Cornatan, and Merlin, a
godly Minister, escaped, and were miraculously preserved. The Admiral's
Chamber Door being now opened, seven or eight Armed Mem with their Targets
entered into it, and one Besmes, Servant to the Duke of Guise, with a naked
Sword in his hand, offered him the point: Whereupon the good Admiral, said unto
him, Young man, thou oughtst to respect my Age and Insirmity, yet shall thou
not shorten my life. With that, Besmes thrust his Sword into the Admiral's
Body, and redoubling the blow upon the Admiral's Head, every one of the rest
also gave him a blow, in such sort, that he sell upon the Ground, and so lay
gasping. The Duke of Guise, and others, staying below in the Court and hearing
the blows, asked if they had done, and commanded the Body to be thrown out of
the Window; which was presently done by that villain Besmes, and his
companions. Now the blows that he had on his Head, and the Blood covering his
Face, had so disfigured him, that the Duke of Guise hardly knew him; whereupon
stooping down and wiping his Face with his Hankerchief, he said, Now I know
him, it is he indeed; and therewith gave him a kick with his foot on his Face
being dead; whom all the Murderers of France extremely feared being alive.
Which done, he left the Admiral's House, accompanied with his most bloody
Train, and began to cry about the Streets: Courage, fellow Soldiers, we have
made a good beginning, let us now to the rest, for the King commands it.
Repearing those words often, with great majesty, For the King commands it, it
is his pleasure, it is his express commandment. (Just as our Romish Clergy in
the Irish Massacre in the Year 1641, pretended the King's Authority for their
Rebellion, laying all the Odium of their impious Villainies and Cruelties on the
King's Majesty, saying still, 'twas his pleasure it should be so.) Now
presently thereupon the Palace Clock struck, and then a Noise was heard all
about the Streets of Paris, saying that the Hugonots (for so the Romish
Catholics term the true Protestants in France) were in Arms (they being all,
alas, in their Beds, far from any such thoughts) and meant to kill the King;
(just as our Powder Traitors intended had their Plot taken effect, to have
standered the Puritans in England, to have been the Authors of that
hellish-Treason) to whom the Admirals Head was carried and presented, See here
the Holiness of Rome, and zeal of the Romanists.
and to the Queen Mother of France, and then imbalmed and sent to Rome to the
Pope and Cardinal of Lorrain. The Common People (like Priest, like People) ran
to the Admirals Lodging, where they cut off his Hands and his privy Members,
and drew his Body for the space of three days about the Town; which done, it
was born to the Gibbet of Monifaucon and there hanged by the Feet. The
Gentlemen Officers of the Chamber, Governors, Tutors and household Servants of
the King of Navarre, the French King's Brotherin Law, lately married to his
Sister, and of the Prince of Conde, were driven out of their Chambers, where
they slept in the Louvre, and forced into the Court, were there massacred in
the Kings own presence. The like was done to the Lords and Gentlemen that lay
round about the Admirals Lodgings, and then throughout the Town in such sort,
that the number slain that Sunday at Night and the two next Days ensuing,
within the City of Paris, and Suburbs thereof, was esteemed to be above ten
thousand Persons, Lords, Gentlemen, Pages, Servants, Justices of all sorts,
Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, Artificers, Women, Maids, and Boys, not sparing
little Children in their Cradles, no nor in their Mothers Bellies. The
Courtiers of the Kings Guard and Strangers that massacred these Gentlemen,
said, that in one day, by Weapons and disorder they had ended those Processes,
which Pen, Paper, Sentences of Justice nor open War could not find the means to
do or execute in 12 years space. And thus these most honorable Protestant
Lords and Gentlemen, falsely accused and standered of Conspiracies and Practices
against the King, being stark naked, thinking only upon their rest, scarce
awakened out of their Sleep, utterly unarmed, in the hands of infinite, crud,
crafty and most treacherous Enemies not having so much leisure as to breath,
were barbarousaly slain, some in their Beds, others on the roofs of Houses, and
in whatsoever other places, where they might be found. It would be too tedious
to recite at large the Names and Sirnames of all the honorable Personages of
diverse Qualities that were then slain and butchered, it suffices that their
Names are written in Heaven and that their Death (though shameful and
despicable in the sight and presence of Men of this World) is precious in the
sight of the Lords most holy Majesty.

Now let the tender hearted Christian Reader, but consider and ponder in his
Heart, how strange and horrible a thing it might be in a great Town or City, to
see at the least 60000 Men with Pistols, Pikes, Courtlasses, Ponyards, Knives
and other such bloody Instruments, run swearing and blaspheming the sacred
Majesty of God throughout the Streets, and into Men's Houses, where most cruelly
they massacred all whomsoever of the Religion they met, without regard of
Estate, Condition, Sex or Age, the Streets paved with Bodies cut and hewed in
pieces, the Gates and Entries of Houses, Palaces and public places died with
Blood. A horrible Plague of shoutings and howlings of the Murderers, mixed
with continual noise of Pistols and Calivers, together with the pitiful cries
of those that were murdered, the Bodies cast out at Windows upon the Stones,
drawn through the Dirt with strange noise and Whistlings, the breaking open of
Doors and Windows with Bills, Stones and other surious Instruments, the spoiling
and plundering of Houses, Carts carrying away the spoils, and dead Bodies which
were thrown into the River of Soame, all red with Blood, which ran in great
Streams through the Town, and from the Kings Palace into the said River.

As for the King of Navarre himself, and the Prince of Conde, they were called
into the King's presence, who must himself speak with them, who with his own
Mouth certified them, what had thus past all this while, adding that he had
saved their Lives only upon Condition, that they should renounce their
Religion, and follow his; otherwise that they must look for the like punishment
that their Adherents had and should receive. The King of Navarre besought the
King to remember his promise of Alliance newly contracted, and not to constrain
him in his Religion. The Prince of Conde also more fervently answered, that the
King had given his Faith unto him and to all those of the Religion, with so
solemn a Protestation and Vow, Mark here the Vows of Romish Princes.
that he could not be persuaded that his Majesty would falsify such an
authentic Oath, and that thereupon he had thus far yielded to his Majesty's
Demands, and faithfully performed what he had required of him on this
Assurance: But as touching the Religion, whereof the King had granted him the
free exercise, and God the true knowledge, to whom he was to make an account
therein, for this his Religion, he said, he was fully resolved to remain most
constant therein, and which he would always maintain to be true, although it
were with the loss of his Life. This answer of the Prince, set the King into
such a choler, that he began to call him Rebel, seditious, and Son of a
seditious Person, with horrible threatenings to cause them to lose their Heads,
if within 3 days they took not better counsel: and indeed these threatenings,
and other crafty carriages in this way, so wrought on both these Princes at
last, that they forsook their Faith and first Love, and turned to Romish
abominations.

Now the King perceiving that this Massacre of Paris would not quench the Fire,
but rather kindle it the more, fearing lest those of the Religion in his other
Provinces and Towns might assemble and unite themselves together, and so give
them new work; he with the speedy advice of his Counselors, sent two
Messengers with two several Messages, the one to the Governors and seditious
Catholics of his remoter Towns, wherein were many of the Religion, with
express command to massacre them; the other containing certain Letters to the
Governors of Provinces, by which he pretended this Massacre to be perpetated by
the Duke of Guise, and the Admiral to be murdered on a particular and private
quarrel betwixt them two, and that the King's honest meaning and intention was
utterly against these things, and seriously to maintain his former Edict of a
general Pacification; and therefore that his care and vigilance had ceased it
the same day it began; and yet (as my Author records in his History) on the
Tuesday following, being the 26 of the same August, the King accompanied with
his Brethren and the chiefest of his Court, went to the Court of Parliament,
and there publicly declared in express terms, That whatsoever had happened in
Paris, was done, not only by his consent, but also by his Commandment, and of
his own motion. And as for his other former mentioned Message and Letter to
other Towns and Provinces, for the massacring of those of the Religion among
them also; his bloody command herein was immediately put in execution at Lions,
and many other places, where the poor Protestants were murdered and massacred
in most hideous and horrible manner, by those merciless and inhumane Butchers
of bloody Rome, who knocked down the innocent Christians among them, as so many
Dogs, cut their Throats, mangled their Bodies, slashed off their Hands with
great sharp Knives, as on their Knees they held them up to the Villains,
praying for the sparing of their Lives; yea, and were known to rip up their
Bellies and take out their Fat from their Bowels, and to sell it to the
Apothecaries to make Medicines. Thus also in those remoter parts from Paris
were very many thousands of the Religion murdered, without any difference or
distinction either of Sex or Age. And so deeply enraged was the King and his
Adherents, and so desperately resolved to root out and extirpate the memory of
those of the Religion, especially of any note or eminency, that the King having
at last got into his custody one Briquemant a noble French Gentleman, of the
age of seventy years, one that had valiantly employed himself in the Service of
the Kings of France, having been found in the House of the Ambassador of
England, then resident in France, wherein he had hid himself, whilst the
greatest fury of the Massacre was executed, was by the King's command put in
close Prison, together with another virtuous Gentleman, Cavagnes, Master of the
Requests, both which Gentlemen bare great affection both unto the Religion, and
also unto the renowned Admiral, and were themselves of great esteem and
reputation in France; but the King having them now fast in hold, threatened to
tear them in pieces upon the Rack, if they would not write and sign with their
Hands, that they had conspired with the Admiral to kill the King, his Brethren,
the Queen, and the King of Navarre. But they having most constantly and justly
refused to avouch so horrible a lie against their own and their godly Friends
Innocencies, were racked and cruelly tormented, and by a most unjst sentence of
the Court of Parliament in Paris, they were both declared guilty of Treason,
and condemned to be hanged upon a Gibbet, which was accordingly executed. The
Queen Mother leading the King, her two Sons, and the King of Navarre her
Brother-in-Law to see the Execution. Her Counselors thinking that at this last
exploit, what they had wickedly projected, namely, the false transferring of
the cause of this bloody Massacre on a treasonable Plot, intended by the
Admiral and others of the Religion against the King, (as was forementioned)
would now be wrought out and effected, if Briquemant in presence of all the
People, now at the time of his expected Death would ask pardon of the King,
withal (to work it on the more) sending one to him to certify and assure him,
that so he might easily save his Life, for the King was merciful, and that he
should have pardon, if he would desire it, confessing this fact wherewith he
was charged. But Briquemant answered boldly and with a good courage; that it
belonged not unto him, but to the King to ask pardon of God for such an
heinious Offense: That he would never ask pardon for a fault, wherein he had
not offended, but knew himself to be most innocent, whereof he called GOD to
witness, desiring him to pardon the King's so great Disloyalty and Cruelty.
Cavagnes also, the other noble Gentleman, did the like until he died. Insomuch
that this execution (contrary to the King's expectation) served to no other
end, but more to publish the iniquity of all those cruel Homicides, and of all
their most pernicious Counsels.

The Papists Plots in reference to the late Troubles, and particularly about
the Death of King CHARLES the First (of blessed Memory) as proved by Doctor Du
Moulin.
WHen the Businesses of the late bad Times are once ripe for an History, and
Time, the bringer forth of Truth, has discovered the Mysteries of Iniquity,
and the depths of Satan, which has wrought so much Crime and Mischief, it will
be found, that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the Arts of the
Court of Rome. That Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not depending
on the Church of England; and Fifth-Monarchy-Men, that they might pull down the
English Monarchy, and that in the Committees, for the destruction of the King
and the Church, they had their Spies and their Agents. The Roman Priest and
Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke given to our holy King and
Martyr, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the greatest Enemy that we
have in the World, it gone.

When the news of that horrsble Execution came to Roan, a Protestant Gentleman
of good Credit, was present in a great Company of Jesuited Persons: Where after
great expressions of Joy, the gravest of Company, to whom all gave ear, spoke
much after this manner: The King of England at his Marriage, had promised us
the Re-establishing of the Catholic Religion in England; Which is false.
and when he delayed to fulfill his promise, we summoned him from time to time
to perform it: We came so far as to tell him, than if he would not do it, we
should be forced to take those Courses, which would bring him to his
Destruction. We have given him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve,
we have kept our word to him, since he would not keep his word to us.

That grave Rabby's Sentence, agrees with this certain Intelligence, which
shall be justified whenever Authority will require it: That the year before
the King's Death, a (...) of English Jesuits were sent from their whole party
in England, first to Paris, to consult with ^^e Faculty of S^rbon, then
altogether Jesuited, to whom they put Question in writing:

That seeing the state of England was in a likely p^sture to change Government,
whether it was lawful for the Catholics to work that Change, for the advancing
and securing of the Catholic Cause in England, by making away the King, whom
there was no hope to turn from his Heresy: Which was answered Affirmatively.

After which the same Persons went to Rome, where the same Question being
propounded and dehated, it was concluded by the Popeland his Council, that it
was both lawful and expedient for the Catholics to promote that alteration of
State. What followed that Consultation and Sentence, all the World knows, and
how the Jesuits went to work, God knows; and Time (the bringer forth of
Truth) will let us know. But when the horrible Paricide committed on the King's
sacred Person, was so universally cried down, as the greatest Villainy that had
been committed in many Ages, the Pope commanded all the Papers about that
Question to be gathered and burnt; in obedience to which Order, a Roman
Cathollck in Paris, was demanded a Copy which he had of those Papers; But the
Gentleman who had had time to consider and detest the wickedness of that
Project, refused to give it, and showed them to a Protestant Friend of his; and
related to him the whole carriage of this Negotiation, with great abhorrency of
the practices of the Jesuits.

In pursuance of that Order from Rome, for the pulling down both Monarch and
the Monarchy of England, many Jesuits came over, who took several Shapes to go
about their work, but most of them took party in the Army. About Thirty of them
were met by a Protestant Gentleman between Roan and Diep, to whom they said
(taking him for one of their Party) that they were going into England, and
would take Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor to be Agitators.

A Protestant Lady living in Paris in the time of our late Calamities, was
persuaded by a Jesuit going in Scarlet, to turn Roman Catholic: When the
dismal news of the King's Murder came to Paris, this Lady, (as all other good
English Subjects) was most deeply afflicted with it, and when this Scarlet
Divine came to see her, and found her melting in tears, about that heavy and
common disaster; he told her with a smiling countenance, that she had no reason
to lament, but rather to rejoyet, seeing that the Catholics were rid of their
greatest Enemy, and that the Catholic Cause was much furthered by his Death.
Upon which, the Lady in great anger, put the man down Stairs, saying, If that
be your Religion, I have done with you for ever. And God has given her the
Grace to make her word good hitherto.

Many intelligent Travelers can tell of the great joy among the English
Convents and Seminaries, about the King's Death, as having overcome their
Enemy, and done their main work for their settlement in England; of which they
made themselves so sure, that the Benedictines were in great care that the
Jesuits should not get their Land, and the English Nuns were contending who
should be Abbesses in England.

An understanding Gentleman visiting the Friars of Dunkirk, put them upon the
discourse of the King's Death, and to pump out their sense about it, said that
the Jesuits had labored very much to compass that great work: To which they
answered, that the Jesuits would engross to themselves the glory of all great
and good Works, and of this among other Works; whereas they had labored as
diligently and effectually for it, as they. So there was striving for the glory
of that Achievement, and the Friats showed themselves as much Jesuited as the
Jesuits.

In the height of Oliver's Tyranny, Thomas White, Gentleman, a Priest, and a
right Jesuit in all his Principles about Obedience, set out a Book Entitled,
the Grounds of Obedience and Government: Wherein he maintains that, If the
People by any Circumstance, he devolved to the State of Anarchy, Dr. Moulin,
page 122.
their promise made [to their expelled Governour] binds no more. That the
People are remitted, by the evil managing and insufficiency of their Governor,
to the force of Nature to provide for themselves, and not bound by any promise
made to their Governor. That the Magistrate by his miscarriages abdicateth
himself from being a Magistrate, Page 123. and 124.
and proves a Brigand, or Robber, instead of a Defender. The word Defender, by
writes with a greot D, that the Reader may take notice whom be means.

If the Magistrate ( says he) have ^ruly ^^served (...) or if it be rationally
doubted, that he has deserved it, and he actually out of possession. Page 133.
In the (...), i^ is certain the Subject has no Obligation to h^^ard for (...)
Restitution, but rather to hinder it: For since it is the Commom Good that both
the Magistrate and the Subject are to (...), and (...) out of what is expressed,
it is the common harm to (...) again of such a Magistrate; every one to his
power is bound to resist him. The next Case is, Page 135.
if he be Innocent, and wrongfully Deposed; nay, let us add, One who had
Governed well, and deserved much of the Commonwealth, yet he is totally
Dispossessed: And so that it is plain in these Circumstances, It were better
for the Common Good to stay as they are, than to venture the restoring him,
because of the public hazard.

And now to set down all his words, and follow his style, which is affectedly
intricate and obscure, he maintains that a Dispossessed Prince, whether by
right or wrong, is obliged absolutely to renounce all Right and Claim to
Government; and if he does not, Page 136.
he is worse than an Infidel.

He tell us, That Pope Urban the 8th. published a Decision, That after five
Years quiet possession of an Estate, the Church was not bound, to take notice
whether the Title were lawful o^ (...) acknowledge the Possessor in Eccle
siastical Business.

That when the Peoples Good stands on the Possessors side, then clearly he
begins to gain Right and Power, That when the People think themselves well,
they manifestly consent to the present Government. Besides (says he) who can
assure they shall be better by the return of the Dispossessed Party? Page 14^.
Surely by common presumption, the Gains is like to defend them better than be
who lost it. He comes so far as to conclude, That if the Old Magistrate offer
to return, the must be repulsed by force of Arms. His reasoning is this, What
if an open Enemy should come; could or ought the Subjects join against him with
their New Magistrate? Page 157.
If nor, the whole Public must perish: If they may, then (...) Case is the
same against their Old Magistrate, since his Right stood upon the Common Peace;
had that transferred from him to his (...) by the title of Quiet Possession.

This was the Philosophy of that Contemplative Gentleman, when the King lived
in Exile, and Oliver ^ate on the Throne. Having so well desorved of the King,
he was not long since highly recommended to his Mejesty, by a Man of great
Note. But the king who has a Royal insight in Person and Businesses, stopped him
with this short answer, No more of that, I know what Man he is

Father Br^t was of Mr. Whites Opinion: for the Castle of Jersey being
surrendered, after that resistance, which for the length of standing out, and
the height of Valor shall be memorable in all Ages; When the Gentlemen who
had defended it were pressed to take the Engagement, contrary to the Articles of
their Rendition: That goodly Divine was very carnest with them at St. Malo to
take it; maintaining. That they were not to acknowledge any Supreme, but the
prevailing Power.

When his Majesty cast himself upon the Spaniard, the Jesuitical Pasty thought
they had him sure enough from ever returning; but God disappointed their hopes,
and deceived our fears by his Miraculous Mercy For it is the Lord's doing; and
it is mavelous in our Eyes, that he escaped out of those hands.

I cannot leave un-observed, That in the height of the late Tyranny, two Heads
of the Gunpowder Traitors that were set upon the House of Lords, were taken
down; not by the high Winds, but by the same Zeal which had plotted that
Treason, and with the leave of Traitors of another Feather. We may hear in
time, that those holy Relics are shrined up in Gold, and are working Miracles.

The King's happy Restoration, did somewhat (as the Learned Bishop Usher
Prophesied) shop the Papists Carreer, so that they were constrained a while to
demur and alter their Measures, yet the same restless and ambitious Spirits
have acted all along, ever since the Restoration, to this very Day. And this
present year 1678, may be called a Year of Amazing and Stupendous Discovery:
For the Parliament meeting in October, 1678, after some Intimations given by
his Majesty in his Speech, and after severe Examinations of Mr. Oats, and Mr.
Bedlow, (two active Persons in the Popish Cabal, but now (...) there has been,
and still ^s* (...) and carried on by the Popish Recusants* to (...) destroy
the Protestant Religion, and to subvert the (...) of this Kingdom. On which
account several (...) ^^^mitted to the Tower on Suspicion, and several Persons
of lower degree to Newgate. Two of the latter sort, viz. (...) and ^ole^^n,
(late Secretary to the Duchess of York, and one that assumed to be Principal
Secretary of State) have received their Rewards as notorious; Traitors. This
Plot, in the general Opinion, is thought to be the greatest and most Dangerous
that ever was since the Reformation: For as it has been of long Continuance, so
it is laid Universal; for no less than these three Northern Kingdoms were
designed to be delivered from that which they call Pestilent Heresy (so
Coleman in one of his letters has told us); all the power and Wealth of the
popish Party was laid out to carry on the Catholic Cause. Witness what the
Burning of London in 1666. cost them, viz. 14000 l. and the Burning of
Southwark, 2000 l. and what Doctor Wakeman was offered to poison the King, viz.
15000 l. besides other unknown Charges, which in time well hope will be
Discovered, together with the depths of their Notorious Villainies. In the mean
time by what we true seen, felt, and heard, the Reader may see that the
Religion of the Papists is not from above (which is Pure, Peaceable, and
Gentle, and easy to be Entreated;) but from the Devil, who was a Murder from
the Beginning, and like a Roaring Catholic Lion, goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour.

FINIS.

