eighteenth century engraved portrait of Richard or Dick Whittington with a cat
Alderman Whittington afflicted with the Gout




THE Art of Cuckoldom: OR, THE INTRIGUES OF THE City-Wives.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1697.

THE Art of Cuckoldom, etc.
INTRIEGUE I.
THERE was a very pretty young Virgin Gentlewoman, whose whole Patrimony was
her Face, together with a very handsome competency of Wit, the bounty of Nature
on one part, and a genteel Education bestowed her by her Friends on the other.
For to tell Truth, Providence had not been over generous in any other worldly
Capacity: Not but that so much Beauty deserved a fair and ample Fortune,
suitable to her other Accomplishments, and indeed she was Born to such a one,
had not the over profuseness of a prodigal Parent (her Fathers sower Grapes)
embittered her unlucky Circumstances, and thereby entailed some Frowns in the
World upon her, her forementioned Education being indeed the whole Portion she
had left her.

This young Lady a little turned of Sixteen, (an Age that generally furnishes
the fair Sex with some little speculative Knowledge into the great Work of
their Creation, the End they were Born for,) felt an extraordinary Passion for
a young Gentleman on this side Twenty, a very zealous Adorer of hers; and one
that (not to render the conquered Virgin a Prize too easy) had fairly Sieged
her Heart, and had as nobly won it.

But for another Persecution of Fortune; this Gentleman a younger, or rather
youngest Brother, of not an over-Rich, though otherwise Honorable Family, had
as little to trust to, or expect from the unkind World as his Mistress. For as
she had only her Eyes and Charms to raise her Fortunes in it, so he had little
else but his Sword to raise his; a Commission abroad, or perhaps some
Court-favour at home, being indeed the whole Foundation of his Hopes.

These unhappy Obstacles to their Felicity being duly considered, especially on
the Ladies side, (not but she loved him to a hight, even to run all Hazards for
his sake;) she durst not, or rather would not Marry him, out of a principle of
pure Affection; as well remembering an old Proverb, That when Poverty comes in
at the Door, Love creeps out at the Window; insomuch that, that only Check,
viz. Her loving him too well to run the risque of loving him less, restrained
her Inclinations from so dangerous a push as Matrimony.

All Things being thus duly weighed, she took an occasion one day with her kind
Arms round his Neck, and a dropping Pearl in her Eye, to burst out into an
extravagant Complaint against the cruelty of their Stars, that such true Love
as theirs should be excluded from the Bed of Honor, Marriage: That she was
entirely his own, her Love, her Life, and what not. However, she could no ways
consent to a long miserable Life, (for that would be their Nuptial Portion)
only for a few short lived Bridal Joys -- with infinite more tender Expressions
upon this Melancholy Subject.

The young Lover who in all his Passion for so darling a Mistress, was still
Master of some Reason also, could not but acquiesce in the Justice of her
Complaints and the mutual Resentments of both their Misfortunes, under this
cruel Bar to their Felicities.

Some little Time after it happened that a very eminent Merchant in
Lime-street, of the reverend Age of Fifty Eight, was Captivated with this young
Fair One; a Man of a true City Complexion, Naturally very Jealous, and as
Naturally Covetous, being a Person of a very low Extract, though otherwise
blessed with the extraordinary Smiles of the World, having heaped together more
than double an Aldermans Estate.

This superannuated Inamorato, being now entered into the Rivals List to our
young Gallant, makes his bold and open Addresses to the fair Phillis (let that
pass for her Name:) For though the disparity of their Age might have rendered
him a more modest Intruder; Nevertheless, as Wealth never wants Front, the
consideration of that single Advantage so amply atoned for all other
Imperfections, that well knowing his Endowments that way, he accosted her with
all the Courage of an Heroic Lover.

This new Victory was no sooner obtained, but her first Io pean was sounded in
her young Gallants Ears: She immediately run to her dear Strephon (for so we'll
call him) big with the Triumph of so doughty a Conquest as her new Lime-street
Captive. As formidable a Rival as his City Figure might make him; nevertheless,
so antiquated a Pretender to so young a Bedfellow, created no great Jealousies
on the young Strephon's Side. But to shorten this heaviest part of our History,
the young Lovers in an Amorous Consult between 'em, come to this Resolve, viz.
That the Man of Gold shall carry the Dame: She shall Marry our grave Citizen,
and her contented Strephon wear the Willow. However, not to make a too
mortifying Divorce between the young Lovers, it is agreed; that the Virgin
Prize, viz. The First Fruits of Love shall be Strephon's, and the old Gentleman
shall only be admitted Tenant to her Reversion. In short, she will condescend to
make a City Husband of one, and a Court Friend of the other; the good old
Gentleman, the titular Lord of the Soil, like old Jupiter, shall shower Gold
into her Danae's Lap, and Strephon shower Love.

Accordingly all reasonable Advances are made on her side, to her Small-Ware
Merchant, her Lime-street humble Servant. His Addresses are favorably heard,
his Suit received, and the Preliminaries soon fettled for the great, and now
easy, Work of Consummation; easy indeed, for the happy Strephon has opened the
Blooming-Rose, done his aged Rival that Favor, that the Bridal Night Drudgery,
is not like to be too hard a tug for his Fifty eight. Thus whilst all three
Parties are rapt up in equal Felicities, the young Wantons in their substantial
Joys, and the old Fondling in his imaginary Paradise, the nuptial Day and the
bridal Robes are all fixed and prepared: Our Strephon and Phillis having first
Sworn an inviolable Correspondence, the Golden Fleece to be at his faithful
Service, as often as it is possible to lull the watchful Dragon to give 'em the
Opportunity.

To pass over the matrimonial Ceremony; for indeed it is little else but
Ceremony; at least on the feminine side: After she has received all the
congratulary Compliments from the most eminent City Matrons, and took her Seat
of Honor amongst them, suitable to the Dignity of the fair Partner of
Magistracy, the Bride of such an Honorable Metropolitan-Member; After her
first due provision of all Perquisites of State, Equipage and Grandeur, equal
to her Character; The next and indeed most important Study, is the performance
of Covenants with her dear Strephon, for as to her Vows at Home, she left them
at the Altar. Love is resolved to make strong Work here, whatever Cobweb Lawn
it makes there.

But now under her nuptial Yoke she sees a great part of her Hopes defeated;
it is almost impossible for her to find that happy Minute of meeting her
Strephon: For her doting City Sir Politic is so fond, or at least so cautious
of such young Flesh, that he is never out of her Sight. It Is true, she keeps a
Coach, but she can never go abroad in it, without his Luggage to load it: If
she pretends to go to Church, he is in earnest with her there; and whatever
Powers she prays to, he resolves she shall never be upon her Knees without him.
If she pretends a Visit to any Relation of what Degree or Sex soever, it is a
downright Affront to his Years and Person to be left behind her; so that she
must either carry him along with her, wherever she goes; Or, plainly tell him,
she is either ashamed of him, or has Designs upon him, which is neither
consistent with her Honor, nor the great Game she has to Play; for the Hope of
a Rich Widowhood will not permit her to put any Slights upon him, lest it might
endanger his Deathbed good Graces, and a kind last Will and Testament. In
fine, it was a full Month (which Lovers call an Age) before she could have one
half Hour with her dear Strephon, and that very difficultly obtained.

What use was made of the short Minutes, the Reader may guess. But more
particularly they laid this Plot together, that her Spark being of a perfect
Beau shape, fair Complexion'd, and as yet wholly Beardless, he should Dress
himself in Women's Apparel, and by passing for a dear Country she-Cozen of hers
(to whose admission it should be her Business to pave his way) he should be
received into her House; and by Living under her Roof, have all the private
Hours of stolen Delight, that their own Hearts could Wish. This Design so well
laid was decreed for speedy Execution, the Lady equiping him with a fair
Yellow-lined Purse (a small Token of her brighter Golden Favors in store) to
furnish him with all the Feminine Accoutrements requisite, etc.

Accordingly, about Six Days after, by which time the young Spark had not only
rig'd himself Capapee for a Virago, but also practiced some necessary Graces in
his Looking glass, more cleverly to carry on the Masue; and likewise his kind
Phillis had rapt up her believing Spouse into wonderful expectations of a
visiting Cozen of hers shortly looked for in Town: With this preparation the
bonny Lass makes her Entry into our Alderman's Roof, with all the welcome
Reception imaginable. Her-Lodging Apartment is immediately very Respectfully,
and no less Prudently provided, being a large Room on the same Floor, only a
Stair-head between that and her new City Cozen's the Alderman's Bedchamber. By
this Domestic freedom how many riotous Joys were tasted, though no set Feasts
of Love, but only so many running Banquets (a snap and away) may easily be
imagined. However, as our Phillis's whole Ecstasies were all bounded in her
Strephons Embraces, it was a little shackle upon her Delights, to think that
she could no ways furnish out more plentiful Revels, viz. A whole Nights Regale
in those darling Arms. However, the two Lovers contrived a very pretty
Stratagem to gain that Enjoyment. For which purpose one Evening by a small
slight of Hand she conveyed a small quantity of Jallop into the Alderman's
Supper-broth, which Operating as soon as ever he came to Bed, the poor Man was
forced to rise several Times in the Night, which unseemly mischance made him so
ashamed, as well as surprised at the suddenness of the Indisposition, that with
a kind of a Blush, to have so tender and Nice a Stomach as his young Brides
offended by so unsavory a Society, as his at present is; he desired her to make
bold with her Cozens Bed for that Night, whilst his Servants sat up with him,
and some learned Assistance was called from abroad to take care of him.

The poor young Lady with a great deal of Tenderness for him, and passionate
concern at this sudden Irruption, was very hardly pressed to desert him in this
Condition, till his absolute Commands compelled her to withdraw: and
accordingly, she trips over to her expecting Strephon, where we'll leave her to
as little Sleep as her sick Man she left behind her, the operations of warm
Love on this side affording as little time for Rest here, as the Jallop does
there, It Is true she has the Misfortune now and then to hear some unmusical
Gruntings and Grumblings, from the the other side of the Stairhead, a very
melancholy Discord to her tender Ears, had not some sweeter Harmony in her
Strephons Embraces a little softened those ungrateful sounds, together with the
private Titillation of so successful an Intrigue.

All Matters thus go on rarely: This ravishing Night on the young Lovers side
has eased a great many hideous Sighs and Longings, now all amply satisfied by
this favorable occasion. In short, not a shadow of Suspicion disturbs their
mutual Joys. Nay, not only the old Gentleman's, but likewise another younger
and more penetrating Rival's Eyes are deluded by this Female Masque of the
happy Strephon. For I had forgot to tell my Reader, that our Phillis's Charms
had captivated our Merchant's elder Prentice, a young Spark within Three Months
out of his Time, and by Birth a Gentleman, a very accomplished Youth; who to
tell the Truth, from the first Day of his Masters Marriage, had not only
entertained an extraordinary Veneration for his fair young Mistress, but
likewise naturally imagining that such dry Bones as her old Husband, could not
be over-extraordinary satisfactory to such young Veins; had one Day assumed the
confidence to Breathe a few passionate Sighs to her, and to throw himself a
perfect Adorer at her Feet. It Is true the Fair Offended gave him but a cold
Answer, and perhaps repremanded him very severely for so bold an Attempt,
against so much Virtue and Honor, as could not but be highly profaned by such
insolent Language. However, this Repulse had not wholly dashed him; but that he
both continued his Devoirs, and perhaps not wholly despaired of a more smiling
Beam, that might one Day shine a little warmer upon him; not at all doubting,
but as louring an Ascendent as her rigid Virtue yet held, that still she was
Flesh and Blood, and that the present fond Hony-moon of her cold Fifty Eight,
would not last always.

As prying a Hawks Eye as this more dangerous Critic might have upon her; yet
still, as I said before, neither our young Strephon's Behavior or Deportment
had any thing that in the least looked like Masculine; so very artfully was the
fair Imposture carried on.

One Afternoon a little time after, it fell out, that the young Lady was called
to a City Matrons, an eminent Neighbors Labor. And as this particular
occasion gave her the freedom of going abroad, unhaunted by her troublesome
Persecutor; she whispered her dear Strephon in the Ear, that as in all
likelihood she should return pretty late in the Night, when the good Man would
be asleep, so in Compliment to him, she was resolved at her return to slip to
Bed to her dear Cozen, upon pretense that at so unseasonable an Hour, she was
afraid she might hazard the Waking him, and so breaking his Rest.

The fair Cozen to make all due preparation for so dear a Bedfellow, took the
occasion that Evening to pretend some small Indisposition, and so went to Bed a
little sooner than ordinary, with a design to have taken a short Sleep before
hand, to be the better Fortified for those sprightlier waking Hours she should
have occasion to melt in Raptures afterward.

The young Strephon having thus bid good Night; it fell out that a young Girl a
Neice of the old Gentleman's, that lived somewhere toward Westminster, a very
honest poor Creature, whose whole Fortunes depended upon her rich Uncles
gracious Favor, came to pay her Duty to her honorable Uncle and Aunt, the
Aunt being at that time abroad, and consequently that part of her duteous
Devoirs yet unpaid, the old Gentleman resolved she should stay all Night, as
being uncertain of her Aunts return. And not to make any Ceremony with making
another Bed for her, by way of good Husbandry and saving that trouble, he
resolved to make bold with his Wives Cozen's, who was just gone to Bed before;
being withal charged that she should disturb the young Ladies Rest as little
as possibly she could, because she was gone a little Indisposed to Bed.

The poor Innocent Girl, without any more Attendance than a Candle in her own
Hand to light her up, accordingly prepares for Bed, where entering very softly,
she finds the young Lady fallen fast asleep, and therefore in Obedience to her
Commission, the Bed being large, and the young Lady lodged on the further side,
she pulls off her Clothes and puts out her Light, and creeps very silently into
Bed, as cautious of Waking the sleeping Lady.

By this time the whole Family were all gone to Bed, excepting a small
Domestic that waited below for the return of the Mistress from her Christian
Visit abroad. The young Westminister Lass was no sooner in Bed, but, what by
Virtue of a good Supper of somewhat better Fare than her own Commons at home,
together with the Fatigue of a long Foot-walk from Charing Cross to
Lime-street, was fallen into a very sound Sleep. At this time the young Strephon
waking, and his roving Arms being the first Member that moved, he felt a soft
Bedfellow lodged by him; hereupon being not only Transported to find his dear
Phillis so near him, not Dreaming a Mistake, but likewise hearing by her
Breath, that she was fallen asleep, notwithstanding his impatience for the
unutterable Joys, however he was resolved he would not Wake her too rudely; and
therefore first gently stealing his warm Hand into her Bosom, the soft
Temptation soon grew so powerful, that he could not forbear rambling it a
little farther still, to which her sound Sleep gave him all the free Accesses
his most libertine Fancy could reach. These preliminary Blisses having now
entirely fired him all over for more substantial Ecstasies, he could not forbear
clasping her round in his Arms, when with those burning Kisses sealed to her
Lips, and Embrancing her so close, her Face happening to lie toward him, and
not so much as the least Bar between the nearest touch of all her softest
Chrams; (for his own roving Hand before had removed and unveiled all
interposing Skreens) these too ardent Arms about her, and some other yet more
surprising pressure so very near her tenderest Virgin Treasury, the poor Girl
was immediately startled out of her sleep, into that hideous Terror, that she
presently shrieked out, crying, Help, Murder, Help, I am Betrayed, I am Ruined;
and so leapd' from him out of the Bed, the poor Strephon's Amazement no ways
hindering her flight (for the change of the Voice soon distinguished his fatal
mistake, and put him into no small Disorder and Astonishment.) This uproar of
the poor frighted Maiden alarmed the whole House, insomuch that not only the
Husband from his Bed, but likewise several of the Servants from theirs
(particularly the Elder Prentice we spoke of, who run down from his Chamber
above in his night Gown,) all bolted into the Room where the poor Girl, under
little less Apprehension than downright Ravishment still continued her Outcry;
when her Uncle asking her waht was the Reason of all this noise, Oh Sir, says
she, you have put me to Bed to a Man, a filthy, lewd, wicked, lascivious, wild
Man. Lord have Mercy upon us, replied the old Gravity, a Man! Yes Sir, cries
the young thing, this impudent pretended Niece of yours, is a He Devil in
Petticoats, a mere Tarquin, a downright Rampant Limb of Lucifer.

Just in the height of all this dismal Outcry (the poor Stephon being little
less than Thunderstruck, and having only time to leap out of the Bed, and
skreen himself in a large Night Gown that lay upon the Table,) it happend that
the gossiping Lady was just returned home too, and entered in the nick, full in
the middle of the whole hideous Impeachment against her poor discovered
Sham-Neece, to her no little Mortification and Confusion. However with a little
more Presence of Mind, and somewhat a larger Talent of Assurance than the poor
mute Strephon, she fell very Magisterially upon this clamorous young Roarer,
and asked her with what Impudence she durst talk at this wild rate, or what
Bedlam Frenzy had possessed her, to run on with all this Noise and Nonsense? Nay
Madam, answered the Girl, don't think to fright me out of my Reason; what I say
is Truth: I say again, and again, it is a Man; and though I thank my Stars, I am
a pure spotless Virgin; yet I am not so Ignorant at these years, but I have my
feeling about me, and know what is what, Madam. And if I had not had Grace
enough to cry out as I did, but been as willing as he, I might have been
Ravished before this time. In short, if I understand a Spindle from a Wheel, or
a Pestle from a Mortar, or any thing in this World; nay, if there be a Cock
Sparrow in all the Hedges between High-Gate and Hamstead, or a Whoremaster
between Aldgate and Westminster, I tell you once more, this impudent She Cozen
of yours, is a downright He Rogue, Madam.

Before the Lady could make answer to this crying Charge against her dear
Strephon, the old Gentleman took up the Alarm; She Cozen! with a Pox, cries he,
Any, I am He-cozen'd and She-cozen'd too in the Devils Name; betwixt your
Ladyship, and your Ladyship's Niece, I am sweetly brought to Bed, I thank you;
I have nursed a Snake with a Sting in his Tail indeed. Yes, you Jezabel, with
your Mr. Horner in Petticoats, I have been finely Cornuted.

Before the poor Lady could speak in her Justification (as indeed it was but a
very barren Subject) the poor Elder Prentice, who by this time had fully smelt
the whole Intrigue, and saw his dear Mistress in this inextricable Plunge and
Labyrinth, very generously fell down uypon his Knees, beseeching Pardon both
from Heaven and his Master, when his own Guilt and Confusion must unravel this
whole Mystery of Iniquity, and unfold the whole Riddle that had occasioned all
this Alarm and Distraction: And hereupon with a great deal of Pentience and
Shame, he very formally told them, That he himself was the true and only
Tarquin, the intended Ravisher, that the young Woman had accused, and who had
made all this wicked Assault upon her Virgin Innocence, and that by an unahppy,
though no less guilty Mistake; for what through the Instigation of the Devil, and
his own Brutal Lust, he had a long time conceived a Design upon the Chastity of
his Mistress's fair and virtuous Cozen, and this Night intending to put his
wicked Purposes in Execution, he had sotlen down from his own Bed to surprise
her in her sleep, and not knowing of this Stranger's being Lodged with her,
through the darkness of the Night he had mistaken his Prey, and only through
his Bestil violence, had been the whole and sole Author of all this
Disturbance. And though at the young Gentlewoman's first Outcry he had leaped
out of the Bed again, and stole back into his own Chamber; yet his own, now too
accusing Conscience had made him return to confess his intended Villainy, and
implore all their Forgiveness. The old Man who had scarce Patience to hear out
the Story, notwithstanding the satisfaction it gave him in clearing his dear
Spouse's and Cozens' Innocence, nevertheless could not forbear a great deal of
very violent and opprobarious Language against his wicked Servant for this
outrageous Fault. But his good Lady, who by a private wink to her kind
Deliverer, had partly acknowledged his wity and geneous Ingenuity in this
defense of her endangered Honor, very modestly reprimanded her Husband's too
vehement Indignation. She told him, That truly she had as much, or more Reason
to be angry than he, for her Virtue and Reputation lay at stake; not but her
Cozen, if occasion had been, should have strained a Point of Virgin Modesty,
even to a more ample Demon stration of her true Sex. But as Heaven had been
pleased to clear the innocent without any such unseemly proofs, and the
Criminals true Penitence had made some part of an Expiation for his Fault, it
was their Christian Duty to endeavor both to forget and forgiven.

All Parties being thus fully convinced, and all Clouds entirely dissipated,
the fair She-cozen (was likewise graciously pleased to grant her Padon to the
penitent Offender, for now we may restore her her feminine Epithet) declaring,
That she was heartily sorry, that she should carry any of those fatal Charms in
her Eyes, as could have power to provoke any such lewd Attempts against her
Virtue; not but had the young, too Violent, Gentleman addressed himself to her by
any Modest and Honorable Tenders of Passion toward her, perhaps upon fair and
virtuous Terms, she might not have been wholly insensible nor invincible.

All Things thus hushed, the good old Man took his harmless and spotless Lady
to his Embraces, and his Westminister Niece lay down again by her late
Ravishers side, who took care to play the Lucrece not the Taquin, the remainder
of the Night.

The next Day our fair Guest, took an occasion to take her leave of the Family,
in order to her pretended return into the Country, out of a Point of Virgin
Honor, as not seemly for her to remain any longer under that Roof, and so near
that Person by whom such Violence had been only offered to her.

Though her Strephon's absence was highly regretted by his dear Phillis, yet
she was forced to consent to it, as not willing to have so dangerous a Spy upon
her Actions, as the Rival Prentice, who she was now satisfied was no longer a
stranger to her whole Masquerade. However she comforted her self, that this
dangerous Rival had not above two Months to serve, and then she might have
fairer Liberty for her disguised Strephon's safe return again to her Embraces.

No sooner was the false Cozen and true Strephon departed, but the poor
blushing Phillis, out of a principle of Gratitude, took an opportunity to make
some farther acknowledgments to the kind Prentice for her protected Honor in
that unlucky Exigence. To which he replied, That truly as he had had the
Fortune to relieve a Distressed Lady, he hoped her Goodness and Smiles (for he
was so far mercenary) would be pleased to reward his Service: And now if he was
so impudent a Beggar, as to ask a return of Love from her, however the boldness
of such a Petitioner was so far excusable, that the niceties of Virtue could be
no Bar to his Ambition, and nothing but her Aversion, could deny him that
Bliss. To conclude, he preset the Subject so home, that notwithstanding her
vowed Fidelity to her dear Strephon, she could not tell hwo to refuse him: She
was Conscious to her self, that her Frailty was discovered, and (if for no
other Reason) she ought to consult the preservation of her Honor, by hushing
the Silence of the Discoverer, though at no less price than her last Favors;
besides the Merit of the Service he did her, in sheilding both her self from
inevitable Ruin, and her dear Strephon from eternal Exposure and Shame,
demanded her kindest Retaliation; and therefore the Invasion of her Strephon's
Right, was at least in this Case, a venial Trespass.

INTRIEGUE II.
AN Eminent high City Mercer, much such another doughty Yoke-mate to a young
Bride, as our Lime-street Merchant, having much in the like nature, taken To
have and to hold a wet Eel by the Tale, called a Wife, a Girl of high Sanguine,
just on this side Twenty; was Conscious to himself, that his natural Abilities
stood fairer for a Deputy of his Ward, than a Family Duty-man at Home; having
indeed over-match'd his reverend and superannuated Manhood in the Choice of a
Spouse. However, though so fair and fruitful a Soil, was but weakly and poorly
Tilled at Home, he took all the necessary Care to keep off all Foreign Hands
from the Plough, as resolving to have it lie Lay, rather than bear any Crop but
his own; and accordingly made all the Fences to secure it, that Caution and
Safety could invent.

In the first Place, he debarred her all Visits Abroad, without his own Personal
Attendance. Secondly, To keep her from Sloth and Idleness, the general Nurses
of Wantonness and Vanity; he introduced her into his Business in the Shop, her
Station behind the Counter, being her six days Labor; so that from Morning
till Night she was kept employed; This Projection carrying a double advantage
along with it, as being likewise a promotion of Trade; for such lovely White
and Red within Doors, is a greater attraction of Custom, than a gilt Sign
without Doors, the Town Gallants being always invited to buy their rich Mercery
from so fair a Hand.

And Lastly, To guard all safe at Nights; besides his Chains and Bolts, and all
the Iron work of his Doors, of which he himself always kept the Keys, his
constant Custom every Night, under pretense of seeing that no Thieves were
sculk'd or stolen into any part of his House, was to search every Room in it
before he went to Bed; though in reality, the dangerous Picklocks of Her
Cabinet-treasury, more than his own, were the Thieves and Sculkers he resolved
to secure against; and though the English Custom would not permit him to hang a
downright Italian Padlock upon it, however he would not be wanting in a true
Italian Watch and Ward set over it.

This poor young Thing being kept as his Cage-bird, with only two Pearches in
her Aviary, from her Chamber to the Shop, had only the Conversation of the
Young and the Gay, the generality of her Husbands Customers, with the envious
Bar of a Counter between them; however she had a great many fond Eyes upon her,
for she was posted at a very fair Stand to wound Hearts en passant, though she
had no convenience of Ministering a Cure to them.

Amongst her thus distant Admirers, was a very handsome young Gentleman, who
very often bought Goods at the Shop, and would always deal only with the
Mistress. This young brisk Fellow that never had an opportunity, beyond a
little cursory Rallery, however had made those Amorous Glances, and met those
kind encouraging Returns, that he sought an occasion one day of meeting her
Maid abroad, and broke his Mind to her in a hundred protestation of Passion for
her Lady. The Girl, who professed her self a faithful Confident of her
Mistress's, promised him all her best Assistance to gain him Access, which
having gratefully requited with a Brace of Guineas, and desired the conveyance
of a Letter, He came the next day before Dinner, (as appointed) and buying some
rich Brocade for a Wast-coat, this Billet Doux was stolen into his Hand.

SIR,
IF the easiness of the Grant has not cheapned the Value of it, I would tell
you your Petition shall be answered. I confess, if the fault were my own, I
should color Scarlet deep at the Frailty I am guilty of; but when dull Sixty
Weds gay Twenty, the fault lies at my Husbands door, and it is his business to
blush, not mine. Come then exactly at Seven this Evening in an ordinary
Vn-gentleman Habit, for Reasons you shall then know, and expect Admission.

The Spark accordingly in a very scrubbed Dress comes at the Hour, where the
Maid was ready to receive him, and guide him up Stairs: He was conducted into a
very fair Chamber one pair of Stairs backward, the Room hung with Tapistry; the
Maid being furnished with all Instructions, told him in few Words her Masters
Jealousy: That at present he was abroad upon Business at a neighboring
Coffee-house, but in less then half an Hour would return; that having a great
Cold he was this Night to take a Sweat; for which reason his Lady for this
Night lay from him in this Chamber; that considering the old Gentleman's Custom
of searching the House, she had no place to hide him in, but a great Clock-case
in the Room that was large enough to hold him, and into which her Master would
never look; that he must wait possibly an Hour or two there with Patience,
where she would lock him in, till her Mistress came to Bed.

The impatient Lover was very willing to undergo so small a Penance, as an
Introduction to so sweet a Paradise, etc. and took his Post accordingly being
squeezed and locked into his narrow Wooden Walls.

The Husband soon returning, it was about an Hour and a Half before he prepared
for Bed, when entering into this Room, Lord! my Dear (says he) our Clock stands
sure, or else goes near two Hours too slow, for the Hand is but just turned of
Seven, and it is now as much past Nine. [For the Reader must understand that the
Gentleman's being squeezed into it, had stopped the Weights and so hindered the
Movements of the Clock] However, says the old Gentleman, I Will wind it up. The
Lady was strangely startled at this, and endeavored to divert him by some
little Dalliances. Fie, my Dear, says he, be not troublesome but let me wind up
the Clock. No matter for the Clock, answered she, have you not a Watch in your
Pocket? No, my Dear (answered he) it is gone to the Watch-makers to be mended,
and I must set the Clock a going to know how many Hours I must Sweat. The Lady
was almost at her Wits-end, at this Accident, and could no ways stop him; when
missing the Key, the Maid made a blind Excuse that she had unhappily locked it,
and carried the Key into the next Room, for which her Master heartily Chid her,
and bid her fetch it again: The Maid returned, and made answer that she had
looked, but could not possibly find it; at this the old Gentleman catches hold
of the Knot or Button of the Door to pull it open by force: When the Spark
within finding he would be certainly discovered, pressed forward as the old Man
pulled, and threw the whole Clock-case down upon him; at which the Ladies
Candle being dashed out, the old Man cried out to the Maid, to run into his Room
for her own Candle which she had left there; and in the mean while the Spark
stole out of the Chamber, where the Maid at the Stair-head handed him down to
the foot of the Stairs almost into the Shop, and then run in for her Candle.

The old Man's crazy Bones, though none of the Strongest, yet by good Fortune
got no harm by the Fall: It Is true he complained that the Clock-case fell very
heavy, insomuch that he thought a piece of the House had fallen with it, which
only gave him a slight Brush, and did him no great Mischief. The Lady seemed a
little concerned at the Accident, but withal was much pleased that he had
received no hurt. And the old Man did not so much wonder at the fall of it, by
Reason it was but slightly tacked up against the Wall, and nailed only into the
soft Hangings, the Clock it self, which remained unshaken, being fastened with
Iron work above into the massy Wall, and which continued undamaged: So that
they set it all to rights again, and would it up, and so the old Man returned
into his own Chamber; where being put to Bed to take his Sweat, and suitable
Attendance planted about him, the Lady retired into the back Room, whither the
Gentleman with his Shoes taken off, was by the kind Damsel conveyed softly up
Stairs to Bed to her Mistress; and then she shut the Door upon them, and
attended her Master in the other Room.

The two Lovers being both gone to Bed, no doubt but they Sympathized with the
old Gentleman; for it is shrewdly to be suspected that they made Sweating Work
too. For warm Love must have warm Effects; where we'll leave 'em to all the
Delights of Velvet Kisses, the best and softest Mercery in the whole House.

As the Curtains were carefully drawn round them, and all his Clothes as
carefully laid under the Bolster, it was the Maids Post to be watchful in the
Morning when the Husband rose (for he was always an early Man) that he should
not go in there for fear of waking her Mistress. But there was no danger of
that, for the first thing he did was to go down into his back Shop, and there
in a small Closet or Counting House to settle his Shop-books. At this
Opportunity the young Gallant made have to rise, and was led down by the Maid.
The Master happening then to be in the Fore-Shop, very hastily asked her who she
had got there? To which the Maid dropping a low Courtesy, made answer, only a
Corn-cutter, Sir. When came he hither replied the old Spark? I brought him in,
Sir, answered the Wench; when you went first into your Counting House, for some
occasion I had for him. A Corn-cutter Replied the old Spark, you are come in
good time, Friend; I shall use you my self: I have a troublesome Corn on my
left foot, and a Toe-nail that grows into the Flesh. -- But take him up again,
Hussy, and give him a Glass of our Drink, till I finish my Accounts, and come
up to him. Ay and thank you noble Master, replied the Spark in Quirpo; I was
Prentice to old Stephens, and I thank Heave am as able to serve you with a whip
and a flash at a Foots End, as neatly as any Man in Town. And so the Maid
carried him up Stairs.

As soon as he got up again he was under some present Consternation how to
behave himself, for he fancied himself but a damnable awkward Corn-cutter, and
as bad provided with Tools for it. However a sudden thought came into his Head,
to carry it off very heroically, and therefore he desired the Maid to get him a
Penknife, for one of his Corn-cutting Tools. But above all to help him to a
piece of Plastering, which the House at that time not furnishing, she presently
be thought her of two large Velvet Temple Patches that she wore for the Head
ach; for which, the Gentleman immediately dismantled a large Snush-box of half
an ounce of Spanish, and clapping in the two Plasters, was entirely
accommodated with a Salvatory, and indifferently well set up for the Manual
Management.

Our young Corn-cutter was no sooner equipt with his necessary Implements, but
up came the old Gentleman, and sitting down in an Elbow-chair, as he pulled of
his Shoe and Stocking, he began to ask him some Questions. Well Friend (says
he) what Countryman art thou? -- Northwest Sir, answers our Corn-cutter. --
Northwest Friends! -- Corn. Ay Sir, I was born at Pancrass. -- Old Genesis
Pancrass: From Cheapside! Troth I think that is Northwest indeed. But Friend,
thou say thou were Stephens's Prentice; does thy Occupation take Prentices?
-- Prentices Sir, replied the Corn-cutter; ay, and all the reason in the World.
Lord, Sir, we intend to petition the King for a Charter, build a Hall, and set
up a Corporation of the Right Worshipful Corn-cutters. -- Nay Friend (answers
the Don) I believe thou art Stephens's Prentice indeed; he was just such
another joking Wag as thou art. -- Ay Sir (says he) my Master before me was an
ingenious Dog, and I am a true Whelp of his own Breeding. -- Old Gent. But
Friend, are you Master of his Art too. -- Corn. Never fear Sir, my Master was
too good a Commonwealths-man, to let his Talent dye with him. And though I say it
as should not say it, I scorn to turn my Back to the best manual Operator in the
whole Mystery. -- Old Gent. Most learnedly spoken; then you are sure you are
very dextrous at Corn-cutting. -- Corn. Dextrous at it! Ay Sir, I Will cut your
Corns and pare you Horns, with the best Master of the Art in Kent or
Christendom. -- Old Gent. My Horns? Friend. -- Corn. Your Nails, Sir, your
Nails; Horns and Nails are of the same natural homogeneal Growth, as the famous
Paracelsus, the great Doctor of our Chair, has very learnedly observed in his
Treatise of Anatomy. -- Why this Fellow (replies the Lady that stood by) talks
like a Philosopher. -- Corn. Ay Madam, I have Read Aristotle's Problems. If
your Ladyship never saw it, I Will lend it you. -- Lady. Nay, troth, this is a
merry Fellow indeed. -- Corn. Merry Madam, why it is the best Tool of my Trade;
my Master got half his Estate by it. -- Estate! replied the Mercer; I thoguht
he had died in Sutton's Hospital. -- Corn. Ay Sir, no matter for that, he had
good Lands and Livings to my Knowledge. -- Old Gent. Lands and Livings, prithee
in what part of the World? -- Corn. Why in Gypsey Land. We Corn-cutters are
mungril Gypsies.

Our Lands and our Livings,
Are of other Folks givings;
And so rubs the World away.
Lady. Troth my Dear, I like this Fellow well, I care not if I come under his
Hands. -- Corn. Truly Madam, I shall use you very gently, for I have a very
neat Hand at Women's Work. -- Lady. Now I think on it I have a kind of a soft
Corn on the inside of one of my great Toes that dos so pain me. -- Corn. A Pain
between your two great Toes! You are not the first fair Lady that has been
troubled with that Malady. But Madam, if I don't presently ease you. -- Lady.
Say thou so; then call some Morning toward the end of the Week, and I Will
take a Cast of your Office.

By this time, the old Gentleman was ready for the manual Operation, and had
showed where his Grievance lay. Well Sir, says the Corn-cutter, shall I go
through stitch with you, and take out your Corn, Root and Branch; or shall I
leave some few strings of it behind me, to have your Custom another time? Nay
Friend, replies the Don, if you have an Art to take it off Root and Branch that
it will never grow again; pray use your best Skill, though I pay you double
Fees for it. -- Corn. Why then I Will tell you; I have a Plaster here in my Box,
that will so ripen it in one 24 Hours, that by to morrow Morning when I shall
come again, I Will make such clever Work on it, that I Will lay my Life to a half
penny worth of Butter-milk, you shall never hear more on it. -- Old Gent. Say
thou so! Then prithee lay on thy Plaster. But what, a Velvet Plaster? --
Corn. Ay Sir, I always suit my Surgery to my Customers. Your Worship has past
your Brass Chain, and your plush Jerkin, and your rich Batchelorship, and may
live to be an Alderman: And so a Velvet patch to a Velvet jump, is all secundum
artem.

Having reserved the Corn-Cure for the Morrow, the old Gentleman however
desired the other part of his Office, viz. The paring of his Nails; but our
Corn-cutter (to shorten the Story) excused that too, till to morrow Morning,
for want of an extraordinary Tool that he said, he had at the Grinders, which
he would bring with him, and which should do it much more easily than any of
his present Implements he had about him. And so the old Spark stealing a
Shilling into his hand, the young Artist went off with flying Colors.

The next Morning our young Spark, sent a more able Operator, whom he rewarded
with a brace of Crowns to go in his stead, and make an excuse for him, that he
was fallen Ill, and was afraid of the new Fever, and for that Reason, had sent
his Deputy.

One Evening at the end of the Week, the Ladies Maid came to his Lodging from
her Mistress, to tell him, That the morrow Morning following, the Coast would
be clear, for her Husband was to be out the whole Forenoon: And therefore she
desired his Company, remembering him withal, to bring his Tools along with him.
Ay Chicken, replied the Spark, I never go to a fair Lady without 'em. Nay,
replied the Girl, I mean your Corn-cutting Tools, for you must come in that
Habit again. So the Gentleman repaying her former Favors, he presented the
Girl with ten Guineas, and promised to be punctual at the Assignation, etc.

The next Morning he made his Visit at Eight, when the Lady in a loose Dress, a
Dishabilee, only her morning Gown, etc. and in her own Chamber was ready to
receive him: And here he continued till near Noon, for the Lady had very
private and important Affairs with him; for her Fondness would not yield to
part with him, till the last Minute when she was forced to lose him; nor was he
Idle all the while, for no doubt she found Work enough for so dear an Operator.

Between Eleven and Twelve the Husband returned, and the Corn-cutter was
dismis'd, the Maid attending him down to the Shop door. It happened that the
Husband had brought home with him a very eminent Citizen, a Banker in
Lumbard-street, who seeing a Face pass by him that he was so very well
acquainted with, caught hold of our young Spark; why how now, cries the
Cash-broker? What have we got here, my good old Friend Sir William in
Masquerade? Sir William, Sir! answered the Landlord, somewhat surpised; why
Sir, do you know this Man? Know him, Sir! replied the Banker; ay Sir, I think I
have Reason to know him, for I have Six Thousand Pounds of his in my Hands.
Lord have Mercy upon us, (cries the old Man, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, and
turning as pale as Death,) a Sir William! and Six Thousand Pound, and my Wives
Corn-cutter, Oh! I a Sir William! (answered the young Spark) and Six Thousand
Pound; faith Master woul'd you would make your words true; I gad, if I had but
half that Money, I Would build one of the Steeple's of Paul's. I beg your Pardon
honest Fellow, replied the Goldsmith, (finding he had done Mischief, and
smelling a Trick,) now I hear thee speak, I find my mistake; thou have a Face
as like a Bedfordshire Baronet, as one Apple's like another; but thy Voice is
no more like his, than a Bagpipe to a Recorder. And so the young Spark scraped
him a Leg, and marched off.

Lord Sir, continued the Banker, how two Faces may be alike. I remember I read
a Story of a Shoemaker of Maidstone in Kent, in Harry the Eighths Reign, that
was so like the King, that he was sent for up to Court; and in one of the
King's Vests, past through the whole Court at Whitehall saluted for the King,
and undiscovered by all his Guards; and coming to the King's Presence, the King
saw his own Picture so exactly, that he asked the fellow Jocosely, If his
Mother had never been at Court? No, replied the noble Cordwainer, but my Father
has been there.

The King was so very well pleased with so smart and ingenious a Repartee, that
he settled a very fair Estate upon his Royal Representative, and made him that
little Prince of a Crispin, a Degree above his Awle or his paring Knife.

The good old Gentleman was mightily pleased with this Story, thanked the kind
Banker for the Relation, laughed at his own groundless surprise, making all the
due Application of the Story to his own Case; and went off with all the entire
Satisfaction and Peace, like a true City Husband, with full Faith and
Confidence in his innocent Yoke-mate, and her honest Corn-cutter.

INTRIEGUE III.
ABOVE a year before the Revolution, a young Gentleman, whom we will call
Peregrine, of very Honorable Birth and Education, the second Brother to an
eminent Baronet in the West of England; fell passionately in Love with a young
Country Gentlewoman, the Offspring of a Father, who (bating his overmuch
Inclination to Avarice, even to a Fault,) was a very accomplished Man, and the
Master of many eminent Virtues. It unhappily fell out, (if we may venture to
Arraign the distribution of Providence) that this young Lover, though with the
too slender Fortune of a younger Brother, was a Person of that Gallantry, Wit,
Spirit and Courage, so much beyond the weaker Merit, and the more cloudy
Intellects of his elder Brother, that swept the whole Estate from him; that
it is much to be pitied that no other Title, but the start of a year into the
world before him, should load this Saturnine elder Birth with above Two
Thousand per Annum, and the Sprightlier younger Brother should carry little
more than as many Hundreds.

This young Lover with the forementioned Accomplishments, made a very fortunate
Attack upon the young Ladies Heart, with a success, even to his own utmost
Wishes; and when the mutual Faith was plighted, and not till then, (there
remaining nothing now but Obedience to be consulted) the Fathers consent was
asked to the Marriage, being now told that he had long loved his Daughter, the
fair Urania, (for that shall be her Name) and there was nothing wanting but his
paternal Assent and Blessing to Crown their mutual Felicity. The Father seemed
much surpised at this Narration, and fell into a very great Passion at the
Boldness of his Daughter, to receive and encourage a Suitor, without giving him
an earlier Account of the Matter; urging, that it was the highest Breach of her
filial Duty to keep any thing of this kind concealed from a Parent, it being
his equal Right to have a concurrence, as well in the disposal of her Heart,
(nay, even her very Looks) as of her Person. In short, here was the paternal
Authority infringed, and nothing could pacify the angry Father.

But all this Outcry (which indeed was but the pretense) was really Founded
upon a more heinous Disgust: Neither the Quality nor Person of the young Lover
were any ways Faulty, nor the private Commerce of Love so long managed betwixt
the young couple was the true capital Crime: No, her Father was able to give
her half Five Thousand Pound Portion, and the poor young Gentleman's worldly
Circumstances did not deserve such a Fortune. If the elder Brother, it is true,
had been her humble Servant, the infringement of the paternal Power had then
been a more venial Sin: A Baronet, and Two Thousand a year, might have wooed,
won, nay, and worn her too, without half this Quarrel.

To shorten this part of my History, it is enough to tell you, that the Father
is wholly Inexorable, and the Daughter being all Duty, dares not Rebel, though
to be the happiest Woman in the World, as such the Embraces of her dear
Peregrine had undoubtedly made her: Insomuch, that her Fathers consent being
utterly unconquerable, there is nothing but Despair and Misery before their
Eyes; for possibly never was Love so Passionate, as between the languishing
Peregrine, and the mourning Urania; Mourning indeed, for that melancholy
Epithet was entirely her own, under her infinite Griefs at her hard Fathers
Cruelty.

The defeated Lovers, under all the Agonies imaginable, nevertheless renewed
their eternal Engagement of Fidelity; the Lady on her part made a solemn Vow,
that she would never Marry any Man whilst her Peregrine lived; and he, with as
many hearty Oaths bound himself under the same Obligation. All their Hopes, if
any, were, that possibly her Father, or his Brother might die, and by that
means, either the Command of her Fortunes in her own hands would render her
Mistress of her self; or the advance of his would mollify an obdurate Father,
who in spite of all his other Pretensions, she was very well satisfied had no
true Obstacle to bar their Happiness, but the slender Patrimony of her dear
Peregrine.

After this inviolable Contract between 'em, the poor Gentleman in tenderness
to the Peace of his darling Mistress, (being sensible if he stayed in England,
he should be eternally hovering about her, even possibly to the ruin of her
very Freedom, under the Jealousy of an enraged Father, or some other paternal
Frowns that his Presence might pull down upon her) resolved to take the
opportunity of Traveling Abroad with a young English Nobleman, his Relation
and intimate Friend.

In his Absence according to mutual Promises, a Correspondence was held between
'em by Letters, the most Tender and Passionate that all the Inspirations of
Love could dictate; which for the safer conveyance to her hand, was agreed
between them, they should be all directed to her Maid (her particular
Confident) who constantly attended the Post House in the Town for their
Receipt, to prevent any Interception. The Father after his Departure, who was
no Stranger to his Absence, nor that Coast of the World wherever he rambled,
(for his Suspicion made him set up for a Spy, and keep Intelligence on that
very Account) took an occasion one day to present his Daughter with a very rich
Scrutore, to which he had provided a double Set of Keys. This noble Present,
was soon made the young Ladies Closet-favourite, the Cabinet where the greatest
Treasure of her Life, her Peregrines Letters were reposited; to which the
Father, at favorable opportunities, by the help of his false Keys, had all the
Access he desired; and there was not that Secret of their Souls, at least, that
they trusted to Black and White, that he was a Stranger to: For he read both
Peregrines and his Daughters Letter the innocent Lady keeping the Copies of her
own, as well as the Originals of her dear Peregrines, under the same Lock and
Key.

The Father now plainly perceived the Vows and Contracts made between 'em,
which he likewise sound inviolable; not only by their mutual Protestations, but
likewise by daily Experience: For in less than half a Years time, the Fair
Vrania's Beauty (for she had no common Stock of Charms) had attracted her more
than half a Score new Idolaters, some of them of the highest Estates and
Quality, but all despised and slighted: Nay, the very Commands of a Father, all
rejected, she being utterly Deaf to all Arguments, Reason, or any Authority
whatever, on that Subject.

This Discovery gave the Father a great deal of disquiet, who saw his whole
Ambition frustrated, in all his endeavors for the happy Disposal of his
Daughter; nevertheless, to conceal all Suspicions from his Daughter of any
Discovery whatever, in all his resentments against her continued Deafness and
Obstinacy, he took care not to let drop a Word that should intimate his least
knowledge of her Correspondence with Peregrine.

About this time it happened that the Father took a particular Fancy to leave his
Country Residence, and take a great House in Linclon's-Inn Fields; whither the
greatest part of his Goods and Furniture was removed, and his whole Family
transplanted to London. The young Lady who gave her Lover Advertisement of her
removal, continued her foreign Correspondence with her Pregrine. About the time
of her arrival at London, her Peregrine had then Traveled through all france,
visited several Courts in Italy, and was settled for the whole Winter Season at
Rome.

As the fair Urania carried her Charms to London, so she made her new Conquests
there. And amongst a Crowd of Gazers upon so celebrated a Beauty, it happened
that a very rich Merchant, dignified with a Knighthood, was made one of her
Captives. It Is true, he was a Widower, had several Children, and was aged about
Fifty, almost old enough for Vrania's Grand father; but still he had a vast
Estate, was a Man of no mean parts; and to manage his Addresses to so young a
Lady, with the true arts of Policy, he made his strongest Attack upon the
Father; and to bribe him to his Party, nay, and possibly endear the young Lady
too, by so generous an Offer, he proposed to settle her a Jointure more than
doubly answerable to her Fortunes, and yet receive not one Penny of Portion
with her; giving her Father free leave to dispose of that to the bettering his
younger Childrens Portions. This wonderful Generosity carried a high sway with
the Father; and though God knows but little influence upon the Daughter,
however her acknowledgment of so frank a Lover, kept her in the bounds of
somewhat more than ordinary Civility toward him. Besides, though in all her
Coldness to all the tenders of Love from any thing but her dear Peregrine, both
her Prudence and good Breeding always gave a very Courteous Reception to all
her Adorers, how coldly soever she received the Adoration: And even her very
Refusals, nay her coyest Disdain, had a peculiar Grace and Air in it, that
spoke her the Mistress of an admirable Wit and Address.

Her Father, who now grew almost enamored of his rich and generous
Merchant-pretender, nevertheless daily found both by his Daughter's and
Peregrine's Letters (for he kept the old Custom of prying into her Cabinet)
that neither Time, Distance, nor Absence, could shake her Engagements with
Peregrine; and consequently whilst that inviolable League held firm, all other
Hopes or Attempts were wholly Fruitless: And therefore began to think of some
Plots or Stratagems, if possible, to cut this fatal Gordian.

Accordingly, as Mischief never wants a Prompter, he soon furnished himself with
edge Tools for that illnatur'd Work: For first he went to the grand
Post Office, and there corrupted one of the Post-officers to stop all Foreign
Letters directed to such a young Woman so named -- viz. His Daughters
Confident, which by Virtue of a Golden Bribe was readily granted him; and for a
Fortnights time together, all Peregrine's Letters which innocently continued
that Superscription, were detained at the Post office, and received by the
Father: After this, he feigned a very long Letter (which received the
Post-mark) as from the young Nobleman, dated from his very Lodgings near the
Vatican (from whence Peregrine had always dated before, and which much
contributed to the Credit of the Contents) directed to the Young Lady her self,
preparing her first with a great many artful and tender Expressions, for the
Reception of the melancholy Relation he was going to make. In fine the long
doleful Epistle concluded with the deplorable Account of the Death of her dear
Peregrine, who dyed of an Apoplexy; and that having had the Honor of his
particular Friendship and Confidence, he made bold to be this ungrateful
Messenger, whilst mixing his own Tears for so dear a Friend, with those from
her own fair Eyes for so faithful a Lover, who as he lived, died only Hers; he
promised her to take care of all her Letters, which as so many Relics, he had
Sealed up, together with some smull Jewels and Rarities designed by the kind
Peregrine, for a Present to his adored Urania; and which being not so portable
by the public Post, should with all imaginable Speed be conveyed to her fair
Hands by some properer way.

I need not tell my Reader how fatally this Paper Thunderbolt struck the poor
afflicted Urania, who, sweet Innocence, not in the least suspecting the
Forgery, sunk under that Load of Grief, that was almost inexpressible. Her
Father, inquiring the Fountainhead of all these sudden floods of Tears, she
very frankly showed him the fatal Letter, as having now no farther occasion of
Privacy or Reserves, confessing her whole Correspondence and Engagements (as
much as her Sighs would give her utterance) with her dear Peregrine. The Father
very cunningly, not in the least resenting her Disobedience in such a
Confession, joined with her in her very Tears, and expressed himself little less
a Mourner than her, assuring her that his Pity for his unfortunate Death, had
made a very great Conversion upon him, and much softened a great many hard
Thoughts which he had formerly very unkindly conceived against him.

During her daily repeated Sighs for her truly lamented Peregrine, her Father
was a constant Condoler with her, till at last, telling her how 'twas
impossible to combat the Decrees of heaven, he besought her to bury her Griefs
in her Peregrine's Grave; and as her Vows of Fidelity were now cancelled in his
Death, to think of some less melancholy Subject; and if she tendered either her
own Felicity, or her Fathers Satisfaction, she would condescend to lend a kind
Ear to her kneeling City Knight, and Reign both the Mistress of so faithful a
Heart, and so ample a Fortune.

The fair Mourner you may well believe conceived but very little Harmony from
so ungrateful a Tune as Love; however, taking her Pillow, which she every Night
watered with a Thousaned melting Tears; amongst the Reflections of her present
Misery, she began to consider of the disposal of her future mourning Hours of
Life, under the Loss of her never to be forgotten dear Peregrine. She well knew
there would be no long Resistance against a commanding Father: For how little
soever the Taste of Love would relish with her, she must at last be forced to
sit down with that unpalatable Feast called Matrimony. And truly, if she must
have a Husband, she reflected that the best Choice she could ever make would be
her City Merchant. For as all Fondness or Delight died with her Peregrine, she
thought that her cold Embraces could now be no where better bestowed, than upon
reverend Five and fifty, viz. her Widower Knight, her Ice and his Age being the
most suitable Match. For to Marry any Gentleman of Birth, Youth and Honor, she
thought would be a kind of Cheat and Delusion (which her Candor and Integrity
utterly abhorred) by lodging so heartless a lump of Wedlock in the Bosom of
Desert and Worth, that both required and merited a more cheerful Mate than such
a drooping Turtle should ever make. Besides, what was yet the strongest
Obligation; she stood so much endebted to the Love and Memory of her dearest
and only dear Peregrine, that she fancied it an open Violation of her very Vows
to that only Lord of all her plighted Faith (a Bond that even Death could never
Break) to Sleep in any young and charming Lovers Arms; being resolved to pay
that Pious Duty to his very Name, as never to taste the true Joys of Life, which
nothing but Peregrine could, or at least no Man else shall ever give her. And
therefore if she Marries, it shall be to her antiquated humble City Servant,
whose Person and Age being both so very little agreeable, she thought it so far
from a Blemish or Reproach to her Infidelity, or any Invasion of her
Peregrine's ever sacred Right, that on the contrary she rather esteemed it as
no other than giving up her self a perfect Sacrifice, even to her dear
Peregrine's ever darling Memory, by tying her Youth and Beauty, to so tastless
a Wedlock Bed, a Penance more than Pleasure; and consequently a kind of
voluntary Oblation even of her whole Peace of Life (under so mortifying a
shackle) to the very Ashes and Name of Peregrine.

This generous, though a little Romantic Resolution, being spurred on by her
Fathers daily Importunities, so prevailed at last, that in less than a Month
she Married her Knight; where we'll leave her in her Wedding sheets, in all the
Embraces, though not all the Transports of Wedlock; and make a short Visit to
her poor Traveller at Rome. -- Above a Month (an Age in a Lovers Calendar) had
now past, since he received one Line from his Urania: An Hundred melancholy
Reflections he made upon so strange a Silence: Sometimes he fancied she might
be Indisposed; but then he considered her Maid would have written for her: Her
Silence he durst not impute to any Falsehood or Infidelity, for he had too good
an Opinion of such inviolable Truth. Possibly then her Father had discovered
their Correspondence, or intercepted his Letters; and therefore he sent a
Letter to her, enclosed in another to a Merchant his Friend, in London; with a
particular Charge of a private Delivery.

He need not have given him so strict a Commission in that Point. For coming to
deliver a Letter from a young Spark to a Married Lady, (as such indeed he found
her) he thought it high Prudence to use the best Caution and Privacy in such an
Errand. Accordingly he took the opportunity of meeting her Abroad one Morning
with no Company but that of her Maid, as she was going to Church to Prayers. He
no sooner gave her the Letter, and she saw but the Superscription, but well
remembering the Hand, she turned as Pale as Death, and looking almost
Frightfully in the Messengers Face, she asked, From whence comes this? From Mr.
Peregrine -- replied the Merchant, Sir Peregrine, I should say: For his
Brother's newly Dead, and we hope we snall see him in England, to take
possession of -- Before he could finish his short Speech, the Lady fell down
Dead in a Swoon into her Woman's Arms, letting drop the Letter from her Hand:
The poor Maid very much concerned at her Ladies Indisposition, and more at the
fatal cause of it; immediately called a Coach, into which, with some help, she
got her poor Mistress; and having secured the Letter, she bid the Coachman
drive softly to the next Fields, as prudently thinking it the best Policy, not
to drive home immediately, but first a little to recompose her sad Ladies
surprising Afflictions, and recover her lost Senses; so much the more
cautiously to manage this fatal Accident, to the prevention of raising any
jealous ill Blood at home: For the Knight was utterly a Stranger to the whole
History of this darling Rival.

As the Coach drove through Moor-feilds (for they set out from the Change) the
Lady by the Care of her Maid, was brought a little to her Senses again: And the
Coachman being ordered to drive very slowly, she turned her drowned Eyes to
the Reading of her Peregrine's Letter, the Subject possibly the tenderest that
the most transported Passion could write. He began first in a few mourning
Turtle murmurs to tell her, That above a whole Month had past in which he had
not received one Line from his Divine Urania: But that he could impute only to
some unhappy Accident, not to any Coldness or Forgetfulness, for his Soul was
too full of the darling Virtues of his dear Urania, to apprehend even but a
shadow of a Change, in such unshaken Constancy, Faith, Honor, Love, and every
Charm of Heaven, all joined in his Urania.

But now to reward his long, long Sighs and Tears, he told her he had newly
received a Letter with an Account of his Brothers Death, by which the whole
Estate and Honor of his Family devolved upon him, and that he was immediately
following his Letter, which was only sent with the Olave-branch before him:
That he was posting with all the Wings of Love to the Arms of his Urania; for
now he doubted not but he should be able to melt down her obdurate Father into
Justice and Mercy. In short, he run on with so many hundred Transports and
Ecstasies upon the prospect of his approaching Felicity, in the Embraces of his
Urania, as if he had seen no less than the Clouds opening, and the Angels
descending, and all the whole Joys of Heaven pouring down upon his Head.

Oh do but think, what an Epistle was here written, and what Eyes were here to
read it! It Is true, she read it out, and I dare not say either with a more than
Woman's strength or courage she outlived the reading it. For though the poor
Fidelia, her Maid, made a hard shift to prevent her relapse into her former
swooning Fit; however 'twas only to suffer the Torments of a more lingering
Death. For nothing was so killing as this Language from her dear Peregrine, and
nothing so miferable as the wretched and hardfated Urania, that lives beyond
the reading it. It is impossible to express the Flood, the Torrent, nay, the
Deluge of Tears, that followed this fatal Discovery of the inevitable Miseries,
Despair and Ruin, that now lay before her.

But not to hold my Reader too long in this melancholy Relation, Fidelia at
length prevailed that they should drive home, and 'twas agreed between 'em,
that whatever indisposition attended her unhappy Mistress, (for this shock was
enough to stagger a stronger Heart) that the Cause of her Affliction should be
concealed with all the Caution and Care imaginable. Accordingly she returned
home, where she gave her self up to all the most violent Transports of Grief
that a breaking Heart could utter. The poor Knight at home was infinitely
surpised at the red Eyes of his dear Lady; but Fidelia had a nimble excuse to
salve all, by telling him that 'twas an Indisposition of her Mistress's, that
had attended her from her very Youth. The good Man immediately posted away a
Messenger for a Physician; but Fidelia stopped him, desiring (and Urania joined
in her request) that no Doctor might be sent for, but Fidelias Brother (at that
time a young Practitioner in Physic, living not far off.) The kind Husband who
was all Obedience to the Commands of his dear young Lady, could not deny her
any thing; and therefore the young Esculapius being sent for, Fidelia very
cunningly managed the Matter, that the Doctor gave in his Report of his Ladies
Distemper, as the Maids, not the Mistress's Pulse beat; nay, the whole Recipes
of her Cure, were all of her own prescription: For the young Doctor very
readily (as tutored by his Sister) declared that the Nature of her Disease,
required Silence and Rest; that it was absolutely necessary she should lie
alone, till her Recovery. The poor Man, though with much Regret, submitted to the
Sentence of being excluded from his dear Spouse's Arms for some few widowed
Nights: However imposing a Confidence in her young Doctor's Skill and Judgment,
he prayed for his success in the restoration of her Health; and so resigned her
to the care of Heaven, and into the hands of Art.

This Project was very useful in the poor Lady's Circumstances; for lying
alone, with Fidelia in a Pallate-Bed by her, 'twas not only some ease to her
Sorrows that she could entirely give her self up to her Sighs for her
Peregrine; but likewise she had rid her self of the ungrateful Embraces of a
Tyrant and an Usurper, for as such she looked upon the present possessor of her
Bed, as only mounted thither by Cheats, Plots, Forgery, Treason and Delusion.
In all her apprehensions of Shame and Confusion at the return of her Peregrine,
(for see him she is resolved, though she die at his Feet) she has this only
dawn of hopes of one kind beam of Pity and Pardon from him; when in all the
Miseries her barbarous Father has heaped upon her, her very Choice of a
Husband, and the Reasons of that choice, should convince him, that she had
Truth even in her Falsehood. For since an irresistible Power, had compelled her
into the Bonds of Matrimony, she had chosen a Shackle, not a Bracelet, by a
Match of that inequality of Age to her Youth and Charms, as might sufficiently
testify that, it is true, the Right even of her dead Peregrine might be
supplanted by Constraint and Force, but never alienated by Delight, Desire and
Inclination.

The Father, as you may imagine, was strangely mortified at the News of his
Daughter's Ilness, but more at the unhappy cause of it; and almost trembles to
approach the fair Ruins he was now sensible himself had only made. It Is true,
the poor Lady received him with all the filial Duty and Respect, far beyond the
common Forgiveness of such Unpardonable Injuries: It Is true, she Charged her
whole Destruction, and she much fears her Death, upon his unnatural Cruelty;
however, she freely forgives him; and would make it even her last dying
Command, or at least her dying Prayer (for her Commands she feared had now no
Power) to her wronged Peregrine, to seal him that same Pardon, and to bury all
Resentments against the unkind Father, in the unhappy Daughters Grave.

This infinite Goodness of the sweet Urania, struck him so near the Heart, if
possible, beyond the shock of her very Sufferings and his own Injustice;
insomuch, that there never was a more hearty Mourner, and a truer Penitent,
than her unfortunate Father. -- But to leave him to his Sorrows, and to bring
over our young Traveller, raped up even in Paradise it self, with those Dreams,
those Hopes and all those dazzling Visions, of almost more than mortal Happiness
in his Vrania's Arms: Think what a Phaeton's Fall must here be; when little
less than dashed down from Heaven, his very first Salute on the English Shore,
(if Ravens Croaks, and Mandrakes Groans can be Salutations) is the whole Story
of his Vrania's Marriage. For such prudent care was taken both by the lady and
the Father, that Attendance lay ready at his Transport from Callais to Dover,
(for in pure Expedition, he crossed the Alps, and came Post by Land, arriving in
England in five days after his Letter) on purpose to prepare him for the whole
mournful Narrative, thereby to prevent those too violent, and possibly those
too fatal Transports of Fury, that otherwise, upon any other Irruption of the
ungrateful News, might have broken out. Besides, it was both high Prudence and
Justice, to have the whole Tale delivered in all its true Circumstances; as
well for the Vindication of the poor Ladies Innocence, as for some little
alleviation of the poor Gentleman's Peace, when the whole Tragical Scene of his
lost Urania set forth in its true Light, would appear to have more the Hand of
Fate in it, than Infidelity.

Besides, this preparation (the whole Story being faithfully related, and as
generously believed) in some measure a little paved the way for the interveiw
of the two unfortunate Lovers, which the next morning after his arrival in
London, by the management of Fidelia, was made between 'em. When Peregrine
meeting the still charming Eyes of his ever adored Urania, (for though Sickness
and Sorrow had emptied half their Quiver, yet still they had Darts enough to
kill) instead of Revilings, Upbraidings or Reproaches at any thing of Levity,
Forgetfulness or Inconstancy, in the too hasty Marriage of his lost Urania: On
the contrary, here was nothing but wet Eyes, bent Knees, a prostrate Lover
thrown dying at her Feet, and the languishing and breathless Urania, at the
same time falling dead into his Arms; that 'twas almost a Question in all the
Agonies of Grief on one side, and Tenderness on the other, which held fastest,
the Embraces of Love, or those of Death between 'em.

When they had both recovered Life enough for Breath, and Breath enough for
Words, and recollected Sense enough to find a Tongue between 'em; what Torrent
of Murmurs were here poured forth, and all against their cruel Stars, but a
more cruel Father; the overruling Powers that had fated their Destruction! For
their whole Misery lies at no other Door: The generous Peregrine has no
complaint at any thing but Destiny: The Eyes of Love can see nothing but Faith
and Virtue, in that sweet deluded Innocence his dear Urania; and even Heaven it
self may be Faulty, when she cannot.

'Twas in this kind of Entertainment, that the Conference lasted a whole
Afternoon between 'em, when they only Adjourned till to morrow after Dinner, to
renew the same Murmurs, and all the same Raptures over again. For here is only
the beginning, to what must never have an end: For the complaints of unhappy
Lovers are Number less.

The good-natured Knight at home, had naturally a great stock of Faith, and
therefore was not over-jealous of the innocent Liberties his young Lady took.
Besides, her Doctor in Ordinary, had given in his Judgment, That Diversion and
walking Abroad, would be highly instrumental in the restoration of her Health;
which gave her all the unquestioned Freedom of going Abroad, and meeting her
Peregrine as often as she pleased. These meetings were very often repeated, and
were wholly made up of nothing but Love. Peregrine amongst a hundred other
Protestations, made a solemn Vow which he bound with all the most vehement
Imprecations, that he would live and die hers and only hers; that he would tire
out the whole Malice of his Stars, and wait the very Death of her Husband, for
the possession of Urania; for he made an absolute Abjuration to all the Sex
beside. This Protestation, and indeed a hundred more, were all graciously
received by the kind Urania, who wanted no returns of Inclination and Love, to
so devoted an Adorer.

And though with all the imaginable endearments between 'em, these private
Visits were almost daily renewed; however the unsatisfied Peregrine, began to
repine at the Felicities of his envied Rival; and though they never met but
they melted into all the Tenderness of twining Embraces, and their Souls met a
hundred times over, not only at their languishing Eyes, but even at their
burning Lips, a liberty the Amorous Peregrine daily more and more encroach'd
upon the languishing Urania; however not contented with all these Favors, he
could not forbear openly murmuring, even at those yet more charming Blisses she
bestowed on his happier Rival, who in all his pretended lawful Possession, had
not half the just and equitable Right of Peregrine. Urania, reprimanded him for
so unkind a Reproach, assuring him, that if he knew how those Blisses, as he
was pleased to call them, were extorted from her, even with the whole coldness
of a Lucretia, he would be far from envying the poor Possessor, that little
despicable Thief, that only rifled an empty Cabinet; his very Embraces being
the perfect Picture of Slavery, all Violence and Arbitrary Power on one side,
and nothing but Non-resistance and Passive Obedience on the other. No,
Peregrine, continued she, never envy the Sacrificer at so cold an Altar of
Love, where he may bring Fires, but never find any. This Declaration was so
very kind, that he threw himself at her Feet, to thank the fair obliging
goodness, which the sweet Urania would by no means suffer, but gently raising
him up with her fair hand, she told him; That Posture and these Acknowledgments
were more than he owed her; for there are no Thanks due for Duty. If she was
all this coldness to that Possessor he so unjustly envied, it was but a just
Debt she paid, even to the dead, and much more to the living Peregrine. -- This
second Declaration rapt him into new Transports; and now instead of his bending
Knees at her Feet, he threw his grasping Arms about her Neck, and poured his
melting Soul into those charming Lips that delivered such ravishing Oracles.

As the daily Conversation continued, and a hundred more and more passionate
Vows and Endearments past between 'em, the amorous unsatisfied Peregrine could
not forbear telling her; That there were yet infinitely diviner Blessings in
her Power, and which, if she would give him leave to remonstrate his
Sufferings, he had some Plea even to ask of her. (For though he found a rising
Crimson in the Cheeks of his Blushing Urania; however, he conjured her to give
him the Favor of hearing him out:) He desired her therefore, continuing the
Subject, to call to remembrance their first mutual Vows of Fidelity made
between 'em, that had sworn and sealed their plighted Souls; what new Vows he
had since made of all Abjurations to the whole Sexe's Charms but his Urania.
How that if there was a fatal Marriage knot that seemed to bar his Joys;
however, what Villainy, Treason and Injustice, tied that Knot; and how venial
must the Concession even of her highest Favors be, under so honest and just a
Reprisal, from so much Rapine and Tyranny as had torn her from his Bosom. That
as he had contracted himself her very Husband, and only waited an Usurpers
Death; why not some little Anticipation of his rightful Joys, and not so
tedious an Attendance only for the Reversion of Felicity? Why should they
postpone that Happiness to long long Years to come; possibly a whole Age
distant, when the present Golden Minute smiled before 'em? Nay, granting some
shadow of a Fault, a Weakness, or Frailty, in the Concession; which either her
too nice Virtue, or scrupulous Fears might raise against him; however, taking
the whole heap of their accumulated Wrongs together, nothing sure could be more
excusable than Peregrine and Urania. A great many other Arguments he urged,
which were all answered by the invincible Virtue of Urania. The chiefest
Objection was the Anger of an offended Heaven, which she durst not incurr; she
trembled but at the very Thought of the broken Sleeps and distracted Peace,
that the violation of her Virtue would undoubtedly pull down upon her, telling
him, That he ought to content himself with the Favors (even to a Profuseness)
she had already granted him, and wait the pleasure of Providence, which one Day
might more amply crown his Joys. She besought him to take it as some additional
Favor too, that she could hear him urge so immodest and unreasonable a
Petition, with so much Patience and Forgiveness, for she cannot be angry even
at an offending Peregrine. Nay, (throwing her white Arms about his Neck) my
dear, dear, Peregrine, she cried; think what it is you Ask and what I must Deny.
For believe me, Vrania's Heart is molded all of the same Love as Peregrine,
and I give you leave to think, there is not that warmest Wish, his melting Soul
can form, but is met, returned and answered by Urania. She desired him then to
rest satisfied that nothing but her Honor, which she must never Violate, held
the Flaming-sword that barred both His Paradise and Hers. And after all this
frank Confession, she conjured him by all that is Sacred to desist from that
Suit which she hears with a Pain, denies with a greater; and yet the Grant were
the greatest, under the pangs of a bleeding Virtue, and therefore must be
denied. The amorous Peregrine, in all the Raptures of this generous Confession,
was contented to cease the Subject, at least for the present. But upon several
Meetings afterward, the Subject was revived: But not to particularize the
whole Arguments on both sides, let it suffice, that he wrought that impression
upon the yiedling Urania, that at last she confessed, that both Virtue and Honor
were stormed and vanquished, and nothing but the excess of her very Love
refused him; that last impregnable Retrenchment against him. How, Love!
Answered the amazed Peregrine. Yes, Love, replied the sighing Urania, I Love so
well, that I neither dare make my self nor my Peregrine happy; for from that
Hour my tottering Virtue shakes, as proudly as my Peregrine may wear the
present Trophy, yet if that Day should come, when my Usurpers Death, and my
happy Widowhood might open my lawful Arms to his Embraces, he would then look
back upon the cheap Favors I had given him, and under the common Reproach of
that easy Creature a Wanton, start from so poor and so dishonored a Thing, and
disdain so low-priz'd a Bliss as the Arms of Urania, for his honorable bridal
Joys. In short, she told him she loved to such a height, that the ties of her
Favors must be a Seal for Life, and therefore she dares not be guilty of a
Weakness that may hazard even the remotest Loss of her Peregrine, though for
all the most exalted Felicities that his utmost Love can give her. For she
cannot think of living Blessed in his Arms, without being secure of dying Blessed
there too. And for that, and indeed that only Reason, she must deny him.

This last generous Argument, was immediately as generously answered by the
passionate Peregrine; who told her, their Case was utterly different from the
common Breaches of the Marriage Bed; or indeed was rather no Breach at all. The
whole true Right was in the Lover, not the Husband. That though, its true, it
was always reputed not only an ignoble, but a hazardous Condescension in a Man
of Honor, to Marry those easy Fools, that before Marriage would be so weak as
to yield their cheap unlicensed Favors, and much more those Libertine Rovers,
that could break through the sacred Bonds of Matrimony; as too dangerous
trusting to such brittle Bridal Fidelity. But his Vrania's Condescension on the
quite contrary was rather a conjugal Consummation than Violation: That nothing
but invincible Tyranny had ravished her from him; that he should esteem her
Concessions as not the least Weakness, but Justice, no less on that very sacred
Consummation; and be so far from refusing her a formal Marriage, when the Death
of her Tyrant should entitule him to that Ceremony, that he should think
himself an absolute Apostate both from Love and Honor at the very thought of
such a Refusal. In fine, he had so much to say upon this copious Subject, and
bound it all with so many Oaths of eternal Truth and inseparable Bonds between
'em, that even that last impregnable Retrenchment can hold out no longer.

And now for the happy Peregrine's Instalment in the Throne of Love, or rather
his translation to Immortality; (for Empire and Paradise are both in Vrania's
Arms, and no Rapture of Bliss can express his Felicity) first there is a solemn
Pacta Conventa Sworn on his part, of no less Contract and Obligation than a
Seal for Life. And then for the Consummation between the happy Lovers, it is
agreed on the Ladies side, that she will find an Excuse to be absent the whole
Day to Morrow from Seven in the Morning till Ten at Night; against which time
the amorous Peregrine engages to provide a Bridal-Bed (for that is the Name he
gives it) not at his own House, for the Ladies Honor must be guarded; and not
any of his Servants must be trusted with so important a Secret: And therefore
he provides a Chamber very richly Furnished in the Middle Temple, whither the
Lady conveyed by Water, in a Disabilee and a Mask, is received at the
Temple-stairs by the waiting Peregrine, and handed up to the Palace of Cupid.

Here she finds a Bedchamber and a Bed all richly Persumed, a Table spread in
the Dining Room with great variety of Rarieties, but all cold Dishes, Flasks of
rich Wine, and a Pile of Sweetmeats, etc. But that is the least part of the
Feast: No it is Love, his Nectar and Ambrosia, the Regale of Gods, must furnish
this Banquet. It Is true, they were a little stinted in one part of the hymeneal
Ceremony: What other Pomp and State was not wanting, yet still here were no
Bride-maids to dismantle the Bride. And here a little amorous Contest arose
between 'em: The blushing Urania, she by all means desired the permission of
undressing her self; but Peregrine he was for supplying both the Bride-maid and
the Bridegroom, making a Hundred passionate Entreaties to have the Charm of
disrobing his Urania, or rather unclouding his dear Divinity: For so he was
pleased to call it. At last the supplicating Peregrine prevailed, that that
favor should be granted him; the fair Urania yiedling only in this Point, viz.
That she came to his Arms as a Wife not a Mistress; and therefore her part was
Submission and Duty, and he the Lord of her Love and her Life, 'twas his part
to Command and be Obeyed: All she begged of him, was, that he would be so kind
even to her Modesty, as not to exceed the Liberties of a Bride-maid, or offer
the least Indecencies that might put her to a feminine Blush: For whatever
Blushes she might afterward receive in his Arms, those she would hide in his
Bosom. The generous Peregrine conceded this Point, and promised her faithfully
he would not transgress the Limits prescribed, but act the very Virgin
Bride-maid, etc. But oh, when he came to perform the Virgin Office; (for, upon
the aforesaid Articles, she submitted her whole Dis-robement to his Hand) when
by degrees, nearer and nearer, and all with a thousand new discovered Beauties,
he had unveild her almost to her naked Charms, Gods! what a check, what a
restraint was it to be burning Peregrine, now all on fire, to see the
reprimanding Eye of his Urania, (for all the while he undrest her, she awed him
with that Look as reminded him that he was yet but a Bride-maid) debar him even
the least preliminary Freedom, though not three Minutes distant from the most
unbounded exalted Felicities.

When he had put her to Bed, and scarce a Minutes time had thrown him into her
Arms, (for his Joys, were too Rapid to make much Ceremony in undressing
himself) Oh! in what a Torrent of Blisses, did melting Love pour forth his
highest Raptures! In short, I can only tell my Reader, That such were the
Transports, even of one short Minute, as if they resolved the Joy of an Hour
should repay the Sighs of an Age; and the long-suffering Years behind 'em be
utterly forgotten. In these, I may say, almost continued Ecstasies between 'em
(for the very Intervals of Rapture had so much Endearment as wanted but very
few degrees, even of the highest Beatitude) they continued till Noon: At which
time by a consenting Parley between the Amorous Combitants, it was agreed on
both sides, they should Furle up the Colors, give a Cessation of Arms, and
quit the Field for short Quarters of Refreshment.

Accordingly they each of them slipped on a Night Gown, etc. and retired into the
Dining Room, where they made a short Repast, though indeed a double Banquet. For
the grateful remembrance of their late mutual Joys carried so charming a
Thought with it, that whether they Eat or Drank, still at the same time they
feasted their very Eyes too, so many languishing Glances, and dying Looks there
past between 'em; for whilst their Lips were now other wise employed, they
continued the Language of Love at their Eyes.

After this short Cessation of Arms, or rather Recruits for new Forces, they
both returned to their Colors, viz. to Bed again; where we'll leave 'em
Engaging and Rallying, with all the open Arms and utmost Efforts of Love, till
about Nine at Night; at which time making a drawn Battle between 'em, the
Amorous and now Fatigued Combatants retired, having made a new Challenge of
another select Day of meeting in the same Quarrel.

After this mutual Conquest (for both sides come off Victors in the Battles of
Love) I will not enlarge upon this part of my History any more, than to tell my
Reader, That the happy Pair very often met, and the Scene of Felicity, always
the same Chamber in the Temple, where the several Meetings were little less
than so many new Bridals; for they Loved at that rate both of Ardour and
Constancy, that Length of Enjoyment put out no Spark of the Fire.

In a very little time after, the fair Urania began to have some very apparent
or rather Pregnant Symptoms, of her fulfilling the First, (how much soever the
nicer Casuists may accuse her of breaking one of the other Commandments) viz.
That Original great Work of her Creation, Increase and Multiply; for she was
pretty far gone with Child. At this time Summer coming on, she went up to her
Country House at Richmond, where the greatest part of the Week (as much as his
Absence from Change would permit) she was Visited and Attended by her
Half-Bedfellow, (though Heaven knows not Quarter-sharer) her fond Cit.

At this Place she managed a Project of contracting an Acquaintance between
her Knight and her Baronet. For the Knight being a great Bowler, it was
resolved that her Peregrine should amongst the other crowd of Gentry, come down
to Richmond; and by being a constant Gamester at the Bowling-green, should
screw himself into a particular Familiarity with the Husband, etc. which
succeeded to their Whishes. For the Baronet took several occasions of
Challenging the Knight at Rub and a good Cast; nay, very often played Booty, on
purpose to encourage his winning Hand; which begot such a Familiarity between
'em, that the Baronet was soon made an invited Guest to his House: Which
Admission gained the Point.

This Initiation of a Country Friendship between 'em, opened a fair Door for
his City Acquaintance too: Which gave him occasion of many public Visits; in
all which, however our young Lovers managed their Looks and Civilities so, as
to give no shadow of Jealousy.

Not long after, the joyful Knight was saluted the Father (a Titular one) of a
young Squire, a Son and Heir, to his no small Pride; and perhaps some little
City Honor. For though, it is true, he had several Daughters by his first Lady,
However this was the Firstborn Male Issue; which gained him perhaps a
Reputation of extraordinary Prowess among the kind well-believing Gossips, to
be the Father of so lusty a Boy at his Years.

The Fair young Teemer, the Mother of this young Templar (for so I may venture
to call him) in less than another Year, brought forth another Branch of the
same fair Fruit-full Stock, a young Daughter. At her uprising from this last
Labor, it happened that she was invited by her Father down to Salisbury, to
accompany a married Sister of hers, that at that time was just upon lying In of
her first Child, being Married to a Gentleman of considerable Fortunes there.
Though she could not well refuse such an Invitation from so near and dear a
Relation; yet it was with some Regret that she must be separated from her much
dearer Peregrine, for at least 6 or 8 Weeks, (for she could not well propose to
return much sooner.) Before her departure, she took her leave of her dear
Peregrine at his Temple-chamber, and could not forbear a stream of Tears on so
melancholy an Account, even in the very warmest Arms of Love. However, it gave
them an occasion of renewing their former Vows of eternal Fidelity, it being
mutually engaged between 'em, that this Parting shall be only a continued
mourning time of Widowhood, till Love shall restore them to each others Arms.

The fair Urania was no sooner set forwards for Salisbury, but our City Knight
had an unexpected Guest, his eldest Daughter, (bred up at a rich Aunts at
Norwich) that came up to London. This young fair One, was Mistress of a more
than common Portion of Beauty, an extraordinary sweat Creature, about the Age
of Seventeen: And though her coming to Town, unsent for, was a little surprise
to the Father, yet such a Darling of his Heart could never be Unwelcome. The
true Cause of her coming was indeed the common Cause of the Young and Fair,
viz. Love.

These lovely Eyes had Charmed the Heart of a young Country Gentleman of some
hundreds a Year, though possibly, at a Smithfield Bargain, not altogether full
weighty enough, in the Worldly Balance, answerable to what her Father was
able, or indeed designed to give her. These fair Eyes had not only darted
Flames into this young Gentleman's Heart, but as generously received some little
Sparks of the same Wildfire into her own; for here was Love for Love, between
'em, the young Lady having contracted a very passionate Esteem for him: And to
tell Truth, she had in a manner stolen up to Town, (her Lover being likewise
come up with her) on purpose to watch the opportunity, under the Smiles of a
tender Father, of introducing him as her professed humble Servant, and smoothing
all the way possible to a happy nuptial Knot between 'em.

As this young Daughter arrived in the absence of her young Mohter-in-law (whom
yet she had not seen) it happened at that time that Peregrine came to Visit the
worshipful Knight her Father. For though his dear Urania, the fair Charmer,
that drew him to the House, was gone; however, in Prudence or rather Cunning he
continued his constant Visits there; it being supposed, inded by the whole
Family, that the Friendship of the Knight, not the Love of the Lady was the
foundation of the Acquaintance, and which a Cessation of his customary
Civility, might have rendered a matter of Wonder, if not worse, Suspicion.

I dare not say what capricious Planet reigned, that the unfortunate Peregrine
discovered some extraordinary Attractions both in the Person, Air, Wit, and
whole Conversation of the sweet Angeline (for so we'll name her) not only to a
common Admiration, but to a little yet nearer Touch: For he not only saw such
Charms in her Eyes, but felt 'em too. And what contributed to his daily growing
Pain, who should the Knight choose out, to usher her to the Park, the Plays,
the Musick-meetings, and indeed the whole Entertainments of the Town; but Sir
Peregrine? The young Lady had had her whole Nursery in the Country, and
therefore must be treated with all the Diversions of London; and handed round
only by Sir Peregrine; so entire a Confidence he reposed in a Man of his
Honor, and consequently trusts his best Jewel in his Hands.

This daily and almost hourly Post of Honor to attend the fair Angeline, in a
little time put him upon a very tormenting Rack; he found himself gone almost
before he felt himself going, now not only staggered but Fallen; Not but so lost
had been otherwise a Pleasure and Delight: But now his Bed of Roses, the Charms
of the fair Angeline, has too many pricking Thorns; when Ingratitude and
Infidelity stare him in the Face, and the remembrance of the wronged Urania
strikes both a shame and terror to his Soul.

His Resentments of this last Barbarity had gone a great way toward the
recalling his wandered Reason, and repairing th Breaches these fair Eyes had
made through his Truth, Vows and Honor. But another more spightful Mischief
started up, which was, That at this time he had some honorable Relations come
to Town, who daily and hourly teized and tired him with the Invitations of
Marriage, urging that great Argument, the Preservation of his very Name; for
without Heirs, his whole Estate and Honor devolved into another Name and
Family, a Collateral half Blood, the next Relation to both of 'em. Nay, some of
the bolder of his Friends pressed him so far, as to tell him plainly, They much
feared, he played the private Libertine, and his refusals of such Virtuous
Counsel must proceed from some secret darling Vice; the cherishing of which,
would end in his double Ruin, both here and hereafter. In short, betwixt
Preaching and Advising, Entreaties and Persuasions, he was at last so worried
of all sides, that what with the irresistible Charms of his new Conqueror, he
began to listen to the Enchantment. He considered too with himself the distance
and hazard, and uncertain Lottery of all his Hopes of Marrying Urania, the
Disparity of his Own and her Husbands Years, being no true Ensurance of Life;
his Youth and the others Age being in the Hands of an inscrutable Power:
Besides, whatever gaudy Visions of Innocence the flatteries of Love might fancy
in the Unlicensed Embraces of his Urania, 'twas much to be feared, when weighed
in a higher Balance, that Flattery would be found too light; for whatever
Severity of Providence it appeared to have that deluded Sweetness betrayed into
such a fatal Wedlock; yet such was the Decree of Providence, and the great
Dispenser was Absolute. And therefore in the Divine as well Humane Canons of
Marriage, Quod fieri non debet, factum valet; and Marriage whether a Fetter or
a Bracelet, is still a Bond; and consequently his happiest Embraces were all
but so many Criminal Violations of Honor.

These and a hundred Reflections being made, his new Conqueror carried the
Cause, and in short, he very boldly makes honorable Love to the fair Angeline.
The young Lady was strangely startled at such an humble Servant, and how cold
soever were her Denials, like Wind to Fire they only enflamed him the more; and
considering here must be Expedition in the Case before Vrania's return; To make
quicker Work of it, he Attacked the Father, and offered to settle a very large
Jointure, and remit all pretensions to a Portion with her. The Father who
indeed, desired no better a Son-in-Law, and perhaps had contracted this
intimate Conversation betwixt his Daughter and him, partly from such some
hopes; very readily listened to so honorable a Professor, and immediately
laid his absolute Commands upon his Daughter to Embrace the Happiness of such
a Husband. The poor Lady was almost mortally Afflicted at that Command; for
whatever Desert she might otherwise have found in such a Lover, yet here was a
Heart already disposed, and consequently not in her Power to recall.

The young Country Rival had at this time made some Tenders to the Knight a a
Suitor to the fair Angeline, and the Lady seemed inclinable to him; (for 'twas
agreed between 'em not to own any Pre engagement, fearing it might breed ill
Blood, and be interpreted an Invasion of his paternal Authority, in daring to
contract Love, and the Father not called to the Consult.) But whatever
Inclinations the Father might otherwise have had toward this Country
Pretender, from that Minute that Peregrine set up for an Addressor, he would
not so much as hear him Named. The whole Dead weight was on this side, and the
Baronet entirely weighed down the Squire; and therefore it is resolved, that
nothing but Sir Peregrine must, and shall be the favored Lover, the Husband
Elect; and consequently the fair Angeline is bid to prepare without any dispute
for a Ladyship, etc.

The poor Lady in this Distress, endeavored all that was possible to Fence and
Shield against this impending Storm: She begged the cruel Peregrine with wet
Eyes and almost bended Knees, to desist his hopeless Suit. It Is true, she durst
not tell him plainly her Heart was not her own, because she would not, and
indeed durst not, trust a Secret of that Importance to a Rival, as dreading
some fatal use that might be made of it, if told to a resenting Father. And
though the Baronet was otherwise a Man of great Honor, yet still as all
Hostilities are thought Lawful in Rivalship, she durst not put such a dangerous
Discovery into his Power.

All these continued Repulses, could not daunt our bold Lover, who still
persues the flying Fair, being resolved to push on the Siege, as invincible as
she seemed to hold out against him; till at last the young Lady Persecuted by
Love on one Hand, Commands on the other (for Reasons that the sequal of our
Story will discover) received the adoring Peregrine with a little kinder
Aspect; nay, made him those advances of her Favor, that in three days more
Courtship she struck the Flag, and received him as the Conqueror.

I will not describe the Triumphs the happy Peregrine made, upon so charming a
Victory, the Glory of which was not a little heightened by the opposition and
obstinacy he met in his first Assaults; it is enough to tell you, That the
yiedling Lady on her part, to caress the Man, she has now made happy; having
now no reserves of Coyness or Coldness, told him very kindly, That it was her
Duty now to contribute every thing in her Power to their mutual future
Happiness; and therefore she must communicate one extraordinary Secret to him,
which was, That her Father, whatever ever his outward Aspect, or rather
Disguise to the World might be, was in his Heart, the most hearty and unshaken
Zealot for King James, possibly in the Kingdom: That as her Peregrine (for now
she will call him so) was already a Favorite so near his Bosom, and in a little
time might be yet nearer, she thought that nothing could be more advisable for
him, than to take some private opportunity of caressing her Father upon that
Subject; for as much as her Father already Loved and Honored him, there could
be no excess in Love: And it would only make the Bonds the more inviolable, and
the approaching Alliance yet more grateful, if he should let drop any
Expressions of his own Inclinations that way, to transport him with that new
Satisfaction and Pleasure, viz. That he was like to have a Son-in-Law of his
own Principle and Constitution, etc.

The kind Peregrine received this generous Information with a hundred Thanks,
and promised there should be sought a very speedy opportunity of obeying her
Commands. It Is true, as he might open his Soul to his dear Angeline, he
confessed, that his Pulse beat very little that way; However, that was but a
civil Complaisance to strain a Point, upon so important an Account as the
endearing in all kinds a Person, whom he had so many Obligations of the highest
Duty to Respect and Honor.

Peregrine, who very wisely, was for imbraceing the first smiling Minute that
offered so fair for Happiness, immediately attended the Knight, with some Io
peans of his Conquest, and then desired his permission of engaging his Lawyer
with the first expedition of drawing the Jointure; all which you may imagine
was gratefully accepted and granted by the Joyful Don Senior. And the very next
Night the Baronets gay Coach and Livery were ordered to attend the Aldermans
Door, to invite him forth to his Man of Law at his Chambers in the new Square
in Gray's-Inn; where coming about 20 Minutes before the Hour appointed, the
Clerk received them with a great deal of Respect, told them his Master was
ready within call, at another Brothers of the Robe in the Inn, from whence he
was commanded to call him; and therefore desired their Pardon for a Moments
Patience, till he could fetch his Master.

Peregrine now remembering his dear Angeline's last Commands, and this being the
first private opportunity, himself and the Knight being then all alone in a
large Chamber, began first to tell him how Blessed he should be in the Embraces
of so charming a Creature as the fair Angeline, and not only so but doubly
Blessed in the Alliance to a Family of such true Worth and Virtue.

For Sir, continued her, believe me it is no little pleasure to my Soul to think
that this happy Knot will tie me so near to a Person of that more than common
Merit and Character, that his Loyalty shines equal, nay, if possible, beyond
his other Virtues. My Loyalty! replied the Alderman. Yes Sir (interrupted he) I
know you honor our great Master, are a true and pious Mourner for his Wrongs;
and if the Infinite Goodness would but graciously please to withdraw his too
long Indignation that hangs Louring over these poor Kingdoms, and restore our
dear Prince to his Throne -- Lord Sir, answered the Knight, what do you mean!
(holding up his Hands in an Amazement:) Nay Sir, replied the Baronet, I see you
are surpised, I know I have crept into the secrets of your Heart; but never
doubt your ever obedient humble Servant; my Silence shall keep a very faithful
Key to so rich a Cabinet. And to secure you, my Discovery shall never turn to
your prejudice in so sacred a Trust: I beseech you to rest satisfied that I am
as nearly related to your Virtues, at least in that Point, as I hope I shall be
to your Blood. For to deal plainly with you, not to be vain of what is no more
than my Duty; there is not that honest Subject in the Nation, more in the
Interests of that unfortunate Prince than my self; and when that blessed Day
shall come when I may show the World -- Here Mr. Lawyer came in, and broke off
the Discourse; when the Baronet calling for the Writings, they were immediately
brought out of his Closet, all ready for Signing and Sealing.

When the Writings were produced, the first Word the Knight Spoke was to ask
the Lawyer, what the Writings must cost. -- Cost! Sir, answered the Son Elect,
a little amazed. Ay Cost! (says the Don) the Purchase of 'em I mean: I suppose
Mr. Lawyer must have his Fee; Law and Gospel are both Goods and Chattels that
must be Bought and Paid for, as Justice and Divinity go now. The Knight still
pressed the Lawyer to tell him what he must have for the Writings; for no Man
shall pay for 'em but himself. -- Per. Lord bless me Sir! What do you mean? --
Knight. Lord bless us all, for it is a very wicked World we now live in. Once more
Mr. Lawyer, what must I pay you? Lawy. Nay Sir, since it is your pleasure, I
deserve Five Pounds. -- Knight. Let every Man have his Deserts, I say, and give the
Gallows her due. -- There Is your Money (throwing down five Guineas.) And here is
your Jointure (throwing it upon the Fire, and stamping his Foot upon it.) Marry
my Daughter to a Son of Belial, a Tory, a Rapparee, a Jacobite! What do you see
in my Face! And what have I seen in yours, to be thus long deluded? What a
false Snake have I all this while lodged in my Bosom! Look you Sir Peregrine,
or Sir Monster, which is your properer Title, I defy your Devil, your Pope,
your French King, and all their Works: And henceforward pray take care to
follow your great Jacobite Leader, and abdicate my House and Family; for I am a
Magistrate, an Alderman, and a Justice of the Peace; and I shall make bold to
tell you, My Roof harbors no Rebels; and there is a great House near Snow-Hill
fitter for you.

The poor Peregrine was absolutely Thunderstruck at all this irruption of Fire
and Vengeance, and could hardly return a word; but indeed the Alderman stopped
his Mouth, for he would hear nothing. And so bolting out of the Room, with his
Hands up to Heaven, and this short Ejaculation, From Sedition, Conspiracy and
Rebellion, good Lord deliver us; he called a Hackney Coach, and drove home like
a Jehu.

The very first Outcry he made, was to call his dear Angeline, and to tell her
the whole Story; what a Deliverance she had, and what Ruin she had escaped. The
poor Lady fell upon her Knees, and thanked Heaven for her Preservation: And
just in the height of his whole Triumph for so happy a Discovery of the
Cloven-foot, the Fiend, the Lucifer, the Jacobite, and what not! Who should
luckily enter, but the poor discarded Norfolk Squire, who laying hold of so
favorable a Minute, renewed his Addresses of Love with that success, that
before they parted, the old Spark very frankly received him into Favor, and
admitted him a Servant to his Daughter; and in three Days time the Planets of
Love so smiled upon them, that Portion, Settlement, Jointure, and the whole
Match was concluded to the young Couple's no little Satisfaction, and no common
Joys between 'em.

The very next Day the fair (I may say) almost forgotten Traveller, returned
from Sarum. Her first Entertainment, after a conjugal Salutation from her
Knight, and the Embraces of her fair Daughter-in-Law, was the whole Story at
full length of Sir Peregrine's Defeat, and the fair Angeline's Triumph. The
poor Lady was ready to sink Dead at the Relation; which the Alderman observing,
the Lady excused her change of Color by telling him, She did not believe there
could be such Incarnate Devils in the World; and was sorry to think a Man of
such professed Honor as Sir Peregrine, should be such a Monster. This encouraged
the Knight to finish the whole Narrative, which you may imagine was set forth
in the blackest Hew; till the poor Urania was forced to feign an Indisposition,
to get a little Privacy with her Fidelia, (who Traveling with her Lady to
Sarum, was as great a stranger to what had happened at London as her Mistress)
to vent her just Resentments against the Infidelity and Apostasy of the
perjured Peregrine. I will not describe the Agonies the poor Lady felt at this
Occasion; when just at this interim, comes a Messenger to Fidelia with a Letter
from Sir Peregrine, who, poor Gentleman, under no little Shame and Confusion,
desired the favor of speaking with her at his Lodgings. Her Mistress at first,
would very hardly consent to let even a Servant of hers, hold any
Correspondence with so much Barbarity, Ingratitude and Falsehood: But her Maid
requesting that favor of hearing what the poor Gentleman had to say for
himself, at last she obtained her Mistress' leave of calling upon him the
morrow Morning.

In the mean while this very Evening, by a particular Commission from his fair
Angeline, our young Norfolk Lover, was sent to the Baronets Chamber to make a
piece of an Apology for the innocent Imposture she had put upon him, etc. The
young Lover found him within, and accordingly begged his Excuse for the Message
that the fair Angeline's Commands had enjoined him to deliver. The Baronet very
readily lent his Attention, when the Squire as frankly told him his whole
Engagements and Contracts with that young Lady at Norwich; and though otherwise
he had all the Reason in the World to dread so formidable a Rival as the
honorable Sir Peregrine; yet the fair Angeline being all Truth and Virtue,
'twas to that only Obligation he owed the Conservation of her Heart, and the
approaching Felicities he was now going to receive in her Bridal Embraces:
However, she had a little Trouble and Shame lay upon her, to think how she had
been forced to such a piece of feminine Artifice and Delusion imposed upon a
Person of such Desert as Sir Peregrine; nevertheless, she besought his Pardon
for a Fault, so much the more Venial, as being really no other than a Stratagem
of Virtue, to countermine the Cruelty of a commanding Father, and to Fence
against so powerful an Invader as Sir Peregrine. In short, 'twas in the Cause
of Truth and Love; and if there could be an innocent Fraud, she hoped he would
excuse it as such; desiring him to believe, That she should ever carry a very
great Esteem and Veneration for a Person of his Quality, that had honored her
with that Love which she was no ways worthy of, and which she hoped would soon
find a fairer and more deserving Object. -- The Baronet very civilly returned
Answer, That the young Lady was highly commendable for that Cardinal Virtue
TRVTH in LOVE; and he heartily wished he had been as great a Master of that
Perfection himself. As for his part he heartily forgave the fair Deluder, on so
honorable an Account; and had no Resentment left against her, but only, That
she was a little too unkind in so far doubting his Honor, as not to dare to
trust him with the secret of her Pre-engagement; declaring that if she had
given him the least hint of such a Confession, as well in Tenderness both to
her Peace and Vows, he should have thought himself in all Duty Bound, though
with never so much Pain to himself, to desist from so unjust a Persecution. For
as much a Jacobite as the Lady had made him; he had a little more Tenderness to
Right and Property, and more Veneration for Oaths and Contracts, than to admit
of a Dispensing Power. And therefore he heartily wishes her Joy in the Disposal
of her Hand and Heart, by a more rightful Title, to his happy, though never so
much envied, Rival.

The next Morning Fidelia came to wait upon him, where (to shorten my Story) he
desired her to be the faithful Messenger of his whole Pains, Confusion and
Horrors to the wronged Urania; relating at full length the whole Persecution
of his tiresome Relations, that had hurried and plunged him into all this
Infidelity: For which he begged a thousand of Pardons, humbly beseeching the
injured Urania to make her self the Phoenix of her Sex, by a Mercy and
Forgiveness extended to so heinous a Transgressour, etc.

Several other Conferences past between Peregrine and Fidelia, before his Tears
and Penitence could prevail (in which the kind Fidelia was a hearty
Intercessour) to obtain a sight of the fair Urania, which after three Weeks
Prayers was granted him. At their meeting the poor Peregrine so trembled at the
sight of her, and fell into that melting Passion, as to even Unman himself. The
generous Urania not to triumph over a blushing Shame, gave him very few
Reprimands; only told him it was a degenerate World; and she was Sorry, that
there was not a perfect Character in it; Peregrine was the Man of the Creation
she thought came the nearest to a Perfection, but there are Spots even in the
Sun; and even that Peregrine has his Faults. This generous Rebuke touched him so
near, and so charmed him, that if possible, he discovered new Graces in her
Eyes: For whether his Repentance inflamed him to a warmer Devotion; or that the
reparation of Injuries obliged him to a treble satisfaction, the sense of his
Infidelity only heightened his Adoration; and never was Urania so lovely as now.
The Breach in his Faith that the unhappy Angeline had made, was now no more
than a divided Water, where the Dam was broke down, the Torrents rejoined; and
not so much as a Mark of the separation remained.

This the amorous Peregrine endeavored by an hundred Protestations to convince
her; and though Protestations, she had but too much Reason to remember, had
been only Sampson's Cords; however, he besought her to enjoin him a Penance
though never so severe, that might wash him White again; which he would Obey
without a Murmur or Dispute.

Then replied the fair Urania, I take you at your Word; from this Hour forward
never ask me a forbidden Favor. If you can live contented within the Bounds of
Virtue, and make that noble Test of your Love, as to quite all Libertine
Pretentions whatsoever, I Will believe you that passionate Convert you profess
your self, and from this Minute Sign your Pardon. Nor believe it is my Cruelty
that pronounces this Sentence: No Peregrine, it is my Kindness. Love Innocently,
dear Peregrine, and be happy; for it is they only can hope for Blessings who
deserve them. Madam, replied the sighing Peregrine, I embrace my Doom; to atone
my Ingratitude, and merit my Pardon from you, I Will give you Proofs beyond
Professions. For from this Day forward, I Will Love my divine Urania for the
Glory of Love; I Will serve without Pay, and run the whole Race of Truth without
the Reward. Grant me but now and then a Meeting Eye, and sometimes a melting
Lip, just enough to keep a starving Wretch alive; and till the Seal of Heaven
shall make you mine (for sure Heavens pitying Ear will hear at last) I Will never
ask you more. Here the kind Urania poured forth a hundred grateful Thanks for
so noble a Profession; and cherished her dear Peregrine's virtuous Resolution
with all the tenderest Arguments imaginable, and now desired of him her Pardon,
as she had granted him his; begged him to forget the past Frailties that so
bewitching a Seducer had extorted from her; and look forwards to a Beam of that
smiling Providence, which would one Day amply pay their Patience and their
Sufferings.

To conclude, these mutual Articles were Ratified, and as infringibly
performed: Peregrine continued above half a Year in Town, contenting himself
with the innocent Visits of his dear Urania; and at last the Importunities of
his Friends giving him new Solicitations and Troubles upon the old hated
Argument, Marriage; to be rid of their tiresome Impertinence, he resolved to go
a Volunteer for Flanders; a Divorce not a little mourned by the tender Urania:
However, as it was all for her sake, she submitted to the generous Cause that
carried himthither.

Here Peregrine made Glory his Angeline, viz. his new Mistress, and continued
Three whole Campaigns without one Return for England: In all which time a great
many tender Letters past between 'em, which was the whole Cameleon Food, that
both their Loves had now to live upon.

From this last Campaign, instead of taking up his Winter Quarters in Flanders,
he took a Ramble round the Provinces of Holland, and visited the Capital Cities
of that High and Mighty Common wealth; where his short stay at any one Place,
not permitting the continuance of Letters from his Urania, it was six Weeks
since he last heard from her; however, he resolves to make himself amends by
Transporting himself from the Brill to Harwich, and give himself the Blessing
of those fair Eyes, after so long a Separation.

Upon the Road near London, it was his fortune to meet a Hearse in great Pomp
going down into the Country, the Arms of whose Scutcheons he had somewhere
remembered; his Curiosity therefore led him to enquire of the Black-robed
Attendants, whose Honorable Remains of Mortality they were, so Ushered with
all this Mourning Cavalcade; to which the Answer was made him, 'Twas such a
Right Worshipful deceased Merchant and Alderman of the City of London, whose
Corpse were carrying to Norwich. Good Heaven! replied the transported Peregrine,
in an ecstasy to himself, the Husband of Urania! Is the Usurper, the Tyrant
Dead! In fine, this surprising News put Spurs to his Horse, and Wings to his
Love to Post him to London.

The Laws of Widowhood were not so rigid, but such a Visitant might gain
Admission, even to a Closet Mourner: For he took no longer time than to put
himself into a Funeral Weed, before he visited the lovely Mourner. I need not
tell you how her Mourning became her; but you may easily believe that this
ruefull Dress was the true Habit of Night; for on this Occasion, to Peregrines
Eyes, it had all the Stars of the Firmament.

It Is much to be suspected that this Visit of Peregrine's after near three
Years Absence might add a new Current to the wet Eyes of the fair Afflicted,
only from a different Fountain, viz. Tears of Joy. And truly to do the fair
Mourner Right, she divided her respective Gratitude to the Living and the Dead;
and as far as the decency of her Sable and Cypress would permit, she was not
wanting in a suitable Welcome to such a Visitant. As for Peregrine's part, he
made bold in a very little time to join his Compliments of Congratulation with
those of Condolence, to Wayle her for what she had lost, a Husband; and Joy her
for what she had found, Liberty. And now the days of Widowhood move with flow
Hours and tedious Sands to the impatient Peregrine; he fancies a few Months
Dispensation might be very pardonable in her Mourning Ceremony; for to say
Truth, the fair Urania her self can hardly deny but the three whole last Years
have been a sort of a Widowhood; and indeed the whole conjugal Fires between
the Knight and the Lady, her happy Peregrine has this pleasure to believe have
burnt but faintly; for he has the satisfaction of seeing the fair Fruit of her
first two Years, in a young Heir and Heiress ( viz. under his own warm Reign)
and a whole Barren Field for the three last, under the Usurpers colder
Administration. Nay, he could not forbear telling the lovely Widow, That she
ought in pure Charity, if only to those two pretty Infants, to throw off her
Veil a little sooner than ordinary; for really it was a little regret to him,
that these two young Pratlers might not call him Father yet. Ah Peregrine,
replied the fair Mourner with half a Smile, those two young Pratlers as you
call 'em, may please You when they call You Father; but by some very shrewd
Signs in their Faces, I fear they will shame Me when they call You so. In sine,
the languishing Peregrine had so many Turtle murmurs to make at the slow
Approaches of his long wished Felicity, that the poor Lady was forced to take
him to Mercy in the half way Stage, viz. in bare six Months Widowhood; when the
now truly and completely happy Peregrine, fulfills all his Vows in the
consecrated Knot, the bridal Embraces of his Urania, and Possesses the whole
Joys of Life, in Loves fair Bed of Honor.

INTRIEGUE IV.
A young spruce Linen Draper, not long set up, took a Ramble in a long
Vacation as far as Newberry. Here he fell in Love with a very pretty young
Virgin Gentlewoman; and made all the passionate Addresses imaginable: Not that
the young Girl could have any Aversion to his Person; however the Conquest was
not so easily to be accomplished, as in that short time his Business in London
would permit his stay in the Country; besides there were Friends in the Case,
who must now be satisfied too, in his more substantial Merit, than that of his
outward Appearance, to carry such a Beauty, and such a Fortune.

Being forced up to Town, he continued his Addresses by very ingenious Letters
twice or thrice a Week, for near four Months; in which her Relations having
duly inquired into his worldly Capacities, and the young Lady extremely
delighed with such eloquent Black and White, having entertained a very tender
Thought for him; the Marriage was soon after consummated, and the Lady seated a
fair Citizen's Wife in a very rich Shop in Cheapside.

This young Bridegroom, contrary to our foregoing Histories, in a manner, kept
open House to all the young Beaus of the Town, as being naturally so vain of
his own personal Accomplishments, (for indeed he was a very handsome Man) that
he feared no danger from the most formidable Rival; and consequently no Company
nor no Entertainments, public or otherwise, were debarred her; rather Priding
himself in so many daily Visitants, as he thought could rather prove so many
envious Spectators, than Invaders of his Felicity, which Thought was his no
small Delight and Titillation.

The young Lady, it is true, was a very fond and dutiful Houshold-dove; not
that she wanted a Cage to keep her so: Rather the Freedom he allowed her, made
a stronger impression of Love and Confirmation of her Fidelity, according to
the true Saying,

No Obligation binds so fast as Trust. Being a very Airy, Facetious and
Ingenious Woman, she was more Charmed with Wit, than any other Perfection and
Conversation, and had made this Observation upon her Husband, viz. That she
thought him much more Eloquent at his Pens-end, than his Tongues; for,
reflecting upon his Wooing Letters, she thought there was a great deal more
Ingenuity in the Air of his Writing, than that of his Discourse, though that too
was not disagreeable.

However, as lovingly as they lived together, a Mischance fell out, that one
day prying into a Closet, of her Husbands, she found in a small Desk (which
through) negligence he had left open) a bundle of Papers tied up together,
which her Curiosity inviting her to read, she found 'em all to be the Originals
of her Husbands Letters to her, and all in a strange Hand, which presently
confirmed her, that all the Ingenuity that had Conquered her, was only a Crutch
to a Cripple, an Assistant Supporter from some abler Pen-man's Hand than his
own.

You cannot imagine what a mortifying damp this struck: An hundred untowardly
Reflections presently started up, not much to his Advantage; to think what
notorious Cheats the World was Guilty of; and that a Man who had such a little
stock of Wit of his own, as she now plainly found he had, should be so Impudent
as to borrow abroad so egregiously as he had done. Nay, she could not forbear
reflecting, even upon the very Discovery it self, as almost a greater Crime
than the other, concluding it a piece of Folly, of the two the more
unpardonable: For though a Blockhead might borrow help on so important an
occasion as the winning a Mistress; yet the keeping those Originals, those
Testimonies and Records of his own Witless shame, was such incorrigible
Stupidity as not to be matched.

In short, from this Discovery she conceived so poor and despicable a Thought
of him, (such is the Caprice of Woman) as at last grew up to a downright
Aversion to him. Not that she published her Resentments, or outwardly made any
change in her Conversation, or seeming Respect toward him: But this was the
more dangerous Rancour, far above any such trivial Woman's Anger that vents it
self in a few peevish Words. No, she began in a manner absolutely to loath him;
and if she forced her self to any Complacence or Civility toward him, 'twas
only to carry on a more for midable Revenge, as so notorious an Injury she
thought deserved; for Imposture and Villainy were the most favorable names she
could give so poor a Delusion, thinking it the most barbarous Imposition for
Woman of her Wit and Sense to be so Snared and Yrapaned into the Embraces of a
Fool.

What Execution this Wedlock Revenge, this Feminine Malice propense must end
in, the Reader may guess. For performance of which Revenge Occasion daily
offered, in very plentiful choice of Visitants, all her humble Servants, and
none but would have been proud of so fair a Lady's Favors, had she but made
the least advance toward the Encouragement of such a Presumption. However,
though she made so unlucky a choice of a Husband, she was resolved to be more
curious and more cautious in choosing a Gallant; for if she played the Wanton
it should be there, where her wants at home ( viz. Wit and Sense) could be more
amply furnished abroad. Now it happened that one bold Spark among the rest, a
frequent Guest in the Family, took the opportunity one day to make downright
and hearty Love to her, which the Lady (for the foregoing Reasons) not much
repremanding, she made answer, That truly if ever she vouchsafed to confer her
good Graces upon any Man, it must be where she found Wit as well as other
Charms to deserve 'em; and of which she must have very evident Proofs too.

The young Lover highly pleased with such a Declaration, and upon further
Harangue between 'em upon this Text, finding what fort of Abilities in that
Faculty would best prevail; frankly told her, that if that was the Introduction
to her Favors, he hoped he might stand as fair for that Happiness, as any of
his Rivals: for though it did not so well become him, to magnify his own Parts,
yet since he had no other Test for his Qualifications to her Smiles, he was the
more confident to tell her, he pretended to some little Talent of Wit, as being
indeed a Brother of the Muses: For in short he professed himself a Poet.

A Poet, replied the Lady, mightily pleased, Poetry! the only Wit in the World
she delighted in: She had made it the whole Study of her Youth, having indeed
neg lected both the Needle and the Dancing-school, for the diversions and
improvement from her Cowley, her Dorinda, her Dryden and what not, etc. In
fine, it came to this Issue, he should give her Demonstration in that only
Point of Merit, and then trust to her Goodness to reward it.

Then, Madam, I Will tell you, replies the Spark, not a little elevated with his
prospect of Felicity: I am a Member of the honorable Society of Archers, a
fair Regiment upon occasion, to grace a Lord Mayors Day. Now we had a good old
Knight, a famous Archer, called Sir William Wood, sometimes our Servant as the
Marshal of our Company, who lately dying, the Company were pleased to give him
a very honorable Interment in Clarkenwell Churchyard, with three Flights of
whistling Arrows over his Grave. Nay, resolving likewise to bestow a Monument
upon him too, we set a Town Poet, a Fellow that makes it his Bread, to write
him an Epitaph; which if you please, I Will recite you as follows:

An Epitaph on Sir W. Wood.
HEre just his own Bows length, e'ne five Foot deep,
Does old Sir W. Wood take his last Sleep;
A Bow-man famous, and a Marks-man bold,
As ever hit the conquering Point of Gold:
Till that grim Archer, whose keen Shaft of Fate,
Never Shoots but once, but still aims sure, though late;
Made both the Targetteer and Target yield,
And conquered even the Captain of the Field.
However, poor Sir William never repine;
Thy Bow and Quiver with Content resign.
Though from Twelvesoore now pent to six Foot room;
Yet, if thy last bold Shot has but reached home,
And in the Stars thy mounting Soul but ligh't,
It is the fairest Mark thou e're coud'st hit.
Now, Madam, continues the young Archer, this insipid dull Stuff was offered us
by this Hackney Scribler. But, Madam, to show you how much more Acute the Air
of a Gentleman is, that Writes for his Diversion, above a Hireling Scribler;
these following Lines are of my Composition; Ex pede Hercules: But I should not
talk Latin to Ladies. By this Sample you will guess at my Poetical Talent.

SIR William Wood lies very near this Stone;
In's time, in Archery excelled by none:
Few were his Equals; and that noble Art,
Has suffered now in the most tender Part.
Long did he Live, the Honor of the Bow,
And his long Life, to that alone did owe.
But how can Art secure, or what can save,
Extreme old Age, from an appointed Grave?
Surviving Archers much his Loss lament,
And in respect, bestowed this Monument:
Where whistling Arrows did his worth Proclaim,
And eternized his Memory and Name.
Lady. Well Sir, and this piece of Heroic was a fair Issue of yours? Gent. All
my own I assure you. Lady. And made choice by the whole Body Corporate for Sir
William's Monument. Gent. All in Capitals I can assure you. But dear Madam your
Judgment? Lady. Then to tell you my frank Opinion upon it, Your learned Doctors
of Archery and my Sentiments are quite different. I thank my kind Stars, I
never desire to hear a more Senseless pack of Rhyme, (for Poetry I dare not
call it) then this Heroical Wit-sample of yours, as you are pleased to Style
it: In the first place, [In's time in Archery] is such a Botch, and [Lament]
and [Monument] two such wretched Tags of Verse, that a lower Form Boy at
Westminster would be whipped for. Then for [ His owing his long Life only to his
Bowe] it is next door to Atheism. Did nothing but his Bow (no God ha mercy
Providence) preserve him alive to the Age of Eighty Two? And then did your
whistling Arrows eternize his Memory? A very low prized Immortality, if a never
dying Name can be purchased so cheap, as three Flights of Schoolboys Arrows.
Besides in my little Sense, Immortal Names are obtained by our own Merits, not
by other Folks; and so how your Arrows eternized him, is something
unaccountable. In fine, Sir, your Company of Archers have more Pretensions to
the Feather than the Quill; and truly Sir, as to your own Genius in Poetry,
it is a little Kin to the Head of one of your own Arrows, the Leaden end of it.

Well, this shallow Dabler in Helicon, is none of the Apollo for her Lute; he
has played the Sir Martin, and marred all. But in some few Days after, a very
ingenious young Spark, a celebrated Wit, made his Addresses with better
success, whilst about ten Days Courtship carried the Lady. And whatever
Titillation, whether of Revenge or Love, or both together heightened her
Raptures, he was such a darling Gallant, that never was Passion, Endearments
and Caresses so fond as hers. This Intrigue continued in its full Zenith for
about three Months; at which time a young Cozen of hers, a Country Gentleman,
near Newberry, had a Father died, who left him Heir to above a 1000 I per
Annum. This young Gentleman in his miserable Fathers days, was bred up more
like a Slave, than such an Heir; if he could read English 'twas all, but he
could not write his own Name: And in truth, though otherwise a comely Person, he
had no overgreat Portion of Sense, and less of Literature. This Cozen had a
handsome Sister with a considerable Fortune; now our Lady's own Brother, a
Neighbor of this rich Cozen and Heir, (his Country Seat not three Miles off
him) made Love to this She-cozen; and to expedite his Amor, had requested his
fair City Sister, to come down into the Country, to be a Spokes-woman for him;
she to Court the Brother (for her Fortunes were in his Hands) whilst he Courted
the Sister, and all to make sure work in the Match by Ploughing with the fair
Heifer. Her Husband he was as fond of sending down his Wife upon such an
Errand, as the Brother could, and immediately laid his Commands upon her to
post away in the Name of Cupid, a kind Advocate to the young Spark on her
Brothers behalf.

The Lady who could no ways refuse this Negotiation, met her Lover at his
Chamber, taking her leave with her kindest Embraces, mixed with a Deluge of
Tears for this cruel Divorce; complaning most piteously, to think how she must
leave such Wit, such charming Conversation, and all that was dear in the World,
to go to Court a Fool, a Dunce, an illiterate Blockhead. But it is her hard
fate, and she must submit; and promising him her speediest return, she conjured
him to believe she left her Soul behind her; and that the Absent days she now
borrowed from his Arms, should be repaid with Interest; for nothing in the
World should be so faithful as she, and as nothing ever parted with so much
Sorrow, so nothing should equal the Joys of her return.

The Lady accordingly sets forward the next Morning for Newberry, where in less
than a Fortnights time she so gained the Ascendent of the Country Squire, that
the Match was concluded, solemnized, and what not? However, here was no News of
her return; her very Husbands Commands could not drag her back again; some
Excuse or another was made to all his Letters, insomuch that 14 Weeks past
before she saw London again. And who should Gallant her to Town, but the
Country Squire? The poor Lover at London, who had thus long languish'd for her,
amongst the rest of the Congratulators, came to welcome her happy return; where
the brisk Lady loudly laughing with her Country Cozen, rose up from her Seat,
dropped him a short Courtesy, turned him her Cheek for a Salute, and then
squatted down into her Chair again, to finish her Laugh with the Squire. The
poor Celadon (for that is his Name) was strangely surprised at this cold
Reception; and it was three Weeks (she was so danced abroad by the Squire)
before he could obtain one private Word with her: When all she had to say, was,
That she had bid adieu to all such Vanities, had taken an unatlerable
Resolution of dispensing no more Favors; not that any scruple of Virtue, or
fit of Conscience (for that particular Question was asked her) had been the
Cause; but such a Resolution was taken, and never to be retracted: Her
Friendship was at his Service, but beyond that he must expect no more. The poor
Celadon, though otherwise Master of a great deal of Wit, however was Fool enough
to be strangely concerned at this amazing Change.

He would not willingly believe the Squire had out rivaled him, the whole gay
Humor possibly on that side being the effect of the late new and nearer
Alliance between the Families. Matters held thus, two Months, when Letters came
out of the Country from the new Couple, to invite their Sister down again, for
6 or 8 Weeks, in the Country; which Request was so seconded by the Cozen, that
two Places were taken in the Stage Coach for the Lady and the Squire. -- The
Day before their Journey a great deal of Company were invited to Dinner to take
their Leave, etc. Amongst the Crowd, Celadon made one; at Dinner the Lady was
strangely out of Humor: For her Cozen had been gone a Week down to Chelmsford
to Visit a Knight his Relation, and had promised her to return three Days ago;
and therefore she was certain he was come to some Mischief. Answer was made by
some of the Company, That 'twas but 25 Miles, and the Knight undoubtedly knew
of his Journey to Morrow, and would not part with him till the last Day he had
to stay in London. All this would not satisfy her, for he had promised her to
be in Town, and 'twas not Knights not Lords could make him break his promise
with her. Celadon, who heard all this had a sudden Fancy came into his Head,
upon which he pretended some earnest Business, that would hold him half an
Hour; at which time he would return to the company, who were pretty forward in
a cheerful Glass. He immediately posted to a Scrivener, and made him write a
Letter to the Husband in the Squires Name, to this purpose: That by an unhappy
fall from his Horse, between Chelmsford and Burntwood, he had broke his right
Arm; that he was under Cure with such a Physician; that he desired his
She-cozen would continue her intended Favor to her Brother and Sister at
Newberry; that he doubted not in a very short time to Kiss her fair Hand, being
in the mean time her humble Servant and Cripple.

This he gave to a Porter whom he well paid; ordering him to bring it almost
half a quarter of an Hour after him, and say it came up by such a Carrier.
Celadon immediately posted back to his Company, and the Porter came soon after
him, and gave the Letter as instructed. When it was publicly read in the
Dining Room, the Lady fell downright raving, The Villain, naming the Knights
Name, had made her dear Cozen, drunk; which had thrown him from his Horse; that
he was in his young Blood; 'twould cast him into a Fever, cost him his Life,
and she should never see him more. The Husband himself cried out Shame against
this Extravagant Passion, telling her, He himself had his Arm broke ten Years
ago, and was not Dead yet. No, says she. The Devil cannot Kill you; and so
bolted away from the Company, and locked her self up in her Closet; where the
Husband (resenting the Slight she put upon his Friends) broke open the Door,
and forced her back again. Here she endeavored to compose her Books, though
Sullen ones; when some of he Company, discanting upon who should write the
Letter, the Lady made Answer, Whoever wrote it, no matter, I am sure 'tw is of
his Dictating, the Style is so Witty.

She had scarcely made answer, when the Squire came in, excusing the resistless
Command of the Chelmsford Knight, who in spite of his Promise had forcibly
detained him thus long. He had not time to speak half his Speech, before the
Lady had flew into his Arms, and kissed him over and over, wondering to see him
safe returned, and all his Bones whole. The Squire was strangely alarmed at
this salute; but the Letter being produced, it was made a Jest to every one
round but Celadon, who had now unridled all. None in the Company could guess at
the Author of this Letter; but the Lady singling out Celadon, sitting alone in
the corner of the Room, passed negligently by him, and dropped this Half-whisper
in his Ear, 'Twas you writ this Letter. No, Madam, replied Celadon, it can be
none but your Squires, the Style is so Witty.

FINIS.

