THE ARTS AND Pernicious Designs OF ROME

Wherein is shown what are the AIMS of the JESUITS and FRIARS.

And what Means they use to obtain them, to the Prejudice of this Nation, and
the future involving it in Misery.

Together with some PROPOSALS to prevent the same.

By a Person of their own Communion, who turned Romanist about Thirty Years
since.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE REVEREND, His most Honored good FRIENDS, Mr: H. Th. and Mr. N. Thr.
Divines, and Dignitaries of the Church of England.
Reverend, and my much Honored good Friends,
COncerning the business, whereof I lately promised to give You some account by
Writing, being a little straightened in point of Time, I must crave Your pardon,
if you find not that good method and order observed in the following Lines,
which might have been wished, and that I presume to deliver my Thoughts to You
in such an indigested manner, as I fear I shall be forced to do for want of
time, that is to say, not in the form of a continued, and coherent Discourse,
but of distinct, separate Propositions, set down hastily, as Things come to
mind. However, I think this Benefit may come of the course I intend, that
delivering my self in this manner, you will, perhaps somewhat more distinctly,
and particularly perceive what my mind is, and what sense and apprenension of
things I have: which I confess is the principal thing I aim at; as well to ease
my own mind, as to understand what yours will be of the whole matter. I can
hardly doubt, but in some things you will think me a little too apprehensive,
and that I do overshoot my self in suspicion. But for that (Gentlemen)
appealing to God for the sincerity of my profession herein, I think it
sufficient to say, it is a case, wherein I had much rather be blamed for want
of Discretion, than for want of Affection: and so I may be, though in never so
low a degree, an occasion, or means, of preventing the sad mischief and
trouble, which I verily believe threatens this Church and Kingdom, from the
practices of certain Men, who pretend Religion much, but mind it least of all,
I shall not be unwilling to be accounted a Fool, or Madman, if need be.

As I have already told you, I can frame no particular accusation against any
Person; but must confess, my Fears and apprehensions are only of dangers and
ill practices in general, and for the most part upon general presumptions and
grounds: so that I cannot but doubt likewise, that this will be objected
against me, and made a great argument by some to discredit what I say, Viz.
that I do only suspect, and not prove. But let them make their advantage of it.
I am content to lie under this censure too for a while, rather than that my
Country should want the benefit of some timely admonition, and warning given
them, to beware, how they suffer themselves to be practiced upon, to their own
and the public ruin. Dangers of this nature must be feared, and apprehended,
a little before they evidence themselves, or else God help us. For the
satisfaction ( I hope) of all that will judge indifferently, it may suffice,
that with a clear conscience I can, and do appeal to God, the searcher of
hearts, that I suggest nothing either by way of charge; suspicion, accusation,
or otherwise, which I do not verily conceive my self to have just and
sufficient ground to suggest, and to think, and speak of Things so as I do,
either from their own printed Books, or from their private Writings (which I
have at times seen, and transcribed for them) or from what I have heard from
their own mouths, or the mouths of their friends and confidents: except only
some few things, which here and there I collect, a paritate rationis, or by way
of argument, from what I have undoubtedly heard, or observed from themselves,
and from their Books, Writings, Mouths, respectively.

All that know, and duly consider how industrious this Party is, to pursue and
promote their proper Interest, will (I doubt not) acknowledge this for a truth,
That what they hold lawful to be done, they may be justly presumed to do,
whenever opportunity serves, and that they see it conducible to their
Interest to do it. Therefore to show how they are principled in point of
opinion, touching the lawfulness of the things here in general charged upon
them, or suspected of them, I shall not forget, in convenient place, to insert
some few of their Maxims, serving to that purpose.

One thing I have yet farther to add, not in the quality of a reason, to move
others to regard what I say, (though it be, I confess, some little occasion of
satisfaction to my self) but only because I judge it not improper to be
imparted to you (my Honored Friends) and that I am particularly desirous to
hear your opinion of it. It is this: That being my self a Roman Catholic, and
frequenting the Sacrament of Confession, as Catholics use to do, I have had
frequent occasion to mention these following matters, at least the general
Heads of them, to my (then) Ghostly Fathers, as things that carried a semblance
with them of very rash judgments against so great Superiors, and against
Religious men, and upon that account as being matter of sin, or just scruple,
to me. But neither could I ever hear any thing from them, that gave me the
least satisfactory assurance of the contrary, VIZ. That it was not in any sort
so as I feared and suspected of them, (though they were Jesuits, for the most
part, to whom I made my confession, and such Men as could easily have given me
assurance, had they known it to be otherwise than I suspected:) neither could I
ever find any Benefit by confessing them. But though I have ever made it my
earnest Prayer to God, and still do every day, that he would give me the grace
to judge rightly and justly of all Men, and not to be transported with any
judgments, or suspicions concerning others, contrary to Truth and Charity: Yet
these still continue, and rather grow, and increase upon me, than otherwise,
disquieting my mind, more or less, almost every day; being commonly the last
things that leave me at Night, and returning with the first in the Morning. And
this has been my condition these many Years: Which seeing that my conscience,
on the other side, clears me from bearing any grudge, or offense of mind (upon
my own, or any other Man's account) to wards any Person, or Persons living; and
that even in relation to those, whom in the general I cannot but think and
suspect to be very faulty, I find not my self otherwise affected, than most
truly to love, honor, and respect them for their Calling and Characters sake.
I cannot but for this reason also a little the more yield to my own fears, and
think, that in fearing and judging so as I do, my fear is not altogether
without cause, nor my judgment much contrary to Truth and Charity. However,
such as they are, in order to receive your further Counsel and Direction
concerning them, I take the Boldness to present them to You, in the plain Form
that follows.

THE PVBLISHER TO THE READER.
BE pleased (good Reader) to take notice, that in pursuance of some Verbal
Discourse had with two Reverend Persons of the Church of England, some Years
since deceased, Mr. Thorndike. Mr. Thresscross.
the following matters were first committed to Paper, in, or about the Year
1668. at which time it was much feared, and talked by many, as if some
misunderstanding would have happened betwixt the King and Parliament upon
occasion of the then late Dreadful Burning of the City: and the Writers
intention was, so far as it lay in the power of such a private Subject, to
endeavor, by giving a timely Warning to all Persons concerned, to prevent (if
possible) so great inconveniences, and mischiefs, as would undoubtedly have
followed such a Breach: in order to which prevention, he was also willing for
his part, that his Sentiments should have been made public, at the time when
he first declared them. But that Cloud by the good Providence of God, and the
wise proceeding of Parliament, scattering as it were of it self, and Serenity
of State returning, Those Reverend Persons above named (whose further
encouragement and assistance (to speak the truth) was of necessity to have been
afforded to the Publication of them) judged it not fit to hinder the quiet
composure of things, by casting in ought that might move dispute, minister
talk, or serve to keep on foot public jealousies, and discontents. So they
have lain ever since in the same private Manuscript, in which they were first
drawn up. But (as it happens by the same Permission, and order of Divine
Providence) the face of public affairs beginning now again to change so much
to the worse, and the present state of things so evidently confirming, and
fully justifying those General fears, suspicions, and jealousies, which the
Writer of these following Propositions professes to have had, and to have
labored under a long time together; to the end, that our great, and
highcontrasting Animosities do not hurry us unawares, into irremediable Evils,
the Author has now a second time given his consent to their Publication, in
the same form and manner, and without any great alteration from what they were
in the first Copy: Verily judging the Contents, if well and duly considered,
may, with God's blessing going along with them, serve in this juncture of time
as so many seasonable Retentives, to hold us back from running so hastily and
headlong to our own ruin; or as so many gentle suffusions to correct, and cool
the vehemence of our distempered heats.

It is therefore, both by the Author and Publisher, heartily wished and
desired, that his private Thoughts, hereby made public, might be so happy, as
to come to the knowledge, and be thoroughly reflected upon by all the good
People of this Nation: and particularly, I cannot but prompt to them those
Propositions which concern, and show the means of Cementing our Unhappy
differences, and thereby frustrating the hopes and Designs our Enemies have
upon us, by reason of them; which are Propp. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
32. Those also that discover, and lay open the various, and subtle practices of
our great Enemy (the Roman Consistory and its Emissaries) to kindle, and keep
up Dissensions amongst us, and by means of them in fine to subject us, not so
much to the obedience of True Religion (which they neither regard, nor care
for, but only for their Interests sake) as to their own arbitrary Wills, Pride,
Tyranny, and Superstitions: Which likewise, if God permit, and that moderate
Counsels take not better place with us, they will infallibly effect first or
last. Nothing can hinder, or prevent them, but our own timely Uniting, and
joining together hearts and hands, Counsels and Interests, Affections,
Endeavors, and All whatsoever we have, or can make use of for common defense,
in such manner as is hinted in the abovementioned Propp. 24, 25, 26, etc. But
for their practices, see Propp. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20,
23. And finally, that we do not omit to consider what is said concerning the
Jesuits immense Wealth, most unlawfully gotten, and raked together, and of its
perilous importance to all Princes, and States whatsoever, where they have the
like advantages, and do practice the like industries for the amassing wealth in
a clandestine, and less perceived way. Neither do the Monks (or other
Religious, I suppose) fall much short of their proportion in each kind, that
is, of having, and possessing excessively-superfluous Mammon, or Riches, and of
avaritious industry, diligence, and desire to get more. For this, as relating
to the Jesuits especially, see Propp. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41. And for
the Interest and Power, the Consistory, and they, Viz. the Jesuits, Monks, and
Friars, have also now gained, and do at present hold, and drive on out of
Christendom, that is, in the Turkish, Persian, and Chinese Empires, see Propp.
48. to the end of the Discourse.

Now concerning the Author, or Writer of the following matters, there needs no
more be inquired, or said of him, than what himself confesses in the
Title Page, viz. that he is, as to matter of Faith and Religion, of the
Roman Catholic Communion; but yet a Loyal Subject, and one that hates all kind
of disloyalty (whether in opinion or practice) as much as any Protestant in
England: of which he is also ready at all times (when required) to give the
best assurance he can, and the utmost that the Law requires of the Subjects of
this Nation: being indeed one, whose private condition considered, cannot
easily be thought to have any design in publishing these his Sentiments, more
than to be (under God) some little means of helping to prevent the manifold
Confusions, troubles, miseries, devastations and bloodshed, which those hasty
and precipitate Counsels, that some are found too ready to advance, partly out
of a mistaken zeal for Religion, (which is in truth mere animosity and
haughtiness of spirit) and partly for their own private ends, will certainly in
short time bring upon his native Country, far more grievous, than any they have
yet felt, or seen in War. And therefore prays, that his good and dutiful
Intentions being accepted, his oversights (in case any such be found to have
slipped his Pen, worthy of remarque) may receive a mild censure, and be looked
upon as the Effects (for so they are, I appeal to God) of a most pure, and
intense affection for the good of this Nation in general; and in particular for
the Health and Well being of his Majesty's Royal Person, for his safety and
preservation from all dangers, public or private, and for his long, happy, and
peaceful Reign over us: likewise (as duty requires) for the health and happy
return (when it shall be safe for him) of his Royal Highness: and in the mean
time for the inviolate Conservation of all his Princely Rights, Titles,
Dignities, and Prerogatives to him and his Heirs; and for the frustrating of
all those desperate and destructive Counsels and Practices, which are said to
be carried on for the disinheriting of his Royal Highness because of his
Religion: than which design, nothing ever was, or can be thought of, more
Unadvised, and tending to the Nations ruin; or that does more evidently
proclaim it self to be the very counsel, and project of those our deadly
enemies here complained of: who have by some of their hired, or bribed Agents
amongst us, clancularly and underhand procured it to be set on foot, on purpose
to involve us in endless and inextricable troubles, contentions and mischiefs
following upon them; from which God in mercy deliver Us, and cause us to see (I
say not only the iniquity, injustice, illegalness of the Project, which are
apparent to every eye, but) the manifest impossibility of ever carrying it on,
and maintaining it against so many and great oppositions (both domestic and
foreign) as will undoubtedly appear against it, when the resolution shall be
once taken, and formed into an Act of State: Which that it may never be, nor
the traitorous fancy ever be thought worthy of motion, but rather be looked
upon with horror, and rejected with deserved indignation by all the good
Members of our ensuing Great Council, the Parliament, as also by all Good
Patriots, Lovers and Well-wishers of their Countries public, and common Good,
Peace, Tranquillity, Quiet, more than their own Wills, private Passions,
Interests, and Concerns, is, and ever shall be (as both Duty and Conscience
binds) the daily, and most earnest Prayer, of (Good Reader) Your loving
Countryman, and most hearty Well-wisher of the Best Things to You from God.

August 25th. 1679. N. N.

A NOTE concerning ERRATA.
THe PRESS has done its part so well in this little Thing, that unless a
diligent perusal deceives me much, there is not to be observed one fault worth
correcting, save only in the word Hyocrisy, page 17. Prop. 26. line 11. for
which, if thou read Hypocrisy, I have no more to say, but Cave and Vale,
Lector.

The SENTIMENTS of N. N. Touching the ROMAN Consistories, DESIGNS and
PRACTICES, etc.
The First Proposition.
Roman Catholic Religion, in the Principals thereof, Viz. so much as is
grounded upon Christian Tradition, the Universal practice of the Church, or the
Authority and Definition of General Councils, be (in my persuasion) undoubtedly
the True Christian Religion, and in all the parts thereof Good and most
Acceptable to God, and consequently also most worthy to be embraced, and
professed by all Christians; Yet through the infirmities of Men, and the
Vicious corruption of Times, hugely declining in point of Judgment, as well as
Manners, from primitive and pristine integrity, to my extreme grief and
scandal, I find it to be here in England, of all others generally speaking, an
affair, or business, most Unfaithfully and Unworthily managed by Those, who in
virtue of their respective Callings and Offices in the Church of God, have the
chief management thereof in their hands.

Note.
The ingenuous Protestant Reader will not (I hope) be offended, that such a
Proposition as this is set in the Front of my. Sentiments, it being neither by
way of Challenge, nor out of any private confidence, or presumption set down,
but merely and simply as a profession of my present Belief; which being (as I
said) sincerely Roman Catholic, I thought it not Unnecessary to intimate so
much briefly in this place, as well to prevent Scandal-taking by some, who may
be too apt to interpret things to the worst; as to show, that though in the
following Propositions I be to mention with great dislike, many Things of
private opinion and practice amongst Roman Catholics, yet I do it with a clear
conscience, and without any (the least) prejudice to that Faith, which I hold
in common with them, upon the grounds mentioned in the said Proposition, Viz.
Christian Tradition, the Authority of General Councils, etc.

Proposition II.
those, who have the chief management of Catholic Religion in England, is
sufficiently known; therefore I say in the second place, That neither the
Consistory of Rome, nor their principal Correspondents, (which, as I said, are
the Jesuits, Monks and Friars, with some few others of the English and Irish
Clergy, pension'd by procurement and help of the Jesuits, etc. and therefore
wholly dependent on them) do at all seriously desire any general advancement,
or liberty of Catholic Religion, nor any General Conversion of the People of
this Nation from the Errors of Protestantism: But only make use of that
pretense for their reputation sake, and the better to carry on their own
private, and more intended Designs; which are Ambition, Honor with Ease,
Emolument, Power, Authority, and the like.

Proposition III.
Majesty's most happy, and long-wish'd for Restoration, Things were at such a
pass, and the Cause of Catholics, as well as other Dissenters, so favorably
looked upon by all forts of People; that had Those, who pretend to the chief
care of Religion, as well here at home as abroad, seriously and in good earnest
desired the advancement thereof, it might have been procured, even by an Act of
Parliament, in such good measure, as that it should have been free for them, (I
mean for all Catholics of Loyal and moderate Principles) privately to have
exercised their Priestly Function in all the parts of it without danger, or
molestation; though not, perhaps, to an absolute repeal of all the Statutes
against it, or them. Now what should move both the one, and the other of these
Parties so deeply, and hernously to prevaricate in a cause, so worthy of their
best endeavors, and which they will seem so much to own, must be left to
private conjecture: which yet, if we consider things well, it will not be hard
to make.

Proposition IV.
Those here in England, did not effectually endeavor this liberty of Religion,
when time was, (so as they might and ought to have done) was without doubt in
great part their Unwillingness to be obliged to the duty of Preaching, which
would then have been generally expected of them, and whereto they have so
little Affection, (their Sufficiency I shall not question, knowing it by
experience in some, and not doubting it in others) that in all the English
Orders, Viz. of Jesuits, Monks and Friars, there were not Three Persons to be
found (when enquiry was made about it by some that had Authority) willing, or
inclinable to undertake that most necessary charge in any constant manner. Not
to mention their like Unwillingness to conform to that more strict regularity
of life, manners, habit and conversation, which the Gospel, and many holy
Canons of the Church require of them, and would then (if Religion had been made
free) as well for their own honor, as for good example, and conscience sake,
have been no less looked for at their hands.

Proposition V.
Consistory also neglected this opportunity, (and thereby in effect betrayed
that cause, which they pretend so much to maintain) was really no other than
this, That they do not indeed care for Religion, nor mind, or look at the
advancement thereof, either in England, or any where else, farther than it
serves for the advancement of the private and temporal Interests of the Court
and City of Rome: Which, in relation to England alone, is manifest enough, even
from hence, Viz. that though the general Unqualifiedness of their Churchmen
here, were by some, sent from the Consistory with particular authority to
enquire into that affair, so much taken notice of, that thereupon, and for no
other reason, not without some resentment, they Voted, That it was not for the
honor of Catholic Religion, that the profession thereof should be free in
England, but rather still to remain under Persecution; although, I say, this
matter were so long since sufficiently taken notice of by Those, who want not
authority to do well, if they pleased, 1660. or 1661.
yet neither then, nor since, has there been any good order taken for the
redress of those abuses, and supplying those patent, and scandalous defects,
which they found, and made show to be much offended at. But on the contrary,
instead of reforming what is known to be amiss, or quickening up that most
grievous and scandalous Acedie of Ecclesiastics to a better performance of
duty, letting all things remain as they were, or rather to run on from bad to
worse; as time in the revolution of a few years will further show, to the
deserved shame both of the one and the other.

Proposition VI.
Roman Court and City, and not the advancement of the Religion; the advancement
of their profit, the advancement of their Extravagant Authority and Power, (and
not of the true Catholic Faith and Religion without these) is the thing, which
the Roman Consistory looks at in all their Counsels and Proceedings: it is the
Cynosura, by which they steer all their courses.

Proposition VII.
Viz. of advancing their Temporal Interests and Grandeurs, they have wholly
laid aside, and do totally neglect all ways, and means of advancing Religion,
here in England, that are fair, open and proper, and such as might have been
attended unto with permission of the State, and had its effect by the free and
deliberate consent of the People themselves, as it ought to be: and think only
of the ways of Policy and Power: of Policy to surprise us; and of Power to
compel us, when they shall see time: In the mean while waiting to this purpose
the opportunity of finding (or otherwise of making) some Foreign Prince, or
Princes, our Enemies: into whose hands, what by the help of Domestic Factions,
what by their own evil practices, they doubt not but to be able, in time, to
devolve the Sovereignty of these Nations, and by that means to promote their
Temporal Interests (Viz. Profit and Power) here, more than they can hope to do
under the present Government: which God preserve, and establish.

Since the writing hereof (which was about Ten, or Eleven Years since)
something has fallen out concerning his Royal Highness, the Duke of York, which
may make it probable, that the Consistory will use all their Interest and Power
to promote his Rights, and Title in Reversion, To which I answer, it may be so
they will, if they can see no other way of proceeding more advantageous to
themselves. But be sure they will do nothing without Stipulation, and forcing
his Highness (for the gaining of their favor) to condescend to some
conditions, or other, less worthy of his Highness's Princely Dignity and
Honor, and no less contrary (perhaps) to the Liberties and Freedom of These
Nations. How much better therefore were it, that his Highness were called home,
and that (for more security) by the Joynt-authority and Votes of Both Houses of
Parliament; where, his Rights first solemnly acknowledged, Consultation may be
afterward freely had concerning such Laws, as shall be judged necessary for
preserving, in time to come, the Protestant Religion, by Law now established,
in its full Liberty, with all the Rights, Privileges and Immunities by Law
belonging to the Ministers thereof against all attempts whatsoever, made by
what Persons, or Powers soever, and upon whatsoever pretenses: Unto which Laws,
with convenient Salvo's and Proviso's, for the Liberty of his Highness's
Person, and Domestics, there is little doubt to be made, but his Royal
Highness, for the full satisfaction of all the good People of these Nations,
and for the quieting of men's minds, will readily consent, and oblige himself as
far, as can be required of him by the wisdom of Parliament.

Proposition VIII.
Interst, and also the avowed Policy of the Roman Court, in order to the
perpetuating, and establishment of their own Domination and quiet, to keep all
other Princes and People, as much as may be, in continual trouble and
commotion, and if not in some actual War; and Hostility, yet at least in
jealousy one with another: and more especially such Princes and People, as are
either her professed Enemies, or not so much her Friends, as it is pretended
they should be.

Proposition IX.
the prudent management of their Interest, the Roman Consistory maintains her
Instruments, and Agents in all the Princes Courts, public, and commonly known,
as Nuncioes, Internuneioes, Legates, etc. where they will be admitted: secret,
and not known to be what they are: the chief business, both of the one and the
other (respectively) being to observe the Inclinations, Passions, Humors, and
several Interests of Those, who sit at the Helm of Government, or are any way
considerable in State; and accordingly by their dexterous Insinuations and
Compliances to work upon them, and to dispose and temper them, so far as they
can, to such resolutions, as are best agreeable to their own designs, and to
the designs of the Court from whence they come: or otherwise, if they cannot,
yet at least to stave them off, and keep them, as much as is possible, from
being Enemies, or acting any thing contrary to the Consistories Interest: which
is, as it were, their Aftergame.

Proposition X.
Unknown, concealed, and disguized Agents, it is in the power of this Roman
Court, more or less, and at all times, ordinarily speaking, to excite and stir
up (almost) what proceedings of State she pleases, and also to allay and put
stop to them, when she sees cause; to advance, and likewise to obviate, and
hinder what designs and resolutions she thinks fit; and in fine to foment and
inflame what factions, and to dash together what Parties (and what Persons) she
finds it to be expedient, and conducible to her own ends.

Proposition XI.
private and unperceived Instruments the Consistory moves War, and Dissension,
and is cause of much mischief and disorder in the Civil Government, and State
of Princes, so by her public, known, and avowed Ministers, (such as are
Nuncioes, Legates, and the like) she does no less studiously (I mean in outward
appearance) negotiate, and labor the procuring of peace, and redress of
public disorder. But all for Interest sake, and more out of policy, than
conscience. For thereby she maintains her own reputation amongst Christian
Princes; and by the peace which she procures, is not unmindful, as occasion
serves, to make her own particular advantages.

Proposition XII.
Majesty, through the Unhappiness of his being abroad so many Years, together
with all his Chief Counselors, and Ministers of State, then abroad with Him,
did become more or less obnoxious to the Counsels, and Practices of the Roman
Court: and that partly by pretense of doing good Offices, and partly by other
Arts, such Ministers and Agents of the Consistory, as we now speak of, have
gained too great an influence upon his Majesty's Court, and Counsels: if they
did not also force them, through the sad exigency of their affairs, to some
compliances with that Court, beneath his Majesty's Honor, and contrary to the
just Interests of the Nation.

Proposition XIII.
Rome, having by their practices with and upon the late Usurpers, and Rebels
here in England, and by their Dividing Counsels, brought things to such a pass,
as that it was both feisible, and also for their Interest, that his Majesty
should be restored, they did upon that account, Viz. for their Interest-sake,
and not for any good will, effectually contribute thereunto, and by their
several Agents and Instruments cooperate, and help toward the most happy, and
most just Restoration of his Sacred Majesty to his Royal Throne and Dignity;
and that by the advantage of this service (how much prejudice, and mischievous
disservice they had formerly done him) they do yet hold, by some concealed, and
less known Instruments, as great and very powerful influence upon his Majesty's
Councels and Court.

Proposition XIV.
Dutch was (originally) the project, and contrivement of such Roman Emissaries,
and Counselors as abovesaid, who under disguise and show of Friendship
haunting the Courts, and Supreme Councels of both Nations, do equally abuse
Both by such feigned, and subtle pretenses, as they are ever furnished withal,
and suitable to the Inclinations of Those they have to deal with: as in this
present contest, with Hoxour and Victory on the one side; of Profit and
Emolument to the other: but with a success to Both, answerable to the
advisedness of the Undertaking, and to their Good Will, who really engaged us
in the quarrel.

Proposition XV.
H. with his Sacred Majesty and the Parliament, is another effect of their
subtle, and malicious practices, of whom we now speak; offended with him for
being so much an enemy to the said War, as he is known to have been; and for so
effectually and happily procuring the present peace: Both which actions of his
were little to the Gust, or good liking of the Consistory. Yea, I verily think,
if the Truth of such Things could be known, and matters examined to the bottom,
the chief crimes, of which my Lord Chapter stands accused, would (if real) be found
to have been the effect of their own temptations, who have now, for the reasons
last mentioned, underhand procured his ruin for them: and particularly, that
his preferring of Presbyterians, doing ill offices, or neglecting the Indigent
loyal Officers, together with the business of Dunkirk, and (generally) all
those other matters, which were first exhibited, or said to be exhibited
against him in Parliament by the E. of Br. there is none of them, but (if his
Lordship were rightly charged with them) he may be thought to have consented
unto, and proceeded in them, according to the direction, and at the instance of
this Party: with whom, at his first return into England with his Sacred
Majesty, it is certain, if Jesuits themselves may be credited in the affair, he
had intimate intelligence; and was no less confided in by them. Neither is it
any disallowed policy, or practice, with the Consistory (though they have
scarce any President for it, but what Satan, and his Kingdom of Darkness
affords) to tempt, by some instruments, to sin, and to prosecute, and punish by
others.

Proposition XVI.
from the same advisers, that his Royal Highness should so perpetually engage
himself in These Sea fights, as he has done all along, first and last:
wherein, doubtless, his destruction was more particularly aimed at by this
party, than any thing else: though hitherto it has pleased Almighty God to
preserve him in such particular manner also, as may tell the perfidious
contrivers of his danger, how much their Counsels are displeasing to him, and
contrary to the counsels of Heaven. May it please the same Divine Goodness ever
to protect his Royal Highness from the Machinations of whatsoever Enemies, and
from all dangers and mischances; and to make his Princely heart duly Thankful,
and observant of Divine mercies, that he may heap more favors and mercies upon
him. In the last War there are said to have been some particular provocations
given him, and indignities put upon him by the Dutch. Whatever they were, his
Highness may do well to look upon them as the projects and contrivances of this
sort of men, done on purpose to incense him, and render him irreconcilable to
that Nation. However that his Highness would more value his Princely Person,
(on which the welfare of Three Nations does so much depend) than to seek
revenge with such extreme peril to himself, I am sure, cannot but be the sense
and prayer of all that love England, or the Royal Family.

Proposition XVII.
Consistory (I speak still of those, who are clandestine and not known) do, not
seldom, but almost perpetually act contrary to one another, according as their
design, and the subject they have to work upon, do require, and little doubt
there is to be made, but that there are in England, (and have been all along
our late Troubles) of this company, and sort of men, those that under disguise
do both act, and plead for all parties: some for the Presbyterian, others for
the Independent. Some for the Anabaptists, others for the Quakers: yea some,
perhaps, even for the Protestant Church it self, and Clergy of England; though
most feignedly, and hypocritically all, and only to drive on their own design;
which is to multiply dissensions amongst us, and to keep the several parties at
as great a distance, and disunion of hearts and counsels as they can. And in
this craft they have thriven so well, that from what I do certainly gather from
the mouths and profession of some of them, I can make little doubt, but that at
this present all, or most of the principal, and leading Men in all the
dissenting Parties in England, are, if not bribed, or pension'd, yet some way
or other purchased, gained, wrought upon and abused (mediately or immediately)
by these Ministers and Agents of Rome. I do not except that religious, and
honest Gentleman, (and sincere Royal Convert, I hope) Mr. W. Pr. himself, when
living.

Proposition XVIII.


Proposition XIX.
Roman Court by this means; that is to say, by their Unwary and ill-advised
pursuing of their private passions, and Affections, of their private, and
particular Interests, Animosities, Ends, without due regard to the dictates of
Reason, Religion Piety, Justice, and Virtue, which is requisite: and that the
crafty, complyant managing of Peoples Inclinations and passions, by the hands
and industry of such Agents as she makes use of, is (to speak the truth) the
very Neptunes Trident of Rome; (hac movet and componit aquas) I mean, it is the
chief Art and Engine, where by that Court, (not much unlike the Woman mentioned
in the Apocalypse, sitting on many Waters) moderates at this day the public
affairs of Christendom, Apoc. 17.5.
and tempers them all to her own Interest.

Proposition XX.
Roman Consistory are, in a manner, wholly mundane, secular, and aiming at
temporal Things; to wit, the upholding, and advancing in what they can, their
worldly Interests of Profit, Power and Authority, etc. So are the Principles by
which they act, and the Doctrines and Maxims, by which the Divines attending
that Court do instruct, and direct them, no less corrupt, spurious, and
perniciously different from the genuine Maxims of Christ's Holy Gospel, and
from the true Primitive, Catholic, and Apostolic Doctrine of the ancient
Fathers. Evil and debauched practices suppose most commonly a debauched, and
perverted judgment; it being not, otherwise, so easy for Satan to tempt
persons, especially of Sacred Character and Function, to the Transgression of
Divine Law, without first perverting their Understanding with false Notions,
and Opinions; by means whereof they are made to think it, either no sin at all,
to act contrary to what the Commandment of God requires of them, or at most but
light, and Venial sin; which by another error, no less dangerous than the
former, they make no account of, nor scruple to commit, whenever their
passions, or corrupt Interest inclines them thereto. Neither can it be denied,
but what through immoderateness of Disputation, what through vain subtilty of
speculation, (wherein every one strives to exceed each other) what through
presumptuous, and unadvised decision of matters, (not to say that through
direct compliance with their own, or others, inordinate affections, for
Interest sake) the Doctrine of the Modern Schools is extremely much corrupted,
and degenerated from the ancient Primitive purity, even in all the Heads of
Christian Morality and Piety: of which, with God's help, a further account may
be given in due time, and place. At present it may suffice, only to mention
some few Maxims, that are, more than ordinarily was wont to be heretofore, put
in practice, and pursued by the Roman Court.

CONSISTORIAL THEOLOGY; OR, A COLLECTION OF Some few of those Corrupt,
Uncatholick Maxims, which are now in chief Vogue, and Current at Rome; and by
which the Resolutions and Proceedings of the Roman Consistory are at present
governed.
1. THat Catholics may in some cases so far dissemble their Religion, as to
deport themselves, both in Religious Assemblies and otherwise, as protestants,
or any other Sectaries: Which Proposition is variously defended by them.

Some assert absolutely, that a Catholic living, or having occasion to be, and
abide in any Uncatholick Country, be it with Heretics, Turks, or pagans, if he
be not known to be a Catholic, may without scruple conform himself exteriourly
to all the Rites, and Customs of that Country, even in matters of Religion.

Others limit, and restrain this Liberty only to such cases, and times, wherein
he is not bound to make express confession of his Faith: Which cases being so
rare, and seldom, as they are taught to be ( Viz. when one is publicly
questioned for his Faith before Authority, or the like) it comes to the same in
effect with the former assertion Viz. that where a Man is not known, nor
suspected to be a Catholic, or a Christian, he may, if he will, feign himself
an Heretic, or Pagan.

A Third sort require the Pope's Dispensation to do this; that is, to dissemble
their Faith: and certain it is, if any credit may be given to Priests
themselves, and to their own Writings, That the Pope does grant such Faculties
to English Missionaries, (and no doubt to others too, where like cause requires
it) and that ore tenus, by word of mouth only; which I suppose is for greater
secrecy, and that the matter should not be too generally, or publicly known:
the Pope (I say) does grant in such manner Faculties to Jesuits, (and other
Priests) to dispense with Catholics for going to Church; and being present
Sacris and Ceremoniis Haereticorum, when they find it necessary.

II. That upon the same ground ( Viz. the Pope's Dispensation, or Permission)
the Oath of Supremacy is now also allowed to be taken by Catholic people;
which was formerly held so Unlawful: and they give a reason for it, Viz.
because there is now (so they pretend when, and where they think good) a better
Under standing between the Court of England, and Rome, than has been in former
times.

III. That for the avoidance of a greater Evil, which in prudent judgment is
held to be inevitable, and certain to come to pass, a lesser evil may be both
counseled and practiced; Understanding in Both cases the evil of sin: that is,
it is lawful to commit a lesser sin for the avoiding of a greater, which by no
other means can be avoided.

They usually give examples of this in smaller matters; as if I know a Thief
intends to rob such a poor Man, as I cannot otherwise save from being robbed,
but by telling the Thief, where he may have a greater prize, Viz. by robbing a
rich Man, I may both tell him where it is to be done, and persuade him to do
it, and the like. But who sees not how easily the Maxim (if taken for a truth)
may be extended to things of greater consequence? As for example, the public
profession and prevalency of Heresy, being in the judgment of this Court
incomparably the greatest of evils, to hinder the growth, and establishment
thereof, otherwise judged inevitable and certain, what other evil and sinful
practices may not, by virtue of this Maxim, be allowed, and set on foot? as
the raising of Dissension, and War, the multiplying of Sects, and differences
in religion amongst those who are already Heretics? What Treasons, what
Massacres, yea even of Catholic people too, if they judge it may conduce, or
be necessary for the rooting out of Heretics?

IV. That the Pope under Christ is Lord, and proprietor General of the whole
Universe; and that in order to the Administration of Christ's Kingdom upon
Earth (of which he is held to be Supreme and Perpetual Vicar, or Viceroy) he
may dispose of all the Temporalties of the World, as he thinks good; and that
he has the same Dominion in Things, as Vicar and Deputy, which Christ has as
Sovereign: and that by virtue thereof that Text of the prophet Jeremias (chap.
1.10) is literally true, and to be understood of him, Constitui te hodie super
gentes, and super regna, ut evellas and aestruas, ut disperdas and dissipes, ut
aedifices and plants, with diverse other Extravagancies of like nature
attributed to him, justly abhorred and long since confuted, as well by
Catholics themselves, as protestants.

However standing yet, as they do, Uncensured, and passing in the quality of
probable opinions at Rome (where all probable opinions are also practicable,
when occasion serves) whose estate can be thought secure (whether Princes or
peoples, whether Sovereigns, or Subjects) from the mischievous effects of them?
what wicked and destructive practices may not the Consistory, when they please
or see occasion, warrant and allow to be put in execution, by confidence of
such opinions? what fireing of Cities, Towns, Escurials, or Palaces-Royal; what
betraying of Forts, Castles, Places, Ships, etc. what Robberies, what Murders,
and Assassinations of Men, may not, upon this pretense, be perpetrated and
done, with many other like outrages both public and private? Omen avertat
Deus, God grant we may never feel the effects of such opinions. But if the Pope
be Lord of all (as they forbear not to profess, where they dare speak their
minds freely) and that he may dispose of all Temporals (our Fortunes and Lives
too) in ordine ad spiritualia, as they say, what may not this Nation, and all
others in like condition with it, have just reason to fear?

V. That upon the same ground, ( Viz. of being Christ's Vicar upon Earth) the
Pope has Jus Belli (the right of waging War, and of using Temporal Force)
against all Nations and People, that live not in communion, and due obedience
to the Church.

Now seeing he not only accounts us Enemies, and Rebels, but every Year, by his
Bull of Excommunication proclaims us such, and that we are commonly styled his
Rebels by those that come from him; it is left to common prudence here likewise
to consider, what clandestine and treacherous mischiefs may not, by order and
direction of this Court, be practiced against us upon this score, remembering
that of the Poet,

Dolus, an Virtus quis in host requirit? All courses are held lawful to
damnifie, and destroy a declared Enemy.

VI. That in order to the advancement of Religion, and as Christ's Vicar, the
Pope may do whatsoever God can do, if it be in his power, that is, excepting
only Acts of Omnipotency, and such like; and particularly, that in order to
good ends, he may make use of evil and wicked Instruments; and according as it
is said of God by Saint Augustine, that he does been uti malis hominum
voluntatibus; so they talk of the Pope. The Pope may not (say they) by himself,
or by others, bid any Man sin; but knowing his inclination to sin, he may
effectually comply with it, and make use of his sin to some good end of his
own. Neither may he bid, or command any to tempt others to sin; but knowing
them to be so wickedly disposed, that they will do it, he may place them in
office, or put them in favor, and give them opportunity with persons, whom
they may tempt, and whom he knows subject and apt to be tempted. This, they
say, he may do, if it be judged expedient for the advancement of his better,
and greater designs.

So that, if it be for the interest, or according to the designs of the
Consistory, that a Prince, or other Person in the State and Government, be made
publicly odious, and contemptible, by reason of his Vices, the Pope (or rather
the Consistory and Court, in whose power the Pope is little less than
captivated, as to cases of this nature) by Virtue of this Maxim may set, or use
its interest and power for the setting of such Ministers, and Servants about
him, as shall daily tempt, and solicit him to evil, and to all manner of
courses, that may render him odious and contemptible to his people.

VII. That by virtue of Christ's words to Saint Peter, Matthew. 16.19. Quicquid
solveris super terram, erit solutum in coelis, etc. The Pope may dispense with,
and loose all bonds whatsoever betwixt Men, that he shall judge expedient, and
fit to be loosed, in order to his Ends, as Pope and Vicar of Christ upon Earth.
But enough has been said for the present of Consistorial Doctrine, or Maxims.
I return now again to my own Propositions, and say,

Proposition XXI.
That in pursuance of these (and the like) false and nefarious Principles, and
in further neglect, yea even contempt, and defiance of their duty, means,
order, and way, by which they ought to endeavor the advancement of true
Christian Catholic Religion, Viz. Preaching, Exhorting,
Charitably-admonishing, amicable, and friendly reasoning, and the like, many of
the Pensioners, and Missionaries of this Court, stick not, (where they dare be
free, and open) to profess, that it is not the Word, that must do the work in
England, but the Sword, and that the Pistol will confute Heresy more to
purpose a great deal than the Pen; with other like speech, which is observed
sometimes to fall from them, showing (as I verily persuade my self) a most
wicked, and hostile resolution to be taken up by the Consistory of reducing
England (if ever they shall be able) to the Communion of the Catholic Church,
and obedience of the Apostolic Sea, not by any fair, proper, Christian and
Apostolic means, or endeavor, but by Fire and Sword, Compulsion and Violence,
and with all the Miseries, and Calamities, that War and Foreign Tyranny can
bring upon us; unless God of his Goodness in mercy prevent it.

Proposition XXII.
Majesty, and the generality of his Subjects; that so all Parties remaining
still in the old Fewd, and at distance one with another, and all likewise more
or less in disgust, and disaffected to the Royal Government, and Interest, we
may all, for want of Union amongst our selves, be the more easily subdued, when
time shall be, to the yoke they are making for us.

Proposition XXIII.
English, of what Judgment soever in point of Religion, could be persuaded
timely to unite both Counsels and Affections, (for one of These, without the
other, will do but little good) and to be jealous of every thing, or motion,
that tends to disunion, either of the Subjects from their Sovereign, or of the
People amongst themselves.

Proposition XXIV.


Proposition XXV.
English hearts following upon it, would, with God's help, effectually secure
us against all evil practices whatsoever of this nature, and more disappoint
the designs, and counsels of our enemies, than any other courses, or counsels,
that can be taken by us: and it being likewise a thing so consonant to the
common grounds of Protestant Religion, it cannot well be opposed by any
Protestant, nor would be, I verily believe, if once well set on foot, by any
Persons, but such as care not, how much they Sacrifice the Peace, and public
Welfare of the Nation, to their own Pride, Passion, and worldly Interests.

Proposition XXVI.
English are apt to have against those of the Roman Catholic persuasion, if
they rightly considered the matter, both Charity and Prudence would persuade
them at length to lay it aside; seeing it has hitherto served for nothing, nor
ever will serve to any other effect, than to be a plausible, and easy means
for Ambition, Covetousness, Cruelty, and Hyocrisie, to advance themselves into
Power, and to exercise their Tyranny over us. A Truth, which this Nation has
been taught by so late and sad experience, that we cannot think, many Persons
will be found in the whole Nation to dispure it.

Proposition XXVII.
were by Act of Parliament made such a Fundamental Law of State, as that it
should be Treason, or a Praemunire Unpardonable, for any Person in time to come,
whether in Parliament, or out of Parliament, to speak against it, or to wish,
motion, or argue for the Repeal of it.

Proposition XXVIII.
sufficient assurance of our Fidelity, and Loyal Affections to his Majesty, and
the present Government; and of our having nothing to do with the Pope,
Consistory, or Court of Rome, in any thing relating to Temporal Affairs, or the
Government of State, but only in Things Spiritual, and pertaining to our Faith
and Conscience.

Proposition XXIX.
the Oath of Allegiance already by Law established, be in it self both
sufficient and fit for this purpose, and the taking thereof by us Catholics
undoubtedly consistent with the Catholic Faith which we profess, and with the
duty of good Subjects; yet because some cavillatory Objections are made against
it, and the pope, upon misinformation, has by some private Breves forbidden
the taking of it, to prevent all scrupling and dispute about the matter, it
might be wished (perhaps) that a new Oath might be framed, comprehending as
particularly and expressly all things pertaining to Temporal Allegiance, as the
Wisdom of Parliament should think fit to prescribe: But withal by an express
Proviso declaring, that notwithstanding any words in the Oath, we are left free
to acknowledge, and give that respect to the Pope, as chief Pastor of the
Church, which according to the Principles of our Faith is known to belong to
him, that is, in matters merely spiritual, and pertaining to Faith, and not in
Temporal Affairs: wherein his Authority, Jure Divino, is nothing at all out of
his own Territories: And as for that which he claims Jure Ecclesiastico, by
virtue of some Canons, or by Prescription, Custom, etc. we doubt not, but these
being all Titles of Humane Right merely, the power grounded upon them may, upon
just reasons, be limited, suspended, or abrogated, by the Sovereign Authority
of each Nation, Kingdom, or State, respectively for it self; and as de facto in
this, and diverse other Christian Kingdoms and Countries, even of the Roman
Catholic Communion, it is abrogated, or not acknowledged.

Proposition XXX.
Roman Catholics, as well as others, their Numbers should much increase in the
Kingdom; and though they should increase, yet the State being assured of their
Allegiance and Fidelity, what harm could come of it? Harm indeed may come in
time by the multiplying of Church-Papists among us; that is, of such Men, as
having for their Temporal Ends, more than our of any good Faith been secretly
reconciled to the Catholic Communion, are yet allowed by their Reconcilers to
go to Church, and carry themselves exteriourly in all points, as Protestants.
From these (possibly) there may be danger, and a just ground of fear, lest they
should be too apt to serve Designs, and Interests, not much tending to the
Nations good. But from such, as merely out of Conscience, the better to serve
God, and save their Souls, (at least as we verily think and believe) become
Catholics, and when they are such, do make open profession of their Faith in
due time and place, (as every true Christian ought to do) what evil can be
feared? especially having also given Legal assurance before some Magistrate of
their Loyal mind?

Proposition XXXI.
disguised Instruments, which the Consistory, or their Partisans may employ,
and maintain amongst us, it is humbly proposed and wished, that in the
condescension that shall be made to us ( Roman Catholics) for Liberty of
Conscience, it be exprestly provided, and enacted by Law, that all Persons of
that Religion, not already notoriously known to be such by their professed
Recusancy, shall, in such manner, as the Parliament shall prescribe, and within
a certain time limited, under pain of Death, before some public Magistrate,
profess and declare themselves to be what they are in point of Religion; as
also what their quality is, whether Lay People, or Ecclesiastics, or
Religious: and if Religious, or Churchmen, that they be bound indispensably by
Law to wear the Habit proper to their Calling, and Order; or at least such an
enjoined Clerical Habit, as may sufficiently denote what they are to others:
and that for any Ecclesiastical, or Religious Person of the Roman Communion to
be taken publicly, that is, out of their own house, or ordinary dwelling, in
any other Habit, than such as is prescribed, that it be made Death, or
perpetual Imprisonment to him. But I return to my proper matter.

Proposition XXXII.
Homebred, and Domestic Agents (as I may call them) which the Roman
Consistory uses, and has at command in all Countries, and Courts of Christendom
generally speaking, and which under various Forms, and Masks do with
incessant diligence, and industry drive on, and promote Consistorial Interests
and Designs by Land, That Court wants not her like Instruments abroad at Sea,
to act for her, and serve her, as occasion offers it self, there also no less
than at home: concerning whom I hold it necessary, and a part of my duty, so
well as I can, to caution my dear Country in a few words, and to that end to
present her These following Remarques.

Proposition XXXIII.
Jesuits, partly by themselves, and partly by their Factours, Correspondents,
and Trustees, are the greatest Merchants at this day in the World, and the
richest Society in Christendom; (though they Vow, and Profess Poverty) I mean
the richest, and wealthiest company of Men that are to be found in Christendom,
United in one common Body, and Partners in one common Stock, under one common
Purveyour, or Administratour; who is their General, together with his
Assistants, residing at Rome: and that either in their own Persons, or by their
Factours, Confidents, and Trustees, they do drive a great, constant, and
gainful Trade of Merchandise, both by Sea and Land, in, and to all Parts of the
World, where they find it commodious for them: and more particularly in those
Parts, from whence rich Commodities come, and where other Merchants have least
Liberty of Trade; as in China, and the Countries lying that way, the American
Indies, etc. And how much this Society is linked in common Interests, and what
Servants the Jesuits are of this Court, is not needful to say.

Proposition XXXIV.
of them, and of their Factors, and Dependents, it is always (morally speaking)
in the power of the Consistory to procure what Quarrels at Sea they please,
amongst Merchants, and others, and in consequence thereof to stir up Wars
between Princes and States by Land. The truth of which Remarque, I make little
doubt but would clearly enough have evidenced it self, if, when time was, it
had been well examined, what kind of Persons they were, (Masters, Commanders,
and others) who owned, and managed the Ships on either side, that were first,
and most forward in giving occasion of our late Wars, and differences with the
Dutch; and will likewise evidence it self, whenever just enquiry shall be
made into the original causes, and occasions of the present War betwixt the
French and them. If the business were well looked into, all would be found
(probably) to be but mere Merchants pretensions one upon another; and those too
(perhaps) more than half Jesuited. I might mention also their so confident, and
early giving out, that the late Peace concluded betwixt the English and Dutch,
would not last long. A word so rise in the mouths of some of their Partiaries,
and of such an ominous success, as showed their insight into affairs of that
nature, was something more than of right belonged to them, or than is safe for
the Peace of Christendom.

Proposition XXXV.
at Land, (as it is most certain they are) and Masters of such Vast Sums of
Money, besides other Unknown Possessions, they are able not only to contrive,
but also to carry on, to foment, and abet whatsoever seditious, and turbulent
designs they see conducible to their ends, and to the ends of the Consistory
from whom they come: Whose Maxim, and chief Policy (as has been said) is to
divide, as much as may be, that so themselves may more easily rule, and make
their advantage of the Division.

Proposition XXXVI.
unlawfully gotten, and unlawfully possessed Wealth, it is not to be thought,
but the said Jesuits do maintain their Emissaries and Agents also, in all parts
(generally speaking) both City and Country, and with all Parties, where they
find opportunity: Whose business is, under the allowed disguise, or liberty of
feigning themselves of what profession, and party in Religion they please,
first to insinuate themselves into the affections of those they have to treat
withal, and then to sow the seeds of Discord further in their minds, incensing
Parties one against another, and All, so much as possibly they can, against the
present Government, and chief Governors, both in Church and State.

Proposition XXXVII.
Instruments and Helpers as their Wealth procures them, it may not a little be
feared, they are able to make what Persons they please publicly odious, or
publicly acceptable, according as they find it to be useful for them, and
according as such Persons are likely to serve, or obstruct their Designs: and
consequently that they may have too great an influence even upon the Election
of Parliament Men, (especially as to Cities, and Buroughs, if People take not
better heed in their choosing) and be able thereby, more or less, to fill the
House with Persons of what passions, and what principles they think good,
rather than what the good of the State, and Kingdom requires. May I not add
hereunto that which report speaks, (but does not, perhaps, intimate the true
cause, and origin, from whence the inconvenience springs) Viz. the procuring so
many young Gentlemen to be chosen Parliament Men, void of competent experience
for such an employment, and fit only to make up a Number, and to be misled by
others?

Proposition XXXVIII.
English Jesuits alone, if their Wealth be equally distributed among them, and
that they be alike rich in all parts of the Kingdom, where they have residence,
are able by their Wealth (not to speak of their Interests, and other practices)
are able (I say) by their Wealth and Money only, to bring an Army of Rebels
into the Field against their King and Country; and when they see their time,
it is to be feared will do it, if their practices be not more timely discerned,
and prevented: which Army shall march under the notion of Presbyterians
(perhaps) or Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, or perchance, if any such can
be found out, upon some more plausible, and popular account, but really
gathered together by their ( viz. the Jesuits) practices, and governed by their
Counsels, and ultimately tending to the bringing about of their Designs: which
are to subdue both Presbyterians and Independents, and the whole Nation at last
to their own Ambition and Interest.

Proposition XXXIX.
French Nation (if reports speak true) are permitted to come over, and to swarm
so amongst us, both in the City, and in other parts of the Nation, where it is
opportune for them to be: it is, I say, to no other end, than to be assistant,
when time shall be, in some Hostile design against this Kingdom; and in the
mean while to fit themselves for it, to learn the Language, to acquaint
themselves with the site and condition of the Country, the common Roads, all
great Towns, Cities and Places of Strength, etc. that afterward they may be
fitter for Service, and as need shall require, the better act in the quality of
Natives, or Homebred People, Independents, Presbyterians, or others; Serving
their turn thus far also at present, that they give ill-affected people
occasion to think ill, and speak ill of his Sacred Majesty, and the Duke his
Brother; as if they distrusted the fidelity of their English Subjects, and
intended by degrees to bring in Strangers upon us, and by their Insolency to
secure themselves, and awe the Nation: and out of the Peoples general
dissatisfaction at these apprehensions and fears (be they real, or but
imaginary) these Boutefeux (casters of seditious Wildfire avantages, as
occasions serve them. So that unless God in mercy prevent, by awakening the
People to see their true, and truly common Interest (which is a timely and firm
Union of all dissenting Parties whatsoever, in such manner as has been said,
and a good Understanding fixed betwixt his Majesty, the Parliament and People,)
it is very much to be feared, that first or last they will be able to bring
their mischievous Counsels to effect, and involve this Nation in the greatest
of miseries and troubles: it being their inhumane, and cruel Maxim, which,
where they dare speak their Thoughts freely, they stick not to profess and
avow, Viz. That this Nation must be humbled in such manner, or it will never
learn the Obedience it ought.

Proposition XL.
Viz. That the Jesuits are grown every way so powerful, or able to do mischief,
and are so obliged to the practice and procurement thereof by the corrupt
Interests (both of their own and other Men) to which they have devoted
themselves; and seeing they do not mind the advancing of the true, Christian
Catholic Religion in any such good, sincere, proper, and lawful manner, as
they ought, but mind only and pursue their private Interests, Ease, Honor,
Profit and Power, etc. making use of Religion only to get Wealth, and by means
of that, by degrees to subdue all Parties, and all Interests to their own,
which is the worst of all: These things (I say) duly considered, I see not, but
it may be the just wish even of Catholics themselves, (so many of them as have
any true Sense of Humanity, and do cordially wish well to their Neighbors, and
the Nations peace and prosperity,) that some course could be thought upon, for
the effectual expulsion of the whole Order of them out of his Majesty's
Dominions; at least so many of them as should not give sufficient assurance to
the State of their having no Commerce, nor holding any Intelligence, or
Correspondence, mediate or immediate, by themselves or others, with the
Consistory, Court, or City of Rome, or with any person Resident, Inhabitant, or
belonging to any of these: and if those of the other Orders, Viz. Saint Bennet
and Saint Francis, etc. might in like manner (except before excepted) be sent
away with them, it would be so much the better: These Orders being the chief
Confidents of the Roman Court, and the only Persons (to speak on) that are used
for the executing of Consistorial Counsels and Resolutions, both within
Christendom, and without. For they publicly boast of their Numbers in all
Parts of the World: but especially in relation to England, and his Majesty's
other Kingdoms, and Dominions: which God preserve in Peace, and always defend
from the direful effects of whatsoever Traitorous Plots, Machinations, and
other mischievous Practices.

Proposition XLI.
London, (not to mention diverse others of like nature happening in other places
since) if it were a practice of any humane contrivance, and not a mere Judgment
of God from Heaven upon us, cannot reasonably be thought to have been the
project, or practice of any other Men than these, and to have come originally
from Rome, and the Consistory there: who beside the bad Principles already
mentioned, which legitimate such doings at all times, that they judge it
convenient for their ends, were (without doubt) willing to signalize that Year
(1666) with some remarkable mischief done to Protestants, in check to the
Phansies of some in that Party, who have had the confidence to affirm, and as
it were to predict, that in this Year Rome, and (their pretended Antichrist)
the Pope, should be utterly destroyed.

Proposition XLII.
England for the faults of them at Rome. But if it be found necessary, that we
seek revenge, it ought to be endeavored by way of retaliation upon the place,
from whence the Devilish counsel came: the generality of English Papists, and
even of Priests themselves (if their professions may be believed) being as
innocent in the thing (both as to practice and opinion) as any other of his
Majesty's Subjects, except before excepted, Viz. some Jesuits and Jesuited
Monks and Friars, with a few others, which depend on these for Pensions and
subsistence. Whom as I cannot in particular accuse, so neither will I, for the
reasons already given, undertake for their innocence. And if there be any, that
will not give such Testimony of their innocence, and of their abhorring such
practices, as the wisdom of Parliament shall require of them, in God's name,
let them be taken for guilty. But let not the Innocent suffer with the guilty.

Proposition XLIII.
Roman Court, or Consistory, making her self the public Patroness of Opinions
and Doctrines, whereby ignorant and ill advised people are not only allowed,
but also invited, animated, and encouraged, under pretense of religion, and
with opinion of merit, or doing a work acceptable unto God, to concur, and act
in Villainous, and mischievous practices, so injurious, and so prejudicial to
all Christians, both Princes and people, is in all justice responsible for the
mischief done, and may be by the injured parties, if it be in their power,
justly forced to make reparation: and that it would be no impiety, or sin, nor
incurring any just censure, for Subjects, even of the Roman Communion and
persuasion, to bear Arms in such a War; the ground thereof being first legally
evidenced, and declared to the World.

Proposition XLIV.
Roman Catholics, certain it is, that in so doing we shall but give our
Enemies further advantage against us, and involve our selves in greater, and
more remediless Troubles, than we can foresee. By Union, and Equitable, orderly
proceeding, (if we find just cause to act any thing that way) we may with God's
help and assistance be able, in some just and honorable sort, to vindicate our
Nations honor, and take account of those, who, without any provocation given,
shall be found to have machinated so base, and wicked an injury to us. But by
factious and precipitate proceedings here at home, we shall but bring farther
miseries and calamities upon our selves. For, let the Nation be well assured of
this Truth, That whatsoever Indications they have of this matter, they come
originally from them, who were the chief Actors in it; and that as in plotting
and executing such a mischievous work, they intended principally to give an
occasion of some future rupture in this Nation; so in the Indications they make
thereof, they look at nothing more, than that it should put us into an
Universal Distemper, and in fine drive us on to some such violent resolutions
as abovesaid: out of which they will be found (we fear) much more ready to
make advantages, than we shall be to remedy, or prevent the mischief, when
disturbances are once begun.

Proposition XLV.
The Memorial, etc. written long since by Father Parsons of the Society, in
Spanish, that the Jesuits design is, when they shall get power into their
hands, to reduce all Church-revenues, especially the greater, Viz. Bishops, and
Dean and Chapters Lands, with the Lands belonging to Religious Houses (as they
shall be gained) into one common Stock, or Treasury, to be managed and
dispensed out by Commissioners, appointed (indeed) by the Pope, but (no doubt)
nominated, or as good as nominated by themselves: and seeing this design,
beside the open and most execrable Avaritiousness of the Projectors, which it
speaks, does necessarily suppose, and threaten an utter dissolution, and
abolishment of the True, Right, and Apostolic Government of the Church by
Bishops, and Archbishops, etc. That therefore the better, and more effectually
to obviate such their wicked purpose and intention, it were to be wished, that
for all time to come it be made Treason, or highly criminous and penal, for any
person, whether within or out of parliament, to move, or plead for the
alteration of the Church Government by Bishops, and Archbishops, as it is now
by Law established, and has been always accustomed in this Nation; and that
all persons frequenting the Public Churches and Divine Service therein
appointed, be made subject to the ordinary Jurisdiction of Bishops, according
as it has been wont to be exercised in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth of famous
memory, and of King James her Successor, and of our late dear Sovereign, King
Charles, the Glorious Martyr of Monarchy, and Just Government.

Proposition XLVI.
and all Sacred or religious Revenues whatsoever, so much as may be, to their
proper uses; and that it be made highly criminous and penal, to move for the
selling of the said Lands, or applying them to any other use, than by the Laws
of their Foundation, and of the Kingdom respectively, is already appointed.

Proposition XLVII.
Fourbe, and subtle practice of the Jesuits, by that means with the Help of
their Agents, and Trustees, to invest themselves of the best part of them, as
some think (upon how good grounds, I will not take upon me to say) they have
long since done, and still continue to do, of the Tribute of Hearth-money. And
when all is done, the Kingdom shall have as much ease in Taxes, and Public
Charges, as it had in Harry the Eighth's time, by the dissolving the
Monasteries, and Houses of Religion.

Proposition XLVIII.
England: otherwise I could willingly enough have added more, of the like evil
practices, which (for my part) I cannot but a little suspect, that the same
parties ( viz. those of the Roman Court, and its Emissaries, Agents, etc.) do
use in other Foreign Countries; and particularly in that so important business
of Candia, so long, and so hard besieged by the Turks. I profess to you
(Gentlemen) and to all the World, if you think fit, I cannot free my Thoughts
from frequent suspicions, and fears, that even in this great affair of Candia,
the Consistory proceeds not so faithfully, as it should, to the Interest of
Christendom, and of those brave Men, who have to their immortal fame and merit
so long defended it; corresponding contrariwise, more or less, with those of
the Divan, and being, if not more willing it should fall into the Turks hands,
than otherwise, yet they are indifferent in the case, and care not much though
it do. That which makes me have this apprehension, are These General
Observations following.

First, I do certainly know (if their own reports be of certain credit, as I
doubt not but they are in these matters) that the Jesuits have got a very
considerable Interest even at Constantinople (and I believe even in the Court
it self) by their cunning, and compliant addresses, their dissembling in
religion, where they see cause, and allowing others to do so: so that there
wants no means of entertaining correspondence, if the parties be willing.

Secondly, I observe, that the Persian (the Turks constant enemy, and who is
known ever upon such occasions as this, to have found opportunity, and some
pretense, or other, to invade his Dominions) does not in all this time of his
Enemies being so deeply engaged here, in any sort stir against him. But it is
alike certain, the Jesuits are not a little prevalent in that Court too, and
may (for ought any Man knows to the contrary) by their practices and arts, help
to stave off such resolutions in favor of the Turk.

Thirdly, the Pope's Galleys, sent the last Summer to their Succor, under the
command of his Nephew, so unseasonably and hastily returning, as creditable
report says they did, and carrying off with them the Galleys of Malta and
Sicily also; and thereby leaving the Seas free for the Turk to send Supplies to
his Army; which by their faithful and constant attendance upon that Service (as
'twas hoped they would have done) might, with God's blessing, have been
hindered: What can all this signify, but the cold, and uncordial affections,
which was on that side, toward the safety of the place!

Fourthly, the like sudden return also of the greatest part of the French
Succors, lately sent, upon a disgust taken (as they say) by their General at
some disappointment he met with, which was occasioned by the Consistory.
Neither can I have any other thoughts, concerning the present return of the
Duke de Navailes with the Succors last sent, than as proceeding from the
prevalency of Consistorial Counsels, both in the French Court, in their Ships
at Sea, and, perhaps, even at Candia it self.

Lastly, because that to be so indifferent, and prevaricating in the business
is consonant enough to the Principles they go upon in other cases, measuring
and doing all things according as Temporal Interest leads them, and nothing
without it, or out of any good, and pure motives of religion. If it be
demanded, what Interest the Pope; or Consistory can have to advance the Turkish
power, I answer, very much. I do not mean so far to advance it, as to bring it
over near themselves. They are wiser than to do so: But to detain it upon the
Frontiers of Christendom, and there to suffer the Turk rather to gain, than
lose ground, I must confess, I am more than half of opinion, it may be both the
Interest, and the design of Rome: and that for this end; namely, that in case
Christian princes should go about at any time, by the Authority of a General
Council, effectually to redress the many abuses in Religion and
Church Government, which are countenanced and supported by the corrupt
Doctrine, and bad example of that Court, they of the Consistory may have the
Turks power at hand to let in upon them, to disturb the work. A thing of no
great difficulty for the Consistory to procure by their practices and Ministers
in the Ottoman Court, and which without doubt they will do, whenever such a
case happens, if good heed be not taken. And therefore (I say) they care the
less at present to permit the Turks reducing of Candia, and thereby making
himself master of the whole Isle of Crete, knowing they shall have him so much
the nearer amongst us. Whereby also the Roman Agents, living disguised at
Constantinople, gain so much the more credit there with those they treat with,
and advance their Interest in the Ottoman State and Councils.

Whereas, on the other side, if the Consistory were faithful in the case, and
would permit his Holiness to give that assistance there to himself, which he
well might, and also to exhort Christians so effectually to the defense of it,
as he ought; and that Christian Princes would rightly apprehend the occasion
which God gives them, and send their Succors thither in such unanimous and
considerable manner, as the place, and cause does most justly require, This
Noble and Renowned Candia might, by God's merciful Providence and Favor, prove
a Rock, whereon the whole Power of the Ottoman Tyranny should, in fine, split
it self, and Christendom be restored to its just, primitive, and most to be
wished for Liberty. But alas! private Interest rules, and prevails too much
every where, for such good and public resolutions to be taken to any effect.

POSTSCRIPT to the precedent Matter.
The place is now lost, and yielded up to the Turks; but with such evident
Symptoms of some secret Treachery amongst the Defendants, causing disunion of
Counsels and ill-management of Affairs, as do not at all lessen my former
suspicion. And as I do very easily believe what I have heard said, That the
loss of it was the Death of the last Pope, so I do as little doubt, but, if the
Truth were known, he grieved not more for the loss of the place, than that it
was lost by such Means and Contrivances, as he out of Piety would, but through
the prevalency of contrary Counsels in his Court, was not able to hinder.

Proposition XLIX.
Turks, (last Summer) so easily taking of Caminiec, in the Frontier Provinces
of Poland. A place heretofore accounted, and found to be impregnable to all
Infidel Powers, whether of Turks, or Tartars, and a great Bulwark of
Christendom on that side; now rendered, as it were, upon Summons. The pretense
for it is want of, and some Casualty happening to their powder. But the like
accident happening, and occasioning the loss of Candia, I must confess, I can
hardly forbear to apprehend, from the like casualty some like Treacherous
practice, procuring both the one and the other misfortune; and that the loss of
this place, together with some considerable part of their Country, may be but a
gentle chastisement of the Poles, procured them by the Consistory, for the
little regard they are said to have had, in the late Election of their King, to
the Exclusive, that was pretended unto in that affair, by the Pope's Nuncio. It
has been (I know) an imputation laid very much upon the French Counsels, of
calling the Turk in upon Christendom; which their singular promptitude, and
zeal upon all occasions most constantly, and to their great honor shown, even
above other Nations, of engaging and hazarding their Persons against those
Infidels, seem to me very justly to confute: The French (I say) have hitherto
sustained that imputation, when the real guilt of such a wicked practice was
(it may be feared) elsewhere to have been found; even so far, as that with time
and the dexterous management of their Counsels, the Consistory has now brought
things to that pass, That the Turk's power is become effectively little else,
but a Rod in the Pope's hand, to lash Christian Princes (and others) withal,
whenever that Court shall judge they deserve correction. And the poor
Protestants (with many others) in the Countries of Selesia and Moravia felt it
so, in the late War of Hungary; when the Turks, by treacherous conduct, made
that lamentable Inroad into those parts of the Emperor's Dominions.

Proposition L.
China by the Tartars, and other barbarous People, some Years since. Certain it
is by consent of all, the Jesuits have gained no inconsiderable footing in that
Nation; and by their own reports were no strangers to the several Invaders, but
rather well known to them, and gracious with them: which can hardly be thought
to have come by chance, or of nothing: but rather to have been the effect, and
remuneration of some good offices, and service done by the Jesuits there, in
favor of the Invaders, as (perhaps) giving them Intelligence, inviting, or
encourageing them to come, helping to conduct their Armies, etc. For my part
therefore I must freely confess, I cannot but apprehend the business of that
Invasion to have proceeded from the same common source of public Troubles,
which others more near us have done: and that it was nothing else, but the
Consistories practick Gloss upon that Text of Hieremias the Prophet, already
alleged, Ecce, constitui te super Gentes, etc. managed, and procured by their
Partisans the Jesuits, in order, no doubt, to the propagation of the Catholic
Faith, as they will pretend; but withal to humble that stiff People, the
Chinese: who will not (it seems) be converted by those milder ways of
condescension, and Temporizing with them in their Heathenish Customs, nor with
European Knacks and Rarities, (which, by report, have been too great a part of
the Means their Converters have hitherto used toward them) and therefore must
be dealt with, and made to submit, by the more powerful (but certainly less
proper, and most Antiapostolick) way of War, and Tumults, Desolation, Misery,
Bloodshed, and the like. The same course, which, first or last, they will take
with this Nation, if God in mercy prevent not, by awakening our chief
Governors to look well to their own and the public safety; and especially to
the cementing those Breaches of Public Concord, and Unity in this Nation,
which by the malice of the Devil, and the wicked practices of these Men, have
been long since made amongst us, and are still kept up, carried on, and
promoted for cursed Interests sake.

But I forget, how much I am troublesome to you, my Honored Friends. Wherefore
humbly commending what I have writ to your favorable Interpretation, and my
self most heartily to your good Thoughts, and Prayers, I rest, your very humble
and obliged Servant,

N. N.
First Written, April 12th. 1669. Revised, with some small Additions, September.
2. 1679.
FINIS.

