AN ACCOUNT OF THE SIEGE of MONS.
Published by Authority.
Hague, March 30. N. S. 1691.
THE King parted from hence the 26th instant for Breda, where His Majesty
intends to stay till Sunday next, and then to go on for Flanders, to Head the
Army, which is drawing together for the Relief of Mons; Ten Thousand
Brandenburghers quartered in the Country of Liege, are already advanced as far
as Leeuwe, and the rest of the Forces march with such Diligence, that they will
be to morrow at their place of Rendezvous, between Louvain and Brussels, and
together make a Body of 50000 Men, without reckoning the Scots Regiments that
are newly arrived at Sluyce in Flanders.

In the mean time we have this Account of the Siege. On the 15th instant Mons
was invested by the French Horse; The next day part of their Foot came up, as
the rest did the day following, and took their several Posts. On the 19th the
Enemy began to work on their Line of Circumvallation, having for that purpose
summoned in several thousands of Country People. On the 22d the French King
arrived in the Camp, and it was thought the Trenches would have been opened
that day, but it was not done till the 25th at Night, when the Enemy began
likewise to play upon the Town from three Batteries, but one of their Batteries
sunk and dismounted their Cannon. The French King did not stay in the Camp, but
went to St. Guislain, where he has his Quarters; and the Dauphin his at
Maubeuge.

On the other side the Town is well fortified, and has in it a Garrison of 7000
Men, besides the Burghers, who make as considerable a Body, are most of them
Men well Disciplined and experienced in War, and very resolute and active in
the Defense of the Place, in order whereunto they have uncovered their houses,
and unpaved the Streets, to hinder the effects of the Enemies Bombs. They are
very well Stored with Provisions and Ammunition, and the Prince de Bergue, the
Governor, has sent Word to the Governor of Flanders, that he wants nothing, and
doubts not but to give the Enemy work enough. The Besieged have made two
Sallies, in which, it is said, they have killed 700 of the French, and very
bravely repulsed the Enemy, in an Attack they made upon a Windmill and a small
Redoubt which lies at some little distance from the Town, and in this last
Action the French lost almost a whole Regiment, and it is very confidently
reported that their Famous Enginier Monsieur Vauban was likewise killed here,
Several Spanish Officers are got into the Town; From whence in a word, we have
as good an Account of things as can be expected.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1691.


