CAROLINA; OR A DESCRIPTION Of the PRESENT STATE of that COUNTRY, AND The
Natural Excellencies thereof, viz. The Healthfulness of the Air, Pleasantness
of the Place, Advantage and Usefulness of those Rich Commodities there
plentifully abounding, which much increase and flourish by the Industry of the
Planters that daily enlarge that Colony.

Published by T. A. Gent.

Clerk on Board his Majesty's Ship the Richmond, which was sent out in the Year
1680. with particular Instructions to enquire into the State of that Country,
by His Majesty's Special Command, and Returned this Present Year, 1682.

LONDON, Printed for W. C. and to be Sold by Mrs. Grover in Pelican Court in
Little Britain, 1682.

TO THE READER.
READER,
YOU may please to understand, that the first Discovery of this Country was at
the Charge of King Henry the the Seventh, as you will find in this Book; and
that as it has pleased God to add such a Jewel to the Crown of England, so I
doubt not but in a few years it will prove the most Beneficial to the Kingdom
in General of any Colony yet Planted by the English, which is the more probable
from the great Concourse that daily arrives there. From the other Plantations,
as well as from England, Ireland, etc. being drawn and invited thither by the
Healthfulness of Air, Delicacy of Fruits, the likelihood of Wines, Oils and
Silks, and the great Variety of other Natural Commodities within specified,
which well considered, will sufficiently evidence the Truth of what I Assert;
that I may contribute what lies in my Power for a further Satisfaction to those
Gentlemen that are curious concerning the Country of Carolina, they may find a
small Description thereof, with a Map of the first Draught, Published by Mr.
Richard Blome, and Printed for Dorman Newman in the Year 1678. in Octavo, and
one larger in Mr. Ogleby's America; since the publishing of these, there is by
Order of the Lords Proprietors newly published in one large Sheet of Paper, a
very spacious Map of Carolina, with its Rivers, Harbors, Plantations, and other
Accommodations, from the latest Survey, and best Informations; with a large and
particular Description of the Entrances into Ashley and Cooper Rivers; this Map
to be sold for 1 s. by Joel Gascoyne, near Wapping Old Stairs, and Robert Green
in Budge Row London, 1682.

A COMPLETE DISCOVERY OF THE State of Carolina, In the YEAR 1682.
THE Discourses of many Ingenious Travelers (who have lately seen this part of
the West Indies) have for Salubrity of Air, Fertility of Soil, for the
Luxuriant and Indulgent Blessings of Nature, justly rendered Carolina Famous.
That since my Arrival at London, I have observed many with pleasing Idaeas and
Contemplations, as if ravished with Admiration, discourse of its Pleasures:
Whilst others more actively pressed and stimulated, have with vehement and ardent
Desires willingly resolved to hazard their Lives, Families, and Fortunes, to
the Mercy of Wind, Seas and Storms, to enjoy the Sweets of so desirable a Being.

Having spent near three Years Abroad, in which time I had a fair Opportunity
of a Survey of great part of our English America. You my Worthy Friend, knowing
in what Character I went abroad, and understanding of my being at Carolina, did
obligingly request (that at Leisure) I would collect such Notices of my own
whilst there, with those Remarques and Observations which I had learnt from the
most Able and Ingenious Planters, who have had their Residence on the place
from its first being Coloniz'd: You desiring to be assured whether the true
State of the Country did answer the Reports of Common Fame. Which in Compliance
with, and in Obedience to your Commands, I have undertaken.

Carolina derives her name either from our present Illustrious Monarch, under
whose glorious Auspices it was first established an English Colony, in the Year
One Thousand Six Hundred and Seventy, and under whose benign and happy
Influence it now prospers and flourishes. Or from Charles the Ninth of that
Name King of France, in whose Reign a Colony of French Protestants were
transported thither, at the encouragement of Gaspar Coligni, Admiral of that
Kingdom; the place of their first Settlement named in Honor of their Prince
Arx Carolina; but not long after, that Colony, with Monsieur Ribault their
Leader, were by the Spaniard at once cut off and destroyed. Since which, nor
French, nor Spaniard have made any Attempt for its Re-Settlement. Carolina is
the Northermost part of the spacious and pleasant Province of Florida; it lies
in the Northern temperate Zone, between the Latitude of Twenty Nine, and Thirty
Six Degrees, and Thirty Minutes: It Is bounded on the East, with the Atlantic,
or Northern, on the West, with the Pacifick or Southern Ocean, on the North,
with Virginia, on the South, with the remaining part of Florida. The Air of so
serene and excellent a temper, that the Indian Natives prolong their days to
the Extremity of Old Age. And where the English hitherto have found no
Distempers either Epidemical or Mortal, but what have had their Rise from
Excess or Origin from Intemperance. In July and August they have sometimes
Touches of Agues and Fevers, but not violent, of short continuance, and never
Fatal. English Children there born, are commonly strong and lusty, of sound
Constitutions, and fresh ruddy Complexions. The Seasons are regularly disposed
according to Natures Laws; the Summer not so torrid, hot and burning as that of
their Southern, nor the Winter so rigorously sharp and cold, as that of their
Northern Neighbors. In the Evenings and Mornings of December and January, thin
congealed Ice, with hoary Frosts sometimes appear; but as soon as the Sun
elevates her self, above the Horizon, as soon they disappear and vanish; Snow
having been seen but twice in ten Years, or from its first being settled by the
English.

The Soil near the Sea, of a Mould Sandy, farther distant, more clayey, or Sand
and Clay mixed; the Land lies upon a Level in fifty or sixty Miles round, having
scarce the least Hill or Eminency. It Is clothed with odoriferous and fragrant
Woods, flourishing in perpetual and constant Verdures, viz. the lofty Pine, the
sweet smelling Cedar and Cyprus Trees, of both which are composed goodly Boxes,
Chests, Tables, Scrittores, and Cabinets. The Dust and Shavings of Cedar, laid
amongst Linen or Woollen, destroys the Moth and all Verminous Insects: It
never rots, breeding no Worm, by which many other Woods are consumed and
destroyed. Of Cedar there are many sorts; this in Carolina is esteemed of equal
Goodness for Grain, Smell and Color with the Bermudian Cedar, which of all the
West Indian is esteemed the most excellent; that in the Caribbe Islands and
Jamaica being of a courser kind, Oil and the Spirit of Wine penetrating it; but
with this they make Heading for their Cask, which the sharpest and most
searching Liquors does not pierce. With the Berry of the Tree at Bermudaz, by
Decoction, they make a very wholesome and sovereign Drink. This Tree in the
Sacred Writ is famous, especially those of Lebanon, for their Stately Stature;
but those in the West Indies I observed to be of a low and humble height. The
Sassafrass is a Medicinal Tree, whose Bark and Leaves yield a pleasing Smell:
It profits in all Diseases of the Blood, and Liver, particularly in all
Venereal and Scorbutic Distempers. There are many other Fragrant smelling
trees, the Myrtle, Bay and Laurel, several Others to us wholly unknown. Fruit
Trees there are in abundance of various and excellent kinds, the Orange, Lemon,
Pomegranate, Fig and Almond. Of English Fruits, the Apple, Pear, Plumb, Cherry,
Quince, Peach, a sort of Medlar, and Chestnut. Wallnut Trees there are of two or
three sorts; but the Black Wallnut for its Grain, is most esteemed: the Wild
Wallnut, or Hiquery-Tree, gives the Indians, by boiling its Kernel, a wholesome
Oil, from whom the English frequently supply themselves for their Kitchen uses:
It Is commended for a good Remedy in Dolors, and Gripes of the Belly; whilst new
it has a pleasant Taste; but after six Months, it decays and grows acid; I
believe it might make a good Oil, and of as general an use as that of the
Olive, if it were better purified and rectified. The Chincopin Tree bears a Nut
not unlike the Hazle, the Shell is softer: Of the Kernel is made Chocolate, not
much inferior to that made of the Cacoa.

The Peach Tree in incredible Numbers grows Wild: Of the Fruit expressed, the
Planters compose a pleasant refreshing Liquor; the Remainder of the Fruit
serves the Hogg and Cattle for Provision. The Mulberry Tree everywhere amidst
the Woods grows wild: The Planters, near their Plantations, in Rows and Walks,
plant them for Use, Ornament and Pleasure: What I observed of this Fruit was
admirable; the Fruit there, was full and ripe in the latter end of April and
beginning of May, whereas in England and Europe, they are not ripe before the
latter end of August. A Manufactory of Silk well encouraged might soon be
accomplished, considering the numerousness of the Leaf for Provision, the
clemency and moderateness of the Climate to indulge and nourish the Silkworm:
To make trial of its Success, was the Intention of those French Protestant
Passengers transported thither in His Majesty's Frigate the Richmond being Forty
Five the half of a greater Number designed for that place; but their Design was
too early anticipated: the Eggs which they brought with them being hatched at
Sea, before we could reach the Land, the Worms for want of Provision were
untimely lost and destroyed. The Olive Tree thrives there very well. Mr. James
Colleton, Brother to Sir Peter, one of the Honorable Proprietors, brought an
Olive Stick from Fyall, (one of the Western Islands) cut off at both Ends to
Carolina, which put into the Ground, grew and prospered exceedingly; which gave
so great an Encouragement, that since I left the place, I hear that several
more were brought there, there being great Hopes, that if the Olive be well
improved, there may be expected from thence perhaps as good Oil as any the
World yields.

Vines of diverse sorts, bearing both Black and Gray Grapes, grow, climbing
their highest Trees, running and over-spreading their lower Bushes: Five Kinds
they have already distinguished, three of which by Re-plantation, and if well
cultivated, they own, will make very good Wine; some of which has been
transported for England, which by the best Pallates was well approved of, and
more is daily expected, it is not doubted, if the Planters as industriously
prosecute the Propagation of Vineyards as they have begun; but Carolina will in
a little time prove a Magazine and Staple for Wines to the whole West Indies;
and to enrich their Variety, some of the Proprietors and Planters have sent
them the Noblest and Excellentest Vines of Europe, viz. the Rhenish, Clarret,
the Muscadel and Canary, etc. His Majesty to, improve so hopeful a Design, gave
those French we carried over their Passage free for themselves, Wives, Children
Goods and Servants, they being most of them well experienced in the Nature of
the Vine, from whose Directions doubtless the English have received and made
considerable Advantages in their Improvements.

Trees for the Service of building Houses and Shipping, besides those and many
more which we have not named; they have all such as we in England esteem Good,
Lasting, and Serviceable, as the Oak of three sorts, the White, Black and Live
Oak, which for Toughness, and the Goodness of its Grain is much esteemed: Elm,
Ash, Beech, and Poplar, etc Into the Nature, Qualities and Virtues of their
Herbs, Roots and Flowers, we had little time to make any curious Enquiry: This
we were assured by many of the knowing Planters, that they had Variety of such
whose Medicinal Virtues were rare and admirable. The China grows plentifully
there, whose Root infused, yields us that pleasant Drink, which we know by the
Name of China Ale in England: in Medicinal Uses it is far more excellent.
Monsieur Tavernier, in his late Voyages to Persia, observes that Nation, by the
frequent use of Water in which this Root is boiled, are never troubled with the
Stone or Gout: It mundifies and sweetens the Blood: It Is good in Fevers,
Scurvy, Gonorrhaea, and the Lues Venerea. They have three sorts of the
Rattle-Snake Root which I have seen; the Comous or Hairy, the Smooth, the
No^dous, or Knotted Root: All which are lactiferous, or yielding a Milkie
Juice; and if I do not very much in my Observations err, the Leaves of all
these Roots of a Heart had the exact Resemblance: They are all Sovereign
against the Mortal Bites of that Snake, too frequent in the West Indies: In all
Pestilential Distempers, as Plague, Small Pox, and Malignant Fevers, it is a
Noble Specific; when stung, they eat the Root, applying it to the Venomous
Wound; or they boil the Roots in Water; which drunk, fortifies and corroborates
the Heart, exciteing strong and generous Sweats; by which endangered Nature is
relieved, and the Poison carried off, and expelled.

Gardens as yet they have not much improved or minded, their Designs having
otherwise more profitably engaged them in settling and cultivating their
Plantations with good Provisions and numerous Stocks of Cattle; which two
things by Planters are esteemed the Basis and Props of all New Plantations and
Settlements; before which be well accomplished and performed, nothing to any
purpose can be effected; and upon which all Intentions, Manufactories, etc.
have their necessary Dependence. But now their Gardens begin to be supplied
with such European Plants and Herbs as are necessary for the Kitchen, viz.
Potatoes, Lettice, Coleworts, Parsnip, Turnip, Carrot and Reddish: Their
Gardens also begin to be beautified and adorned with such Herbs and Flowers
which to the Smell or Eye are pleasing and agreeable, viz. The Rose, Tulip,
Carnation and Lilly. etc. Their Provision which grows in the Field is chiefly
Indian Corn, which produces a vast Increase, yearly, yielding Two plentiful
Harvests, of which they make wholesome Bread, and good Biscuit, which gives a
strong, sound, and nourishing Diet; with Milk I have eaten it dressed various
ways: Of the Juice of the Corn, when green, the Spaniards with Chocolet,
aromatiz'd with Spices, make a rare Drink, of an excellent Delicacy. I have
seen the English amongst the Caribbes roast the green Ear on the Coals, and eat
it with a great deal of Pleasure: The Indians in Carolina parch the ripe Corn,
then pound it to a Powder, putting it in a Leathern Bag: When they use it, they
take a little quantity of the Powder in the Palms of their Hands, mixing it
with Water, and sup it off: with this they will travel several days. In short,
it is a Grain of General Use to Man and Beast, many thousands of both kinds in
the West Indies having from it the greater part of their Subsistence. The
American Physicians observe that it breeds good Blood, removes and opens
Oppellations and Obstructions. At Carolina they have lately invented a way of
making with it good sound Beer; but it is strong and heady: By Maceration, when
duly fermented, a strong Spirit like Brandy may be drawn off from it, by the
help of an Alembick.

Pulse they have of great Variety, not only of what Europe yield, viz. Beans,
Pease, Callavance, Figolaes, and Bonavist, etc. but many other kinds proper to
the place, and to us unknown: Green Pease at the latter end of April, at my
being there, I eat as good as ever I did England. Strawberries Rasberries,
Billberries, and Blackberries grow frequently up and down the Woods. Hemp and
Flax thrives exceeding well; there grows a sort of wild Silk Pods, called
Silk-Grass, of which they may make fine and durable Linen.

What Wheat they have planted has been rather for Experiment and Observation,
whether it would be agreeable to the Soil and Climate, than for any substance
for themselves, or for Transportation abroad; what they have sown, the Planters
assured us grew exceeding well; as also Barley, Mr. Linch an ingenious Planter,
having whilst we were there very good growing in his Plantation, of which he
intended to make Malt for brewing of English Beer and Ale, having all Utensils
and Conveniences for it. Tobacco grows very well; and they have of an
excellent sort, mistaken by some of our English Smoakers for Spanish Tobacco,
and valued from 5 to 8 s. the Pound; but finding a great deal of trouble in the
Planting and Cure of it, and the great Quantities which Virginia, and other of
His Majesty's Plantations make, rendering it a Drug over all Europe; they do not
much regard or encourage its Planting, having already before them better and
more profitable Designs in Action. Tarr made of the resinous Juice of the Pine
(which boiled to a thicker Consistence is Pitch) they make great quantities
yearly, transporting several Tuns to Barbados, Jamaica, and the Caribbe
Islands. Indigo they have made, and that good: The reason why they have
desisted I cannot learn. To conclude, there grows in Carolina the famous
Cassiny, whose admirable and incomparable Virtues are highly applauded and
extolled by French and Spanish Writers: It is the Leaves of a certain Tree,
which boiled in Water (as we do Thea) wonderfully enliven and envigorate the
Heart, with genuine easy Sweats and Transpirations, preserving the Mind free
and serene, keeping the Body brisk, active, and lively, not for an hour, or two
but for as many days, as those Authors report without any other Nourishment or
Subsistence, which, if true, is really admirable; they also add, that none
amongst the Indians, but their great Men and Captains, who have been famous for
their great Exploits of War and Noble Actions, are admitted to the use of this
noble Bevaridge. At my being there I made Enquiry after it; but the Ignorance
of the Planter did not inform me. Sponges growing on the Sandy Shoars, I have
gathered good and large; for which Samos in times past was famous, supposed by
the Ancients to be the only place in the World where they grew: a courser sort
I have seen pulled up by Fishers, fishing among the Rocks of the Island of
Berbadoes. Ambergrise is often thrown on their Shoars; a precious Commodity to
him who finds it, if Native, and pure in Worth and Value It surpasses Gold;
being estimated at 5 and 6 Pound the Ounce, is not adulterated. What it is I
shall not decide, leaving it to the Judgment of the more Learned, whether it be
the Excrement of the Whale, because sometimes in dissecting and opening their
Bodies it is there discovered. I think as well it may be argued the Excrements
of other Creatures, Birds and some Beasts greedily desireing and affecting it,
especially the Fox, who eating it, by Digestion it passes through his Body;
after some Alteration it is again recovered, and is that which we call Fox
Ambergrise. Others, that it is a bitumious Substance, ebullating or boiling up
from the Bottom of the Sea, and floating on the Surface of the Waters, is
condensed by the circumambient Air: of which Opinion is the Learned Sennertus.
Some that it is a Plant of a viscous oleaginous Body, really growing at the
bottom of the Sea, the swift and violent Motion of the Waters in Storms causing
an Eradication or Evulsion of the Plant, forcing it to the adjacent Shoars;
that its most plentifully found after Storms is certain: if true, as an
intelligent man informed me, who lived many years at the Bermudaz, and among
the Behama Islands, who saw at the Behama a piece of Ambergrise weighing thirty
pound (for its bigness famous in those Parts) having perfect and apparent
Roots, equal to the Body in worth and goodness. Others, that it is the liquid
resinous Tears of some odoriferous Tree, hanging over Seas or Rivers,
coagulated in that Form which we find it. Dr. Trapham, an ingenious Physician
in Jamaica, differs little from this last opinion, thinking it the Gummous
Juice of some fragrant Plant which grows on Rocks near the Sea, whose Trunks
broken by the rude and boisterous Waves, emit that precious Liquor. In
Medicinal and Physical uses it has a high esteem, being prescribed in the
richest Cordials, admirable in the languishes of the Spirit Faintings, and
Deliquium of the Heart; given as the last remedy to agonizing Persons. In
Perfumes of Linen Woollen, Gloves, etc. there is none esteemed more costly or
precious. Its of different Colors, Black, Red, the Nutmeg, and Gray Color are
held the best.

The great increase of their Cattle is rather to be admired than believed: not
more than six or seven years past the Country was almost destitute of Cows,
Hogs and Sheep, now they have many thousand Head. The Planter in Winter takes
no care for their Provision, which is a great Advantage; the Northern
Plantations obliging the Planters to spend great part of their Summer to
provide Fodder and Provision for their Cattle, to preserve them from starving
in the Winter. The Cows the Year round brouzing on the sweet Leaves growing on
the Trees and Bushes, or on the wholesome Herbage growing underneath: They
usually call them home in the Evening for their Milk, and to keep them from
running wild. Hogs find more than enough of Fruits in the Summer, and Roots and
Nuts in the Winter; from the abundance of their Feeding, great numbers forsake
their own Plantations, running wild in the Woods, the Tiger, Wolf, and wild
Cat, by devouring them, oftentimes goes Share with the Planter; but when the
Stock increases and grows strong, the older surround the younger, and boldly
oppose, and oftentimes attack their Invaders. Their Sheep bears good Wool; the
Ewes at a time often have 2 or 3 Lambs; they thrive very well, the Country
being so friendly to their Natures, that it is observed, they are neither liable
or incident to any known Disease or Distemper. Of Beasts bearing Furrs, they
have great store of Variety, whose Skins serve the Indians for Clothing and
Bedding, and the English for many uses, besides the great Advantage made of
them, by their being sent for England. Deer, of which there is such infinite
Herds, that the whole Country seems but one continued Park, insomuch, that I
have often heard Captain Matthews, an ingenious Gentleman, and Agent to Sir
Peter Colleton for his Affairs in Carolina, that one hunting Indian has yearly
killed and brought to his Plantation more than an 100, sometimes 200 head of
Deer. Bears there are in great numbers, of whose Fat they make an Oil which is
of great Virtue and Efficacy in causing the Hair to grow, which I observed the
Indians daily used, by which means they not only keep their Hair clear and
preserved from Vermin, but by the nourishing faculty of the Oil, it usually
extended in length to their middles. There are Bevors, Otters, Foxes, Racoons,
Possums, It Is a little creature feeding on Sweet Herbs, whose Codds scent as
sweet and strong as Musk, lasting a long time, if handsomely enclosed in Cotton
Wool.
Musquasses, Hares and Coneys, Squirrels of five kinds, the flying Squirrel,
whose delicate Skin is commended for comforting, if applied to a cold Stomach,
the Red, the Gray, the Fox and Black Squirrels. Leather for Shoes they have
good and well tanned: The Indians have also a way of dressing their Skins
rather softer, though not so durable as ours in England.

Birds the Country yields of differing kinds and Colors: For Prey, the
Pelican, Hawk, and Eagle, etc. For Pleasure, the red, copped and blew Bird,
which wantonly imitates the various Notes and Sounds of such Birds and Beasts
which it hears, wherefore, by way of Allusion, it is called the mocking Bird;
for which pleasing Property it is there esteemed a (...) Birds for Food, and
pleasure of Game, are the Swan, Goose, Duck, Mallard, Wigeon, Teal, Curlew,
Plover, Partridge, the Flesh of which is equally as good, though smaller than
ours in England. Pigeons and Parakeittoes: In Winter huge Flights of wild
Turkies, oftentimes weighing from twenty, thirty, to forty pound. There are
also great Stocks of tame Fowl, viz. Geese, Ducks, Cocks, Hens, Pigeons and
Turkies. They have a Bird I believe the least in the whole Creation, named the
Humming Bird; in bigness the Wren being much superior, in Magnitude not
exceeding the Humble Be, whose Body in flying much resembles it, did not their
long Bills, between two and three Inches, and no bigger than Needles, make the
difference. They are of a deep Green, shadowed with a Murry, not much unlike
the color of some Doves Necks, they take their Food humming or flying, feeding
on the exuberant Moistures of sweet odoriferous Leaves and Flowers. I have
frequently seen them in many parts of the West Indies, but never observed them
to have any Musical Air, but a loud Note to Admiration, crying Chur, Chur,
Chur, etc. which at the distance of half a mile is plainly heard: their Eggs,
of which they produce three or four young at a time, not unlike small white
Pease: they continue between the Tropiques the whole year round, as I have
observed at Berbadoes and Jamaica; but I am informed, that in the more Northern
parts of America they sleep the whole Winter; at Berbadoes the Jews curiously
skin these little Birds, filling them with fine Sand, and perfuming their
Feathers, they are sent into Europe as pretty Delicacies for Ladies, who hang
them at their Breasts and Girdles.

There are in Carolina great numbers of Fire Flies, who carry their Lanthorns
in their Tails in dark Nights, flying through the Air, shining like Sparks of
Fire, enlightening it with their Golden Spangles. I have seen a larger sort at
Jamaica, which Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography, enumerates amongst the Rarities
and Wonders of Hispaniola, an Island under the King of Spain, distant between
20 and 30 Leagues from Jamaica: These have two Lights above their Eyes, and a
third in their Tails; in dark-nights they shine like Candles: for which I have
often at a distance mistaken them, supposeing them to have been the Lights of
some adjacent Plantation; and in this I have not been the first that has been
so deceived. Amongst large Orange Trees in the Night, I have seen many of those
Flies, whose Lights have appeared like hanging Candles, or pendant Flambeaus,
which amidst the Leaves and ripe Fruit yielded a Sight truly glorious to
behold: with 3 of these included in a Glass Bottle, in a very dark Night I have
read very small Characters: When they are killed, their Igneous, or Luminous
Matter does not immediately, (till half an hour, or an hour after their Deaths)
extinguish.

As the Earth, the Air, etc. are enriched and replenished with the Blessings of
the most High, the Seas and Rivers of the same bounty (...) equally participate
in the Variety of excellent and wholesome Fish which it produces, viz.
Sturgeon, of whose Sounds, Iceing glass, of whose Roes Caviare are made:
Mullet, a delicious sweet Fish, of whose Roes or Spawn Botargo is made: Whale,
Salmon, Trouts, Bass, Drum, Cat-fish, whose Head and glaring Eyes resemble a
Cat; it is esteemed a very good Fish; it has a sharp thorny Bone on its Back,
which strikes at such as endeavor to take it: which by Seamen is held venomous;
yet I saw one of our Seamen, the back of whose Hand was pierced with it, yet no
poisonous Symptoms of Inflammation or Rancor appeared on the Wound, which
quickly healed, that I concluded it was either false, or that of this Fish
there were more kinds than one: Plaice, Eels, Crabs, Prawns twice as large as
ours in England: Oysters of an Oblong or Oval Form; their number inexhaustible;
a man may easily gather more in a day than he can well eat in a year; some of
which are margiritiferous, yielding bright round Oriental Pearl.

The Tortoise, more commonly called by our West Indians the Turtle, are of
three sorts, the Hawks-Bill, whose Shell is that which we call the Turtle or
Tortoise Shell; the Green Turtle, whose Shell being thin is little regarded;
but its Flesh is more esteemed than the Hawks-bill Tortoise: The Loggerhead
Turtle, or Tortoise has neither good Shell or Flesh, so is little minded or
regarded. They are a sort of creatures which live both on Land and Water. In
the day usually keeping the Sea, swiming on the Surface of the Water, in fair
Weather delighting to expose themselves to the Sun, oftentimes falling asleep,
lying, as I have seen several times, without any Motion on the Waters, till
disturbed by the approach of some Ship or Boat, being quick of hearing, they
dive away. In the Night they often come ashore to feed and lay their Eggs in
the Sand, which once covered, they leave to the Influence of the Sun, which in
due time produces her young ones, which dig their Passage out of the Sand
immediately making their way toward the Water. At this Season, when they most
usually come ashore, which is in April, May and June, the Seamen or Turtlers,
at some convenient distance watch their opportunity, getting between them and
the Sea, turn them on their Backs, from whence they are unable ever to rise, by
which means the Seamen or Turtlers sometimes turn 40 or 50 in a night, some of
2, 3, 400 weight: If they are far distant from the Harbor or Market to which
they design to bring them, they kill, cutting them to pieces, which Salted,
they Barrel: This is the way of killing at the Caymana's, an Island lying to
Leeward of Jamaica. Turtle, Barrel'd and Salted, if well conditioned, is worth
from 18 to 25 shillings the Barrel. If near their Market or Harbor they bring
them in Sloops alive, and afterward keep them in Crauls, which is a particular
place of Salt Water of Depth and Room for them to swim in, pallisado'd or
staked, in round above the Waters Surface, where, upon occasion they take them
out, and kill them, and cutting them to pieces, sell their Flesh for two pence
or three pence the pound: the Belly, which they call the Callope of the Turtle,
peppered and salted, or roasted and baked, is an excellent Dish, much esteemed
by our Nation in the West Indies: the rest of the Flesh boiled, makes as good
and nourishing Broth, as the best Capon in England, especially if some of the
Eggs are mixed with it; they are some white, and others of a yellow or golden
Color, in largeness not exceeding a Walnut, wrapped in a thin Skin or Membrane,
sweet in Taste, nourishing and wholesome: and of this property, that they never
grow hard by boiling: the Liver is black; it freely opens and purges the Body:
if little of it be eaten, it dies the Excrements of a deep black Color: The
Fat in Color inclines to a Sea Green; in Taste it is sweet and luscious,
equalling, if not surpassing the best Marrow, if freely eaten it deeply stains
the Urine of its Color: It Is of a very penetrating piercing quality, highly
commended in Strains and Aches: Of it the Turtlers oftentimes make an Oil, which
in Lamps burns much brighter and sweeter than common Lamp or Train Oil. In
general, the Flesh is commended for a good Antiscorbutique and an Antivenereal
Diet; many in the former, and some that have been far gone in Consumptions,
with the constant use alone of this Diet, have been thoroughly recovered and
cured in 3 or 4 months. It has 3 Hearts, by thin Pellicules only separated,
which has caused some to Philosophize on its Amphibious Nature, alluding to
those participating and assimulating Qualities which it has to the rest of the
Universe, it swiming like a Fish, laying Eggs like a Fowl, and feeding on Grass
like an Ox. This I am assured of, that after it is cut to pieces, it retains a
Sensation of Life three times longer than any known Creature in the Creation:
Before they kill them they are laid on their Backs, where hopeless of Relief,
as if sensible of their future Condition, for some hours they mourn out their
Funerals, the Tears plentifully flowing from their Eyes, accompanied with
passionate Sobs and Sighs, in my Judgment nothing more like than such who are
surrounded and overwhelmed with Troubles, Cares and Griefs, which raises in
Strangers both Pity and Compassion. Completely six hours after the Butcher has
cut them up and into pieces, mangled their Bodies, I have seen the Callope when
going to be seasoned, with pieces of their Flesh ready to cut into Stakes,
vehemently contract with great Reluctance rise against the Knife, and sometimes
the whole Mass of Flesh in a visible Tremulation and Concussion, to him who
first sees it seems strange and admirable. There is farther to the Southward of
Carolina, especially about the Shoars and Rivers of Hisniola and Cuba a Fish in
Nature something like the former, called the Manacy or Sea-Cow, of an
extraordinary Bigness, sometimes of 1000 pound weight: It feeds on the Banks
and Shore sides on the grassy Herbage, like a Tortoise; but that which is more
wonderful of this Creature is, that she gives her young Ones Suck from her
Duggs; she is headed like a Cow, of a green Color, her Flesh by some esteemed
the most delicate in the World, sweeter than the tenderest Veal, sold at
Jamaica, where it is sometimes brought for 6 d. the pound: It has a Stone in
the Head which is a gallant Remedy against the Pains and Dolors of the Stone;
so are the Bones of its Body to provoke Urine, when pulverized and exhibited in
convenient Liquors. Its Skin makes excellent Whips for Horses, if prudently
used, which are very serviceable and lasting; with one of these Manaty Strapps,
I have seen a Bar of Iron cut and dented: It cuts so severe and deep, that by
the Public Authority at Jamaica, Masters are forbidden and prohibited with it
to strike their White Servants.

There is in the mouth of their Rivers, or in Lakes near the Sea a Creature
well known in the West Indies, called the Alligator or Crocodile, whose Scaly
Back is impenitrable, refusing a Musket Bullet to pierce it, but under the
Belly, that or an Arrow finds an easy Passage to destroy it: it lives both on
Land and Water, being a voracious greedy Creature, devouring whatever it seizes
on, Man only excepted, which on the Land it has not the courage to attacque,
except when asleep or by surprise: In the Water it is more dangerous; it
sometimes grows to a great length, from 16 to 20 foot, having a long Mouth,
beset with sharp keen Teeth; the Body when full grown as large as a Horse,
declining toward the Tail; it is slow in motion, and having no Joint in the
Vertebraes or Back Bone, but with its whole length is unable to turn, which
renders it the less mischievous; yet Nature by Instinct has given most
Creatures timely Caution to avoid them by their strong musky Smell, which at a
considerable distance is perceiveable, which the poor Cattle for their own
Preservation make good use of: their Flesh cuts very white; the young ones are
eatable; the Flesh of the older smells so strong of Musk* that it nauseates;
their Stones at least so called, are commended for a rich lasting Perfume.

Metals or Minerals I know not of any, yet it is supposed and generally
believed, that the Apalatean Mountains which lie far up within the Land, yields
Ore both of Gold and Silver, that the Spaniards in their running Searches of
this Country saw it, but had not time to open them, or at least, for the
present were unwilling to make any farther Discovery till their Mines of Peru
and Mexico were exhausted, or as others, that they were politically fearful
that if the Riches of the Country should be exposed, it would be an Allure to
encourage a Foreign Invader, Poverty preserving, Riches oftentimes the cause
that Property is lost, usurped and invaded; but whether it be this or that
reason time will discover.

The Natives of the Country are from time immemorial, ab Origin Indians, of a
deep Chestnut Color, their Hair black and straight; tied various ways,
sometimes oiled and painted, stuck through with Feathers for* Ornament or
Gallantry; their Eyes black and sparkling, little or no Hair on their Chins,
well limbed and featured, painting their Faces with different Figures of a red
or sanguine Color, whether for Beauty or to render themselves formidable to
their Enemies I could not learn. They are excellent Hunters; their Weapons the
Bow and Arrow, made of a Read, pointed with sharp Stones, or Fish Bones; their
Clothing Skins of the Bear or Deer, the Skin dressed after their Country Fashion.

Manufactures, or Arts amongst them I have heard of none, only little Baskets
made of painted Reeds and Leather dressed sometimes with black and red Chequers
colored. In Medicine, or the Nature of Simples, some have an exquisite
Knowledge; and in the Cure of Scorbutic, Venereal, and Malignant Distempers
are admirable: In all External Diseases they suck the part affected with many
Incantations, Philtres and Charms: In Amorous Intrigues they are excellent
either to procure Love or Hatred: They are not very forward in Discovery of
their Secrets, which by long Experience are religiously transmitted and
conveyed in a continued Line from one Generation to another, for which those
skilled in this Faculty are held in great Veneration and Esteem, Their Religion
chiefly consists in the Adoration of the Sun and Moon: At the Appearance of the
New Moon I have observed them with open extended Arms then folded, with
inclined Bodies, to make their Adorations with much Ardency and Passion: They
are divided into many Divisions or Nations, Governed by Reguli, or Petty
Princes, which our English call Cacicoes: Their Diet is of Fish, Flesh, and
Fowl, with Indian Maiz or Corn; their Drink Water, yet Lovers of the Spirits of
Wine and Sugar. They have hitherto lived in good Correspondence and Amity with
the English, who by their just and equitable Carriage have extremely winn'd and
obliged them; Justice being exactly and impartially administered, prevents
Jealousies, and maintains between them a good Understanding, that the
Neighboring Indians are very kind and serviceable, doing our Nation such
Civilities and good Turns as lie in their Power.

This Country was first discovered by Sir Sebastian Cabott, by the order, and
at the expense of King Henry VII. from which Discovery our Successive Princes
have held their Claim, in pursuance to which, in the Seventeenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign it was granted unto his Grace George Duke of Albemarle, unto
the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon, William Earl of Craven, John
Lord Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, now Earl of Shaftsbury, to the Honorable
Sir George Carteret, and Sir John Colleton Knights and Baronetts, to Sir
William Berkley Knight, with a full and plenipotentiary Power, to Colonize,
Enact Laws, Execute Justice, etc. The Regalia's of Premier Sovereignty only
reserved. The Principal place where the English are now settled lies situated
on a point of Land about two Leagues from the Sea, between Ashly and Cooper
Rivers, so named in Honor to the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, a
great Patron to the Affairs of Carolina. The place called Charles Town, by an
express Order from the Lord Proprietors in the Year One thousand six hundred
and eighty, their Ordnance and Ammunition being removed thither from Old
Charles Town, which lay about a League higher from Ashly River, both for its
Strength and Commerce It Is very commodiously situated from many other
Navigable Rivers that lie near it on which the Planters are seated; by the
Advantage of Creeks, which have a Communication from one great River to
another; at the Tide or Ebb the Planters may bring their Commodities to the
Town as to the Common Market and Magazine both for Trade and Shipping. The Town
is regularly laid out into large and capacious Streets, which to Buildings is a
great Ornament and Beauty. In it they have reserved convenient places for
Building of a Church, Townhouse and other Public Structures, an Artillery
Ground for the Exercise of their Militia, and Wharfs for the Convenience of
their Trade and Shipping. At our being there was judged in the Country a 1000
or 1200 Souls; but the great Numbers of Families from England, Ireland,
Berbadoes, Jamaica, and the Caribees, which daily Transport themselves thither,
have more than doubled that Number. The Commodities of the Country as yet
proper for England, are Furrs and Cedar: For Berbadoes, Jamaica and the
Caribbee Islands, Provisions, Pitch, Tarr and Clapboard, for which they have in
Exchange Sugar, Rumm, Melasses and Ginger, etc. such things which are proper
and requisite for the Planter to be stored with before he leaves England for
his better Settlement there at his Arrival, chiefly Servants: All kind of Iron
Work for the clearing of Land, pruning of Vines, for the Kitchen and for
Building. Commodities proper for the Merchant to Transport thither for his
Advantage, Clothing of all kinds, both Linen and Woollen, Hats, Stockins,
Shoes; all kind of Ammunition, Guns, Fowling-pieces, Powder, Match, Bullet,
Nails, Locks and Knives; all Haberdashers Ware; Cordage, and Sails for
Shipping, Spirits and Spices, viz. Cloves, Nutmegs* and Cinnamon. Finally, to
encourage People to Transport themselves thither, the Lord Proprietors give
unto all Masters and Mistresses of Families, to their Children, Menservants
and Maidservants, if above sixteen years of Age, fifty to all such under forty
Acres of Land to be held for ever, annually paying a Penny an Acre to the Lord
Proprietors to commence in 2 Years after it is surveyed.

Sir, Thus in an Abstract I have given you the Draught of this excellent
Country, beginning with its Name, Situation, etc. and when first settled,
regularly proceeding to the Nature of the Soil, Quality of the Air, the
Diseases and Longaevity of its Inhabitants, the Rarity of its produce in Trees,
Fruits, Roots and Herbs, Beasts, Fish, Fowl and Insects; the Nature and
Disposition of the Indians, the Progress the English have made since their
first Settlement, what Commodities they abound with, in what defective; in all
which from the Truth I have neither swerved nor varied: Indeed in some other
things I might have farther enlarged and expatiated, which I shall refer to a
Personal Discourse, when I have the Honor to wait upon you again; in the mean
time I am

Your humble Servant T. A.

FINIS.

