Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, and other high Crimes and Offenses,
against William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of
Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, now Prisoners in the Tower.
THat for many years now last past, there has been contrived and carried on a
Traitorous and Execrable Conspiracy and Plot within this Kingdom of England,
and other places, to alter, change, and subvert the ancient Government and Laws
of this Kingdom and Nation, and to suppress the true Religion therein
established, and to extirpate and destroy the Professors thereof; which said
Plot and Conspiracy was contrived and carried on in diverse places, and by
several ways and means, and by a great number of Persons of several Qualities
and Degrees, who acted therein, and intended thereby to execute and accomplish
the aforesaid Wicked and Traitorous Designs and Purposes.

That the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord
Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, together with
Philip Howard, commonly called Cardinal of Norfolk, Thomas White, alias
Whitebread, commonly called Provincial of the Jesuits in England, Richard
Strange, late Provincial of the Jesuits in England, (...) Vincent, commonly
called Provincial of the Dominicans in England, James Corker, commonly called
President of the Benedictines, Sir John Warner alias Clare, Barronet, William
Harcourt, John Keines, Nicholas Blundel, Pole Edward Mico, Thomas Bedingfield
alias Benifield, Bazill Langworth, Charles Peter's, Richard Peter's, John
Conyers, Sir George Wakeman, John Fenwick, Dominick Kelly, (...) Fitz-Gerralt,
(...) Evers, Sir Thomas Preston, William Lovell, Jesuits, Lord Baltamore, John
Carrel, John Townley, Richard Langhorn, William Foggarty, Thomas Penny, Matthew
Medburn, Edward Coleman, William Ireland, John Grove, Thomas Pickering, John
Smith, and diverse others, Jesuits, Priests and Friars, and other persons, as
false Traitors to his Majesty and this Kingdom, within the time aforesaid have
Traitorously consulted, contrived and acted to and for the accomplishing of the
said wicked, pernicious and Traiterous Designs, and for that end did most
wickedly and Traterously agree, conspire and resolve to Imprison, depose, and
murder his Sacred Majesty, and to deprive him of his Royal State, Crown, and
Dignity, and by malicious and advised speaking, writing, and otherwise,
declared such their Purposes and Intentions.

And also to subject this Kingdom and Nation to the Pope and his Tyrannical
Government.

And to seize and share amongst themselves the Estates and Inheritances of his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

And to erect and restore Abbeys, Monasteries, and other Convents and
Societies, which have been long since by the Laws of this Kingdom suppressed for
their Superstition and Idolatry, and to deliver up and restore to them the
Lands and Possessions now invested in His Majesty and his Subjects by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm.

And also to Found and Erect new Monasteries and Convents, and to remove and
deprive all Protestant Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Persons from their
Offices, Benefices, and Preferments; and by this means to destroy His Majesty's
Person, extirpate the Protestant Religion, overthrow the Rights, Liberties, and
Properties of all His Majesty's good Subjects, subvert the lawful Government of
this Kingdom, and subject the same to the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome.

That the said Conspirators and their Accomplices and Confederates traitorously
had, and held, several Meetings, Assemblies and Consultations, wherein it was
contrived and designed amongst them what means should be used, and what Persons
and Instruments should be employed to murder His Majesty; and did then and
there resolve to effect it by poisoning, shooting, stabbing, or some suchlike
ways and means; and offered Rewards and Promises of Advantage to several
Persons to execute the same, and hired and employed several wicked Persons to
go to Windsor and other places where His Majesty did reside, to murder and
destroy His Majesty: which said Persons, or some of them, accepted such
Rewards, and undertook the perpetrating thereof, and did actually go to the
said places for that end and purpose.

That the said Conspirators, the better to compass their Traiterous Designs,
have consulted to raise, and have procured and raised Men, Money, Horses, Arms,
and Ammunition; and also have made application to, and treated and corresponded
with, the Pope, his Cardinals, Nuncios, and Agents, and with other Foreign
Ministers and Persons, to raise and obtain Supplies of Men, Money, Arms, and
Ammunition, therewith to make, levy, and raise War, Rebellion, and Tumults
within this Kingdom, and to Invade the same with Foreign Forces; and to
surprise, seize, and destroy His Majesty's Navy, Forts, Magazines, and places
of strength within this Kingdom: Whereupon the Calamities of War, Murders of
Innocent Subjects, Men, Women, and Children; Burnings, Rapines, Devastations,
and other dreadful miseries and mischiefs must inevitably have ensued, to the
ruin and destruction of this Nation.

That the said Conspirators have procured, accepted, and delivered out several
Instruments, Commissions, and Powers; made and granted by, or under the Pope,
or other unlawful and usurping Authority, to raise and dispose of Men, Money,
Arms, and other things necessary for their wicked and traiterous Designs; and
namely, a Commission to the said Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, to be Lord High
Chancellor of England; to the said William Earl of Powis, to be Lord Treasurer
of England: Another Commission to the said John Lord Bellasis to be General of
the Army to be raised, and the said William Lord Petre to be Lieutenant General
of the said Army, and a Power to the said William Viscount Stafford to be
Play Master of the Army: That in order to encourage themselves in prosecuting
their said wicked Plots, Conspiracies, and Treasons, and to hide and hinder the
discovery of the same: and to secure themselves from Justice and punishment,
the Conspirators aforesaid, and Confederates, have used many wicked and
Diabolical Practices, (viz.) They did cause their Priests to Administer to the
said Conspirators an Oath of Secrecy, together with their Sacrament; and also
did cause their said Priests upon Confessions to give their Absolutions, upon
condition that they should conceal the said Conspiracy.

And when about the Month of September last Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, a Justice
of Peace, had, according to the Duty of his Oath and Office taken several
Examinations and Informations concerning the said Conspiracy and Plot, the said
Conspirators, or some of them, by Advice, Assistance, Counsel and Instigation
of the rest, did incite and procure diverse persons to lie in wait and pursue
the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey several days, with intent to murder him,
which at last was penetrated and effected by them; for which said horrid Crimes
and Offenses Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, have since been
attainted, and Dominick Kelly, and (...) Gerald, and others, are fled for the
same.

After which Murder, and before the Body was found, or the Murder known to
any but the Accomplices therein, the said persons falsely gave out that he was
alive, and privately married; and after the Body was found, dispersed a false
and malicious Report that he had murdered himself.

Which said Murder was committed with design to stifle and suppress the
Evidence he had taken, and had knowledge of, and to discourage and deter
Magistrates, and others, from acting in the further discovery of the said Plot
and Conspiracy, for which end also the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey while he was
alive, was by them their Accomplices, and Favorites, threatened and discouraged
in his proceedings about the same.

And of their further malice they have wickedly contrived by many false
suggestions, to lay the imputation and guilt of the aforesaid horrid and
detestable Crimes upon the Protestants, that so thereby they might escape the
Punishments they have justly deserved, and expose the Protestants to great
scandal, and subject them to Persecution and Oppression in all Kingdoms and
Countries where the Roman Religion is received and professed.

All which Treasons, Crimes, and Offenses above mentioned, were contrived,
committed, perpetrated, acted, and done by the said William Earl of Powis,
William Lord Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord
Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, and every of them, and others the Conspirators
aforesaid, against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and
against the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Of all which Treasons, Crimes, and Offenses, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament assembled, do in the Name of themselves, and of the
Commons of England, Impeach the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount
Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord
Bellasis, and every of them.

And the said Commons by Protestation, saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other Accusations or Impeachments against
the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel
of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, and every of them, and
also of replying to the Answers which they and every of them shall make to the
Premises, or any of them, or to any other Accusation or Impeachment which shall
be by them exhibited (as the Cause according to course and proceedings of
Parliament shall require) do pray that the said William Earl of Powis, William
Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, William Lord Petre, and John
Lord Bellasis, and every of them, may be put to answer all and every of the
Premises, and that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, and Judgments may be
upon them, and every of them, had and used, as shall be agreeable to Law and
Justice, and Course of Parliament.

Resolved that the said Articles be engrossed.


