A SERMON PREACHED IN Trinity-College Chapel, BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN
JANVARY the 9th. 1693/4.

Being the First SECULAR DAY SINCE ITS FOUNDATION BY Queen ELIZABETH.

By St. George Ash, D. D. Provost of Trinity College, Dublin.

Published by the Lords Justices Command.

Printed by Joseph Ray on College Green, for William Norman Bookseller in
Dames-street, Dublin* 16^4.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, Lord CAPELL, Sir CYRILL WHICH, and WILL:
DUNCOMBE* Esquire; LORDS JUSTICES OF IRELAND.
My Lords,
IN Obedience to Your Commands, I present to Your Lordships the Discourse I
made before the University on our Commemoration-day, which I justly fear may
fall much short of that Favorable Character Your Lordships received of it from
some very partial Auditors; I am sensible, (my Lords) that its style may appear
too exalted and declamatory, and many Expressions more fanciful then may be
thought by some agreeable to the Gravity of my Place, or my usual way of
Preaching; but that liberty I hope will be excused, in consideration of the
extraordinary Occasion and Solemnity, and the numerous mixed Audience to whom it
was addressed.

If it may any way contribute to Encourage the Study and Improvement of
Learning, or Raise up any New Friends and Benefactors to our College, I shall
think its Publication seasonable: at least, my Lords, let not any Mistakes or
Weakness in it prejudice Your Lordships against our Society, which You have
hitherto so generously and kindly Protected. The Arts and Muses are proud to
call You their own, they glory in having formed Your Minds to that rare pitch
of Wisdom and Knowledge which is admired by all; and therefore it is from Your
Lordships they chiefly expect Patronage and Advancement, from Your Lordships, I
say, whose more liberal Education, innate greatness of Mind, and exalted
Station in the World, give you a privilege to Reason above the common rate of
Mankind, and to Protect all such as endeavor to do so, by Your Authority and
Example.

That Your Lordships zealous Endeavors for the Good and Prosperity of this
Kingdom may ever prosper, and Your Government long continue a blessing to us
that live under its happy influence, shall be the constant Prayer of

My Lords, Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, St. George
Ash.

THE PRAYER BEFORE SERMON.
LET thy merciful Ears, O Lord, be open to the Prayers of thy Humble Servants,
and grant that thy Holy Spirit may direct and guide us in all our ways, and be
more especially assistant to us in the Holy Actions of this day, in enabling us
with grateful Hearts and zealous Endeavors to celebrate this Pious
Commemoration, and to answer by our Studies and Improvements all the great and
useful ends of our Munificent Founders and Benefactors. We render thee humble
Praise and Thanks, O Lord, for the Most Serene Princess Queen Elizabeth, our
Illustrious Foundress; for King James the First, our most Liberal Benefactor;
King Charles the First and Second, our Gracious and Munificent Conservators;
for the protection and bounty we have received from their present Majesty's,
our most Indulgent Patrons and Restorers; for the Favor of our present
Governors, the Right Honorable the Lords Justices; for the Lord Mayor and
Government of this City, our Generous Benefactors; for the Nobility, Clergy, and
Gentry of this Kingdom; through whose Bounty and Charitable Generosity we are here
Educated and Established; for the Improvement of Piety and Religion, the
advancement of Learning, and to supply the growing necessities of Church and
State; beseeching thee to bless them all, their Posterity, Successors,
Relations, and Dependants, with both Temporal and Eternal blessings, and to
give us Grace to live worthy of these thy Mercies, and that as we grow in Years
so we may grow in Wisdom, and Knowledge, and Virtue, and all that is
praiseworthy through Jesus Christ our Lord

A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY of DVBLIN.
St. Matthew XXVI. 13. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this Woman has done,
be told for a memorial of her.
OF such universal Obligation is the great duty of Gratitude, so necessary an
ingredient is it both to a Holy and a Happy Life; that our Blessed Savior who
came into the World to teach us Virtue in every instance, could not be wanting
to inculcate as well by Example as Precept this general parent one, this
Original Spring which gives force and activity to so many lesser Graces, which
makes Love to admire, Joy to applaud, Humility to reflect upon the indigence of
humane Nature that needed such benefits, Thankfulness ever to celebrate 'em,
and sets 'em all incessantly at work to perform its various Offices. A certain
Pious Woman (as we read in the Verses preceding, the same who in another Gospel
chose the better part, the one thing needful) having profited much by the
Doctrine of Jesus, and been witness to many of his Miracles, to express her
sense thereof, brought the most precious thing she had, a Box of costly
Ointment, and poured it on his Head as he sat at Meat, so that it ran down to
all the parts of his body, and with its grateful odor filled the whole house;
this kind act of hers our Savior in my Text thus solemnly and gratefully
acknowledges, and declares that it shall be for ever celebrated and remembered.

Now how parallel this case is to the occasion of our present Meeting, a little
reflection may evince: A Princess the most eminent for Piety, Learning,
Chastity, and Happy Government that ever blessed these Kingdoms, having
enlightened our n^ighbouring Nation with the brightness of the Reformation, and
fenced it in by Laws and just Authority against all the open force and secret
contrivances of Popery or Schism; took into Her Royal Thoughts also the care
and concerns of our poor Island, almost quite overrun with Barbarity and
Superstition, and as the most effectual means to polish the one and reform the
other, Founded this Seminary (whose Secular Solemnity we now Celebrate) whence
true Religion, and Virtue, sound Learning and ingenious Education, might always
spring up and issue forth to Plant and Cultivate the rest of the Land; She
poured this Box of Precious Ointment upon the Head or Capital of our Kingdom,
whence it might stream or descend to the most distant parts, and refresh the
whole with its excellent savor; She laid in here such lasting Supplies of
Piety and Literature, which, like Ointment, might smooth the natural roughness
of our Temper, supple our morosest Passions, make us of a cheerful Countenance,
render us active and fit for any Employment to which Church or State should
call us; and, like a Sweet and Precious Ointment too, might not only gratify
our own Faculties, improve and better our own Souls, but by a happy emanation
shed its agreeable influence on all that approach us; and tho some ignorant or
envious bystanders may (as Judas) with indignation say, to what purpose was
this wast? what needed this Royal Munificence? yet we and all who are
benefitted by this Auspicious Foundation, must ever gratefully join with our
Blessed Savior in my Text, Verily we say unto you, wheresoever the Gospel
(whose Holy Doctrine we have here sucked in, and to the understanding and
declaring of which we have been here trained up and educated) shall be preached
by any of us in the whole world, there also this, that this Woman has done for
us, shall ^e told as a memorial of her.

Gratitude and sense of Obligation are a kind of Civil Conscience, which oblige
us as Men to perform many excellent Of Gratitude in general.
things, tho there were no Religion in the World to enforce 'em; He who
preaches this Virtue, pleads the cause both of God and Man, since without it we
can neither be Sociable nor Religious; for Thanks and Acknowledgments are a
Tribute payable by the poorest, the most indigent wretch, the most forlorn
Widow has still her two Mites to throw in, has a Heart to be sensible of, and a
Tongue to express its sense of a Benefit received; for surely Nature gives no
Man a Mouth to be always Eating, and never saying Grace; nor a Hand only to
grasp and to receive: but as it is furnished with Teeth for the one, so it
should likewise have a Tongue for the other; and the Hands which are so often
reached out to take and to accept, should sometimes too be lifted up to bless.
The beautiful systeme of Providence, the whole course of Nature is one great
argument for Gratitude; and the World only a larger exchange, in which one
benefit is, or ought to be, the stated price of another. If we consider the
Universe as one Great Body Politic, we may suppose Commerce, Society, and
Conversation to supply the office of the Blood and Spirits, and it is Gratitude
that makes 'em circulate; this is the great Spring that sets all the Wheels of
Nature a going, the Band or Cement that holds together the differing, and
otherwise inconsistent parts of the Creation: one may evidently discover it in
all the Elements, in the Air and Flame, in the Seas and Rivers, in the Earth
and Sun, in the friendly correspondence between the higher and the lower World;
so that the Monstrous Man who has a Soul wholly void of Gratitude, would do
well to set his Soul to learn of any of these, nay even of his own Body, for
all the parts of that do kindly and mutually serve each other; the Hands and
Limbs labor daily to bring in Food and Provision to the Stomach, (as it is
handsomely applied in Menenius Agrippa's Apologue) which is gratefully returned
in strength and nutriment, diffused to all the members of the Body. And is not
then the Ungrateful Man a reproach to the Creation, a manifest exception from
all the visible World? neither the Heavens above, nor the Earth beneath afford
any thing like him, there is nothing besides himself but Hell, which is both
the Region and the Emblem of Ingratitude, that is always receiving and never
endeavoring to require; Ingratitude is instead of all other Vices in the
balance of Morality, a counterpoise to them all; it is one great blot upon
Humanity, and gives completion to the black Roll of numerous other sins.

Now if even Natural Religion prompts so strongly to this Duty, what
impressions must the Gospel make, which so far outshines both the dim Light of
that, and the brighter Inspirations of the Law? which has so far refined upon
all the Duties of Morality, that it declares even Anger and Harsh Words to be
Murder, and looks and desires Adultery, that one may stab with his Tongue,
assassinate with his Mind, and pollute himself with a glance; which obliges us
to love, bless, and do good to our most implacable Enemies; then what tender
sentiments, what a rapturous sense of real Love must it inspire for Friends Of
the Gratitude due to our Founders and Benefactors.
and Benefactors? who have here expressed the noblest Charity to us, and
conferred the most important and lasting Obligations upon us, by clothing our
most shameful Nakedness, our Ignorance, our Errors, our Prejudices; by feeding
our hungry Understandings, by furnishing our Minds; by healing our perverse
Inclinations; and placing us in the path way to Heaven; these are truly
Obligations as eternal as our Souls, and therefore it is but reasonable that our
Gratitude, the memory of them should be as immortal also.

But Words and Complements are no suitable return to our Pious Benefactors, our
justest Acknowledgments must be expressed by a diligent endeavoring to answer
all the great and useful ends of their Donations, by promoting the knowledge
and practice of Religion and Piety, the advancement of Learning, by a sedulous
application to all the improvements of Education, and a careful managing the
tender springs of Youth.

Now to show how necessary the Institution of Universities The manifold
usefulness of Universities and Colleges.
and Colleges is to the attainment of all these great designs, as also the
numerous advantages which the Learning and Arts therein cultivated derive to
all the degrees and stations of life, as it will best instruct us in our Duty,
so it may in some measure contribute to perpetuate the Memory of our Munificent
Founders and Benefactors, oncourage others to imitate their Generous Examples,
and be a Subject most proper and suitable to this present occasion.

But here it may be expedient to remove a mischievous prejudice An Object^
against Aca^mick studies ^^swer'd.
against Academick Studies, which comes recommended in a venerable imposing
Proverbial Dress, as if Ignorance were the only True Mother of Devotion, and
Learning of Atheism; however ancient this saying may be, it is certain that
Humane Nature and the Service of God are little beholden to them who first
introduced the false observation, as if Simplicity and Dullness were becoming
Qualifications for the Divine Worship, or that the Light of Reason should ever
be likely to produce a Spiritual Darkness; The Jewish Law forbad to Offer a
Sacrifice to God that had a Blemish, yet this Opinion, while it bestows the
most Excellent and Useful of all the Race of Mankind on the Devil, assigns to
Religion only those Men, and those Times, which are stigmatized* with the
greatest blemish of Humane Nature, namely, a Defect of Knowledge and
Understanding: nay, as if God had despised our Rational Services, it
complements him still with Brutish Sacrifices, Man without Understanding being
justly compared (by the Psalmist) to the Beasts that perish; both Reason and
Revelation assure us, that all Sin and Error proceed from Ignorance, that it is
the blindness of the Understanding which misguides the Will, and our Blessed
Savior says the same thing to the Jews, Ye do err (says he) not knowing the
Scriptures and the Power of God, the Scriptures which Reveal his Will, and the
World his Power; as if the study of these two Books were the best preservative
from Error and Irreligion, and so it has always proved; to omit the former
(which yet makes one of the noblest parts of that Knowledge and Learning The
Usef^^ness of Huma^ Learning to sacred Knowledge and Pi^
I am discoursing of) how must the contemplation of the Admirable Order and
economy of Nature in all its Productions and Periods, in all its several
Seasons and Revolutions: how must the study of the surprising results of a
Regular Providence, that Harmonious Concordance which runs through all the
parts of the Universe, and renders them mutually subservient to each other, not
only charm our Thoughts with delightful Idaeas, but likewise insensibly raise
'em up to the great Author and Contriver of this wonderful Masterpiece? When
God himself would represent his own Magnificence and Glory, he directs to his
Works; he bids Job consider his Earth, his Ocean, his Clouds and Rain, that is,
he bids him be a Philosopher; and Holy Men in Scripture, when they would
quicken their own Souls and those of others to Praise him; send their Thoughts
abroad among the Creatures, to the stupendous Furniture of Land, Air, and
Seas, to gather instances of Acknowledgment: By the help of this Prospect we
may discover conspicuous Characters of Gods Omnipotence, and sound his Wisdom
as far as the short line of Humane Reason is capable; thus by the Scale of
Visibles, Contemplation and Knowledge lead us up to that Supreme Invisible
Power which gives the Spring and Motion to all this mighty Machine; and by the
steps and links of the Creation, our Inquisitions may guide us till we ascend
to the top of that Chain, which the Poets feigned was fastened to Jupiter's
Throne.

Such dawnings of Divinity does each part of Knowledge contain, that the
Astronomer finds a Deity in the Uniform Motion of Celestial Bodies, and
Regular Vicissitude of Seasons; The Philosopher in the delightful variety of
Natural Productions, their Beauty, Order, and conspiring tendency to the great
ends of the Creation; The Historian in the wonderful turns of Providence, and
manifest Discoveries of the Divine Managements in the Revolutions of the World:
and tho the Obvious Firmament, the Visible Beauties of the great World, and the
appearing variety and fitness of those parts which make up the little one in
Man, could scarce secure Galen from Atheism: Yet when he pried farther by
Anatomical Inquiries, and saw the surprising diversity, aptness, and order of
the minutest Fibers and Passages that are in the inward Fabric, he could not
then abstain from the devoutness of an Anthem of Acknowledgment; nor can it
otherwise happen, but that the Discoveries which are daily made by Study in
God's Immense Treasury, must needs every moment fill the Soul with pleasant
astonishment, and inflame the Heart with the ardors of the highest Love and
Devotion, and the Contemplation of God's Works* joined with these natural pious
Sentiments, seem almost an anticipation of that Bright and Clear Knowledge,
which we shall hereafter enjoy in Heaven. Nay, of such a pious tendency is
Learning, that in proportion to the Philosophy, and Knowledge, in which various
Nations excelled, God has generally been worshipped in former Ages; Thus in
Persia and Chaldaea, where the Skill of Heavenly Motions first began, they had
their Temples on the Tops of Hills, and Open to the Air: In Egypt, where they
had the best opportunities of studying the Natures of Living Creatures, by
reason of that Variety, which their River and Land produced; all their
Religious Mysteries were contained in Hieroglyphics, borrowed from Beasts and
Animals: And shall Learning now be stigmatized for contempt of Divinity, when
of old it did rather incline Men to Superstition, which is the supersaetation
and rankness of Religion, and quite the other extreme? Formerly Priests and
Scholars were Synonimous Words, and the great Apostles of Natural Theology, the
Preachers of Un-enlightened Divinity through the World, were no others than the
Philosophers and Wisemen; and certainly Nature, being nothing else but the
Instrument of God, whereby he gives Being and Action to things, the knowledge
of that, and other Useful Science, should be so far from being accounted
Dangerous or Impious, that it ought rather to be esteemed a subordinate
Theology, a necessary step and gradation to those exalted Mysterious Truths,
which revealed Religion discovers to us. And agreeably hereunto we find the
Patriarchs and Holy Men of ancient times, that were most in God's Favor, were
also best Instructed in the Knowledge of his Works, and Contributed most to the
good of Mankind by their Useful Discoveries and Inventions: Adam (we read) was
acquainted with the Natures of all Living Creatures; Noah, a Planter of
Vineyards; Abraham (as Grotius collects) an Excellent Astronomer; Isaac,
prosperous in Agriculture; Jacob, blessed in his Phylosophical Experiment and
Stratagem of the Speckled Rods; Moses, eminent in all the Wisdom of the
Egyptians; Bazaleel and Aholiab, inspired in Architecture; Solomon, a deep
Naturalist; Daniel, and his Brethren, skilled in all Learning and Wisdom, and
(not to multiply Instances) they were the Philosophers of the East, the Magi or
Wisemen, who expressed the most Early Piety and Zeal for Christianity, and made
first Addresses to the Infant Savior.

Julian the Apostate, who was the most Refined Politic Enemy that ever
Christianity had, well knew how beneficial sound Learning ever was to true
Religion, and therefore the Edict which he published to suppress all Christian
Schools and Colleges, was justly esteemed a more pernicious Engine to overthrow
our Religion, than all the most Bloody Persecutions of former Emperors.

Let them therefore, whose Interest it is to preach up saving Ignorance,
implicit Faith, and blind Credulity; who could declare the Assertion of
Antipodes to be a point of Heresy, and imprison poor Galileo in the Inquisition
for proving the Earth's Motion; who could pronounce Mathematics heretofore to
be Magic, and find Damnable Heresy in Greek and Hebrew: Let such (I say)
applaud Ignorance as the Mother of Devotion, condemn all curious Researches and
free Disquisitions in Learning, and write Encomiums upon passive credulous
Simplicity; it is certain our Church and Religion can never be safer than amidst
the Consequences of a Rational Learned Age, and all the various Improvements of
Knowledge, since they aim not at the Captivity but Freedom of Men's Minds; and
we can never make War against Learning, without Undermining one of our chief
Strengths, our most successful Weapon, with which we combat Enthusiasm on one
hand, and Supers^ition on the other.

And thus having not only vindicated Human Learning, and the Arts that are here
cultivated; from an unjust Prejudice; but likewise shown their great Usefulness
and Subserviency to all sacred Knowledge and Religion: The Proofs will lie more
easy and obvious, how they farther tend to the Improvement and Perfection of
^our Minds; and are the fruitful Parents of all those profitable Discoveries
which render the Life of Man Happy The Usefulness of Human Learning to
Government, and all the In- (...)
and Comfortable.

The Poets with great Significancy feigned Minerva as well to be the Goddess of
Arms, as Patroness of Arts, intimating doubtless, That Empire did ever best
flourish and grow up in Conjunction with Learning; witness the Ancient
Principalities of Greece, those Celebrated Schools at once of War and
Philosophy, where their greatest Generals were taken out of Colleges, from
under the Institution of Wise Men and Philososophers, from the Calm and
Retirement of a Study; where Socrates could furnish out a Pupil Xenophon, raw
and undisciplined, to perform one of the greatest Actions of Antiquity; and a
single Archimedes with his Rule and Compass could defend Syracuse, and defy
for a long time the whole Force of Marcellus's Army: Witness Rome it self,
whose Empire was never in greater Glory than when Arts too and Ingenuity were
most cultivated and encouraged, Julius Caesar from an Orator became a Hero, and
is still perhaps as justly Celebrated for his Commentaries as his Conquests.
Scipio the Great is reported to have spent more time in his Study then in his
Camp, and was oftener observed with a Book than a Sword in his Hand; nay
Learning among them was the undoubted and infallible step to all sorts of
Preferment; it Recommended their Consuls and their Dictators, nor could the
Government of Nations, the Dispatch of Armies, the Noise of Victories interrupt
their Studies: They writ Books even with Triumphal Hands, and Argued and
Disputed with Philosophers, tho they had Legions at command. From the days of
Nerva down to Commodus was the Happiest Age the Roman Empire ever knew, whether
we consider its vast Extent, or the great Felicity and Peace in which it was
Governed; and then we find none but Plato's wished for Emperors, such as were
Philosophers too, a succession of Antonines, Trajans, Adrians, such Wise and
Learned Princes, as brought Knowledge into Fashion and Repute; gained it
admission into Courts and Palaces; taught it to keep the Best Company; rendered
it the study of Statesmen and Politicians; the Employment of the Rich and of
the Great. But not to wander so far; who among the Saxons was a greater
encourager of Learning then King Alfred? and who too, more Victorious in his
Arms, and more Wise and Regular in the Administration of Affairs? And to come
yet nearer to our present Occasion; When were these Nations more Happy, then
under the long and glorious Reign of our Illustrious Foundress? whom as we must
always gratefully own to be the Best Patroness of Arts and Knowledge, the
Restorer of Decayed Learning among us. so all the World will grant Her not only
to have been the Most Learned of Her Sex, but to have exceeded in this
Particular, as well as in Wisdom and other Princely Virtues, all the
Contemporary Monarchs and Princes in Christendom.

To descend yet lower; 'T would be almost infinite to reckon up the various
Helps and Compendiums which Learning has furnished to all the Inferior Arts, to
the Entertainments of Peace, as well as the Successes of War. What Improvements
do Trade, Commerce, Navigation, the Culture of Lands and the Advancement of
Mechanics in general owe thereto? nay if we will not give these useful
Inventions an Epicurean original, and impute 'em wholly to Blind Chance or a
fortuitous concourse of Lucky Thoughts, we must believe they proceeded from an
unwearied vigorous investigation of Nature and it is Powers, from a sedulous
tracing such Links and Connexions, Corollaries and Consequences, as none but a
Thinking Learned Head is acquainted with.

In sum, Antiquity owes all it is Heathen Gods and Divinities to the fruitful
Industry of Scholars, the Admiring World of old deified their Discoveries,
Built Temples and Raised Altars to the happy products of Science; and tho
Theseus, Minos, and Romulus, who were Founders of Empires and Fathers of their
Country, could only arrive to the Inferior Honor of Heroes and Demigods: yet
Ceres and Bacchus, Mercury and Apollo, who invented Useful Arts and Sciences,
and obliged the World with more lasting and advantageous Benefits, were
Worshipped with the highest degree of Adoration and ranked among the Dij majorum
Gentium. And doubtless the Discoveries of the latter bringing perpetual Profit
and Advantage with them, being gentle and easy; like the still small voice, had
more evident Characters of a Divine Presence and Efficacy then all the
boisterous noisie transient Benefits of the former.

But if any are more affected with the pleasures of Thinking and Meditation
(which indeed is properly to act as Men) no other Employment can afford the
like Advantages. All other Delights are mixed and adulterate and do chiefly
gratify our Bodies or Sensitive parts; are acquired with Expense and Hazard,
and do either weaken Nature, or nauseate in the very enjoyment: whereas these
render the constitution of the Mind more vigorous and healthy, it is Faculties
are made more bright and active by constant use, their fruition does not
exclude Appetite, while we drink we thirst, and by a grateful vicissitude of
Desiring and Possessing, are always in Action and always Happy, And indeed what
more manly and becoming, as well as Noble Employment can there be, than to
improve our best Talents, and enlarge and extend our Spirits? while we
industriously cultivate our Lands, and adorn our Bodies, is it fit our
Understandings should ly fallow and barren, and the Divine Image which we carry
within us remain neglected, dishonored, and unimproved? Is it fit our Minds,
which are large enough to embrace the whole World, and comprehend the vastest
Truths, should be busied only Servilely to cater for the Body, and not rather
employ themselves according to the dignity of their exalted Natures, and be
cultivated and adorned as becomes their Heavenly Extraction? It Is the
perfection of our Rational Part to know, that is, to be able to frame clear and
distinct Conceptions, to form right Judgments, and to draw true Consequences
from one thing to another; and Reason is the undoubted Birthright and Patrimony
of every man, and whoever will suffer this valuable Entailed Estate to ly wast
and useless, or be Mortgaged and Squandered away for Trifles, does scarce merit
Pity, if he become Poor, Despised, and Miserable.

But to be more successful yet in the behalf of Learning, we will bribe the
Sensual Appetites and Affections of Men, and show that even their Lusts and
Passions may find repose there. Is any one ambitious of Fame and Glory? It Is
this shows the readiest path thereto, and will furnish out a Name, precious as
the Benefits it derives on Mankind, and lasting as the Books and Monuments in
which they are Registered. Aristotle's Works will be known, read, and admired,
when his great Patron's Conquests may perhaps be forgotten; and the Reputation
of Achilles is much more obliged for it is duration to Homer's Pen, than his own
Sword.

Is any fond of Empire and Command? Learning establishes the most diffusive
Universal Monarchy, extending its Power to the most distant Nations, and making
a Conquest over all that is rational; Tyrants may enslave the Body, and by
Rigor and Injustice preserve an uneasy tottering Command; but the Empire of
Knowledge is over the Will and the Mind, it fixes its Throne in the Souls of
Men, and rules their Reasons and Understandings.

Are we desirous to Keep the Best Company, and Converse familiarly with the
Most Ingenious, the Greatest and Wisest Men that ever were? In Books we may
freely talk with the most Celebrated Philosophers, and com^endiously reap the
advantage of all their Studies and Improvements; there we shall find Reason
without Passion, Learning without Affectation, and Eloquence without Noise or
Clamor; by their means we may Converse with Mighty Heroes, whom in their
Lifetime we durst scarce perhaps Salute with our Eyes; We may be admitted
Confidents to Statesmen, hear Demosthenes and Cicero haranguing in open Senate,
be present while Augustus and Trajan speak to their Armies, see them Riding in
their Triumphal Chariots, and Receiving the Acclamations and Applauses of the
People. And all these Privileges we may arrive too, without Attendance and
Crowding, without Brihing or Flattery, without Sawciness or Intrusion. Thus by
the assistance of Books and Learning we may acquire a kind of Intellectual
Omnipresence in all Ages, and to all Places; it is thus we break into all the
hidden recesses of Truth; Indefatigable Reading brings in a vast stock of
matter, which is often without form and void, like the first Chaos, till
Thinking and Contemplation, like the seminal Spirit, agitate the dull shapeless
lump, and work it up into Figure and Symetry.

Lastly, What Raptures can the Voluptuous Man fancy, to which those of Learning
and Knowledge are not equal? If he can relish nothing but the pleasure of his
Senses, Natural Philosophy exposes the beautiful bosom of the Universe to his
view, admits him into Nature's Garden, where he may taste of its Fruits, and
satisfy himself with its Plenty; learn, not only to admire, but, comprehend
all its surprising Phoenomena. Mathematics discover all the delightful
Contrivances of Art, unfold all it^ curious Springs and latent Causes, and
instruct the Busy Mind how to improve and better former Inventions; from most
obvious Principles, by a natural progress and ascent, the Understanding rises
to the boldest Truths, tracing the Chain of Propositions from Link to Link, and
still diflusing it self over infinite Regions of new Discoveries, wherein no
fallacious Shadows of verisimilitude intervene, there is no suspicion of any
latent mistake, turn the Theorem which way you please, in every light the Mind
is still in full aquiescence, in most secure possession of it is Valuable
Purchase; most other Knowledge (how diverting soever) is yet still conjectural
and litigious, whereas Peripatetick and Cartesian, Catholic and Heretic, do
all agree in a Mathematical demonstration, which is yet a farther conviction of
the great Excellency and Beauty of its Truth.

'Twould be endless to run th^o all, to describe the great and useful Images
which History furnishes, the Subtilty of Logic and Metaphisick, the Advantages
of Moral Philosophy, the resistless Power of Rhetoric, and the Charms of
Poetry; it is sufficient to have pointed out such general Instances, whence it
may appear, that all the Blessings of Nature, as well as the Ornaments and
Comforts of Life, are derived from the retired Thinking Man.

It Is true, no one Humor has furnished the Stage with more pleasant Scenes, or
afforded a larger Harvest to Comedy and Burlesque then the Actions, Gestures,
Habits, and Expressions-of Scholars; Aristophanes of old diverted the Athenians
by Ridiculing Socrates, and the fruitful Satyr has been plentifully propagated
to our times; coming out of the retired silence of a College and Study, they
are supposed to be deafned by the noise, or dazzled with the false Glories of
the World; their Sedentary Life is thought to unfit 'em for Activity and all
Business, to render 'em sheepish in their Looks, phlegmatic in their Tempers,
mopish in their Conversations, ridiculous in their Behavior, and exposed to a
thousand pleasant Absurdities, which a man of the World would escape; but it is
to be feared that they who obj^ct at this diverting rate, mistake Affectation
and Pedantry for Learning, the Sordid Ape for the Man; true Learning takes in
the theory of Men as well as Nature, and it is Object is as large and universal
as the very Notion of Being; it Reads the World as much as Books, Recommends
Conversation as well as Study, and joins Experience and Contemplation together
to perfect and complete the Mind.

But to come closer yet to the Occasion of our present Meeting; As Water (to
use the Excellent Lord Bacon's comparison) whether it descend in Dew from
Heaven, or spring out of Fountains of the earth, is easily lost, unless it be
preserved in certain receptacles, where by union and collection it may be kept
and increased, whence humane industry has designed Aquoeducts, Cisterns, and
Ponds, adorned as well for State and Magnificence, as contrived for use and
necessity: So likewise this precious liquor of knowledge (this sacred ointment
of my text) whether it be instilled by divine inspiration, or conveyed from our
senses, would soon perish and be lost, were it not preserved in Universities,
Colleges, and Schools, which are the lasting Fountains and Repositories of
Learning, whence with glad streams it flows to refresh and make sertile all the
neighboring land. A solitary unassisted industry, tho never so indefatigable;
is rarely known to produce any thing great or extraordinary; whereas no part of
knowledge seems insuperable to the joint endeavors of a well regulated Society,
united in common studies and the prosecution of the same useful ends; in the
former it is like spending out of a private Estate; in the latter, as out of a
public Fund, or Treasury; Add to this, the new lights which are daily struck
out, and appear by mutual Converse, the happy effects of a generous Emulation
(which is the most impetuous powerful Spring to all the good performances of
Youth) and above all, the inestimable advantages of Education, and forming the
Minds and Manners of the tender waxen Age, by laying the foundation of a holy
and happy life, and adding several cubits to the stature of our minds; which
render such Societies as this, the best security of Virtue and Piety, the
bulwarks of true Religion, the most public Blessings of a Nation,

'Twas truly observed by Aristotle, that we are at first born mere Animals, to
be afterward Educated and brought up into men; our Reason then seems (in a
great measure) to be the birth of Time and Institution; and the Mind of man is
such a Jewel, that tho it bring its perfections from the Bed, yet they are
altogether rough and unpolished; much pains and art are required to fashion
their rudeness, to conceal the flaws, and as well to form as cultivate the
tender Seeds; and in the care of this, the Chinese (if we may trust the
relations made of them) do justly boast they have out done all other Nations,
having erected the most noble Edifices for the instruction of Youth, allotted
the most liberal maintenance to the Professors and Teachers, and thought no
Honors and Respects too great to be given them, who lay out their whole time
and powers on the Improvement of others; rich persons are often expensive upon
trifles, about the mere circumstances of life, and useless ornaments of a man;
they can often afford to be generous to those who instruct the feet and the
hands; and is it fit then, that they who labor to furnish the head with useful
Knowledge, to adorn the Mind and Soul, and to enable men to serve their God
piously, and their Country usefully: Is it not a reproach (I say) that such
alone should be sacrificed to Thrift, or sordid Avarice? Life is a Journey, not
an anxious Pilgrimage; and doubtless therefore, the Hospitality of the World
should be the rather afforded to us; and competent Riches and Honors allowed
to our Baiting places, whose whole business it is to study the Improvement of
others, to manage the unequal temper of Youth, and to Cultivate growing Virtue
and Learning.

This our Munificent Founders and Benefactors well understood; and therefore
thought they could not employ their Wealth more advantageously, or place it in
a securer Treasury, than by such pious Erections, where True Religion might be
taught, Virtue Inculcated, Learning Improved, and a constant supply of useful
men both in Church and State furnished out and prepared. What the Poor are
ordinarily relieved with, is not so much the Giver's Alms, as their exigence;
and, as necessity requires it, so it quickly perishes: But these liberal
Oblations, as they savor of a more inward and deeper Charity, are too of a
more lasting subsistence, besides the Eternal Treasures which are laid up for
the Donors, they provide for the perpetuity and propagation of Religion and
Knowledge to all succceding Ages, and may truly be said to Honor God, and be
useful to their Country, not only in themselves, but in all that by such their
Bounty are maintained and educated. This is properly to Convert and Proselyte
M^mmon, to Consecrate that as an Offering, which was before an Idol: this is to
make this Earth tributary to Heaven; and in a much nobler sense than the new
System of Astronomy teaches, advance it into a Star, a Celestial Body.

That their Memories therefore and Benefits may be ever gratefully Celebrated,
and their Names remain precious, and sacred among us; that their generous
Examples may excite other well disposed Persons and Benefactors to an
imitation, and that we may always answer the great and useful ends of our
Foundation, shall be our constant Prayer and Endeavor.

Praise the Lord therefore with Me, ye Servants of the Lord, ye that dwell in
the Courts of the House of our God, and let us magnify his Name together.
FINIS.

