ARTICLES against the Lord Mandevill, Mr. John Pym, M. Denzell Hollis, Sir
Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Strowd.

ALSO THE FRENCH AND SpANISH FLEET Arrived at Ireland, for the Assistance of
the Rebels there.

BEING A true Relation of the Spanish Fleet Arrived in Ireland to aid and
assist the Rebels there against the Protestants, speaking of their inhumane
cruelty. With a Description how the Popes Nuncio came unto the King of Spain,
and instigated him thereunto.

As also, of the Spanish Oath which they took at the first Arrival against
all protestants whatsoever.

Likewise a Relation of the French Navy now lately arrived at the Irish Coast,
with the full Number of both Fleets, in a most true and exact Relation.

LONDON, Printed for John Gr, 1642.

THE FRENCH and SPANISH FLEET Arrived at Ireland.
THe Frenchmen having great and plenary intelligence of the Papists
proceedings in Ireland, after long debate and private confederacy concerning
the same effect, they sent without any intermission of longer time a Herald of
Arms to Tyrone (that Arch-rebell in Ireland certifying him, that if they were
defective, or had any need of auxiliary assistance, they would instantly
conjoyne with unanimity, and defend their party with constant puissance,
Whereupon Tyrone graciously returned an Answer, that he was much respective
toward them, and promised the uttermost of their intents, and endeavors to
perform the best courtesy for their so gracious a Message concerning the
demolition of protestant Religion, and withal beseeched, and earnestly
requested them to raise some sudden force, and to send a Navy with great
expedition unto them, that they might fully subdue the whole kingdom of
Ireland. This Embassage being re^urned, they (after mature, and serious (...)
^long and conected with a regular aggregation the number of six thousand men
of Arms to go speedily into Ireland, with 9 ships fully laden with Arms,
Ammunition, and strong fortification for the same purpose and intent. And being
thus provided for Ireland, they seemed to go on with great alacrity, until
they came to the full ohject of their unanimous expectation: where they were
very nobly entertained, and with great favor and affectionate respection.
Wherefore they being landed at the Port of Cavarre marched on still, until
they came beyond the Territories of that kingdom to Armagh, where they began a
promiscuous rnd tumultuous clamar among the people, slaying, and destroying
whomsoever they could meet with, of what sect, degree, or Age soever.

When as they met with the Rebels, they had great and singular congratulation,
who immediately conducted them with great expedition to that famous, renowned,
and honorable City of Dublin, who incontinently besieged the same, and most
tyrannically assaulted, whenever they met.

The said Castle of Dublin they intended to take the eighteenth day of
December, and without any humane partiality they did put the poor protestants
to the intolerable misery, and deplorable calamity.

There was great and unexpected solemnity, triumph, and celebration at the
French fleet arrived in the p^ Territories of Ireland, who came to assist the
Rebels in so divellish and diabolical a design, and to auxiliate then against
the protestants, that profess the true and sincere purity of religion: but I
hope in Gods omnipotency that all their plots will be emolished.

The Spanish Fleet arrived in Ireland.
SIR Patricke Devons collected a numerous multitude out of Spain to go into
Ireland, for the assistance of the said Papists there congregated, and plotting
the utter subversion of true Christian religion.

He had under his command five thousand men in Arms, who came in a Navy into
Ireland to the auxiliation of the rebels.

Where at their arrival, Tyrone and his confederats joyfully entertained him.
The cause of their first commotion, and furious insurrection was this.

The Popes Nuntio transported such News into Spain, that his supremacy was
pleased to supplant the Kingdom of England, and all their Adherents: and
because they were Heretics. Therefore his Primacie would vouchsafe to depose
them all. After this Nuncio's message reported to the King of Spain, he
imposed, and committed all the subsequent to Sir Patrick Devons in Ireland, who
immediately by the command of the King of Spain went under the conduct of 5000.
soldiers, who arriving at the Irish Coast were royally entertained by some of
the chief of the Rebels.

They seemed to be very inhumane, and withal they took a private Oath among
themselves, that whatsoever Protestant they should mere, or any inclining to
the Protestant Religion, he or they should be incontinently slain without any
partiality at all, and he or they, or any of them that should deny the same
should be expelled as a traitor to their party. Thus they proceeded in their
unchristian and tyrannical slaughter, putting all to the sword, that they
could meet obviously of the Protestant religion and profession.

We see therefore, and may apparently perceive how bloudily these rebels
proceed in their cruelty and therefore we ought not to sleep in the chaires of
security, and suffer our poor Brethren to suffer there in great violation, and
miserable calamity,

For security is the very door that opens the very plain way to destruction.
And I pray God whilst many of us do think our selves safe on the sleeping
beds of security, that the enemy does not cut our throats.

While Esau prolonged the time, Jacob stole away his birthright: And I pray
God, while were procraitinate and defer the time in helping out Brethren in
Ireland, that a foreign enemy do not steal away the renowned Prerogative of
this Kingdom, and so consequently it become a conquered Nation.

While the men in the holy Gospel slept, the Enemy sowed tares amongst the
wheat, and I am sure while we neglect the proper time, many tears of Discord,
and schismatic dissension are sown amongst us. But I hope that God, who
heretofore have always defended, and preserved this Kingdom of his singular
mercy, and favorable omnipotency, will still defend the same for ever, to the
propagation of his Truth and Gospel.

FINJS.
ARTICLES O^ High treason against the Lord Mandevill, Mr. Pym, Mr. Denzell
Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Strowde.
THat they have traytorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental laws, and
government of the Kingdom of England, and to deprive the King of his royal
power, and to place in subjects in arbitrary power over the lives, liberties,
and estates of his Majesty's liege people.

2. They have endeavored to lay many foul aspersions upon his Majesty and his
government to alienate the affections of his people, and to make his Majesty
odious unto them.

3 They have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army into disobedience to
his Majesty's Commands, and to side with them in their traiterous designs.

4. They have traitorously invited, and encouraged a foreign power to invade
his Majesty's Kingdom of England.

5. They have traytorously endeavored to subvert the Rights, and very Being of
parliaments.

7. For completing of their treacherous designs, they have endeavored as far
as in them lay by force and terror to compel the parliament to join with them
in their traitorous designs and to that end has actually raised and
countenanced Tumults against the King and parliament.

7. That they have traitorously conspired to levy and have actually levied
power against the King.

FINIS.

