SEVERAL ASSERTIONS PROVED, In Order to Create another Species of MONEY THAN
GOLD AND SILVER.

SEVERAL ASSERTIONS PROVED, etc.
First Assertion.
That there seems a Necessity of creating another Species of Money than Gold
and Silver.

BY Necessity I don't mean an absolute Necessity, Proved.
but such a Necessity that either this must be done, or a worse thing will
ensue for want of it. The past Contracts now depending in the Kingdom for
payment of Moneys in Specie do far surmount all the Species of Money in the
Kingdom; and because Money is become more valuable than Bills of Credit,
therefore they that have the demands of it do and will demand it; and the more
they demand it, the higher the price rises, so that the price multiplies the
demands, and the demands advance the price, which renders the performance of
these past Contracts to be impossible: And thus the Kingdom stands
Stock-jobbed, by being obliged to deliver what they have not: And yet these
Contracts (though they are impossible to be performed) are lawful, for by the Law
where the Condition of a Bond is impossible, the Bond it self is absolute, and
the Obligee may sue for the Penalty, and have Judgment; and if (in this Case)
the Plaintiffs happen to be more than the Defendants, they may have Execution
too; but if the Defendants come to be more than the Plaintiffs, there is an end
of the Law.

And notwithstanding that the whole Moneys of the Kingdom stand anticipated by
the past Contracts, the present Exigencies and the growing Contracts call for
as much more, and it is impossible to answer these Demands but by the Money due
on the former Contracts, taking it from whence it is already due, and lending it
to the present Wants; and thus the Public have had the greatest part of their
late Supplies, (which I don't observe as a misapplication of the Moneys, (under
our Necessities) but as an Evidence of our Necessities) Therefore for
preserving the peace of the Kingdom, in relation to the past Contracts, and for
raising the present and future Supplies, there does seem a Necessity of
creating another Species of Money than Gold and Silver.

Second Assertion.
That this Necessity is no Cause to discourage Proceedings in public or
private Affairs, but rather to force us upon an Invention which otherwise we
should not find out.

Proved.
All the Improvements in the World have been produced from the Necessities of
Men, putting them upon Invention, according to that saying, Venture largitor
Artium: Shame invented our Clothing, Cold our Houses, Hunger our Food,
Sickness our Physic, and Rapine our Laws; Laws necessitated Trade, Trade
necessitated Money, and the multiplied occasions for Money does now put us upon
a necessity of inventing another Species of it, and therefore we must find it
out. What if the Spaniards Mines were exhausted, or the Laws of their Country
(prohibiting the Exportation of them) observed, must the whole World stand
still? As Silver and Gold were invented for Money, when they were to be had, so
when we cannot have that, we must invent something else (which may be had)
instead of it. The whole World once lay open for Man and Beasts to be Tenants
in common of it all, but while it lay so, it was incapable of improvement,
because no Man could preserve the benefit of his own Labor to himself, and
this forced men upon Agreements to enclose, and that every Man should have a
Property in his own Enclosure, which was the first initiating of Laws, and this
Law forced Trade. For the Earth consisting of diverse Veins, of different
qualities, distant from one another, one man came to have occasion of something
which lay in ( alieno solo) another man's Enclosure, and so they exchanged with
one another; but the things exchanged not being always equal in value, nor to
be delivered at the same time and place, put men upon an Invention of Pledges,
or security for the things delivered, until the value thereof should be
returned in another Commodity; and these at first were but particular Tokens
between one man and another, 'till by degrees Silver and Gold (having acquired
a certain value from the uses made of it for other things) became the common
pledge of the World, and by further degrees the Values thereof came to be
ascertained by Laws, which has advanced it to an extravagant price, contrary
to the original intention of it. The sole use of Money (as Money) is but to
keep an Account of other things by; it is a Tool in Trade found out by the
Policy of Man, and that it might not grow into any other use, the first Law of
the World (foreseeing the mischief) forbid those that had it, from taking
Interest for the Loan of it, from any but those whom they designed to
impoverish by it: But since this prohibited use of it has advanced it above
its original institution, we must invent something else instead of it, as they
who had the first Occasions of Money did invent Gold and Silver: And therefore
this Necessity is no Cause to discourage us from proceeding in public or
private Affairs, but rather to force us upon an Invention which otherwise we
should not find out.

Third Assertion.
That all Proposals for making Bills of Credit current Money directly, by Act
of Parliament, can be of no use in this Invention.

Proved.
For, 1. These Proposals are Unjust, being more than the Law does in relation to
the Coyns of the Kingdom. The Law never makes the Coyns of the Kingdom to be
current in any Payments but where they are agreed to be paid, but these
Proposals would make these Bills current in Payments, in which they were never
agreed for, therefore they are unjust.

2. They are Illegal: I mean, they are an Inversion of Laws, which the
Legislative Power have no power to do; their Name defines their power not to be
absolute, but only a power of making Laws; and the intent of all Laws being for
the preservation of Life and Property, whatever violates this Intent, is no
Law. Should an Act pass, that every Man in the Kingdom should kill himself, or
give his Estate to any one else that would do it for him, this would be no Law,
nor any Man's Life or Estate bound by it. Now some Men have turned their
Properties into Land, and some into Money, and all by Agreements with one
another; and should an Act pass, that a Man who has agreed for, and purchased
500 l. per Annum in Land, should convey that Estate to any Man who would pay
him 10000 l. in Gold or Silver, this would be no Law; then by the same parity
of Reason, should an Act pass that any Man who has contracted for 10000 l. to
be paid him in Money, should assign this Contract to any one, who would convey
to him 500 l. per Annum in Land, this would be no Law; for if such Acts should
be admitted as Laws, they put an end to all Laws. Men cannot deal but by
Agreements with one another, and if the Law will invert those Agreements, this
puts an end to all dealing, and therefore these Proposals are Illegal, by which
I hope I shall not be censured as irreverent of the Legislative Power, for I
mention this in reverence to those Laws of which they are the Legislators. I
don't say, but one Man may by Conquest get an absolute Power over another, but
this is by Usurpation and Wrong, and not by Law; for all Laws are the
Agreements of Men, and no Man ever by his own Agreement delivered himself into
the disposal of an absolute Power. God himself (though a supreme Power, and
absolute over all) does not demand Man to deliver himself up into his Power as
absolute, but treats with him by a Law of Justice, in which he makes himself a
Party, and stands obliged to the performance of several things, as the
Condition of Man's Obedience, and therefore for man to assume a right of
Government by an absolute Power, is to set himself above God.

3. These Proposals are impracticable, and (should they be granted) would be
ineffectual. Suppose an Act should pass, that a tender of a Bill of 100 l.
should be a sufficient tender of 100 l. contracted for in lawful Money of
England, and the People should think themselves bound by this as a Law, then
their study would be to evade this Law, by changing their Contracts from lawful
Money of England to some other Species, As so many Ounces of Gold and Silver,
which would not be construed to be lawful Money of England, and so then the Act
would not reach it; and if the Act should follow these Contracts, and be
changed as often as the Contracts, it must at last be so general, that a tender
of a Bill for payment of 10 l. should be a good tender for all Commodities
agreed to be delivered of the value of 10 l. and so when a Man had contracted
for a Horse, he should have a Bank Bill delivered him to ride on, and therefore
the Proposals are impracticable, and (if granted) would be ineffectual.

4. These Proposals are fallacious, and carry a Cheat in the bottom; for the
Bills being given out for payment of Money, if the Law releases the payment of
the Money, and makes the Bill it self a good tender, there is nothing left to
answer the Debt but the Paper or Parchment on which the Bill is written, which
is worth nothing, and therefore the Proposals are fallacious, and carry a Cheat
in the bottom: And for all these Reasons they can be of no Use in this
Invention, of finding out another Species of Money than Gold and Silver.

Fourth Assertion.
That this Species must be made of something that has all the Qualities of
Money.

Proved.
Money has these several Qualities: First, The Metal of which it is made is
Valuable, from the other Uses made of it; for Silver and Gold do not receive
their Value from being made Money, but Money receives its value from being made
of Silver and Gold: For Money (as Money) has no other value than Figures or
Counters, by which Men keep Accounts with one another; but because Money is now
become a common Pledge, it must be made of something that has in it self a
real Value from other Uses, whereby whoever has these Tokens, may purchase any
Commodity with them, according to their Value in weight in all other places as
well as where the Money was coined, and therefore nothing can be made Money but
what is thus valuable, from the other Uses made of it. The Second Quality of
Money is Durableness and Incorruption, which is also Necessary. The Third
Quality is Divisibleness into greater or lesser-peices, without which it cannot
be used as Money. Fourthly, The Value of each piece is certified by the stamp,
without which it could not be used as Money, by the common People. Fifthly, The
Title thereof is readily transferrable; the Delivery only makes it a Title: And
this is as necessary for making it money as any of the other qualities: For
were the Titles of Land transferred to the Titles of Money, it would cease to
be Money, notwithstanding all its other qualities; were it necessary to have a
Lease and Release, Feofment or Bargain and Sale, and (if it came by the Wife) a
Fine, to the Transfer of every piece of money, the Charge and Trouble of this
would soon reduce our Nobles to Nine-pences. Now all these qualities being
Necessary to Money, nothing that wants either of these qualities can be Money,
Therefore this Species must be made of something that has all these Qualities.

Fifth Assertion.
That whatever is capable of all these Qualities of Money, is capable of being
made Money.

The Philosophers define all Substances by Qualites; they say, Proved.
That whatever has all the qualities of a thing, ceases to be a likeness, and
is become that very thing. Now I don't say, that whatever has all the
qualities of Money, does thereby become Gold and Silver, but it becomes Money.
Gold is money, and Silver is money, and yet Gold is not Silver, nor Silver
Gold. Things of different Substances may be put to the same use; Brick and
Stone, Brass and Copper, Lead and Iron, may be all adapted to the same Uses,
being stamped into the same Forms; Therefore whatever is capable of all the
Qualities of Money, is capable of being made Money.

Sixth Assertion.
That the Securities on Lands are capable of all the Qualities of Money, and
therefore they are capable of being made Money.

Proved.
First, The Lands on which the Securities are charged, have in themselves a
real Value, from the other Uses made of them, which need not be enumerated.

Secondly, They are durable and incorruptible: The Earth is the great
Storehouse of the World, where all the magazines of Life and Defense are kept
sweet and safe.

Thirdly, These Securities are divisible into greater or lesser Sums.

Fourthly, The Value of each Security may be certified by a stamp given to it.

Fifthly, The Title of these Securities may be transferrable, by delivery only:
And all this is proved by Fact; And therefore these being all the Qualities of
Money, and the Securities of Lands being capable of all these Qualities, they
are capable of being made Money.

Seventh Assertion.
That these Securities of Lands being thus formed into the Qualities of Money,
it is in the Power of the Owners of the Lands themselves to make these
Securities to be Effective and Lawful Money of England, By reserving the Rents
of their Lands payable in them.

Proved.
First, This would make them effective Money: The use of Money is to buy
Commodities, now these Securities will buy Land, and therefore they will buy
all Commodities. The common definition of Money, That it is Money that buys
Land, is comprehensive of all the uses of it; for whatever will buy Land will
buy all Commodities. What we call Commodities is nothing but Land severed from
the Soil: The Owners of the Soil in every Country have the sale of all
Commodities of the Growth of that Country, and consequently have the power of
giving Credit in that Country, and therefore whatever they will accept for
their Commodities is Money. Man deals in nothing but Earth; the Merchants are
the Factors of the World, to exchange one part of the Earth for another: The
King himself is fed by the labor of the Ox, and the clothing of the Army, and
the victualing of the Navy, must all be paid for to the Owner of the Soil, as
the ultimate Receiver, and whatever the ultimate Receiver will demand or
accept, must be a Rule for the intermediate Receivers to govern themselves by:
All the other Contracts of the Kingdom must follow the Reservation of the
Rents; and hence it is that all the present Contracts of the Kingdom are agreed
to be paid in Money, because the Rents of the Lands are reserved payable in it;
and therefore if these Rents were reserved in the Securities of Land, formed
into the Qualities of Moneys, (which we call Bills) it would force other
Contracts to be made payable in these Bills, and consequently make these Bills
effective Money.

Secondly, As they would thereby become effective Money, so they would become
Lawful Money of England; because the Law would compel the payment of them. The
Law of England has given no other sanction to Gold or Silver, than to certify
the value of it, to tell the People what it is, that when they make Contracts
about it, they may know what they do. The Law says that such a piece of Money,
stamped into the King's Coin, shall be esteemed five shillings of lawful Money
of England, whereby whoever makes a Contract to pay five shillings of lawful
Money of England, knows what he is to deliver, and he knows that the delivery
of that piece will be a good discharge of his Contract. But the Law never
compels any person to make these Contracts, nor ever compels the payment of
this Money, or makes the tender thereof to be a good payment, in any case, but
where it so agreed between the Parties; and this is no more but what the Law
does to any other thing contracted for, as well as Money: The Law no more
admits Gold or Silver Money to be a tender for Corn, or Cattle, contracted to
be delivered, then it does admit Corn or Cattle to be a tender for Gold or
Silver Money contracted to be delivered, for the Law respects nothing but the
agreement of the Parties; and by the same reason that the Law obliges the
payment of Gold and Silver, it would oblige the payment of these Bills, in case
they were agreed to be paid: And therefore it being in the power of the Owners
of the Lands, to reserve their Rents payable in these Bills; and the other
Contracts of the Kingdom being governed by the Reservation of the Rents, and
the Law compelling the performance of those Reservations and Contracts, it is
in the power of the Owners of the Lands to make these Bills effective and
lawful Money of England, by reserving their Rents payable in them.

Eighth Assertion.
That Lands thus formed into the Qualities of Money, are more Useful and
Valuable than Gold and Silver, or any other Commodities severed from the Soil.

First, They are more Useful: Proved.
Gold and Silver serve but for one use at one time, while they are used for
Money, they can be used for nothing else, and while they are used for any thing
else, they cannot be used for Money: But Lands may be converted into Money,
without loosing their other Faculties; they serve for both uses at the same
time, the Owners keep the Possession, and receive the Profits of the Soil,
while the Securities thereof are used for Money; and this is what cannot be
done in Securities of Pledges, or Pawns of Commodities severed from the Soil;
for when the Owner makes these a Security, he must part with them out of his
possession, and can make no use of them 'till he has redeemed them.

2. As they are more Useful, so they are more Valuable: What serves for two
uses at once, is more valuable than what serves but for one; if Silver and Gold
could serve for Money and Plate both at the same time, or if Commodities
severed from the Soil, could retain their own natural uses, and also serve for
Securities of Money at the same time, they would both be double the value they
now are; for by loosing one of their uses, they loose the value at which they
are valued in respect of that use; therefore Lands retaining their own natural
use, while they are made Money, are more Useful and Valuable than Gold and
Silver, or any other Commodity severed from the Soil.

Ninth Assertion.
That it will be in the Power of the Bank from whom these Bills are issued, to
make them more Valuable than other Money, by accepting them at a higher Rate,
and that they will be Gainers thereby.

The Profit of a Bank depends upon the Credit of their Bills, Proved.
and the Credit of their Bills depends upon their making them more Valuable
than Money; and the making their Bills more valuable than Money depends on
their accepting of them at a higher Rate than Money. Money and Bills never keep
long at a par; if Bills are not better than Money, they will soon be worse: If
Money gets the upper Hand of Credit, it puts an end to all Credit. There is at
this day no Credit in the Kingdom. Credit is when Men choose Bills rather than
Money, and not when they take them only because they cannot receive Money. The
present Credit of the Kingdom is no more than the Credit of a man who cannot pay
his Debts, and therefore gives Bond, which his Creditors are forced to accept
for want of money. The Bank of England have issued out Bills which they cannot
pay, and so the People that have their Bills must keep them. But there is no
fresh Money brought into their Bank for their Bills, without which no Credit
can be maintained: And they finding great Demands upon them, immediately raised
the Interest upon their Bills, hoping thereby to keep those Bills which were
out against them from being demanded of them, and to draw in fresh Moneys into
them: But this proved so ineffectual, that their Bills at Interest are at no
more value than their Bills without Interest, which shows plainly, that the
giving Interest on Bills does add no Credit to a Bank. For raising the interest
on the Bills of the Bank, raises the Interest of Moneys out of the Bank, and so
keeps the Moneys from them. The more a Bank raises their Interest to overtake
the Money, the faster the Money goes from them, raising the Interest 1 l. per
Cent. upon Bills payable at demand, raises it 2 l. per Cent. on Common
Securities; therefore a Bank should always fall their Interest as fast as
others endeavor to raise it. Credit is no more to be begged or bought than it
is to be forced; giving Interest on Bills is begging of Credit, or buying of
Money, which may be done by a common way of mortgaging, (without keeping Moneys
to pay the principal at demand): And it had been Policy for the Bank of England
(when they had got the Coin raised from clipped to full Money) to have raised the
value of their Bills with it, by accepting them in Reciepts of Interest, from
the Crown and others, at more than Money, and then they had kept down the Price
of Money below their Bills, which is now got above them: For let Money be of
what Weight it will, if those who have the Receipt of it, will accept Bills at
a higher rate, this does depreciate the Money, and keeps the Bills above them:
And therefore in case this Land-Bank be established by Parliament, (as is
proposed) it is intended that the Interest of 3 l. 10 s. per Cent. shall be
reduced to 3 l. per Cent. to all those who will pay it in the Land-Bank Bills,
which will advance the Credit of the Bank, and consequently their Profit; by
enabling them to lend great quantities. A Bank is like a Merchant, whose Gains
don't arise from the extravagant Profit of any particular Commodity, but from
the greatness of his Trade; for the Retailers get more per Cent. than the
Merchants: Therefore it will be in the power of the Bank from whence these
Bills are issued, to make them more valuable than other Money, by accepting
them for more than other Money, and that they will be Gainers thereby.

Tenth Assertion.
That this Invention falling the Interest of Money, will advance the Rents of
Lands.

Proved.
That this Invention (succeeding) will fall the Interest of Money, needs no
proof: But it has been made a Question, Whether the falling the Interest of
Money will advance the Rents of Lands? And it must be confessed, that Lands
already improved to the height, are not capable of this advantage; but most of
the Lands in England are capable of being improved to double their present
Value; in Cities and Towns by Building, and in the Countries by Planting and
Manure, and lie unimproved for want of Money; Therefore this Invention falling
the Interest of Money will advance the Rents of Lands.

Eleventh Assertion.
That advancing the Value of Lands in the Purchase, is equal to advancing the
Rents.

That the falling the Interest of Money advances Lands in the Purchase, needs
no Proof: Proved.
But it has been a Question, Whether advancing the Lands in purchase be an
advantage? because the Value of the money for which they are sold is thereby
depreciated: And it is certain that the falling the Interest of Money does
depreciate the Value of it, as to the Purchase of the Soil of the Lands, but it
does not depreciate it as to the Purchase of any Commodities severed from the
Soil. The Interest of Money is an Annual Profit, and therefore does affect
nothing but what has an Annual Increase. The Soil of Land is an Annual
Interest to the Owner, and therefore the price thereof rises and falls with the
Interest of Money, which is Annual: But the Commodities severed from the Soil
lie all in Principal, and therefore the Interest of Money being Annual, does
not affect them. The Price of Corn and Cattle don't rise and fall with the
Interest of Money; or if at any time they happen so to do, it is not caused by
the Rate of Interest, but some other cause which happens at that time;
Therefore the advancing the Value of Lands in the purchase is equal to
advancing the Rents. Indeed, if Men were to live with the Beasts, ranging up
and down the Earth, and taking their Food where they found it, Lands would be
of no value in respect of Sale; but ever since the Commencement of the Laws of
Property, Money is as necessary as Bread; and therefore whether Land will yield
a hundred quarters of Corn, or will sell for as much as will buy it, is equally
beneficial to the Owner.

Twelfth Assertion.
That this Invention perfected will extinguish the Interest of Money upon
Lands, and thereby make the Lands inestimable.

Proved.
The Securities of Lands are now as valuable as money, or else money would not
be lent upon them: And the Reason why the Owners are forced to borrow money
upon these Securities, is because they cannot make money of them: If therefore
these Securities could be made Money, there would be no Occasion of borrowing
money upon them, and consequently the Interest of money on these Securities
would be extinguished, which makes the Lands to be inestimable; for all Value
is by comparison, two things of equal goodness are the value of one another,
and the purchase of Lands being valued by the rate of the Interest of money, if
this Interest be extinguished, there is nothing left to make the comparison
whereby to value the Lands, and therefore they must be inestimable. Pleasure
and Profit are all the Accomplishments of Life; now the natural produce of
Lands supplies all the Pleasures of Life; and if the Policy of Man can add the
profit of money to it, all the accomplishments of Life are contained in it.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
But this is the Invention perfected, which we must not promise our selves to
see. I only mention it, to show that the falling of Interest by the Invention,
will be a growing improvement to Lands, even to an infinity, whereby to
encourage the beginning of the Invention. I know the Mercurial Projectors of
the Age skip to the top of their Notions at the first jump, like the Mother of
Zebeaee's Children, who made it her first Prayer, that the two highest seats in
Heaven might be reserved for her two Sons: But this shows their ignorance of
Nature, who never leaps; all ascent is by climbing, Men grow from Children,
Trees from Seeds, and Learning from the Element of Letters; I don't doubt but
Lands by this Invention may be advanced to a hundred Years purchase; but this
must proceed from the Practice and Improvement of the Invention, and not the
Notion of it only: If the growth of this Invention will yearly advance the
value of Land one Years purchase, (which may modestly be expected) it is in
effect doubling the present Rents.

Thirteenth Assertion.
That though this Improvement added to the present Value of Lands be
unexpected, and surprising, it is nevertheless plain and true, and agreeable to
other productions in Nature and Arts: And though it is plain and true, it is
never the less valuable, but rather the more admirable.

When God had made Man, Proved.
he gave him a view of all the Creatures made before him, pleasant to the eye,
and pleasant to the taste, and good for food; which was a complete
Entertainment to him, as he apprehended, for he felt no Appetite in himself,
but what had a suitable Object to gratify it. And yet all this while Man had
within him a dormant Affection, (which he did not know of) capable of a higher
Enjoyment than all his other Appetites, and this lay concealed from him, 'till
the Creator presented him with his Female; who being an Object suited to that
Affection, gave him the first feeling of it. Love is an Affection contracted by
the Eye, and therefore 'till the Object was produced, the Affection lay
dormant, (as Fire does in Stones 'till they are smitten): If therefore the
Fairest Aspect of the Creation was presented to Man, after he had ended his
Expectations of being entertained with any more Objects, and consequently That
highest pleasure of Life was added to him, after he had ended his Expectations
of any further happiness, why should it seem strange, that other Qualities in
Nature should lie concealed, 'till the Wisdom of Providence thinks fit to
produce them. How many things now common in the World were kept hid from Ages
past? as the virtue of the Lodestone, and thereby the discovery of America,
the use of Guns, Printing, Glass, etc. The Earth is the great Staple of the
World, made by God to be manufactured and improved by Man, and perhaps the
things not yet seen are greater than the things already seen. And though we can
have no Notion of them till they are produced, yet when they are made to
appear, the Concealment of them seems more miraculous than the Discovery, for
the making them to appear, makes them plain, and the plain appearance of them
raises an admiration, that they were never before observed. Inventions are
Mysteries found out, and what is not plain, is not found out, but remains a
Mystery still, so that the Author of an Invention ((...) make it perfect) must
thereby loose the Honor of it, and be despised, as producing a common thing.
And that this may be my Fate, is the top of my Ambition; however this proves
the Assertion, That though this Improvement added to the present value of the
Lands, seem extravagant, and be unexpected and surprising, it is nevertheless
plain, and true, and agreeable to other Productions in Nature and Arts: And though
it is plain and true, it is never the less valuable, but rather the more
admirable.

Fourteenth Assertion.
That therefore it cannot be doubted but the Legislative Power will encourage
this Invention, by reviving the Clauses relating to Lands, in the Act passed
last Sessions, for Establishing a Land-Bank.

When we address to our Superiors, Proved.
for any thing to be done by them, it is Duty and Good Manners to consider,
1st. That the Notion and Intent of the thing we propose be useful and honest,
in case it can be effected. 2dly. That the practice of it be made visible and
plain, before we offer it: 3dly. That we prepare every thing ready for their
Fiat, which is to give the Sanction; that they may have nothing to do, but what
can be done by none but themselves: Now that the Notion and Intent of forming
these Securities of Lands into the Qualities of Money, and using them as Money,
will be esteemed by the Legislative Power to be useful and honest, in case it
can be effected, cannot remain a Doubt. Then the next Query is, Whether the
practice of this Notion can be made visible and plain? The first part of the
Notion is the forming these Securities into the Qualities of Money, and this
belongs to him that offers the Invention, for it is not the Business of the
Legislative Power to draw Settlements and Forms, those must be done by some one
of that Science to which these Forms and Settlements relate. And that I may not
seem to amuse with implicit terms, this Form is nothing but Division: The
forming the Securities of Lands into the Qualities of Money, is no more than
Dividing these Securities into smaller Sums. Division is the first thing in
Form. In the Description of the Creation it is said to be without Form, and
void, 'till it was divided, The Light from the Darkness, and the Waters from
the Dry Land; and by these Lights, Eternity was divided, and sub-divided into
Time, of Years, Days and Hours, for Man to keep his Accounts by; for Eternity
undivided is of no use to Man. Every thing is more or less valuable, as it is
more or less capable of Division. Now 'till these Securities were made
divisible, all the residue of the Invention was impossible; for if the
Securities themselves are not capable of being formed into the Qualities of
Money, it is not in the Power of the Parliament to make them so. But this first
Part of the Invention is actually done, and has showed it self in all the
parts of it. The 26 th. of October, 1695. was the first day of issuing out
Bills charged upon Lands, (which are the Securities thereof divided) and these
were the first Bills (we hear of) that have been charged upon Lands, and issued
out for Money: And to give plain Instances that these Securities, so divided
into Bills, are Money, the Mortgagees who had these Securities before they were
divided, and were to receive the Moneys due upon them, brought their Securities
to the Bank, to be formed into Bills, and received back those Bills for their
Money; They brought the Bullion into the Bank, and took it back in Coin; and
for doing this the Owners of the Lands are content to pay a small Interest to
the Bank, for keeping a Cash of other Moneys, to answer these Bills as they are
demanded, ( and this by the way may silence all Enquiries into the profit of
the Bank): And in this manner there has been issued out forty five thousand
Pounds in Bills, all which have been paid and repaid as Money, and the Bank had
valued Estates for issuing out One hundred thousand pounds more, but
foreseeing the impossibility of maintaining a Credit in their Infancy, during
the Regulation of the Coin, they stopped their Hands, and content themselves at
present in paying their Bills already issued, and giving an undeniable
demonstration of the first part of the Invention, by forming the Securities of
Lands into the Qualities of Money, and thereby standing ready for the Sanction
and assistance of the Legislative Power toward the perfecting of this
Invention.

What was passed by the Act of last Sessions, relating to Lands, and is now
humbled represented to the Legislative Power, is,

First, That the Subscribers may be incorporated, in order to stand seized of
Lands to be conveyed to them, to prevent the charge or Fraud of Trustees. In
the dividing the Securities of Lands, the Legal Estates thereof must be
conveyed to Trustees, who are to stand seized in the first place for the
Persons who have the Bills charged on the Lands, and afterward in trust for
the Owners of the Lands, who make the Conveyances; and to prevent the Legal
Estates from going to Heirs or Executors, there must be several Trustees in
every Conveyance, which may occasion great Charge and Trouble in transferring
the Securities, especially if the Trustees prove corrupt, (which often happens
in common Securities, amongst private Men): I have known a Mortgager forced to
pay twenty Guineas to a parcel of Trustees, for sealing an Assignment of his
Mortgage: Now this charge of Transferring Securities entailed on Freehold
Estates, is as real Encumbrance upon them as Fines upon alienations are upon
Copy-holds: And if (as has been observed) the transferring the Titles of Land
to Money, and making the assignment of every piece to be by Deed, would
depreciate it, and incapacitate it from being Money, by the same reason the
transferring the Titles of Money to Lands, and making the delivery only to be a
Title, would (of it self) render them much more valuable; and though the
equitable Interests only (which are the Bills) can be assigned by Delivery, yet
the less Charge is incident to transferring the Legal Estates, the more
valuable the Lands will be, And this is the Intent of being Incorporated. A
great part of the Towns and Trades in England have been incorporated by Kings
or Parliaments, for the convenience of doing their own Business. The
Worsted-Weavers in Yarmouth and Lynn were each of them incorporated by
Parliament, in 15 th. Hen. 8. with a power to have a Seal for their own Cloths,
for no other reason than that it was before painful and costly for them to
carry their Cloths to be sealed at Norwich, which they were obliged to by a
former Act. And the School of Norleech in Gloucester-shire was Incorporated by
Parliament, in 4. Jac. 1. upon the Opinion of three Lord Keepers, and two
Judges, that they ought to be Incorporated, in order to stand seized of their
own Lands; for that the surviving Feoffee of the School-Lands went about to
defraud the School, by making a long Lease to his own Son, under a small Rent.
If therefore the Kings and Parliaments of England have incorporated so many
Towns and Trades, for the convenience of doing their business, and that the
Parliament (in the first of these Cases) incorporated two Companies of Weavers,
for preventing their trouble and charge in going to distant places; and (in the
last Case) incorporated a Countrey-School, to prevent frauds in their Trustees,
can it be doubted that the present Legislative Power will deny the like
convenience for the better settling and improving all the Lands in the Kingdom?
and in this they have signified their pleasure already, by declaring (in the
Act passed last Sessions) that the intent of the Incorporation was in order to
lending Moneys on Lands.

The Second Thing contained in the last Act, and now humbly represented to the
Parliament, is, The securing the Titles of the Lands after they are so settled:
And this is intended by the Settlement already executed and practiced, whereby
it is declared that the Lands conveyed pursuant to that Settlement, (as long as
they stand so conveyed) shall not be subject to any other Encumbrances than
what shall be charged thereon by the Owners thereof, in the Register-Books of
the Bank; by which the Lawyers are of Opinion, that the Lands will be protected
against any other future Encumbrance. But to put that out of all doubt, it was
inserted in the Act, which can be no Unjustice to any, (as a Register with a
Retrospect might be) being only the initiating of a voluntary Register, to be
perfected by time.

The Third Clause relating to Lands in the last Act, and now humbly
represented, is, A power by public sale to sell the Mortgaged Lands, in case
the Money lent thereon by the Bank be demanded, and unpaid six years together;
and with the Money arising by sale to Discharge the Mortgage-Monies, returning
the Overplus to the Owner of the Lands. And this will save Expenses in Suits,
which must otherwise be charged on the Lands.

There are other Clauses for Transferring the Bills, Searching of Judgments,
etc. for the better Security and Convenience of the Bank.

And that this Constitution may not be diverted from the end proposed and
intended, we shall think it no Penalty that the Bank may be restrained from
issuing out any Bills, but what shall be charged upon Lands conveyed unto them,
which is more restrictive than all the Clauses drawn for that purpose by the
late Opposers of the Act.

Now all these being Conveniences only, grantable by the Legislative Power,
without charging any Man's Property, and the use of them seeming so necessary
and advantageous, It cannot be doubted but the Legislative Power will encourage
this Invention, by reviving these Clauses.

Fifteenth Assertion.
That it cannot be doubted but the Owners of the Lands will readily receive and
use this Invention.

Silver and Gold are Foreign Commodities, Proved.
bought of those who are sometimes our Allies, and sometimes our Enemies, and
we (by virtue of our Agreements) have made them Money, to the depreciating the
value of our own Lands; and shall not we (by the same Agreements) make Money of
our Lands, which will cost nothing, and double the value of the Lands by doing
it? Never was any thing more eagerly received than Proposals for lowering the
Interest of Money, insomuch that the Notions of it dispersed in common
Pamphlets, brought men out of all Countries, only to hear silly Men talk about
it. Perhaps some Ceremonies may be used in the Order and precedence of coming
into this Invention. When that Doctrine (which we now profess to be our
Religion) was first vented in the World, the Priests and Rulers stood off, and
would not meddle with it, because they were safely posted at the head of the
Church and State, and had no occasion to expose their Reputation, by turning
Projectors, and venturing upon a new thing, before they knew whether it would
take or not; and therefore they set the Publicans and Harlots (who thought
themselves to have most need of it) to go in first, to try the Experiment; but
when they found that the thing would do, they all fell in to it one after
another, 'till at last it came to be as scandalous to be out of it, as it was
at first to be in it. I know the thing now proposed is New, and therefore I
expect that those who are a cold must first blow this Coal, but when it is once
kindled, it can never want Fuel to maintain the Fire. We call them Fops who
invent new Fashions, and yet we all follow them one after another; some will
have them in a Week, others in a Month, some in a Year after they are in, and
some seven Years after they are out; and so it is in the change of other
Customs; for if Men should be all of the same mind together, the crowd would
hinder the doing the business they come about. Men fall into things one after
another, as their Occasions and Inducements lead them. There is no Profit in
the World made certain: All Gain depends upon the contingent Occasions and
Necessities of others; a Lawyer is not sure of Clients, nor a Physician of
Patients, nor a Landlord of Tenants, nor a Monied Man of any one to borrow of
him, but they all expect the Necessities of others to support themselves by;
and therefore the present Necessities requiring the use of this Invention, it
cannot be doubted but the Owners of the Lands will readily receive and use it;
and by so doing they enter into other Men's Labors, their Estates are improved
to their Hands, without their Heads or Thoughts. Let but the reservation of
their Leases be made thus, Yielding therefore the Sum of 100 l. in Lawful
Money of England, Or in Bills of the Land-Bank, and This short Disjunctive
makes the Bills Lawful Money of England, and the Owners of the Lands to be
Bankers upon the Credit of their own Estates.

Sixteenth Assertion.
That a General Consent of the Kingdom to receive and use this Invention, would
cause a sudden fall of the Price of Money, notwithstanding the practice and
execution of it could not be immediately made general.

By General I don't mean Universal, Proved.
that every Man should set his Hand to it, but a common Approbation of it by
those who know it. Men deal upon Prospects of what is like to be: Merchants and
Ttraders have gotten Estates, by foreseeing the rise or fall of Commodities,
and it is observed amongst them, that an extravagant price of any Commodity does
produce a sudden fall, by putting Men's Heads to work to procure more of the
same kind, or to invent something else instead of it. And did the present
Owners of Money foresee a fall of it, by providing a Supply of another Species,
they would part with it as they do with other Commodities, under the like
apprehensions. There is no way to break Game-Houses but to keep out of them,
nor any way to fall the price of Money, but to lessen the occasions of it. That
therefore, etc.

Seventeenth Assertion.
That the Reviving these Clauses in the beginning of the approaching Sessions,
will almost amount to an Unanimous Consent of the Kingdom to receive and use
this Invention; and will thereby facilitate the raising the present Supplies
for the Government, by a sudden fall of the Price of Money.

It is not intended by reviving these Clauses in the beginning of the Sessions,
Proved.
that the Supplies of the Government should be post-poned, but first provided
for. The Government is the fence of the Kingdom, without which the Subjects
cannot enjoy their Properties, and therefore to provide for our selves before
the public, is as if a Man should sow his Corn before he has enclosed his
Ground. And as our own Security obliges us to provide for future Defense, so
Justice and Gratitude calls for the Arrears of the Army and Navy, who have
fought upon the Honor of the Kingdom, to preserve us at home in Peace; and
therefore they who have enjoyed that repose, cannot truly call any thing their
own, 'till they have made Provision to pay the utmost Farthing of so just a
Debt.

But the present Owners of Moneys depending that there will be a Necessity of
raising the value of the Coin, (as the Term is) will not deliver it out of
their Possession to others, to receive the advantage of the rise, and 'till
this matter be adjusted, they who want Money must pay Extortion instead of
Interest. Now as to the thing it self of raising the Coin, to me it seems, As
to past Contracts, to be an inversion of Agreements, (of which I have before
wrote my thoughts) and as to future Contracts, to be wholly insignificant, for
if I am to repay the same Money I receive, it is no matter what the weight of it
be. And upon the whole, it seems to have a Trick in it, which must be showed
but once, like the splitting of shares in Joint-stocks, to multiply them in the
Hands of those whose they then are, that, before the fallacy is found out, they
may sell them (by number) to others, who come to the right understanding of it
by the fall of them in their own Hands: By which I would not be thought to
reflect on those Gentlemen (whose Opinions have seemed for it) as designing any
ill, for I own that my first apprehensions of it were different from what I
have now hinted; though I never read the Arguments in it, or ever concerned my
self about it; having waived the Study of it, to find out another Species
besides it. And therefore I desire that what I have here offered as my present
Conceptions of it, may not be taken as any part of my Argument.

The Drift of this Essay is to depreciate the Value of our Gold and Silver, as
it now is, by making another Species more valuable than that, by the acceptance
of it at a higher rate. It is to undersell the Spaniards, by making Money of
our home Manufacture, without any other charge than some Paper or Parchment;
and if the Legislative Power (in the beginning of the approaching Sessions)
shall be pleased to declare their Resolution against raising the denomination
of the value of the Coin, and will second that Resolution with reviving these
Clauses, it will almost amount to a general Consent of the Kingdom to receive
and use this Invention. An Act of Parliament is an Agreement of the Kingdom;
for though I have before (by way of Argument) supposed an Act to pass contrary to
the Nature of Laws, yet it is not to be supposed that the Wisdom of the
Legislative Power will ever do this in Fact. And I dare imitate the Prophet, to
foretell, That a Bill of Revivor (grounded upon these Reasons) passed into a
Law, will cause as sudden and unexpected a fall to the price of Money in
England, as the Noise heard in the Camp of the Syrians did to the price of
Provisions in the Seige of Samaria, and thereby give occasion to use the
Acclamation of the Poet upon another Event,

-- Quod, optanti divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies en attulit ultro.
What Heaven durst not promise them that pray,
Here Is of it self produced in a day.
Eighteenth Assertion.
That a Settlement of a Bank for Lands distinct by it self, without annexing it
to the Supplies of the Government, seems the best Establishment of it.

The Government wanting their Supplies in Species of Gold and Silver, Proved.
the Subscriptions for that purpose must be made by those who have the
possession of the Money, who being (for the greatest part) Merchants and
Traders, must thereby have the first possession of the Bank; and they being
unacquainted with the Securities of Lands, and accustomed to more present Gains
then low Interest seems to them to be, they will endeavor to divert their
Credit from Lands to what they apprehend more profitable, and of this we have
had an Example in the Bank of England: Whereas if a Bank for Lands be
established by it self, their Occasions for Money will arise by degrees, and
may be raised by the Owners of the Land themselves, either in Money, or in
Securities on their Lands, which (by the assistance of this Invention) will be
equally useful as Money of Gold or Silver: That therefore, etc.

Nineteenth Assertion.
That a Bank thus established, will be a greater Security to the Government for
the future, than a Bank set up for that purpose only.

Cursed be he that divides the Interest of the Government and People. Proved.
Private Subjects have all along supplied the Government with Money, through
the Bank of England as their Casheir, who have taken upon them to dispose of it
as their own, and magnified themselves to the Public for it, which has put a
Disobligation upon their Creditors, that those that have only the Receipt of
the Money, should be esteemed the Owners of it: Now in this Bank here proposed,
the Bank lends the Subjects, and enables them to execute the grateful office of
lending the Money to the Public with their own Hands, and to receive the
Profit of it, and yet the Bank is as serviceable to the Crown, as if they lent
them the Money directly, because it is incumbent on the Bank to pay the Bills,
which is the most difficult part in all Accounts: And is not the Crown more
secure in being supplied by a Bank, whose Securities are charged on the Lands,
and their Credit supported by the Receipts of the Rents of the Kingdom, than by
a Bank to which the King himself is forced to give the chiefest Credit by
receiving their Bills in the public Revenues, to his loss? That therefore a
Bank thus established will be greater Security to the Government for the
future, than a Bank set up for that purpose only.

Twentieth Assertion.
That an Unanimous Consent in this Establishment, would be a happy Event of the
War.

By the Constitution of the Government of England, Proved.
the Execution of the Law is vested in the Body Politic of the King, that he
may stand seized thereof to the use of the Subjects, for preserving their
Liberties and Estates; and whenever that Trust is broken, the Subjects having
no Court of Equity to appeal to, are driven to their Arms, and the Descent of
his present Majesty with his Foreign Troops into England, was to head the
Subjects against the Invasion of their Liberties, begun upon them by him, who
then had the possession of the Crown, which being translated to his present
Majesty, put him into the possession of the Law, and thereby the Subjects into
the use of their Liberties under him. But to maintain this Possession, it was
absolutely necessary to begin the War against a Foreign Power, who had made
themselves formidable by unjust acquisitions from their Neighbors; and this
War has and will cost us forty Millions of Money, directly advanced to
maintain it, besides the Losses by Sea, and yet it is the best Money that ever
the Subjects spent; for by this they have preserved the whole, which otherwise
had been lost before now, and therefore according to that Saying, What is saved
is got, the Expense and Loss of the War has purchased three Kingdoms, with
which we may rest well satisfied, without the fond Conceit of the Conquest of
France, which is to ask we know not what.

But as a Reward to the Subjects for their Zeal and Bravery in expending so
large a part of their present Possessions, to convey the Reversion of their
Estates and Liberties to their Posterity, here seems a fair Opportunity offered
(occasioned by the Expense of the War) for improving their own Estates, with
their Wives and Families at home, which is better than transplanting themselves
to Foreign Conquests. Would but the Gentlemen of England for one Year spend as
much time and pains in their several Countyes to promote this Invention, as
they do to manure two Acres of Land, they would find the Improvements
increasing upon them a sufficient Encouragement to proceed in it, 'till they
had made themselves rich, and from their abundance the Necessities of the Poor
would be supplied. I can say truly, that the Miseries of the Poor do affect me,
and yet I never had thoughts of Proposing any thing directly for their Releif,
apprehending their chiefest dependence to be upon the Superfluities of the
rich; and this was the Provision made for them by the first Law of the World,
which forbid the rakeing of the Corn, that the Poor might live upon the
Gleanings, and the leavings of the Poor is the Provision for the Fowls of the
Air -- Whereas raising the Rates for the Poor, without adding something to
those that are taxed, does insensibly draw the Scot and Lot-men into the
Poors-book, the Rates mulitiplying the Poor as fast as the Poor multiply the
Rates -- But let more be given to them who have the possession of much already,
and somewhat of it will naturally fall to them that have nothing.

As for the King himself, (whose Success is our Safety) I cannot conceive him
capable of any greater or less Enjoyment than his own Complacency in that
Choice which has descended upon him from Providence, to be the Deliverer of
that People who have also chosen him for their Defender: And though his Alliance
by Blood be the initiating of his Title to the Crown, yet his Election
thereunto is his highest Personal Honor. To be a King is a mean thing in
comparison of being made one. The Redeemer of the World was an Office of that
state and dignity, that his Harbinger is declared to be the highest post of
Honor that ever Man stood possessed of, and yet it is said of this Redeemer, He
gloryed not that he was an High Priest, but that he was made an High Priest: He
did not magnify himself that he was the Redeemer of the World, but that he was
Chosen by God to be so.

And I am glad to find my Arguments terminate here, for by this I know I have
done, because I have run it where I can go no further: Nor did I know what I
was going to do, when I first put Pen to Paper, or where I should begin or end,
but having seen and (for some years) felt the extravagant rate of Money, I
resolved to search the Pedigree of it, (as Men do of Upstarts preferred above
their Merit) and if I should find it of an Honorable Descent, and absolutely
necessary, I resolved to conceal it, but if I could trace its Original to be
mean and inconsiderable, I resolved to expose it, thereby to vilifye it in Men's
Thoughts, as not so indispensably necessary as it is generally apprehended: Not
but that Money is absolutely necessary, but not the very Money of Gold and
Silver. And in pursuit of this Enquiry, I found that though the common use of
this (as of other things) be obvious unto all, yet when we would dissect them,
to search out the manner of their Subsistence and Operations, we find them all
fastened down to the Root of Nature, by certain Fibers, which we must digg down
to, and trace from thence into all the Labyrinths of Succession, feeling all
our way by that thread. There are no Fractions in Nature, nor any things
independent, they are all linked to one another in a continued Chain, which
reaches from the Creation to Eternity: And I have so far endeavored to imitate
Nature in what I have written, as to argue from a Chain of Positions,
successively depending upon one another, which is the most dangerous way of
arguing, because if one Position happens to be false, it vitiates all that
follow: But there is no finding out the Truth any other way. It Is an easy
matter to frame Sentences, and dance up and down with them and never be
discovered whether they are true or false, because the Notions are not digested
into such a Method, that either the Writer or Reader can judge of them: But
when the Assertions are positive, and the Arguments to prove them follow
immediately upon them, the Writer and Reader can the better judge of them, as
they go along; and if every individual be true by it self, then the whole is
true altogether, or else not. And upon review of what I have written, it all
seems to me to be true, or else I would not publish it; but yet my Arguments
may be fantastical and fallacious, though I don't know it, therefore I offer them
to be scanned by others.

Truth made manifest is the Foundation I have aimed at, and though my Assertions
seem bold, I hope my Proofs do manifest them to be true; and if in finding out
the Truth I have spoken more plainly and freely of some things that have fallen
into my Arguments, than otherwise I should do, I hope the Truth found out will
excuse my manner of Enquiry after it.

And to clench the Nail, I Will venture to fling in a bolder Assertion than all
the rest, That there is no other Foundation to build and support the Credit of
the Kingdom upon, than the very thing hereby proposed: But this being a
Negative; I Will let it stand to be falsified by those who will prove the
contrary, by doing it. Nor do I say that there is nothing else to be done, but
that this ought not to be left undone, for though the present Supplies could be
otherwise raised, the growing Interest of Money will eat out the Kingdom,
unless something be laid to the Root of it, to eat out that. The Interest of
Money has such a Spell in it, that were the whole Coin of the Kingdom but ten
thousand Pounds, the Rate of Interest for that Sum would set a price upon all
the Lands in England, which are computed at 15 Millions per Annum; and the less
principal Money there is, the higher the Interest rises, therefore there is no
way to fall the Interest but to multiply the Principal. In the time of the Late
Revolutions, upon reading a Bill in the House of Commons, Entitled, An
Ordinance for suppressing the Horrible Sin of Adultery, a Member there moved
that the Title might be, An Ordinance for the more secret committing the
Horrible Sin of Adultery: And considering how Usury and Extortion have thriven
under all the Laws made against them, the Titles of the Acts for that purpose
might have been, For the more Artificial taking Extortion and Usury. Now in
multiplying the Principal of Money, perhaps other Securities may be so formed,
as to supply the use of Moneys as well as the Securities on Lands. But the
Credit of them must depend upon their Alliance with Lands, especially since the
Owners of the Lands (having Intimation of their Strength) will be able to
suppress any Credit that shall be set up in Prejudice to their Estates.

And after all this, had I not a greater Authority to justify my Assertions
than all the Arguments I have used to prove them, I durst not be so bold; but
that I may not seem immodest by taking so much upon me, I own my self ignorant
of many other Accomplishments, that I might attain to this, I have waved all
Advantages in my Profession, to study A more convenient Settlement for Lands;
and therefore I hope the more Learned and Successful in that Science will not
envy me, if I should be the Author of an Improvement in that point, and thereby
entail upon my self the Despicable Name of a Projector for doing it: However as
to that, every Man is either a Projector, by finding out New Forms, or a
Mechanic by copying after them: And if they who give me the Character of the
former, will please to accept the Title of the latter, I shall not think my
self affronted: Especially since the Sages of the Law themselves, who have
chosen that grave Sentence for their Motto, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare, have
been the Projectors of New Inventions in the Law, which by time have grown into
Customs. The Titles of the greatest part of the Lands in England do depend upon
an Invention of the Lawyers, in the manner of passing Recoveries to bar Estates
Tail, notwithstanding the Statute of Westminster 2 nd. For though the Writs on
which these Recoveries are grounded, were ancient, yet the setting up a Common
Vouchee, the Appearance of all Parties without Process, Execution and Seisin and
Returns of the Writs being all done together in an instant, is a Project in the
Law which by Custom has gained the Name of A Common Recovery, and is now
become a Common Assurance of Lands. And as the Titles of Lands do thus depend
upon an Invention in the Law, so the manner now used for trying these Titles by
Possessory Actions, ( termed Ejectments) is an Invention in the Law, by the
introducing of which the ancient way of Trials by real Actions is become so
obsolete, That at a Call of Sergeants the Counts and Pleadings in Formedons
being transcribed from Precedents, are delivered to these Graduates, only to be
read over by them, as Relics of the Law, amongst other Antiquated Ceremonies
used at that Solemnity.

And if any thing be expected from me, relating to the differences which have
happened from passing the Act last Sessions, I must say no more of it here,
than That all the Charges and Aspersions cast upon us from thence, and the
impeaching the Justice of the Parliament for establishing another Bank, while
THE Bank of England (whose Name or Essence never extended beyond 1200000 l.
limited them by the Act) is in being, are so vain and ridiculous, that to bind
them up with the Names of God and the King, (whom I have dared to insert in
this Essay) would render me guilty of profaneness and irreverence.

Lincoln's Inn, September. 1696. J. Asgill.


