AN ACCOUNT OF THE Surrender of Limerick; AND THE Particulars of the French's
Retreat to GALLOWAY: WITH Monsieur LAVSON's and TYRCONNELL's going Aboard the
French Galleys.
LIKEWISE A particular RELATION of the Irish Flying in Scattered Parties to the
Mountains of Kerry.
August the 15th. 1690. With Allowance.

LAst Night a Messenger came Express, from the King, out of Ireland, bringing
Her Majesty the glad Tidings, That that which appeared the most difficult to
accomplish, viz. The Reduction of the Town and Castle of Limmerick, considering
the strength and situation of the Place, which renders it almost Impregnable,
did in a most wonderful manner, as it were by the Providence of the Almighty,
to astonish and intimidate the French Garrison, upon appro^ch of ^is Majesty's
Forces, strike a Terror and Diffidence of their own ^^tended Prowels and
Valor, in such a nature, that the Count de Lozun, General of the French
Forces, not being willing to give the English the opportunity of Signalizing
their Courage a second time, having already sufficiently experimented the
Effects thereof, on the River Boyne; and thereupon, gave Orders for all the
French to draw thereout, with what Baggage they could possibly convey, and take
their March toward Galloway, carrying with him Eight Pieces of Cannon, some
Arms and Ammunition, giving out, to delude the simple Irish, That he had
Express Orders from his Master, to take Shipping, to assist the rest of the
French King's Forces, that were making a descent in the Western Parts of
England, which by Five German and Walloon Deserters was brought to the King,
having the day before arrived at his Camp, within 8 or 10 Miles of the place:
And also confirmed by many others, with the addition, That Colonel Lutterell,
with three Companies of Irish, had taken possession thereof; and it is not to be
doubted, but they will gladly accept of His Majesty's Mercy, and Surrender the
same. To which end, the King has Expedited a considerable Detachment, with a
peremptory Summons to the Governor, to deliver it up; which, by our next, we
shall be able to give a more ample Account of that proceeding, there being
above 60 heavy Cannon for Battery, and 20 Mortars, drawing before it. Already a
great many Irish flocks in to take His Majesty's ^^otection; the rest are got
the other side the Boyne, and sc^mpers away in great Parties. And it is
affirmed, that Tyrconnel himself, not thinking himself safe in Limmerick, is
gone after the Monsieurs; but Sir Patrick Trant, and some other of the Irish
Gang is got therein, thinking to obtain some favorable Conditions.

By Letters from Paris we have Received certain Information, That the French
King has Ordered 12 or 14 Ships for Galloway to fetch off the Remains of his
Troops, which are Reduced to near 5000. That the Lord Tyrconnell intended for
France with Monsieur de Lausun, and they were sending away their Baggage. That
many of the Irish had followed the French to Galloway; and that a good number
of others, who were discontented at the Lord Tyrconnell's Proceedings, were
retired to the Mountains of Kerry.

LONDON, Printed for R. G. in Holbourn. 1690.


