Some general OBSERVATIONS UPON Dr. STILLINGFLEET'S Book, and way of Wrighting.

WITH A Vindication of St. Ignatius Loyola, and his followers the Jesuits.

From the foul Aspersions he has lately cast upon them, in his discourse
concerning the Idolatry, etc.

In four Letters, written to A. B

Printed, 1672.

A short address to the READER. concerning Dr. Stillingfleet, and his present
Answerers.
Good Reader,
WIthout farther ceremony, be pleased to take notice that these Letters were
ready for the Press, much about the time, when his Majesty's gracious
Declaration for a general toleration came first out a time which was generally
thought not so seasonable for exposing such writings to public view. I was
therefore willing to follow the example of other Catholic Writers, who then
were unanimously resolved rather to smother their just complaints in silence,
and quietly enjoy his Majesty's indulgent favor to all Non Conformists; then
by justifying themselves, raise new heats and animosities amongst his Majesty's
loving Subjects. Had Protestants then been as forward to lay down their arms,
probably not only these Letters would have been still suppressed; but all other
Polemical writings in this kind. But when we heard of a new War so solemnly
proclaimed against us out of the Pulpit, by D. Tillotson, and our adversaries
(Dr. Stilllingfleet by name) daily triumphing and insulting over us, and
interpreting this our silence to be an argument of our weakness, as if his
books were unanswerable; we could no longer forbear to speak for our selves
without betraying our cause.

Now as D. Stillingfleet in particular has abused many you are to know that
many have been also bold to lash him* and discover his tricks, and it is worth
your observation, that no less then eight several Treatises are already come
out against his charge of Idolatry and Fanaticisme, etc. either to the whole
Libel or to some part of it.

1. D. Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet, in which he is showed to be a
very Lylbourn, ever jarring with himself, and scarce able to write ten pages
without a manifest contradiction.

2. Reason and Religion by the same Learned Author that writ Protestancy
without Principles: to which the Dr. has been fain to make so poor a retourn.

3. (...) etc. Containing an entire answer to the Drs. whole book, which I hear
will shortly be made public, though the greatest part of it was taken in the
Press by the Drs. Emissaries.

4. There is a Collection of 4 other Treatises bound together, in answer to the
material things in the Drs. book, 1. Fanaticisme ^anatically imputed to the
Church of Rome. 2. The Roman Church's devotion vindicated. 3. Of Indulgences.
4. His Protestant Principles discovered. The first of these was written by one
of those most Learned writers that sent away Dr. Pierce with a flea in his ear.
The other three were penned by the Learned Author of the Guide in Controversy.
These Letters make up the eighth Treatise and I am credibly informed that the
Author of the two questions (which in truth are unanswerable (though the cause
as the Dr. pretends of the present Controversy) has a full answer ready, which
I doubt not will be suitable to his Worth and Learning.

And let not the Dr. slight any of these Treatises, because they are not of so
great a bulk as his own: for after a diligent perusal, you will find, that
this mighty Man, who in his own conceit, was swelled up as big as another
Goliath, professing himself to be invincible, has met with as many David 's
slings to fell him to the ground, as there are books out against him. If this
be not really so, let him take up his Buckler, and appear again in the Field to
defend himself; let him, I say, make a close reply to his Adversaries, and he
will show himself a man, but without this, his vapouring will not do it: for he
that only challenges his Enemy into the Field, or strikes the first stroke, and
then runs away when he meets with a resistance, shall never have the reputation
of a stout man. It is easy enough to make a fair flowrish in words, to
maintain the greatest Paradox in the World, if there must be no si^ting into
the solidity of the Proofs: and it is after this rate that the Dr. writes
books, without caring how to defend them, when they are once got safe out of
his hands.

But now a word or two to his Rational Account: he often brags it has never
yet been answered, though he knows well, that both the Guide in Controversy,
and Protestancy without Principles, had destroyed his very Foundation; nay he
knows that many learned Men of the Church of England, have despised it as no
ways advantageous to their cause, and deemed it a Fanatical work, as defending
the Greeks, Arrians, and all other Heretics, and Schismatics, that oppose the
Church of Rome. Notwithstanding all this, had not Mr. Sp. dyed and seft his
work half finished, the Dr. would have seen himself baffled long a go and it
will not be long, I hope, before another Learned hand complete the Work, to the
shame and confusion of this vain and self conceited Man; Farewell, and be so
kind as to excuse and correct these.

Errata.
PAge. 1. Sir is omitted in the beginning. p. 7. l. 15. dele much. p. 9. l. 19.
sermones. p. 10. l. 3. well, l. 4. Cardinals. p. 14. l. 5. jealous, p. 16. l.
30. dele also, p. 19. l. 1. Bozius. l. 31. for at p. 22. l. 1. makes. l. 12. to
the. l. 19. his way. l. 31. carried away. p. 23. l. 2. time l. 17. and that, p.
25. l. 1 literae. l. 6 whereas. p, 26. l. 19. as slight. l. 22. expressions, p.
27. l. 5. only soon, l. 26. of the. l. 27. dele the, and read with a. p. 29. l.
5. dele if, l 34. one of his, p. 34. l 30. witnesses. p. 35. l. 10. he is not,
l. 25. by good. p. 37. l 31, how easy. p. 38. l. 9. cites Navar. l. 16. titles
p. 39, l, 39. neither taught, p, 41, l. 33: the misdemeanors, p, 42. l. 18. in
those l. 23, triple, l, 33, du Pleix, Peter Matthew, l, 34, Spondanus. p, 48.
l. 5, and 9, St. Amor. p. 52. l. 8. dele that. p. 53. l. 7, saw how, l, 20,
most forward. p. 55. l. 14, of these some, l, 28. too clear, p. 58, l, 1, dele
sect. 9, and read D, Stillingf. sect. 9, l, 12, for calling, l, 15, executed p,
60, l, 32, contrivance, p, 61, l, 10, that Cardinal, l, 29, was not of, l, 32,
delivered it at Port Royal or if, l, 36, talks of. p, 64, l, 12. Archivium, p,
67, l, 17, dele any, p, 68, l, 20, into Canton.

THE FIRST LETTER; SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON Dr. STILLts BOOK, And way of Writing.
1. I Have spent some few hours upon that part of Dr. Still. Discourse, which
was the subject of ours lately, and the occasion of your last Letter. And
before I enter upon telling you my particular reflections, you may please to
observe three things; the first, his severe dealing with Roman Catholics; the
second, his Comical and jesting way of expressing himself; the third, his
cunning artifices to deceive his Reader.

2. His severity is the more remarkable, because contrary to the modern style
of his own party, and cross to his own sentiments delivered in his Rational
Account, (p. 1. Chapter 2. and p. 3. Chapter 4. and p. 54.) For there he is so
complaisant, as to confess (with other Protestants) that the Roman Church is a
true Church, yea the very same with theirs, and a true way to salvation, and
that she holds the foundation, that is, all fundamental or essential points of
faith, and differs only in certain inferior truths, or pious opinions, which
no man is bound to believe. But now (since the Lady left his Congregation) he
is grown so fierce on a sudden, there is no dealing with him, he will ^eeds
Unchurch us, and by laying Fanaticism and Idolatry at our doors, obstruct our
way to salvation, leaving us no other gate to Heaven, but that of ignorance or
repentance, which lies open to Turks and Jews as well as Roman Catholics.

3. This makes me call to mind, a pleasant passage between Bishop Fern and a
good honest Parson, of whom I had it. The Parson was ready to publish a
moderate Treatise in Grotius his way; but the Bishop would by no means suffer
it to go to the Press, but told the Author that he was very much mistaken, if
he thought that was the way to win us: he must know, that a Papist was a kind
of a beast, that would not be tamed with stroaking: much less with striking,
said the Parson. But the Bishop for all that would not alter his opinion; but
the book must be suppressed. Dr. Stillingfleet is directly of the Bishops mind,
he will stroke us no more, he will not court us into the same Church, or
flatter us with the hope of salvation, as he has done formerly, he is now all
for dry blows, and down right striking, and will not be content with any less
charge, to beat down Popery, than that of Fanaticism, Idolatry, and unavoidable
damnation: how in consequently to his own maxims, you have partly seen
already, and has been clearly evidenced, in that short but smart piece, Dr.
Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet, where he is made not only to wipe away
the dirt, which he had cast at the Roman Church, but to throw a good part of it
in his own face, by manifestly proving himself an Idolater, by the very same
arguments which he brought to prove Catholics guilty of that crime. And the
Author (had he bin disposed) could with as much ease, have proved him a
Fanatic as an Idolater from the same principle he made use of against
Catholics.

4. For why I pray are we Fanatics, in his judgment? because forsooth we
countenance some private revelations, and allow some of our Saints to have had
an Enthusiastic way, as he calls it, in their devotions. Now this argument is
far short of proving us Fanatics, because we own nothing in this kind, but
what is approved of by the authority of the Church, which is ever watchful and
severe in punishing all impostures, and will not suffer pretended revelations,
or any such extraordinary favors of Allmighty God to pass for current, but
what have past the test of a rigorous examination. For it is well known, that
all such pretenders, are immediately clapped up by the Inquisition, and do not
easily recover their liberty, till they have given a good account of
themselves. So that none amongst us are permitted to be their own judges, in
matters of faith, or particular ways of devotion, but all are obliged to submit
to the judgment of the Church, and be guided by their lawful Pastors and
Superiors: which submission effectually destroys, the very notion of
Fanaticism, which is grounded in a private Spirit, and independent way of
proceeding, contrary to authority.

5. Yet as to the Doctor, the argument comes home, to prove him a Fanatic. For
I argue thus: he is a Fanatic that pretends to rule himself in matters of
faith, by his private spirit revealing the truth unto him, but D. Still.
pretends to rule himself in matters of faith, by his private spirit revealing
the truth unto him, ergo Dr. Stillinfleet is a Fanatic. That he that pretends
to rule himself in matters of faith, by his private spirit revealing the truth
unto him, is a Fanatic, cannot be denied, it contains the very notion of
Fanaticism. The consequence is evident. The only thing I am to prove is, that
the Doctor pretends to rule himself in matters of faith, by his private spirit
revealing the truth unto him. This I evidence out of the Principles set down by
him, in the end of his Book, Princ. 5. where he says, that there can be no
other means imagined, whereby we are to judge of the truth of Divine
Revelation, but a faculty in us of discerning truth and flalshood, in matters
proposed to our belief, Princ. 13. That the Scriptures can be understood by all
persons, who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them, Princ. 14. And
that they contain the whole will of God so plainly revealed, that no sober
enquirer can miss of what is necessary for Salvation. For what I pray can tha^
faculty of discerning truth from falsehood in matters of faith avail him, with
all the sincere endeavors, and sober enquiry he speaks of, unless it be
infallibly assisted by some private spirit, which inspires and reveals the
truth unto him. For since it is clear by experience, that the same words of
Scripture, are construed by others, after all their endeavors, and best
enquiry to find out the truth, in a quit different sense from that, in which
the Doctor understands them, he must pretend some such private infallible
assistance, which others have not. For example, the Doctor understands his
commandments so, that God has there forbidden all worship of Images; Catholics
understand them otherwise, so as to hold such worship lawful. The Doctor will
have, This is my body, to be taken in a Metaphorical sense, and so denies the
real presence. Catholics understand it litteraly as it sounds, and therefore
adore Christ in the Sacrament. Again an Arrian denies the Son of God to be
equal to his Father, and thinks he has clear Scripture for it. John 14. 28. The
Father is greater than I. An Anabaptist will not allow Infant Baptism, because,
says he, the Scripture requires that all be taught before they be baptized,
(Matt. 18. 19.) Teach all nations baptizing them, and children are not capable
to be taught. The Doctor reads the same Texts, and holds the quite contrary
tenets to both. The question then is, how he comes to see more than his
Neighbors, if he hit right, in all these points wherein he differs from
Catholics, and other Sectaries, since the same clear light of Scripture is
exposed to all, be they Catholics, Arrians, Anabaptists, as well as to the
Doctor: But oh says the Doctor, I have a faculty in me of discerning truth from
falsehood, I seriously endeavor and soberly enquire into the truth. They reply,
they are rational creatures as well as he, and consequently have the same
discerning faculties; they have also souls to be saved as well as he, and are
therefore as much concerned to be sober and serious in enquiring out, that true
faith which is necessary to Salvation; they have the same promises made them,
of being assisted in their endeavors, where then is the difference, or how
come they all to err more than the Doctor? will you know the mystery? it is
this: The faculty which the Doctor has of discerning truth from falsehood, with
his sober and serious enquiry has an extraordinary private assistance, (which
others want) and this directs him so infallibly, that he cannot miss. What Is
this in plain English, but to rely upon I know not what infallible private
spirit, or to pretend to an Enthusiastic way of expounding the Scriptures,
when the sense is in dispute. Is not this to make himself (and every
Protestant) more then Pope? Is it not a degree of Enthusiasm, equal to the
spirit of discerning, which the greatest Fanatic or Quaker ever pretended? and
after this, me thinks, he should leave of clamouring so much against new
revelations, since he has them at his command.

6. But do you not wonder, Sir, why the Doctor has so little charity, as to
engross and monopolize this enthusiastic gift of discovering the true faith,
to himself and a handful of Protestants. Bishop Taylour was a greater
latitudinarian then so, when he granted the liberty of prophesying to all
Christians. And he was as charitable, in clearing us from Idolatry, though the
Doctor observes well, that else where he was of another opinion, that is
contradicted himself, which he thinks a very sufficient way of answering his
arguments, and possibly he may use the same method to defend himself, by
showing us that in another book he taught otherwise. I can assure you Sir, it
were to be wished, that the Dr. had, that which Momus found wanting in the
bull, viz. an eye upon his horn, for he strikes at no aim, and never minds,
whether the blow may not light upon himself.

7. I have done with his severity, only I cannot but take notice; how he
labors in his Preface, to justisie it, at least for as much as concerns his
charge of Idolatry laid against us by producing other Protestant Doctors, who
managed it against us with as much heat, in Q. Elizabeth's, and King James his
days, for what is all this to the purpose, but only to tell us, that
Protestants clash with one another, in this point as well as in others, and
that for his part, he is resolved to side with those, that are the most rigid
and puritanical, such as Dr. Downham, whom he rancks in his list of Authors,
and scorns to be less zealous, so that you may probably expect, that his next
work will be, to prove the Pope Antichrist. But since he leans so much upon the
credit of his Protestant Predecessors, I hope he will find a time also, to
vindicate them from playing the Fanatics, or false Prophets, in pretending to
foretell, the down sall of Popery in the year 666. from the number of the beast
in the Apocalypse. And least Protestants should also be taken for visionairs, he
may do well to give us his opinion of his great grandfather Luthers black
familiar, [Luth. to. 7. Wit. fol. 228. Hospin. hist. Sacram. p. ult. fol.
131.] who in a long conference, related by himself, gave him several reasons
for the abolishing of the Mass, and of Zuinglius [Zuing. to. 2. fol. 249.] his
private admonisher, who as he confesses, gave him the same counsel, though he
did not well remember, whither he were white or black.

8. I come now to his comical strain of writing, which I little dreamt to have
met with, after such a sober declaration in his Preface, that nothing shall
proceed from him, but what becomes a fair and ingenious adversary; that he does
not think it such a mighty matter, to throw dirt in a man's face, and then to
laugh at him, or, any great skill, to make things appear ridiculous or dark.
That it shows far more art and ingenuity to give them their due colors, and
set them in their clearest light. That smartness of expression seems to be like
throwing of vinegar upon hot coals, which gives a quick scent, for the present,
but vanishes immediately into smoke and air. And lastly, that though men
cannot command their judgments, they may and ought to do their expressions. I
say after all these affected promises, of writing soberly in the Preface, who
would have imagined, to have found either so much bitterness, or so much
drollery in the following Discourse, or so much confidence in the man, as to
bind them up both together in the same Book. It is a folly to bring instances,
the whole work is stuffed with flirts and jeers, which do well in Hu^^bras, but
are nothing becoming a person of his calling, or one that professes himself a
fair and ingenious adversary. This appears chiefly in his fourth Chapter: where
he is so far from commanding his expressions, that he makes it his whole
business, to throw dirt and make all things ridiculous, not sparing the very
Saints themselves, for whom the greatest part of Christendom, has so much
veneration, but making them pass for the veriest Idiots and Fanatics in the
World. This is not such a mighty matter to brag of, there is no great skill in
it, for nothing is so holy but may be easily profaned, by a loose libertine
pen. How ridiculous might he make the lives of the Prophets, or of St. John
Baptist, or of Christ himself, would he but employ his talent in writing them,
with as much smartness and picquancy, as he has done the lives of some of our
renowned Saints. What can be written in a graver style, then the life of St.
Ignatius of Loyola, is done, by Orlandinus, Maffeius, and Ribadeneira, and yet
by his legerdemain, he has so metamorphos'd it, that it appears to be a kind of
Romantic story. Take but off his dress, and unmask it, give but things their
due colors, and set them in their clear light, and you will find him still a
glorious Saint, though painted by the Doctor like an errant Fanatic. To show
this shall be the subject of my next Letter, where (to use his own comparison)
you shall see, that all the vinegar, he has cast upon hot coals, vanishes
immediately into smoke and air.

9. The third thing I observe, in his way of writing controversies, is his
cunning shuffling, to deceave the world, for never Mountebank had more devices,
to bring about his ends, then this man has tricks, to cozen his Reader, either
by misconstruing his Authors meaning, or by foisting in words of his own
coining, in the same character with the Text, to make it speak his pleasure, or
chopping in a Parenthesis for his purpose, to turn the Readers fancy that way,
which he would have him look, or crying up objections without taking any notice
of the solutions, and so condemning the party without hearing his cause, or by
boldly charging a whole body, with the faults of a few members, though
condemned by the major part. These are some of the Drs. slights, to confute his
Adversaries, and you will discover more in the perusal of his books, for I will
not enlarge my self upon them at this present. Only I pray take notice, that
all this while his design is, (as he tells us in his Preface) to report
faithfully and to argue closely.

10. I wish, Sir, you heard as I do, how some judicious Protestants express
themselves, concerning this his manner of writing, for I should tire you to
relate all their censures. One says it is the language of a John Potage, and
that the only place for such a book in a Library, is amongst the Comedians and
Play books; another that he talks at no aim like a Puritan, and is too severe
and uncharitable. For my part, I rather pity the man, than quarrel with his
book; I deplore the condition of mortals, who are so easily corrupted with
errors and blinded with passions. Yet I cannot but admire, how some men can
put on the nature of Serpents, and make it their business, to show their teeth,
and bite others. But enough of this subject. I am etc.

THE SECOND LETTER; How the life of St. Ignatius of Loyola is abused by Doctor
Still.
1. YOu shall see in this Letter, how shamefully Dr. Still abuses St. Ignatius,
and I am very much confident, you will be of my opinion, that there never was a
Book so belyed the Preface as his does, never man that had less command over
his expressions, or that took it to be such a mighty matter, to throw dirt in a
man's face, and then laugh at him, as he, whatsoever he there pretends to the
contrary.

2. Grave Authors have observed, that St, Ignatius began the great work, of
founding the Society of JESUS, much about the time, that Luther fell into open
rebellion against the Roman Catholic Church, as if God would tell us, by the
circumstance, that as in the rise of other Sectaries, he always carefully
provided stout Champions to encounter them, and defend his Church: as S.
Athanasius against Arrius, S. Austin against Pelagius, S. Cyril against
Nestorius, S. Hierom against Jovinian, Heluidius and Vigilantius, S. Norbert
against Tanchelinus, St. Dominick and St. Francis against the Albigenses, etc.
so in these later times, he raised St. Ignatius and his followers against
Luther and his Camerades, between whom there has ever since been an eternal and
irreconciable feud. And this may be the chief cause, why Dr. St. (who derives
his negative Religion, from no other source) has such a tooth against the
Jesuits, and their holy Founder. How groundless his plea is against the
Jesuits, you shall see by the next Post, [the third Letter] my present task
shall be only to show you, how shamefully he abuses so great a Saint as
Ignatius is, in the common repute of the Christian world; I can assure you,
there are sober Protestants, that do not love, to see him treated with so much
profaneness.

3. I do not question but you have admired to see what a strange metamorphosis
the Author of Virgil Travesty has made of that most excellent heroical Poem,
and how ridiculously it looks under that dress, which he has put upon it. This
will make you wonder the less, to see so admirable a life, as that of St.
Ignatius, made so ridiculous, by a malicious and scoffing writer, who because
he finds no such extraordinary favors of Allmighty God, in those of his flock,
cannot see them in the servants of God, without laughing at them, as N^ro and
Julian the Apostat did in their times. And first to his Sect 12.

4. His malice here, aims chiefly at this [(...) 4 Sect. 12.] to make the
Saint pass for a mere Alumbra^o, or one of the Sect of the Illuminati, And
first says he, [l. 1. c. 17*] Maffeius does not deny, that it was upon the
account of the Illuminati and his enthusiastical Preaching in the streets that
he was questioned in Spain. By his favor, Maffejus has nothing of his
enthusiastical preaching, (they are* words of his own coining.) He tells us
that it was upon the account of the Lutherans, as well as the Illuminati, that
he was brought into suspicion, which (if it prove any thing against him) most
prove him a Lutheran as well as an Alumbrado, and consequently is impertinent
to the Ds. purpose. But is a bare suspicion enough to make a man criminal; or
does Maffejus or any good Author, give evidence that he was found guilty? quite
contrary: all he says is, that many were suddenly converted to a better life,
by his good instructions, in the Christian faith, and other pious discourses,
even in the streets (I hope there is no Fanaticism in all this) and that this
drew the eyes of many upon him, especially in a dangerous time, when many
Sectaries were stirring, so that upon suspicion, he was called in question, but
that after many strict examinations and trials, not the least fault could be
found in his life and Doctrine. By which you see, Maffejus his evidence is
point blanck against him. His next proof is out of the character of the
Illuminati, which he would fasten upon S. Ignatius, but with as ill success.
For first Ludovicus de Paramo describes them, by their pride and disobedience
to their Superiors, by their obstinate adhering to their illusions, and
indulging themselves in their sensual lusts. Now it is manifest, out of the
whole course of his blessed life, that there could not be a more humble,
obedient, docil and tractable person then Ignatius, nor does he commend any
thing more to his followers, than obedience to their Superiors and spiritual
guides, as the safest way to avoid illusions, of which subject he has left
written a most admirable Epistle. And as for sensual lusts, his conversation
was so Angelical, after his conversion, that I defy his greatest enemies to
find the least blemish in that kind. What Spondanus adds to the description of
the Illuminati, that under pretense of mental prayer, they despised the use of
the Sacraments, preaching the Word of God, and all holy exercises, does as
little suit with Ignatius his spirit, for though he stood much for mental
prayer, as more profitable than vocal, if a right use be made of it, yet he was
a great friend of Preaching, and this the Doctor should not deny, who is ever
and anon bringing him preaching before his time, and in the very streets,
though his Authors at most speak of Catechistical instructions, for he must
know, that Sermons in Latin, does not necessarily signify Sermons as he
always translates it, but familiar discourses. For the use of Sacraments, it is
well known, that St. Ignatius was so far from despising it, that he was not
only a great frequenter of the Sacraments himself, but is held to have been
the chief Author of reintroducing that pious practice, which was much gone to
decay before his time. What shall I say of other holy exercises: though he
loved prayer, yet he had so much zeal of souls, that he neglected no charitable
office, which he could do for the good of his neighbor, either in soul or
body, witness his laying hold of all occasions, to exhort his neighbor to the
detestation of vice, and love of virtue, his serving the sick in Hospitals, and
begging alms for the relief of poor people, etc. You see, Sir, not any one part
of the character of the Illuminati can be applied to St. Ignatius; so unlucky
is the Dr. in his arguments, as if he took pleasure in throwing dirt, though it
fall short and cannot reach his adversary. Now if you have a mind to see the
true character of an Orthodox Christian, in opposition to the Illuminati and
other impure Sects, read over those most excellent rules, which St. Ignatius
has set down in the end of his Spiritual exercises, [Reg. ut cum Ecclesia
sentiamus.]

5 The Doctor will not let this fall so, but to put the matter out of dispute,
brings in Melchior Canus, a person, says he, of more learning and judgment then
a thausand Ignatius's. Compa^isons are odious, yet let me tell him, St.
Ignatius has the general repute of a wise man; even amongst Protestants, who
have looked well into his Institute, and it is wels known how Catholics esteem
him. To omit Popes and Cardinal (who when occasion serves, know how to
distinguish an English Quaker, from a man in his wits,) [Orland. l. 16. n.
129.] Ferdinand the first King of the Romans had a great value for him, and
John the third King of Portugal (no fool) thought him the fittest man in the
world to succeed Julius the Third in the Chair of St. Peter. But to return to
Canus, he would never believe otherwise, but that St. Ignatius and his
companions, were the forerunners of Antichrist, described by the Apostle in
the last times. [2 Timothy 3. 1. to the 8.] But in this I am sure he showed
neither learning nor judgment. For first a very little learning would have
served, to answer himself with the very same arguments, which St. Thomas used,
[S. Tho. lib. contra impugn. Relig. c. 24. and 25.] to wipe off the like
aspersions from his own Order. Nor does it argue much judgment, to be so
singular and extravagant in his opinion, as to condemn an Order, which was
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, and approved by his own whole Order. For not
only Penna, a grave Doctor of the same University and Convent with Canus,
stood up in defense of St. Ignatius and his Society, but Franciscus Romaeus,
General of the Dominicans, write a circular Letter, to all his Subjects, in
which he not only commends the Fathers of the Society, but commands them in
virtue of holy obedience, not to write or speak ill of them, but defend them as
their fellow laborers in Christ's Vineyard, as the Doctor might have seen in
Orlandinus, [Hist. Soc. Jesul. 8. n. 46.] in the very place he quotes out of
him, but it was not that he looked for. To his Text out of St. Paul, it agrees
no more with St. Ignatius, and his followers then his character of the
Illuminati, but may well be applied to his grand Patriarck Luther, who was a
great lover of himself, covetous, haughty, proud, blasphemous and wicked,
without peace, incontinent, unmerciful, a lover of voluptuousness more then of
God, one that entered into a Religions House, and lead captive a silly Nun
laden with sins, etc. The story he relates, how Ignatius boasted of his
righteousness, in presence of Canus, and commended one of his brethren for a
Saint, who was Frantic in a certain conjunction of the Moon, may go wirh the
rest, upon Schioppius his credit (who is as good an Author as du Moulin) but
will never be credited, by any sober persons, who take not the Saint for a
starck fool.

What he adds of St. Ignatius his flying out of Spain, for fear of being laid
hold on by the Inquisition, and of his being absolved at Rome, for want of
accusers, is as falls as you shall see anon, for he was both clapped up in the
Inquisition, and honorably dismissed, before he left Spain, [N. 20.] and the
malice of his accusers was not wanting at Rome, nor the just Judgments of God
upon them. [N. 29.] Yet the Dr. draws out of these testimonies this wonderful
conclusion: See from what man, the Jesuits derive the infallibility of their
Faith. I wonder in what conjunction of the Moon, the Doctor writ this, for
there never was such a piece of nonsense, as to make the Jesuits fetch the
infallibility of their faith from St. Ignatius, who profess as all Catholics
do, that they derive it, from the infallible Word of God proposed unto them by
the Catholic Church. I have heard some laugh heartily at this passage. This
(said they) is that which we call pure nonsense, we must confess others are but
bunglers in comparison of him, you must sometimes turn over a whole Book before
you can find it out, but here it lies so close together, you need not go far to
seek it. He has the true knack of it.

6. I have done with his Sect. 12. sure in the next, we shall have something in
good earnest, if he remember his promise, p. 262. to prove St. Ignatius as
great a Fanatic as ever has been in the world, and we shall have fair dealing,
if he keep his word: for he promises to bring no more Schioppius's for
witnesses, but only three Jesuits. I shall only (they are his words) make use
of those of his own Order, who have writ his life, Maffejus, Orlandinus, and
Ribadeneira, he means, so he may use them after his own fashion, for as I told
you in my first Letter, he has more tricks than one, to compass his ends. And
first it is not without design, that he slips over the Saints noble extraction,
from the Grandees of Spain, both by his Fathers and his Mothers side, and his
education at Court, for persons well born and bred, do not use to turn sneaking
Quakers, and therefore he did prudently to conceal these circumstances, least
his Readers fancy should at first sight be drawn off, to imagine him something
better than a quaking Fanatic.

7. He therefore begins his History of St. Ignatius his life, from his happy
conversion, which as all Authors agree was in this manner. In the defense of
the Castle of Pampelona (which was committed to his charge) he received a
dangerous wound, which tied him fast to his bed, and kept him long under the
Surgeons hands. Wherefore to pass away the time, he called for some profane
Book, as his custom was, but the special providence of God had so ordained, for
his good, and the salvation of many souls, that no Book could be found in the
house, but the life of Christ, and the lives of the Saints. For upon the
perusal of these two Books, his heart was filled with thoughts of eternity, and
withal so inflamed with the love of God, that he was instantly changed into
another man, and resolved to follow a new course of life, in imitation of
Christ and his Saints. Tell me, Sir, I pray what do you see in this conversion,
that may not become a Saint? [Conf. l. 8. c. 6.] was not St. Austin himself
moved with the like sudden conversion of two Courtiers, upon reading St.
Antony the Ermits life, written by St. Athanasius? yet the Dr. sticks not here
to compare him to Don Quixot, and the Books he read to the old Romances, only
to cover his profaneness, he purposely conceals the life of Christ, of which
the Authors he professes to follow, make express mention. After this to make
himself more sport, though at his own cost, as you shall see by and by, he
seems to wonder, how he did to read the Books, which were brought him; for
Maffejus, says he, describes him, as one that had hardly ever learnt his
Letters: Were this so, Maffejus had soon forgot himself, for in his third
Chapter, he relates how Ignatius a little while after, being grown to be a
convalescent, took a great deal of pains, to write out in a curious hand, in
golden and other colored letters, all the remarkable passages, which he had
observed in the life of Christ and his Saints, a clear argument, that he knew
his Letters well, since he could both write and read. But the mistake is not in
Maffejus, but in the Doctor, who either does not, or will not understand him
Maffejus his words are: Literis vixdum a limine salutatis; which every
Westminster Scholar will English thus: having hardly learnt his Accidence, or
being but a very mean Scholar; for they will tell him, litera is not always taken
for the Christ-cross row, but most commonly for learning: so that the Doctor
needed not to have turned him back, as he does, to his Horn-book. Nor was St.
Ignatius then such an ignorant soul, as he would make him for Maffejus
observes, [l. 1. c. 2.] that he had long before this, made an heroical Poem in
honor of St. Peter, to whom he was always much devoted. So much cries the
Doctor, that it is possible it was St. Peter, that taught him to read, when he
appeared to him; and so puts off that vision with a jeer. And he scoffs as
much, at his stirring himself up to perfection, by the example of those two
illustrious Founders, St. Dominick, and St. Francis, borrowing metaphors from
Knight-errantry to express it ridiculously, as he does all the rest; as if it
were not a thing very commendable, to strive to follow the examples of the
Saints [Conf. l. 8. ^. 11. The great St. Austin is not ashamed to confess; it
was the example of others, that moved him to a chaste life. Can thou not
perform that, which is performed by so many of both sexes?

8. One night St. Ignatius gets out of his bed, falls down upon his knees
before an Image of the Blessed Virgin, and there wholly devotes himself to Gods
service, in a new Spiritual warfare under Christ's Banner, what can be more
serious and devout than this? yet the Dr. is not much taken with this fit of
zeal, (as he calls it) for he cannot well understand what he meant, to leave
his warm bed to pray in the night, and therefore to make this passage seem also
ridiculous and Romantic, he tells us, it was in that posture that he vowed
himself her, (the Blessed Vi^gins) Knight, and has the face to quote Orlandinus
and Ribadeneira for it, [Ribad. l. 1. c. 2. Orland. l. 1. n. 12.] who have no
such matter. But they both take notice of the strange noise and trembling of
the room, where the Saint made this heroical resolution, of leaving the world
in good earnest, and look upon it as an argument, that his prayer was heard, as
it happened in the case of Paul and Silas, [Acts 16. 26.] or that the Devil
took his leave of him. To this the Dr. only says, there is some reason to doubt
it. But his doubting will not make St. Ignatius a Fanatic:

3. Soon after this, he had a gracious visit from the Mother of God, who
appeared to him, with little Jesus in her arms; at which fight he was
wonderfully comforted, and encouraged in his good resolutions, and particularly
in that of leading a chaste life, and the event proved it a true vision, for
from that instant, to the hour of his happy departure, he enjoyed a most
perfect gift of Angelical purity, both in body and mind. Here the Doctor makes
a learned note, in a Parenthesis, (that he thought himself a wake) for he would
have you take it for a dream. But if his friends Luthor and Zuinglius, could
see their black and white spirits, while they were broad awake; why may not
Gods servants have their visions too, without dreaming. And let me tell him
here once for all, that when such visions are recorded by good Authors, he must
give us leave to believe them with a moral and humane faith. For as it argues a
great deal of folly to believe all things in this kind rashly, and without good
proof; so it is an argument of a kind of stupidity and profaneness, to question
all such stories in the lives of Saints, which upon the Authors credit and due
examination, are generally believed, and cannot rationally be denied, unless we
will tie Gods hands, from communicating his favors unto his Saints, who 's
delight is to be with the sons of men. It is strange how inconsequently
Prot^stants proceed in this point. They will sooner believe that Tarquin cut a
whetstone with a knife, that Claudia a Vestal Virgin drew a great Ship with her
girdle, which could not be stirred, and other such prodigies recounted by Livy;
than a miracle Canonically examined, and attested by many Catholic witnesses
upon Oath.

10. By this time St. Ignatius his elder brother, was grown zealous of his
intentions of leaving the world, nor was it possible for him to conceal them,
his very look, his pious discourses, and his continual prayer were enough to
betray him. He sets himself therefore to persuade him, not to disgrace his
noble family, by running upon I know not what extravagant courses, not to ruin
his own fortune and suffer all his fair hopes of preferment, purchased by his
valor with the danger of his life, in the service of his King and Country, to
be thus blasted in the Bud. But all his Rethorick would not do, St. Ignatius
was temptation proof, against all his Batteries, he soon shook him off, and
underpretence of a visit, which he was to give the Duke of Noyara, which he
soon dispatched, he went thence immediately to Montserrat, a place of great
devotion to our Blessed Lady. In the way thither, entering into discourse with
a Moore, who denied her to have been a Virgin after the birth of her son, his
z^al b^gan to rise against him, and having yet some Relics left of his
Martial spirit, he was in some d^spute with himself, whether he ought not to
defend her honor with hi^ Sword, but the Moore being gone another way, in
great perplexity, not being able to resolve the case, he puts the Reins in the
Mules neck, with a resolution to pursue the Moore, if the Mul^ followed at the
parting of the two ways and not otherwise. But Alm^ghty God so disposed, that
the Mule left the beat^n road, and went on difectly to Montserrat. This
certainly was an ignorant piece of zeal, or a pious kind of simplicity, in a
new convert (for no body goes about to excuse it otherwise) only the Authors of
his life, note well with St. Austin, [l. 22. Cont. Faust. c. 70. that there are
souls, who even in their vices, show the great capacity and inclination they
have to virtue. So Moses in killing the Egyptian, [Exod. 2.] showed what zeal
he was to have for Gods cause, and I hope the Dr. will forbear to list him in
the number of Fanatics for that fact.

11. It was in his way to Montserrat, that he made a vow of perpetual chastity,
and a purpose to go in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Wherefore to put himself in a
habit suitable to that journey, and to the severe life he meant to lead, at a
Village near the Town, he got himself a rough long coat of Sackcloth, with a
cord to gird it about him, a Pilgrims staff and bottle, and hung them at the
pummel of his Saddle, for fear the people should think him in his wits (says
the Doctor in a Parenthesis) but Maffejus (from whom he took that circumstance)
more religiously says, he did it, that he might by degrees learn not to blush
at Christ's poverty.

12. No sooner was he come to Montserrat, but he goes straight to the
Monastery, and there spends three whole days, in making an exact general
Confession of his whole life, to one of the Religious, to whom he also
communicated the new course of life, he was resolved to lead. After this he
hangs up his Sword and Dagger at our blessed Lady's Altar, puts on his Pilgrims
Weed, and steals privately out, to give away his rich cloths to a needy Beggar:
then return's to the Altar, and there watches and prays all night, (it being
the eve of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin) sometimes standing,
sometimes kneeling, and all the while zealously offering himself to Gods
service, under the special Patronage of his Virgin Mother. And the Authors of
his life observe, that he did this, not to be less fervent in consecrating
himself to the sacred Militia of Christ our Savior, then the ancient Knights
were, who before their Instalment were wont to watch in the Church all night in
their Arms. Now you shall hear what the Doctor says to all this. First he
warily omits his general Confession and consulting with his Ghostly Father
about his leaving the World, as no necessary circumstances in point of
Chivalry; then he fondly describes his habit putting a plain Crab tree-staff in
his hand, and a wicker shoe on his foot, (for so he ignorantly translates
baculus tornatilis and calceus esparto) and because he is resolved to make him
our Lady's Knight, as before in his other night prayer, he made him to vow
himself her Knight, so now he represents him, devoting himself with all his
might to her service, as if he had not with all entirely consecrated himself
unto Almighty Gods service. But that in which he hugs himself most, is by a
certain slight of hand, which is natural to him, to pervert his Authors sense,
and make the world believe, that the Knights which they say, St. Ignatius
proposed for his imitation in his night watch, were Don Quixots; whereas it is
manfest that they speak of certain Christian Knights, who it seems according to
the Ceremonies of their Order, were wont to keep a nights watch in the Church
before their Instalment.

13. Thus accoustred in his Pilgrims Weed, bare-headed, and with but one shoe
upon that Leg which was lately broken at Pampelona, leaving his Mule to the
Monks, early in the morning (a necessary circumstance cries the Dr.) and so it
was for his purpose of concealing himself, away he goes for Manresa, a place
where he was utterly unknown, there he takes up his lodging in the common
Hospital, and for that he had been over curious in combing his hair, and
tricking up himself, he begins now quite to neglect himself: lets his hair and
nails grow, begs from door to door, fasts every day but Sunday (when he
constantly went to the Sacraments) Disciplins himself thrice a day, and prays
seven hours on his knees, lies upon the bare grounds, serves the sick, and
distributes part of his Alms to other poor people. And all this to tame his
flesh, and get the mastery over self-love, and so dispose himself the better
for his devout Pilgrimage into the Holy Land. This hardship and austerity of
his, go with the Dr. for an argument of Fanaticism; for it is probable he may
be of their opinion, who describe St. John in the Desert, leading a good
commodious kind of life, [Vide Cern. a lap. in Matt. 3. 4.] wearing watered
Chamlet, feeding on Lobsters, etc. But we must help him to reconcile St.
Ignatius his begging with his fasting, for he cannot understand why he begged
every day, and yet fasted six days in the week. Let him therefore look better
into his Authors, and he will find, that he fasted only with bread and water,
and begged that, and distributed the rest of his Alms unto other poor
Creatures. One thing more is here worth your observation. The Doctor in his
whole Narration, says not one word of his giving away his Mule, and traveling
on Foot, because you know a Knight Errant, is no body without his Rosonante.

14. In this retirement and penance at Manresa, St. Ignatius was not only,
grievously vexed with scruples about his Confessions (a disease which
Protestants are not much troubled with) but also furiously assaulted by diverse
temptations; all which he manfully overcame, by the particular assistance of
Gods grace, and by following the conduct of his Confessor. One among the rest
was, to throw himself out of a Window: and this the Doctor only mentions out of
Maffejus, [Maff. c. 6. Ribad. c. 6.] but also abuses him as well as the Saint,
making him say, that he was near doing it; when he only says, he was tempted to
do it; as our Blessed Savior was to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of
the Temple. And Ribadeneira expressly notes, these devout aspirations which he
used, to resist that temptation: Lord I will not do it. I will not offend thee,
for thou art my God, my strength; why have thou forsaken me? and why go I
sorrowful while the enemy afflicts me?

15. It pleased God after these sharp trials of his servant, not only to
restore him to a great peace and quiet of mind, but to favor him with many
extraordinary visions and revelations. In one of his visions, while he was
devoutly reciting our Blessed Lady's Office, he had a clear sight given him of
the blessed Trinity, under a corporeal representation. At other times upon a
sudden, such clear Lights were infused into his Soul, that without the help of
any Master he understood many things, not only of the Creation of the World,
and other Mysteries of our Faith, but of subtle Speculations, belonging to the
hidden Secrets of Nature, as perfectly, as if they had been represented unto
him in a clear Crystal Glass; so that he learnt more in an instant, by this
infused knowledge, then he could have got by long Study. In one of his
Ecstasies, he continued eight days, without any other sign of life, but a soft
beating of his Heart, and when he came to himself, as out of a sweet slumber,
he opened his Eyes and repeated the name of Jesus, and immediately rose up, to
the astonishment of many that were present; of whom we have it, says
Ribadeneica, for St. Ignatius was not the man, that ever spoke of it in all his
Life. In this Ecstasy says Orlandinus it is credibly believed, that as the
Apostle in his three days rapture to the third Heaven, probably saw the whole
form and mysterious order of Gods Church; so Ignatius had a sight given him of
the whole Form and Model of the Society, which he was to found. These
extraordinary favors of God, have no more credit with the Doctor, then if they
were so many, old Wives tales. But let him give Ear to that of the Apostle; The
sensual man perceives not those things which are of 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the Spirit of God; for it is foolishness to him, and he cannot understand,
etc. he must give others leave to believe, there was something more then
ordinary in these occasions; for had he not got an infused knowledge, by those
Divine visits how could he (ignorant as he was in all humane Sciences) have
composed a large Treatise of the blessed Trinity, or discourse of that mystery,
as he did to the astonishment of all those that heard him, or how could he have
written, such an excellent Book as that of the spiritual Exercises? in which
(to say nothing of other pions Instructions) he teaches, with a singular
dexterity and method, diverse ways of Prayer and Contemplation, fit for the
reformation of manners and progress in all virtue; prescribes admirable Rules
for the examination of our consciences, rooting out our vicious habits,
bridling our immortified Passions, discerning Spirits, overcoming Scruples, and
choosing a state of life according to Gods will. A Book which has drawn infinite
Souls, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular; from a loose kind Conversation, to a
strict penitential Life. A Book which is of that general esteem in the Church,
that it has been approved by his Holiness, Paulus 3 Anno Dom. 1548. without
altering the least tittle, and recommended as a work of great Piety, and very
useful for the benefit of Souls, and acknowledged by the Cardinals of the holy
Rites, to have proceeded from supernatural light and illustration; and not from
the Art and Invention of man. But since I am upon this Theme, you may expect
that I take notice, of a notorious false aspersion, which the Dr. [pag. 341.]
in another place of his Book, has cast upon this most excellent work; as if the
Saint had taught there, I know not what fond Doctrine, about private
Revelations. The place, he confesses, is not in the Editions that are now
extant; so that we have this at least, that the Jesuits do not own the
Doctrine, but he takes it upon the sole warrant of a libellous Author, [Mor.
Pract. of the Jesuits p. 379] who pretends to have it out of an old Edition,
Anno Dom. 1574. I say libellous Author, for his Book was publicly burnt in
Paris by the common Hangman, by the French Kings express order, and I pray take
notice of this, as often as you shall meet with the same Author. The folly of
this slander appears by this, that the Copies we have, are found conformable to
the Original, which was approved by his Holiness, word for word, and which the
Jesuits had no reason to corrupt, by foisting in such a piece of Nonsense, as
he imagines; and soon after for mere shame, to steal it out of all the Copies.
There is much more cause to think (if there ever were such an Edition) that it
was put out by no Friends of the Jesuits. But I must not forget one of the
Doctors Observations, which (though intended as a jeer) makes not a little for
the honor of the Saint. Having told us, what I lately observed out of
Orlandinus, that some think it probable, that he saw the frame and model of the
Society in his eight days ecstasy, he cries out a blessed sight! if he saw all
the consequences of it too. I am clearly of his opinion in this point: it was a
blessed sight, to see his order so strangely increased and dispersed all over
the habitable World, whereas Luther and other modern Sectaries, could never get
footing beyond the Alps or Pyrenean Mountains. It was a blessed sight, to see
how constantly his Children labored for the good of Souls, and how readily
they shed their Blood for the true Faith; what a world of good was to follow,
by his setting up Schools every where, for the Education of Children in Piety
and Learning; what a wonderful reformation was to ensue in all Europe, and what
miraculous Conversions, were to be wrought by his Followers, all over the new
World: in America Asia and Africa. This I say was a most blessed sight, to see
so many Souls, brought to the Faith of Christ, by those of his order, in the
East and West Indies, in Iaponia, Brasil, Aethiopio, China, etc. For Boesius
*de signis Eccl. l. 6. sticks not to challenge all Sectaries, from Simon Magus
their grand Patriark, and Ringleader, to these present days, to produce but as
many souls drawn to their Factions, as were converted from Paganism to the
Christian says, by S. Xaverius alone, the number, says he, amounting to ten
hundred thousand. I know the Dr. will be ready here to repeat that fond story,
which he has set down, pa. 439. of the Jesuits way of converting the Pagans in
China; but till I meet it there, let it suffice to tell you, the Author he
leans upon, is a Libelling Jansenist.

16. Give me leave Sir, to pause here a while, and make a short reflection,
upon what has been already delivered, concerning S. Ignatius his life. You have
seen his converston, and rigorous penance, and some of his divine
illustrations and visions, but perhaps you do not see, how illogically the
Doctor goes to work, to conclude him to be a Fanatic, out of all this. Reduce
but his discourses into Syllogisms, and this will clearly appear. For example
thus. Whosoever upon reading the lives of Christ and his Saints, leaves the
world to consecrate himself entirely to Gods service is a Fanatic, can you
deny this? but S. Ignatius did so, as the Dr. grants, ergo he was a Fanatic, a
wonderful piece of Logic. Again, Whosoever voluntarily embraces poverty, and
gives himself to much Prayer Fasting, and corporal austerities is a Fanatic
(as well as St. John Baptist) but S. Ignatius did so, ergo, he was a Phanatick.
Yet again, Whosoever watches and Prays all night in the Church, as pious
Knights were wont to do in old times, before their Instalment, is a Fanatic.
For no body must do that for Gods sake, which others do for ceremony) ergo he
was a Phanatick. Yet once more, Whosoever has Revelations and visions is a
Phanatick (For many Saints have had them as you shall see toward the end of my
letter) e^go he was a Phanatick. Let us proceed.

17. It seems S. Ignatius did not so ingross all visions to himself, but others
had some too: for at Barcellona in his way to Jerusalem, the Lady Elizabeth
Rosella saw a great shining light about his head, whilst he was humbly si^ting
amongst the boys at a Sermon in the Church, and heard a voice within her,
which bid her call him and treat him like a Saint. There was a Senator also at
Venice, had a like vision concerning him, checking him for lying at his ease,
while the servant of God Ignatius, lay in the Streets, at which voice he
suddenly rose up, found him and brought him into his house, and treated him
civilly, though the Saint next day made choice of a worse lodging. Besides one
John Paschal, often saw him elevated in the air, some cubits above ground.
Perhaps these are the visions, which must prove him a Fanatic. If so, he must
argue thus. The Lady Elizabeth Rosella, the Venetian Senator, and Paschalis,
had their visions in relation to his sanctity of life, ergo he was a Fanatic.
But where will he have a minor to make up the Sillogisme in right form? for
say they were illuded, at most it will prove them Fanatics, but not him. That
indeed of Rosella seems something ridiculous, as he relates it, for he makes
her to have seen a great shining about his mouth, but in this I must once more
appeal to the Lads of Westminster School, whether os oris in good Latin do not
often signify the whole countenance, and whether they would offer to translate:
Os humerosque Deo similis, like a God in mouth and Shoulders, or Os homini
sublime dedit, Nature has given man a sublime mouth. At least Ribadoneira one
of his Authors has caput instead of os, and that I am sure he will not English
mouth least the Boys laugh more at him.

18. S. Ignatius was a well bred Gavalier, and a great Courtier in his time,
(as I told you before) and had affected ceremonies and complements, according
to the mode, but after his Conversion, one of his chief cares was, how to
expiate this vanity of too much courtship. The way he took was, to conceal his
birth and education, so as to be taken for a contemptible person. This made him
lay aside the Gentleman, and carry himself in all company, as if he had been
born and bred a mere clown, calling every body by his name, without any Titles
of honor or respect. Now in his return from Jerusalem (in which voyage there
are many devout passages and many clear tokens of Gods providence to the Saint)
which the Dr. was pleased to omit) as he was passing through Italy, he was
taken for a spy, by the Spanish Soldiers, and in a scornful and rude manner,
dragged along the streets, and carried before their Commander. In this occasion
he bethought himself, whether it were not more discretion, to alter his
carriage, and demean himself with more civility the better to get off; but
finding this to proceed from a base and servile kind of fear, he resolves not
to change his style, and therefore neither puts off his hat, nor scarce speaks
for himself, but remains for the most part silent, that he might be taken for a
fool or a madman. And he mist not his aim, for it was upon that account that
the Captain dismissed him, and the Soldiers abused him shamefully, only one of
them had the compassion and kindness to entertain him and protect him, till he
got out of their reach. However the Dr. is of opinion, he might have saved
himself the labor of whipping himself that day the soldiers doing him that
office very effectually. But for all the Doctors flouts and jeers, the Saint,
who had a true value and estimate of the christian virtues of patience and
humility, knew how to make good use of such sufferings. Nor did he ever after
change his opinion, as to this point, but was often heard say, that were it not
for losing his authority (which is necessary to do good with our neighbor) he
would most willingly walk the streets in a contemptible manner, all stuck with
feathers, and half naked, to be hooted at by the boys, and taken for a mad
man. Nor did he keep this humble spirit to himself but strove to communicate it
unto all his children in that truly Evangelical constitution, which he
prescribes for all his to follow, and runs thus, [Sum. Constable.. 11. They must
diligently observe, esteeming it a matter of great value and main importance in
the sight of our Creator and Lord, how greatly it helps and makes for the
profit of a spiritual life, to abhor wholly and not in part, all things which
the world loves and embraces, and to admit and desire to their uttermost power,
whatsoever Christ our Lord loved and embraced. For as worldly men do follow
Love, and seek with great diligence, those things which are of the world, to
Wit, honors, Fame and the opinion of a great name upon earth, as the world
teaches them: so those that go forward in spirit, and seriously follow Christ
our Lord, do love and fervently desire such things as are altogether contrary:
that is, they covet to be clothed with the same garment and Livery with our
Lord, for his love and reverence; in so much, as if it might be without any
offense of the Divine Majesty, and without sin of their neighbor, they would
be content to suffer reproaches, slanders, injuries* and to be held and
accounted fools (yet without any occasion given by them) because they
earnestly desire to resemble and imitate in some sort their Creator and Lord
Jesus Christ, and to be clothed with his garments, and livery since he
clothed himself with the same, for our greater good and spiritual profit, and
gave us example* that in all things, as far as by the assistance of Gods grace
we may, we should imitate and follow him; seeing he is the true way, that leads
men to life. Thus he, and the next constitution is to the same purpose. To the
end this degree of perfection so precious in a spiritual life, may be the
better attained; let it be every one's chiefest and greatest endeavor, to seek
in our Lord his own greater abnegation, and continual mortification, as much as
he can, in all things This is a language to which the Doctor seems a great
stranger, and he may see by it, that he deals with patient adversaries, who
otherwise would have paid him in his own coin long before this. But I must not
think to escape so; from S. Ignatius his carriage to the Captain, the Doctor
will needs have it, that he was the first founder of that Fanatic sect which
is distinguished so much from others by denying common civilities to men. By his
favor, the bare denying civilities, make not a Fanatic; otherwise every Clown
that knows not how to put off his Hat, or make a Leg or that personates a
Fanatic upon the Stage, must of necessity be a Fanatic. There is something
more then goes to the making it a distinctive sign of a Fanatic; and that is
to do it out of a settled judgment, that there is no distinction of Persons to
be made, nor any more respect due to one than to another: Now it is a clear
Case that St. Ignatius was not of this Fanatical persuasion, but only had a
mind to humble himself, and be taken for a Fool, or an ignorant Clown, the more
to resemble his Master when he was before Herod. And this also in the heat of
his first fervor, when all Masters of Spirit, allow Saints, something contrary
to their ordinary strain of other men: For otherwise it is well known, that
when St. Ignatius was once engaged in an Apostolical calling, no man could be
more civil and complaisant, in a Religious way than he: in so much that the
Doctor soon after, takes notice of his winning way, and obliging carriage,
which he calls obsequiousness, flattery and insinuation; so that if he had
before put on the disguise of a Quaker, it seems he soon put it off. What the
Doctor has to reply I know not, but in the way of arguing I doubt he would have
much ado to excuse our blessed Lord's carriage before Herod from countenancing
Fanaticisme.

19. Being returned to Barcellona, to make himself a fitter Instrument to do
good with his Neighbor; at three and thirty years of age, he applies himself
to learn Grammar Rules, and with all returns to his wonted task of rigorous
penance, which in his travailing for healths sake, he had thought sit to
moderate. And his love of suffering found out a new invention, to corzen the
World, and go bare foot without the least sign of ostentation; for by little
and little, he had so pared away the soles of his Shoes, that he trod upon the
bare ground, though his Feet were covered with the upper Leathers. At his
studies, he was so carried with sensible seelings, and tenderness of devotion
that he could attend to nothing else. The word Amo was sufficient, to put him
upon Acts of divine Love, and transport him out of himself. This amazed him,
and the rather because he had not the same feelings of Devotion, when he had
most reason to expect them, as when he settled himself to Prayer, or disposed
himself to receive the blessed Sacrament. Whence he concludes it to be an
illusion of the Enemy, and to confound and vanquish him the better, he humbly
casts himself at his Masters feet, and beseeches him to be as rigorous in daily
exacting of his Lessons of him, as he was to the Boys, and as severe in
correcting him, when he could not say them. After which Act of humility he grew
to be so good a Proficient, that in two years times, he was judged fit, to go
to his higher Courses. Wherefore he goes to Alcala and in that University
privately studies Logic, Physics and Divinity all together, by the persuasion
of some of his Friends, who by reason of his Age, thought it better for him to
make a short course: But undertaking too much at once, it was not like to
succeed. And besides he wanted not other employments to distract him; for he
continued his begging from Door to Door, and omitted no occasion of drawing his
Neighbor unto Gods service by pious Discourses, which the Doctor will needs
call Sermons, because in Latin it is Sermones, at Eaton School, a Boy would be
called to the Ferula for construing so ignorantly.

20. Now because many were thus suddenly drawn by him to a better course of
Life, it bred a great noise in the Town, and strict inquisition was made into
his manner of Life and Doctrine by Figueroa the Vicar General of Toledo, that
the truth might appear better, he was apprehended, and kept in Prison one and
forty days: After which the Vicar declared, that nothing could be found
worthy of reprehension either in his Life or Doctrine, only he wished him to
wear the same habit with other Students, and not to handle points of Divinity,
till he had studied it four years. Soon after this, with advice of the
Archbishop he removes to Salamanca, but there falls into the same troubles he
had met with at Alcala; for his Zeal still carrying him on to stir up the
Peoples hearts to a holy love and fear of our Lord, he was questioned by the
Sub-Prior of the Dominicans, why he took upon him to Preach without Learning;
Ignatius answered, he did not Preach, but make familiar Discourses concerning
Vice and Virtue, to bring the People to the hatred of one, and love of the
other. (This the Doctor expresses ridiculously by the Phanatick Phrase of
holding forth) the Sub-Prior replied; this was not to be done by unlearned
Persons (he did no say this was Preaching as the Doctor translates it) unless
he pretended to do it by divine Inspiration. For that says St. Ignatius I will
give an account of my self, when I am juridically examined. This bred a farther
suspicion in a dangerous time; and therefore by order of the Vicar, he and some
of his Companions were clapped up in Prison. But in that very place he continued
to speak freely, in the commendation of Virtue, and reprehension of Vice, and
to draw his Auditors from the vain love of the World, and there was a great
flocking to hear him, and he found much comfort to see himself in Chains
without fault, telling those that came to condole with him, that they little
knew the sweetness, which lies in the Cross of Christ, (so do the Quakers says
the Doctor) and so did the holy Martyrs in the Primitive Church say I. After 21
days he was called before the Vicar, where says the Doctor he Preached at
large upon several points of Divinity, under pretense of answering Questions.
But had he followed his Authors, as he Professes, he should have said, he gave
so good an account of diverse subtle Questions of Religion, and out of the Canon
Law, and being bid to discourse upon the first Commadment in the same manner,
as if he were before the People, he did it with so much wisdom and gravity,
that the Vicar and all that heard him were astonished. Whereupon he and his
Companions were declared men of a pure and sincere life, and so honorably
dismissed. Only because the Vicar, had seen certain Rules, which St. Ignatius
gives in his spiritual Exercises, how to distinguish thoughts, when they are
venial Sins, and when mortal; he was charged not to meddle with such nice
points, till he had studied his Divinity. This the Saint did not a little
resent, that he should be thus restrained from making use of those Rules, which
the Vicar himself had allowed to be solid and good. One thing which concurred
to prove them innocent, was, that having a fair occasion to make their escape
out of Prison, as the other Prisoners had done, by the negligence of their
Keeper, they alone would not stir.

21. After all these vexations (which were of no advantage to his studies) away
he goes for Paris (to see says the Dr. whether he could have any better luck
there) and well might he fly such persecutions, as the great Athanasius did,
especially upon the warrant of his Captain Christ Jesus: when they shall
persecute you in this City fly into another. Matt. 10. 23 But he had a farther
aim in it (says Orlandinus) Orlan. n. 63. to put himself upon a necessity, of
dealing less with his neighbor for want of the French Language, and so to fall
closer to his book, which he resolves now to follow in good earnest, and for a
time to lay aside part of his rigorous penance, which could not well stand
with the labor of studying. And because experience had taught him, that he had
made more have then good speed; to lay a good Foundation of the Latin Tongue,
he falls again to repeat his Grammar, (a sad Case cries the Doctor, that alter
so much Schooling, and so many Revelations, he should be yet so great a Dunce,
as not to know his Grammar.) I let the jeer pass, which I am sure the Saint
would have heard with patience. Yet let me tell the Doctor, St. Ignatius would
have then construed literae; os; sermones, baculus ternatilis, calceus ex
sparto, patientia etc. more properly than He has done after all his Schooling.
After 18 months spent in humanity he heard his Philosophy, and took the degree
of Master of Arts, and then studied Divinity, where says the Doctor (he got
just enough, to keep him from being an Heretic, for so much Maffejus his words
imply) where Orlandinus n. 72. Witnessess that one of the prime Doctors of that
faculty, would have had him commence Doctor of Divinity, before he had passed
Master of Arts, professing that he knew not how to own himself a Doctor, while
Ignatius who had taught him so much, had not that title. And Maffejus his words
imply, that he got as much as to give a good account of his Faith and Doctrine
according to the sense of the holy Fathers, without any suspicion of novelty. A
degree of Learning which the Doctor is not yet arrived to, for all he slights
it so much.

22. He has here another slurt at his poverty, which forced him to make several
excursions to beg necessaries for his subsistence, but he says nothing of his
going over into England, because perhaps he was there treated, with more
civility then he thinks he deserved. While he was at Antwerp (upon a like
occasion) he told one Quadratus a Spanish Merchant, that he was one day to be
the Founder of a College of the Society in Spain, which many years after
really sell out, though at that time there was little probability of any such
thing: A good Argument that he had the Spirit of Prophecy to foretell it, for
all the Doctors Parentheses and Jeers to the contrary. And I could give him
many other instances of his Prophetical Spirit, which cannot be denied: as his
foretelling Francis Borgia whilst he was yet Duke of Gandia, and Father James
Laynes, that they should be Generals of the Society of Jesus.

23. All did not go so smooth with him at Paris, but he met with his troubles
there as well as he had done in Spain: For having with his inflamed zeal drawn
some Students of the College of St. Barbara, where he studied to a perfecter
course of life; so as to live upon alms, frequent the Sacraments, and bestow
more time in Prayer upon Festival days; and one among the rest by his
persuasions, as they supposed, having not only left the College, but the World
too, to follow Christ naked upon the Cross; there was a great stir about it and
such a general Animosity raised against him, that they were ready to give him
public correction. For the College Gates were shut, and the Bell and rung to
call all the Collegians together, when the Saint was so far from declining,
that shameful punishment, that he went to the Rector, and with much generosity
and freedom told him, that for his part he was both ready and willing to
undergo the correction, but that he might do well to consider whether Gods
Cause would not also s^ffer by it, if it were reported that he had suffered
only for drawing o^^ers to more piety; which wrought so with the Rector, that
before all the Masters and Scholars he cast himself at his Feet, and with tears
in his Eyes asked him pardon as of a Saint; [Orland. n. 71. Ribad. l. 2. c. 3.
who made little reckoning of his own sufferings, provided they might stand with
Gods greater glory and the good of Souls; and it is worth the observing, that
this Rector ever after retained such an affection to him, and to all his
Children for his sake, that he was the prime Person that persuaded John the
second King of Portugal to send the Fathers of the Society into the Indies:
[Ribad ibid. c. 16. where they have since done such wonders in the Conversion
of Souls. Here the Dr. wants not his Jeers; but what use he can make of this
passage to prove St. Ignatius a Fanatic, passes my understanding let him put
his Argument in form, and it will be as good as those I made for him.

24. He runs on after the same rate, and makes a slight of two most
incomparable Examples of St. Ignatius his Cha^ity. I omit, says he, his flying
or rather being carried as it were in a rapture from Paris to Roven, and the
joy and extatick expression he had in it; his standing up in Dirt and Mire to
the Neck to represent to his Companion, the filthiness of the sin. he lived in.
Had he meant fairly and honestly, he would never have thus slubbard over two
such rare passages hardly to be parellel'd in the Lives of the greatest Saints.
For the first then you are to know, that one of St. Ignatius his Fellow
Students at Paris had cheated him of a good Alms, which was sent him out of
Spain to help him to pay for his board, and which out of confidence he had
trusted in his hands; so that being thus disappointed of the money, he was
forced to retire to the Hospital and beg again for his living. Now this
ungrateful Wretch, having spent the money, and afterward falling sick at Roven
in his way to Spain, writ earnestly to St. Ignatius to beseech him for Charity
sake to have compassion on him, and take some order for his necessary relief,
Upon the receipt of which Letter, Ignatius immediately goes for Roven or rather
flies thither upon the Wings of Love, for sure it must have been some divine
Rapture, that could carry him in three days 28 Leagues bare Foot as he was,
and without Eating or Drinking at all by the way; for so he performed the
journey with a wonderful alacrity, offering up all that labor and penance for
the health of a Person, that had played him such an unworthy trick. And
Almighty God was so well pleased with his Charity, and gave such a blessing to
his endeavors, that the man was not soon only restored to his health, but also
by his mean^ furnished with conveniences to pursue his intended Journey. The
second was in this manner: he had often labored in vain to reclaim a Friend of
his (the charitable Dr. would have you think it was one of his companions) from
his dishonest course of Life, and knowing which way he was to pass to his
Mistress, he cast himself naked up to the Neck into a freezing Lake (not Dirt
and Mire as the Dr. has it) and there cried out to him as he saw him pass:
Whether go thou miserable Wretch? do thou not see the Sword of Divine
Justice hanging over thy head? go then and satisfy thy Lust, I Will here strive
by my suffering to quench thy Hellish Flames, and divert Gods Vengeance from
pouring down upon thee. This Heroical Act of fraternal Charity, this painful
remedy to preserve another Chastity (which we admire in Saints even when it
was their own Case) struck his Friend with such astonishment and horror, that
he suddenly broke off all the Chains of his dishonest affections, and settled
himsef to a chaste Life.

25. Now you are to take notice, says the Doctor, that his design being to
form a Society, he had for that purpose used himself to all the Acts of
Insinuation imaginable, accomodating himself to the humors of the Persons he
had to do with, endeavoring to oblige all men, with expressions of their
greatest kindness, bearing all the affronts with wonderful dissimulation (I Will
warrant you he put off his Hat too, and used other common civilities) what harm
in all this? does it show a Fanatical or an Apostolical Spirit to become all
things to all men, that he might save all? 1 Cor. 9. 22. By these Acts he
labors, says he, to get some of the most hopeful Students in the University
to him, and at last prevails upon nine, to join with him: He studies their
humors, and applies himself accordingly, not acquainting them at first with
his design, but by degrees prepares them for it. Amongst them Xaverius at first
laughed at him, but was won by his patience, (not Flattery, as the Doctor
construes Patientia) and obsequiousness. Having now got Persons to his mind, he
opens his intentions to them, and they all conclude, to meet privately at Mont
martyr a mile out of Paris: here they all vowed before the blessed Sacrament,
from that instant to leave the World, and live in perpetual chastity, never to
receive any thing for their Masses by way of recompense, to renounce all
propriety at the end of their studies, and then (all other respects laid aside)
to go in Pilgrimage, to visit the holy Places at Jerusalem. But if that
Journey could not be compassed within a year, then to repair to his Holiness,
and offer him their best service, for the Spiritual good of their Neighbor.
This happened (for the first time) Anno Dom. 1534. upon the Assumption of our
blessed Lady, to whose holy patronage, they particularly commended themselves.
After this Ignatius very prudently used all means, to keep them all united
together in perfect charity, and for fear least some of their Friends in Spain,
should take them off from these good intentions, he freely offers to go himself
to dispatch their business. All this while do you perceive where the
Fanaticisme lies?

26. In Spain he was followed by such a multitude of People, that he was fain
to Preach in the Fields, and though his Voice were but weak, yet he was heard
distinctly above a quarter of a mile. The Doctor takes this to be a Fable,
though Orlandinus relate it as a thing attested by many Persons then present.
Maffejus is more beholding to him, for without entreaty he believes what he
w^it of the Horse, which carried S. Ignatius into Spain: how having left him to
the Hospital, they would never after make use of him, but preserved him in good
liking all his Life time. This he makes merry with, as if the People had done
it out of reverence to the Beast, as being a consecrated Horse: But his Author
says expressly that they did it in Ignatii memoriam: that is for Ignatius his
sake; in which I see no great mystery. Yet if it must be a piece of
Fanaticisme, let the People of the Hospital look to it.

27. His next Journey was for Venice, where his Companions were to meet him by
agreement, to embark for Palestin, but finding that Voyage obstructed by the
War, which was broken out, between the Turk and the Venetians (their courage
being coold, says the Dr.) they dispersed themselves up and down the Country
(wandering, says he, as if they had been Gypsies) and exercised their
Apostolical Functions of Preaching, sometimes in the very Streets, where they
could get People together, a thing not so unusual as the Dr. apprehends, but
practiced this very day in Rome it self. And though they spoke but imperfect
Italian, yet they converted many, as their Followers have done, says the
Doctor, from the use of Laces and Ribbands. What a piece of impertinency have
we here? the World knows how many millions of Souls, have by their zealous
Preaching, been drawn to the Faith of Christ, from Paganism and Heresy, and
from a wicked Life, and all this the Dr. calls leaving the use of Laces and
Ribbands. But did not the Lady's also sometimes leave his Church; I Will be bound
if he would not write such bitter Invectives and biting Satyrs against the
Jesuits and other Religious, as he does. Who would think he should find any
thing to carp at, in St. Ignatius and his Companions pious custom, of joining
together in Prayer, in all matters of debate, and following that opinion the
most were off* after their Prayer: Yet by chopping in seeking God instead of
Praying he would have his Reader believe they were all turned Seekers. In this
sense I confess they were Seekers that they sought nothing but Gods greater
glory in all things, as St. Ignatius had taught them, whose proper devise was;
Ad majorem Dei gloriam, to Gods greater glory, which he fixed upon all his
actions, to inflame himself, to do yet more and more for Gods honor and
service.

28. Now because the Authors of his Life take notice, that his Visions and
Revelations, which were nothing so frequent in time of his studies, as they had
been at Manresa, began to be as frequent as ever; He most maliciously
attributes it to the hope he had of obtaining a confirmation of his Order, as
if he had had them at command, as well as Mahomet; or in plain English, as if
he had played the cheat and only pretended to receive such favors from
Heaven, which he forged to bring about his ends. He only mentions two of these
Visions. The first was in his way to Rome; where entering into a Church to pray,
he was rapt into an Ecstasy, and saw God the Father commending him and his
Companions, to the favor of his blessed Son, who also appeared at the same
time with his Cross upon his Shoulders, and spoke unto him these comfortable
words: I will be favorable to you at Rome. Which was the chief Cause, that in
the confirmation of his Order, it was called the Society of Jesus. The other
was at Monte Cassino, where he saw the Soul of Hosius, one his of Companions
lately dead, enter into Heaven; and a little after amongst many other glorious
Saints.

29. Notwithstanding all this, says the Dr. they met with great difficulties
at Rome. It is very true they did: but he does not tell us how they came off,
by the favorable assistance, which our B. Savior had promised them. The story
is to be seen at large in Orlandinus and Ribadeneira. Orlan. l. 2. n. c. 47.
Ribal. l. 2. c. 14. The short of it is this. One Austin of Piedmont an Austin
Friar by profession, but a conceald Lutheran, had been blamed by the Fathers
for preaching false doctrine. He conspires with one Michael; and this wicked
fellow gives out, that Ignatius had been condemned for an Heretic, first in
Spain then at Paris, and lastly at Venice. This upon examination was found to
be a mere slander, and Michael was sent into banishment, and S. Ignatius and
his companions, were by a public sentence (which is to be seen in the Authors)
juridically declared innocent persons. And that you may see what a hand Gods
providence had in their defense, and that he had not forgot his promise to S.
Ignatius of being favorable to him at Rome; in the very ni^k of time, that
they lay under this cloud of Persecution, Figueroa the Vicar general of Toledo,
who upon a like slander at Alcala* had cast Ignatius into Prison, and sound
him innocent, comes to Rome, and the other two also, who had been his Judges at
Paris, and Venice; and all these gave testimony of his innocen^y beyond all
exception. And not long after this, Austin of Piedmont, who was the chief
projector in framing the false accusation, publicly professed himself a
Lutheran, and the rest of his instruments grew to be of such wicked lives, that
one was burnt in effigy at Rome, and another was condemned to perpetual
imprisonment, though he afterward repented, and was assisted at his death by
one of the Fathers. 30, Pope Paul the 3. being thoroughly satisfied of their
being serviceable to the Church (says the Dr. very truly which is a wonder)
the Order was confirmed 3 d. October. An. D. 1540. And the Pope himself says he,
became enthusiastical too, for having read the Formula of the institute of the
Society, o^ the first draught of the rule penned by S. Ignatius, he cried out
The spirit of God is here. One of the Ca^dinals had opposed himself at first*
but was soon gained by the Saints penance and prayers, and three thousand
Masses, which he and his friends offered up for that intention, and suddenly
changed his mind* and publicly professed; that although it was a thing much
against his dictamen, to multiply religious orders, yet as to the institute of
S. Ignatius, he neither durst nor could oppose it. I would gladly here omit the
Drs. profane jest upon the Masses and Prayers, that were offered, and not
sully my Paper with it; that it must be a hard heart indeed that would not
yield with so much suppling. Where you see he is not content to jeer the only
Christian sacrifice we have, but to deliver himself as if the Masses had been
offered up to the Cardinal, and not to God the only Ruler of men's hearts.

31. Soon after S. Ignatius was chosen General of the Society; which he
accepted with as many Tears and protestations and entreaties, (says the Dr.
till he plainly saw it was the will of God, as ever any Usurper took the
Government into his hands, which he had most eagerly sought for. Fie upon it!
this is rudeness in a high degree. A civil person would hardly give a dog such
language, if any person of quality had a kindness for him, as he gives S.
Ignatius, who has the esteem of a great Saint in the opinion of most of the
greatest Princes and Monarchs of the Christian world. Had it not been
sufficient to express his ambition, to have said, that he longed as much for
the Generalship, as a hungry Minister newly come from the University, does for
a good Benefice or as a friend of his does for a Bishopprick? but he must
compare him to a p^oud Usurper. But where is his Author for this calumny? he
does not produce so much as a Schioppious to justify it. Let any indifferent
person take but the pains to read over the Saints life, and I am very confident
he will find, that no man could labor more to decline Superiority than he did,
nor to shake it off when it was in his hands, so far was he from seeking it. He
must have been a prodigious Hypocrite, that could preach and profess so much
humility, and bind his followers by express vow, not to seek any such honor,
directly or indirectly, and yet seek it himself, with such eagerness as the Dr.
expresses. But he may do well to tell us how he saught it: was it openly or
covertly; if openly, it was the certain way to lose it, and we have no record
of any such thing; if covertly, how comes the Dr. to smell out his knavery,
which no body has yet discovered besides himself, and those of his privy
Counsel.

32. He concludes his Libel with a whole peal of injuries. Take them as they
lie. Let the world judge (says he) whether there has appeared a greater
Enthusiastic, or pretender to revelations then Ignatius was since the days of
Mahomet and S. Francis. I will not here dispute ho^ unworthily he couples
Mahomet and S. Francis together, that is, a Turk and a Christian, a Devil and a
great Saint. Those of his holy Order will not fail to vindicate their glorious
Patriark. Nor will I quarrel with him, for comparing S. Ignatius with that
Seraphical Saint in point of enthusiasme. But because he takes that word in the
worst sense for Fanaticisme my inquiry shall only be upon what evidence he
makes S. Ignatius a Fanatic. I have run over as much of his life as he thought
worth his glossing; I have considred it leisurely, and by parts, and have not
yet found any thing, that looks like an argument to prove so great a Paradox,
and certainly if his particular actions, do not prove it, he will never do it
by accumulation. But he appeals to the judgment of the world: let the world
judge. I marvail what he means by the world. Turks, Jews and Pagans, or only
Christians? the first are not competent judges, the latter will be sure to cast
him; for amongst Christians, the far major part is Catholic, and honors him
for a great Saint, so that the Dr. will come short of his aim. But it is like he
means only England which being divided from all the world, makes a little world
by it self, and probably is all the world he has seen. If this be his meaning,
set a side all those, whom he calls Fanatics and Sectaries, and his world will
dwindle away into a very Microcosme. But I refuse not to be tried by my
country, provided that he have not the impanelling of the Jury* and will but
give men leave to be rational creatures, that is, lead by reason and common
sense, and not hurried away with prejudice and passion, Let us then see what
evidence he brings. The strength of his accusation lies in this, that, he was a
great pretender to Visions and Revelations. He means a false pretender, for
otherwise to own or acknowledge such favors received at Gods hand, is no more
than what the beloved Disciple of Jesus, S. Peter, S. Paul S. Steven, and
Ananias did amongst the first Christians, as is plainly to be seen in the holy
Scripture, and yet the D^. will not offer to make them Fanatics. To these I
could add a world of others within the first four Centuries after Christ, but
will confine my self to produce but a few of them. If we give credit to the
ancient Records, S. Cicely saw her good Angel, and so did her spouse
Valerianus, and his B^other Tiburtius, all famous Martyrs. S. Martin had often
the like favor* and whilst he was but a Catechumen, saw Christ in that part of
his Cloak, which he had parted from the rest, to bestow upon a poor beggar. S.
Agatha's breast was cured in an apparition of S. Peter. The great S. Austin was
miraculously called by a voice, that said take up and read. Confess. l. 8. c.
12. S. Ambrose had a whispering Angel at his ear, and saw Christ our Savior a
little before his death, as Paulinus witnesses in his life, which he says he
writ at the entreaty of S. Austin. Our B Lady, and S. John appeared to S.
Gregory Thaumaturgus, and taught him the Mystery of the most B. Trinity, as
witnesses S. Gregory Nyssen. O^ B Savior appeared to S. Peter of Alexandria
in a torn garment, and said it was A^rius that had so wrent it by his Schism.
S. Dorothy had Apples and Roses sent her from Heaven, a little before her
Martyrdom. You see all these Saints of the Primitive Church owned or pretended
Visions and Revelations, and must therefore be Fanatics as well as St,
Ignatius. And Constantin the great [Euseb. in vita Consta*] the glory of our
Nation must go with the rest, for pretending to be admonisht by St. Peter and
Paul, to send for St. Sylvester Pope, to wash away his Leprosy with the Water
of Baptism, and for seeing (together with his whole Army) the sign of the Cross
in the Air, with this Inscription, in this sign thou shall overcome, [in act
Silvest, and for having another Vision the same night, in which Christ
commanded him to arm himself with that sign, which he instantly did by placing
it in his Standard and upon his Helmet. It is not then the bare pretense of
having Visions, that can prove St. Ignatius a Fanatic more then other Saints,
who for all their Visions, have the general reputation of Sanctity. It must
then be a false or counterfeit pretense of them, which the Dr. does not so much
as offer to prove, but by his own uncharitable suppositions: against which we
have Miracles enough, and other arguments of Holiness to prove him a Saint, and
consequently to justify the truth of his Visions; if any credit be to be
given, to the juridical Process made in order to his Canonization, which cannot
be questioned, unless we rob the World of all Faith and Honesty. Let not the
Dr. then tell me, his Miracles may be as well questioned as hi^ Visions; for I
challenge him, to produce any Argument against them which Julian the Apostata
might not have urged against the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles. One thing
I must not here omit to tell you, that St. Ignatius was always known, to be
very reserved in speaking of the extraordinary favors of Almighty God, but
when he saw it was for his greater glory to manifest them; in so much, that he
commanded his ghostly Father, upon pain of excommunication and dismission out
of the Society, not to reveal any thing in this kind, that might tend to his
praise. But he did some things like the Quakers, and so does the Dr. too, and
may as well prove him a Quaker, because he had a nose on his face, as because
he did not for a time use to put off his Hat. For as that is no Argument,
because others have Noses as well as Quakers, so does not this conclude,
because there are others that do not use civilities, as well as Quakers, to
wit, Clowns, and those that for just Reasons personate them, as Ignatius did
for a time, out of humility, to conceal his condition, and give occasion of
being flighted, and contemned in all Companies, as a mean ill bred Person.
There was a time when our dread Sovereign, was fain to pass under the disguize
of an ordinary Servant; sure the Doctor will not thence conclude him, to be of
a mean condition because he once acted that part. Say his Majesty had thought
fit, under that Masque, not to put off his Hat, shall he be a Quaker too? The
Argument were as good as that which he brings against St. Ignatius.

33. He goes on. The chiefest of the Quakers, fall very much short of St.
Ignatius in those very things for which they are condemned by us. I pray what
are those things? besides his not putting off his Hat (for the Reasons I
mentioned) I can find nothing in all his Life, which did not become a Saint.
Yet any one, says he, who compares them would imagine, the Life of Ignatius
had been their great Exemplar. In what I pray? was he not a Roman Catholic,
and do not all Catholics cry down Fanaticisme did he ever hold any of the
Quakers fond Tenets? did he deny Infant Baptism, or rely upon a private Spirit,
in opposition to the Churches Doctrine, or refuse to be guided by his
Superiors and spiritual Directors? nay do not the Authors of his Life take
notice, that he had recourse to his ghostly Fathers, and followed their
Directions in the change of his Life in his Scruples, in admirting the
Generalship in all doubtful occasions, and particularly at the hour of his
death? Did he ever profess himself to be Christ as James Nayler did? Again what
Quaker ever followed him, in leaving all to follow the Counsels of Christ, in
voluntary poverty, chastity and obedience? What Quaker ever took so much pains
to get learning as he did, or thought it necessary, to do good with his
Neighbor? What Quaker lead such an austere penitential Life as he, or spent so
much time in Prayer on his Knees, and in the Night; or begged from Door to Door,
in a poor Pilgrims habit? What Quaker ever suffered so many Persecutions, and
came off so clear in the judgment of his Persecutors? What Quaker converted so
many millions from Paganism as he has done by his Disciples? Lastly, what
Quaker had such illustrious marks of Sanctity as he, attested upon Oath by
Witness beyond Exception, and approved by the Sea Apostolic? Let us follow
him. I know not whether any of that Innocent and Religious Order of Jesuits,
had any hand in forming this new Society (he means Quakers) among us as has
been frequently suggested. I know not whether the Dr. were in his wits, when he
writ this, which no sober Person can any more believe, then that it was a
Jesuit, that taught the Serpent in Paradise, to pull a curse upon all mankind,
by cunningly circumventing our first Parents. The thing was merrily said, by a
Person of quality in France, when he heard the Jesuits slandred, but the Dr.
if he please, may object it in his next Book, unless he had rather leave it to
his Friend, the Author of the Answer to the Papists Apology, who it seems, is
putting out another terrible knocking Book against the Jesuits, for it will
come in well there. But have patience to hear him out. If one may guess the
Father by the Child's likeness, Ignatius Loyola Founder of the Jesuits, was at
least the Grandfather of the Quakers. I have already showed you how like, or
rather how unlike they are. I am quite weary of such pitiful Stuff. Let the
World now judge, how well the Dr. has acquitted himself of his promise page
262, of making St. Ignatius appear as great a Fanatic as ever has been in the
World, and whether according to the same promise he is to be contented to be
upbraided with the charge of Fanaticisme. At least I laid it at his Door in my
first Letter, and there it is like to lie together with Idolatry, till he know
how to remove them, without changing his Principles. Let this suffice to
vindicate St. Ignatius, in my next Letter you shall hear of his Followers.

THE THIRD LETTER, That the Jesuits Doctrine and Practices, are not destructive
to Government.
SIR,
1. THe Jesuits had no reason to expect, that after Dr. Stillingfleet had
dealt so rudely with St. Ignatius their holy Founder (as you have seen) he
would use them with more civility. And they are wise enough to bless God for
it. For they take it for a great argument of his Love to their Order, to permit
it to be abused by malicious Tongues, as well as to be cried up by a good
People, as a seasonable recruit and support in the Church, in these later
times. They adore Gods Providence and know it is the style of his infinite
Wisdom, to expose his own works to rough trials, to render them more
illustrious; that the Devil uses all his Engines to destroy them; and that the
world follows the method, and intention of the Devil his Master. There is not a
holier Society upon Earth then Christ's Church, nor was there ever any which
suffered greater slanders then She has done, both in her Head and Members.
Christ was traduced for an Imposter, a Seducer an Enemy to Caesar, a seditious
Fellow, a very Devil, and was crucified between two Thieves, to take away his
life and reputation at one blow. Christians have ever since met with the like
treaty. From the beginning they were every where contradicted. Acts 28. St.
Paul saw a great Door open to his labors in the conversion of Souls, but he
also discovered a great many Adversaries. 1 Cor. 16. others that followed him
were accused for Murderers of Infants, devourers of man's Flesh, Enemies to the
State, incestuous and abominable Wretches, and for such were put to cruel
deaths. Sacred and profane History is full of Examples of this Nature, and no
body can question what I have said, that is not a mere Stranger to them. Yet
could there be a juster or holier man, then the Son of God, the Holy of Holies,
and Justice it self were there ever Persons more estranged from Cruelty,
Sedition and Impurity, or greater Lovers of Peace, Meekness and Chastity, then
those Christians? Why then did God permit the Devil and the World so furiously
to misuse his Son and his Servants? To give their Virtue a greater lus^re,
after such hard trials, to show that truth triumphs over all the Powers of
Hell, and to Crown their sufferings with immortal Laurels. That which happened
to Christ and his Church in general, has befaln all Religious Orders in their
first rise. The Benedictines, Carthusians, Dominicans, Franciscans, have all
had their share in sufferings, they have all been filed, and polished with the
sharp Teeth of wicked Slaunderers, nor will our Adversaries yet let them be
quiet, as you see. The Society of Jesus as it came last into the World, so has
it been more persecuted then all the rest, for as much as the World is grown
more inveterate in malice, and the Devil more enraged, at the good which he
sees daily wrought by their pious endeavors; What mischief has there been in
this last age, whereof the Jesuits have not been made the chief Authors and
Contrivers, as if they had opened Pandora's Box, and let all evils into the
World. But for their comfort, they can be treated no worse then their dear
Master, who has read them this Lesson, as they have persecuted me, so will they
persecute you. And they may well apply that of Origin. to themselves. Hom. 11.
Joshua. He that seeks the Freindship of Jesus, let him know he shall have many
Enemies, Though you be of the least merit in the Church, yet if you belong to
Jesus, you shall be sure to be persecuted.

2. It is not my intention at present to make my self Protector or all those
illustrious Religious Orders (as the Dr. seems to have made himself Champion of
the English Protestant Church) They are able to defend themselves against all
their Adversaries. Nor do I mean to engage in all the Jesuits quarrels, but
only for your satisfaction, wipe off that Dirt which the Dr. has lately cast
upon them. I reduce all his Calumnies to three Heads. First I briefly examine
the Jesuits Principles and Practices, and show them not to be destructive to
Government, and that shall be my Task in this Letter. In the next I will make
it appear that they are neither Factious nor Enemies to Bishops, and then I
will also remove a libellous story of the Jesuits way of converting China. I
confess I do not admire their modesty, for not appearing all this while in
defense of their Order, for the violence of their Enemies is come to such a
height, there is no dissembling it. Their patience may be very laudable in other
occasions, but not when the reputation of their institute lies at stake.
Methinks they should reflect upon the Counsel which his Majesty's Grandfather
Henry 4. (that wise King) gave the French Jesuits, after he had studied them
well. Fathers, said he, make but your selves known, for no body that knows the
Society can speak ill of it. I know they cannot flatter themselves so much as
to think, they can with their writings stop the wide mouths of envy and malice,
yet may they so far vindicate the Society, that Sober Persons will see they are
wronged, and happily some Protestants upon better information, may grow to be
of our great Chancellor of England, Sir Francis Bacons opinion, who Bacon
advancement of Learning.
said of the Jesuits, that when he considered their pains and industry in
advancing Learning, and bringing up Youth, that of Agesilaus came to his mind,
talis cum sis utinam noster esses. By these few Sheets which have robbed me only
of some spare hours you may see how easily it were for a good Pen, to justify
the Jesuits in a Cause, where innocence pleads for them.

3. For methods sake I begin with the Jesuits Principles, and then proceed to
their practices: In both charges I promise to dissemble nothing which the Dr.
has objected, if it any way concern the Jesuits, but make bold to wave some
impertinent matters, which he intermixes, as that of the Irish Remonstrance,
Pope's proceedings, etc.

4. The first principle which he fastens upon the Jesuits, as destructive to
government, is, that civil power is so originally in the people, that they may
in some cases, alter the form of government, if they find it necessary for the
good and preservation of the commonwealth. This principle (whatsoever truth it
may have in speculation) is by no means to be preached to the people, who are
apt enough of themselves to stretch cases, and pick quarrels with their best
Governors, yet was it taught many ages before the Jesuits were so much a
thought of. And as the Dr. confesses that Bellarmine uses Navarr for it (who
was no Jesuit) so he might have produced many more, as well Divines as Lawyers;
and amongst others, Barclay himself allows it may be practiced in two cases, as
Cardinal Perron has well observed. And since there are so many precedents,
where the people have assumed the power, it had been very Oration to the third
state.
strange if no body had stood up in defense of it, had it been but to justify
their Princes Title, who were beholding to the people for them. What then if a
few Jesuits have followed this opinion, which they found taught by others, and
what if Father Parsons had been one of these? is it therefore to be pinned upon
the Jesuits, as their particular doctrine? The opinion may be called any thing
as well as Iesuitical, I will call it Protestant if you please, for this last
age, has afforded us more examples of the doctrine put in practice amongst
Protestants, then many ages have done before, as is demonstrated at large in
that excellent Historical Treatise Jerusalem and Babel. Did not those of the
Reformation actually turn out their Sovereign Princes, in Scotland, Swedland
Denmark, Holland and Geneva? Did they not raise Tumults, and Rebellions in
France, Germany, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Transylvania? did not brave Coligny
(as the Drs. worthy Author of the Answer to the Papists Apology styles him)
head the Rebels in France, and brag he had lost four battles, against the King,
and yet was formidable? did not Edward the sixth with his council, give away
Queen Mary's Title, to the Lady Jane Gray, and did not Cranmer and Ridley
stickle hard for her? were there not more Rebellions in Queen Mary's five years
reign, then in forty under Queen Elizabeth? Was not Queen Mary of Scotland, the
undoubted Heir of the Crown of England and was she not put to death, least she
should destroy the Protestant Religion, as the Earl of Kent told her? Cambden,
1587. page 455. Were not all these Factions and Rebellious proceedings,
warranted by their own Protestant Gospellers, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Zuinglius,
Knox, Bucanan, Douglass, Goodman, etc. But to return again to Father Parsons,
the Dr. makes it sure, that he writ Doleman, but he had most reason to know
that himself, and I have always heard, that he denied it at his death, and
that one Doleman, (no Jesuit) was the Author of that book; there are no few
arguments to prove, that Father Parsons was not the man. But whosoever it was,
it is foolishly done of the Dr. to make him guilty of the late Kings blood. He
has a great deal more reason to lay it upon Hugh Peter's, and other seditious
Protestant Preachers, who though they might borrow part of Dolemans discourse,
yet scorned to be beholding to him for the doctrine. You see, Sir, the
Answerers of Philanax, and the Papists Apology, will receive but little benefit
from this observation, which Dr. Stillingfleet has added to theirs, when they
come to their more accurate examinations of these things.

5. Another Jesuitical principle (of the Drs. making) is the Popes power to
depose Princes. This is every where laid in their dish, by him and his party;
but with a great deal of injustice, as you shall presently see. You are then to
know, Sir, that the doctrine was long ago taught by almost all Orders and
Professions, Seculars, Regulars, Divines, Lawyers, before the Jesuits were in
being. Card. Perron in his Eloquent Oration, to the third State in France,
quotes some of them, and Barclay calls it the Canonists, and Divines common
Doctrine. I will not tire you out, with a tedious Catalogue of Authors, some of
those who are wont to be cited are, Panormiranus, Aegidius Romans St. Thomas
Cajetan St. Bonaventure, Halensis, Waldensis, Bacon, Gerson Chancellor of
Paris, Sanders, Bartholus, Bardus, etc. What wonder then if Bellarmine and
three or four more Jesuits, were carried away with such a torrent of Doctors
who went before them. They found their works publicly exposed it Libraries,
never censured, but in good repute amongst the Learned, nor had Princes in
those days showed their indignation against their doctrine as they have done
since. What wonder, I say, then, if a few Jesuits have since followed it? Is
this sufficient to excuse the Dr. from wilful malice or gross ignorance, in
attributing the opinion to the whole Society, as if the whole Herd of Jesuits
(as the miscalls them) had taught it, and no body in the world but they.
Believe it, Sir, there is no man that has a grain of judgment, but will
acknowledge that the Jesuits of all others can be the least charged with it not
only because it was the common doctrine, before they came into the world, but
also because (whatsoever others have done) they have taught it, nor writ one
word of that subject, these fifty or sixty years. For no sooner was the
doctrine cried down, and condemned in France, but their General Cladius
Aquaviva, to take away all occasion of complaint, forbad it to be taught any
more; and his Successor Mutius Vitelleschi A. D. 1626. not content with a bare
prohibition, commanded all his Subjects in virtue of obedience (that is under
pain of damnation) never to treat more of the Popes power of deposing Princes
either in word or in writing. And this precept was afterward confirmed by the
whole Order in the 8 general Congregation, and runs thus. We ordain in virtue
of holy obedience, that no body hereafter, treat the question of the Popes
power over Princes, to depose them, etc. in any public or private writings,
disputations or School lessons, that all occasion of offense and complaint may
be quite cut off. This decree has been ever since inviolably observed by the
Jesuits, let the Dr. either name the persons that has transgressed, or let him
forbear hereafter to make the Jesuits odious, for a doctrine which they have so
solemnly renounced. He would take it ill to have all the Protestant Ministers
Tenets laid at his door. Henry the 4th. said well in his speech to the
Parliament. I am certain that in averring and defending the Popes authority,
the Fathers of the Society differ not from other Catholic Divines.

6. A third, and yet more dangerous and desperate Principle, which the Dr.
fathers on the Jesuits, is the lawfulness to kill Kings. I cannot name the
person that ever taught it in these terms. I know Dominious Soto a Dominican,
Charles 5 Confessor, taught it lawful to take away the lifo of a Tyrant, (l. 1.
de jure and just.) and Mariana followed him in a book dedicated to Philip the
second King of Spain, and neither of those Princes took themselves to be
concerned in the opinion, or showed their displeasure against the book, no more
than the Royalists were offended at Killing no Murder. But it seems Marcan's
book gave great offense in France. And all the Jesuits sinned in him (as we all
did in Adam) otherwise his doctrine, which they disown, would not be imputed to
them. The French Fathers were the first that discovered it in Mariana's book,
and condemned it in their Provintial Congregation, four years before the Sorbon
censure was passed against it. And their General Claudius Aquaviva, gave order
to suppress the book, till that place were corrected; and more than this,
forbad all those of the Society, under pain of excommunication, and other
penalties (as is to be seen in the 8 Congregation, Tit. censurae) not to write
or teach in public or private, or advise that it is lawful to kill Kings, or
imagine their death upon pretense of Tyranny, so that very probably this
extravagant opinion of Mariana, by the Jesuits industry, would have been so
smothered in its first birth; as not to be revived, had it not been for the
covetousness, or malice of the Protestant Heirs of Wechel who reprinted the
Book at their own charges. I owe this Observation to Father Cotton, who in his
Letter to the Queen Regent of France brings in a whole Jury of Jesuits, who in
their Writings have all rejected the opinion and practice, of attempting any
thing against the Life of a Prince, though he should abuse His Princely Power.
These are all grave Writers, Tolet, Bellarmin, Valentia, Salmeron, Delrio,
Heissius, Becanus, Gretser, Lessius, Serarius, Azor, Richcome. All other
Jesuits side with these, and are ready to seal it with their Blood, that the
Decree of the Council of Sess. 15.
Constance ought to be received by all, and maintained inviolably. This being
the constant judgment of the whole Society, what prejudice can one roving Pen,
bring to the whole Order. John Wicklef is a rubricated St. in Foxe's Protestant
Calendar, and yet the said Council condemned him for teaching that, every
Tyrant ought to be killed* and that it was both lawful and meritorious, for any
of his Vassals or Subjects to kill him, and that by any fraud or deceit,
notwithstanding any Oath or Agreement made to the contrary, and that without
any Sentence of Judgment. Luther, Calvin, Beza, Buchanan, did not only teach
the same Propositions, but most impudently applied them to Princes then living,
namely to Charles the 9th. King of France, Queen Mother with all her Whelps, as
they called her Children, Queen Mary of England, etc. and yet the Dr. with
Reason would think himself much injured if these mad Propositions of Wicklef
and others, were laid to his Church of England, for all they were Protestants,
and some of them cannonized for Saints by Mr. Fox with what Face then can he
lay the fault of one Jesuit to the whole Order, as if it were an original Sin,
which were to descend to all Jesuits though their wills were so far from being
united with his, that they have expressly renounced and condemned his rash
assertion. According to this method, it were no hard matter to ruin the
reputation of the best Families and Communities in the World, by making them
guilty of their misdemeanors of some one of their Body contrary to the
judgment of Almighty God Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Soul that shall sin, the same shall
die: the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father.

7. The Jesuits practices are conformable to the Doctrine and Practice of the
Catholic Church, but the Dr. supposes them guilty of most abominable crimes. I
say supposes, for he brings nothing to prove it besides his Ipse dixit, or bare
assertion, which as you have seen, is not only fallible, but has been often
found tripping, First he supposes them to have had a hand in the massacre at
Paris, and Rebellion in Ireland which is as true, as that they were the
Plotters and Contrivers of the late Rebellion in England, where their penitents
and best Friends, lost their Goods, or their Lives in the defense of His
Majesty's Power and just Rights. The Massacre at Paris was an intrigne of
State, or Cabinet plot, as appears by all the Transactions faithfully Recorded
by D. Avila, and never was laid to the Jesuits charge, who hate such
unchristian like Proceedings. They are as innocent of the Irish Rebellion, for
what Jesuit can the Dr. name that appeared in it? certainly they had not played
their Cards well to raise a Rebellion in Ireland and at the same time promote
to their uttermost, His Majesty's interest in England. I confess Catholics in
that Kingdom were highly to blame, but they stirred not before Protestants had
signed and delivered a bloody Petition to the Parliament, for their utter
extirpation or banishment. And the Author of the Politicians Catechism proves
at large, 6. 10. n. 6. that Protestants had a greater hand then Catholics in
these cruel disorders.

8. His second charge against the Jesuits in point of practice runs yet higher;
for he makes them privy Counselors to three of the greatest Parricids in the
world, Clement, Chastel and Ravillas. Never was there so much malice crowded
into one line, but it will cost me many Lines to clear the Jesuits from that
riple crime; for I cannot do it but by giving you a short Narrative of these
three treasonable attemps. To begin with Clement, the murderer of Henry 3. of
France, the Case is clear, he was no Jesuit nor had he any other Counselor
that we know of but the Devil to set him at work. I think the Dr. is the first
man that ever named the Jesuits in that wicked fact. I beseech God forgive him
for it.

9. For Chastel it is true, Sir, the Jesuits and the Churches common enemies
have blazed about many stories; as if they had been accessory to his execrable
attempt upon the life of Henry 4. but if any credit be to be given to the
French Historians due Pleix, Peter, Matthew, de Ton, Spodanus and others, or to
the grave Counselors who pleaded for the Jesuits before the Parliament; Rene
de la Fon, and Montholon, or to the Kings own testimony, who was most of all
concerned to know the truth, they are most shamefully slaundered. This is the
true Story. One John Chastel wounded the King in the upper Lip and struck out
one of his Teeth. He was taken in the Fact and confessed all before he was led
to Prison: that he did it of his own head; without communicating his design
with any body, only something a far off to his father; that it was eight months
since he had left the Jesuits Schools, and that they knew not any thing of his
intentions. All this he confessed freely and without compulsion. The same story
he repeated again and again in Prison, and though often cruelly racked and
tortured to declare his councillors and accomplices, never varied in the least
from what he confessed at first, nor let one word fall against the Jesuits. And
there were thousands of witnesses in the place of Execution, that when his arms
and thighs were cruelly pinched, his hand cut off, and all humane means used to
extort the truth from him, he persisted still in the same confession and dyed
upon it, declaring the Jesuits innocent to the last breath. Yet for all this,
because he had once frequented the Jesuits schools, their malicious enemies,
would needs forsooth conclude thence that they were plotters of the mischief.
Away then they go armed to their College, set guards at the Gates that no body
should escape; seize on their persons, ransack their chambers, but discover
nothing either in their carriages or their countenances, that could argue a
guilty conscience; but rather all the signs and demonstrations of innocence;
only because amongst other writings of Father Guignard, they found the common
question, de Tirannicidio, which was writ in the time of the League, and which
Canonists and moral Philosophers were wont to treat much in those days, and
which Bodin amongst modern Authors thought fit to dispute in his Commonwealth,
they took him and hanged him up for a Traitor without any form or order of
Justice, say the Authors. And in the same fury they led away Gueret, who had
been Chastel's Master, and put him upon the rack, but finding him innocent they
banished him out of France, and all the Jesuits for company, with confiscation
of their goods: and to make them eternally infamous, they erected a Pyramid
with an inscription, tending more to their disgrace, then the Kings honor.
This sentence of Paris was executed in most places of France, only the
Parliament of Toulouse, looked upon it as an unjust Act, and forbade all towns
under their jurisdiction to obey it. This is the sum of that Tragical story,
which serves well for the Jesuits justification, for morally speaking it was
impossible, that Chastel should not have accused the Jesuits, had he known them
guilty. He that made no difficulty to accuse himself and bring his own father
upon the stage, why should he stick to accuse the Jesuits? is it credible that
a youth of eighteen years age should undergo a thousand torments worse then
death, rather then acknowledge the Authors of his sufferings, when we have
heard of men that were made of Iron, who rather chose to accuse themselves
wrongfully and dye once for all, than suffer so many lingering deaths upon the
Rack? It was questionless a most admirable and miraculous price of providence
over the Jesuits, that he did not unjustly accuse them, when he was so many
ways tempted to do it, for one syllable would have done their business, had it
been upon the rack, had it been afterward recalled* it would have served to
ruin them utterly, not only in their lives and fortunes, but in their credit
and reputation, which is far dearer to them; for if a mere shadow of
presumption gave their adversaries the boldness to charge them and treat them
so severely; what were they to have expected, had the force of torments made
them criminals? true or false it would never have been then much disputed.

10. You may imagine the King himself would be curious to sift out the truth,
whether indeed the Jesuits had a hand in that stroke, which aimed at his life.
He soon discovered the malice of their accusers, but having scarce got the
Reins of Government into his hands, he thought fit to dissemble for a time; but
upon occasion of a studied bitter invective, which the President Harley made in
Parliament, to persuade his Majesty not to think of recalling the Jesuits, he
suddenly took upon him to plead their cause, and did it with so much Wisdom
and Eloquence, that they could not have chosen a better advocate. The Speech is
worth your reading, and therefore I send it with this Letter that you may
peruse it. The conclusion was, that the Jesuits were restored, and the infamous
Pyramid pulled down by the Kings Command; who not content to have
re-established them in their own Colleges, built and founded them a stately
College and Academy at La Fleche, and bequeathed his heart to them as a
perpetual monument of his constant Love to the Society. And that you may here
also read his affection for them in his own language. I think it not amiss to
insert that Speech of his, which he made at Villiers-Coterez, A. D. 1606. to
the Fathers that were deputed by the Provincial Congregation, to give his
Majesty thanks for his continual favors, and to Petition for two things,
first, that as he had been graciously pleased to recall them to Paris, he would
also settle and establish them there by his Letters Patents. Secondly that he
would order that the public Schools might be restored at Clermont College.
Upon this occasion he delivered himself thus. Fathers, There are four years
past since you presented me your welcome Petition at Metz., and I did not admit
you but upon very good informations, You are beholding to your enemies for it,
and my curiosity was not out of your way. If things go on but slowly, do not
attribute it to my want of Affection and care but to the multiplicity of
business, which overwhelmes me. All cannot be done at once, We are now upon the
Foundation of Colleges, and the rest will be done by degrees, for I take it to
heart. I knew well they were calumnies they cast upon you. I have always
defended you, and when I heard of any thing, I instantly acquainted F. Cotton
with it, that you might take your measures accordingly, and to let you know,
that what I did for you, was not out of a counterfeit dissimulation, but out of
My true Love and sincere Affection. I have placed you in my house, and that of
my Ancestors to give my Subjests example to do the like. Your present Petition
is grateful. I am resolved to finish my work; but to tell you plainly, I do not
think it a fit time to restore your College at Paris: there will be a time for
that hereafter. Here the King making a Pause, the Provincial of the Jesuits
began to mind him of the other thing he had requested, and his majesty
immediately replied. I am coming to it; but I was willing to begin with that
which I take most to heart. I remember all you said, though I do not observe
the same method. It is true, you are exposed in Paris, and were I not there,
you might come to be affronted but you were too blame you did not tell me so, I
did not think things went so, had I known it, I would have remedied it before
this. Give me a note of it, that I may communicate it with my Counsel, and get
it dispatched to day or to morrow. I have loved you and cherished you ever since
I knew you, out of an assurance I had, that all those who have recourse to you,
whether for instruction in Learning, or for the direction of their consciences,
are much improved by it* and I have always said, that those that truly love
and fear God, cannot but do well, and are the most faithful to their Princes.
Keep but your rules, they are good ones. I have protected you, and will still
be your Protector. I am much pleased that the Pope does not make you Bishops
and Cardinals: Stick to that, for if ambition once creep in amongst you, you
are lost men. We are all frail, and have need to resist tentations; every one
of you may experience it in himself; but you have the way to overcome them. I
have a great Kingdom, and as great persons may commit great errors, or do much
good, because they are great and powerful, so you that are eminent in Learning
and Virtue amongst the servants of God, may do much good by your Sermons,
Confessions, Writings, Lessons Disputations, and good instructions; but if you
fail in your duty, and grow slack in your pious endeavors, you may do much
hurt, in regard the World has a great opinion of you. I was very glad to
understand that you have taken order that none of you print books which may
give offense, you do well. That which might pass in Italy, will not relish in
other places, and that which is liked in France, may displease in Italy: We
must suit our selves to those we live with, and you must avoid the least
occasion of offense, for there are many eyes upon you and your actions, but it
is better for you to be envyed then pittyed. If all bad tongues were cut out,
there would be great store of dumb persons; we should have difficulty to find
servants. I have been of two Religions, and when I was a Hugonot, what ever I
did, was said to be done for that party; now I am a Catholic, whatever I do
for my Religion, I am said to be a Jesuit. I slight all such sencures and
content my self to do good, because it is good; do you so too. Those that say
it is out of spite that you do not restore your College at Paris, would soon
find something else to object against you. Do not value what they say, but only
do well. If in twelve thousand of you one should chance to commit a fault, it
were no great wonder. It were rather a miracle that no more delinquents should
be found in so great a number, since there was one Judas amongst twelve
Apostles. This i^le tell you if any one of you commit a fault, I will be the
first to fall upon him, but will not revenge my self upon the whole body. The
Father you have chose to go to Rome, will assure your General of my affection
to the Society. For your selves, you may believe i will be as tender of you, as of
the Apple of my eye. Pray to God for me.

This was His Majestyes Speech to the Jesuits, as it is Recorded by Montholon
Advocate in Parliament, and what can be added to his testimony, whether you
regard the person that speaks, who was a most wise Prince: or the substance he
delivers, which is most sententious and solid? I do not see what Panegyric or
what Apology the Jesuits could have made of more force or more for their
advantage. Their enemies are put upon a necessity either to speak well of them,
or affront that great Monarch, by giving him the Lie. For to say he loved the
Jesuits because he did not know them, is to rob him of one of his best parts,
which all admired in him; which was, not to be easily consened in the judgment
he framed of others, and besides, this was after he had tried them many years,
and had one of them continually near his person.

11. After all these expressions of kindness, which were always followed with
real favors, who would imagine that the Jesuits should be, I do not say, so
ungrateful and inhumane, but so stupid and insensible of their own good, as to
plot this their grand Benenefactors and protectors death. Yet Dr. St. is the
man that lays it to their charge, as if they had not only designed it in
Chastels attempt (which proved ineffectual) but actually murdered him in the
person of Ravillac, of whose counsel he supposes them to have been; though the
villain himself, who had most reason to know it, in all his examinations and
tortures, always protested, that no body counsaild him to the Fact, nor so
much as knew of his intentions. It is true the Jesuits enemies taking it to be
a fit occasion to vent their malice against them, during the young Kings
minority, whom they could not hurt in his fathers time; spread abroad Libels
against them, and stuck not to report that Ravillac had sucked all his deadly
poison out of Mariana's book, which he had got by heart: but this engine faild
them, for to their great shame and confusion, it was found upon due
examination, that Ravillac knew not a word of Latin in which the book is
written, nor so much as Mariana's name. And soon after the Queen Regent, with
the Princes and counsel in the Kings name, issued out a Decree which cleared
the Jesuits from all suspicion of having had any thing to do in that wicked
Fact. And because four days before the Parliament had condemned Cardinal
Bellarmins book, de potestate summi Pontificis in temporalibus, in the same
decree they revoked and annulled that Act.

12. His last fling at the Jesuits practice is, to make Father Henry Garnet
guilty of the Gunpowder Treason. But it is manifest, that mild man detested
from his very heart all such bloody practices, and labored all he could to
prevent them, by suing to Rome for an excommunication, against all those that
should use any violent proceedings upon the account of Religion, as is to be
seen more at large in the History of the English Province. (Mar. l. 7. an. 27.)
The main thing objected against him was his concealing the plot, but you must
know all the knowledge he had of it, was in the Sacrament of Confession, and
all he could do there, was to exhort and conjure his penitent, to terrify the
Plotters from so wicked an attempt, and he was not at all wanting in this point
of duty; but for revealing the plot, it was more than he could do, for
Protestants must give us leave to believe, what all Catholic Princes and
States allow, to be of no prejudice, but rather an advantage to their safety;
that the Sacred Seal of Confession is inviolable, nor is this only the Jesuits
doctrine, but the known opinion of all Catholic Divines: there is not that
Priest amongst us that will not rather choose to dye, than reveal a Confession,
and if they dye for it, Protestants must not think it strange that we honor
them. This was Father Garnets case, who was condemned for not revealing
Confessions, and for being a Priest and Jesuit. No wonder then if St. Arnour
saw his picture in a Catholic country: But I dare say he never saw Guerets or
Guignards, as the Dr. insinuates; for though they dyed innocently, yet they
dyed not for the Faith, as Father Garnet did. Let St. Arnour say what he will,
he never acknowledged himself guilty of the Treason: that is a mere calumny and
it is something strange, the Dr. should travail into France to know what passed
in London. All he confessed was, that having an inckling of suspicion out of
confession that Catesby was bruing mischief (though he knew not what it was) he
used all his power to persuade him to be quiet, and not to run himself upon
desperate courses, which were neither pleasing to God nor man, and that finding
him to his thinking, resolved to follow his counsel, he did not take himself
obliged to give informations against him, as not judgeing it the part of a
christian, much less of a Priest, to accuse his brother of a crime, whereof he
verily believed he had repented. After his death it pleased God in a wonderful
manner to confirm his innocence, (ibid. n. 34. 35.) by imprinting his picture
upon a husk of straw, where some of his blood had light. King James himself and
some other Protestants, as well as many Catholics were witnesses of it, and
although much endeavor was used to find out a Painter, that would undertake to
make such another picture by it, none could be found; all concluding it was
beyond the art of man, to contrive such a rare piece in so narrow a compass.
The Baron of Hobocque (who was then Ambassador from the Crown of Spain) offered
six hundred Crowns for the straw, and his testimony is yet to be seen,
witnessing that he saw the picture upon it, though he could not say it was like
Father Garnet, because he had never seen him. There is also extant a large
narrative, which one John Wilkinson signed at his death, who was the very man
that took up the Straw at the Execution, and was also present when Father
Garnets picture was first discovered upon the straw.

13. One thing more I cannot omit in this place, that if Jesuits were such
desperate King-haters, as the Dr. paints them, Kings would not be such sooles
as to build them Colleges, and trust them with the education of youth, and
with their own Consciences too, as we see most Catholic Kings and Princes do
to this very day, the Emperor, the Kings of France and Poland, the Queen of
England, Queen and Prince Regent of Portugal, Duchess of Orleans though but a
late convert, Dukes of Bavary Newburg* and many other Princes of Germany and
else where. It is their nearest concern to look well to their own preservation
and safety, and not to have dangerous Persons about them. Had not the Queen
Regent of Spain taken Jesuits to be honest men, She would never have preferred
Father Nithard her Confessor to the first Ecclesiastical dignity in all Spain,
She would never have made him her first Minister of State, Her extraordinary,
and now lately her ordinary Ambassador at Rome and procured for him a Cardinals
Cap, and his Holinesse's command, and dispensation to receive it, and to
undertake the other honorable Employments, which he labored to decline
according to the Obligation of his Vow. Believe me Princes are so far from
conceiving Jesuits to be Enemies to Government, that they are generally of
Alexander the Prince of Parma's mind, that they are necessary to keep Subjects
in obedience to their Governors, and that one of their Colleges is as good as
a strong Citadel, to keep the People in their duty. [Strad. To. 2. l. 3.] And
it seems the Magistrates of Embrick in Cleaveland thought so too; for not many
years ago, when the Protestant Governor would have turned them out of the
City, they prevailed with him to let them stay, protesting that the Jesuits had
such a powerful influence into the good order of the whole Town, that they
neither could nor would govern it without them, and with a great deal of
reason; for what do the Jesuits Preach to the People, but first, that Sovereign
Princes are the Lords anointed and therefore to be respected and honored as
holy and sacred things. 2. That it is a damnable Heresy to think that their
power does not come from God. 3. That it is God that sets the Crown upon their
Heads, as it was wont anciently to be represented in Pictures by a hand
stretched out holding a Crown. 4. That he who resists Kings, purchases to
himself his own damnation, as the Apostle expresses himself. Romans 13. 1. 5.
That obedience is due to them, not because they are virtuous or wise, or endued
with any other good quality, but for this only that they are Sovereigns and
Gods Vicegerents. 6. that it is not lawful to deny them obedience, much less to
rebel against them although they were vicious, untoward, and hard to support,
as S. Peter speaks. 1 Pet. 2. 6. 7. That it is a most prodigious crime and
execrable Particide for Subjects to attempt any thing against their Persons,
upon any pretense whatsoever, and that afflictions and persecutions patiently
endured, are a most grateful Sacrifice unto Almighty God.

14. What shall I now say to the Drs. two propositions, which he would have
Jesuits declare without mental reservations? To the first, about the Popes
power to absolve Subjects from their obedience, I beg leave to wave such odious
controversies, about the authority of Christ's Vicar upon earth. Let it suffice
to have told you with Henry 4. that the Jesuits hold nothing about the Popes
power, which is not common to other Catholic Drs. It is not handsome for
private persons to renounce a power which their Superiors pretend to. To the
second, how the Jesuits would behave themselves in case the Pope should War
against the King, etc. I answer, I do not question but his Majesty would find
them faithful Subjects, and repose as much trust in them and all Catholics, as
in Dr. Sti. and those of his Principles. It is fresh in our memories how the
French King, for all he lately swagger'd with the Pope, and was ready to make
war against him, did not part with the Jesuit his Confessor, nor repose less
considence in him and the rest of his Order. There never was a president of the
Jesuits siding with his Holiness against their own Princes, but there have been
too many Examples of Protestants siding and Plotting against their Catholic
Princes, We have not forgot the setting up the Lady Jane Greys title against
the undoubted Heir of the Crown, and the cutting off the Queen of Scots head,
that a Protestant might be sure to succeed. It belongs to God to dive into the
secrets of men's hearts, and therefore I will not offer to judge, but if it be
lawful to guess by good conjectures, it is shrewdly to be suspected, that some
Protestants would have scuck to the good Old Cause, and have been backward
enough in his Majesty's happy Restoration, had he not been a Protestant. I
will not puzzle the Dr. with the resolution of such nice cases, nor give you,
Sir, any farther trouble at present, but conclude out of the premises, that Dr.
Still. is far from proving the Jesuits Fanatical, for resisting Authority under
pretense of Religion, which was the thing he undertook to prove. The rest of
his unjust accusations I reserve for a fourth Letter.

The Speech of Henry the IV. King of France, in behalf of the JESUITS.
THe Nobility of the Court of Paris and a great part of the Parliament being
come to the Kings Palace, Harley one of the Presidents of the Parliament of
Paris addressing himself to his Majesty, pronounced a studied invective against
the Jesuits, wherein he urged all that which the enemies of the Society had
premeditated. All his speech closed in this* that the Society of Jesus ought
not to be recalled into France, but continue banished. The King replied in this
manner,

1. THe care you show of me and my Kingdom is grateful to me; albeit you seem
not to have thoroughly weighed the things you demand, nor are you, as yet, so
well acquainted with my thoughts, as I am with yours.

2. You deem the Weal of my Kingdom to consist in the proposition you have
made; you tell me it is a matter that deserves to be most carefully
deliberated. And I tell you, you have said nothing which I have not most
carefully weighed, and most diligently examined by my self these eight or nine
years.

3. You take your selves for men of great understanding and experience in the
Common wealth. But believe me I know as well as You all that has been in
controversy in this matter.

4. First of all you object to the Fathers of the Society, the Assembly of
Poissy, * but without cause. For if there had been at that place others like
many of The Clergy held an Assembly at Poissy an. 1561. in which the society
was allowed of, and admitted though not fully.
them, the Catholic cause would have had a more happy success. Therefore that
which you turn to their dispraise, any just Umpire will attribute to their
virtue. But that which I most wonder at in your judgments is, that so
preposterously you condemn the society of ambition, whereas the Fathers of the
Society with a constant submission, have ever refused all honor and
preferment, as well Ecclesiastical as Political: and which is more, they bind
themselves by vow not only not to aspire to honors, but even to refuse the
same when they are freely offered them. Consider their whole course of life,
and you shall find that all their ambition is to labor to help all, and that
without any pretense of interest or gain. They value not the expenses of their
own pains, so they may profit many.

5. But that you call in question the very name of the Society of Jesus, and
for that you tax them. But see with what reason. For if they must be blamed for
that holy name, what shall we say for those Religious Persons who take their
name from the most blessed Trinity? And your Daughters here at Paris; what will
you think of them that call themselves Daughters of God? Finally how will you
censure my Knights, who are called of the Holy Ghost? Truly I do not more
dislike them that take their name from Christ, then any other.

6. You object that the Divines of Sotborn condemned the Jesuits. I do not
deny it. But they condemned them being innocent, unknown and unheard. For this
I call to witness, those very Divines themselves, who now admit them, whom
their Predecessors banished, and honor them whom they contemned; nay they
praise now and extol those that were condemned, and stick not to take them for
their Directors, and Masters, in all kind of Learning.

7. You tell me the Jesuits have hitherto remained in France only by
connivance, Here I acknowledge, and reverence the divine providence, that has
reserved this honor for me, not yet atchived by others, that I should
establish in this Realm the Society of Jesus, which hitherto has had no settled
abode in France. My Predecessors have received the Society, I will patronize
and preserve them.

8. Peradventure you will turn to the Jesuits discredit, that for which you
ought to praise and honor them: The University of Paris earnestly and openly
opposed them. And what, I pray, was the cause of this opposition? All was, that
the Fathers did not only equal others in Learning and Industry, but also went
far beyond them. A clear testimony of this is the great number of Youth that
frequented the Fathers Schools, where together with Learning they learnt
Virtue. But to stop this opposition, I will make a Decree that the University
of Paris shall no more oppose them. And this you will be glad of.

9. But you will tell me, that the ablest of your Parliament got not their
Learning of the Jesuits. This I will not much gainsay. For the ablest of you,
as they excel in Learning so they exceed in years. These got their Learning in
Foreign Nations, before the Society set foot in France. Others did not so, and
so I am certain they think and speak otherwise. And what need they speak? the
matter it self speaks. We our selves saw now at the departure of the Society
out of France, all the muses seemed to depart. Our Universitie was desert and
mourned: those came seldom at it, who before daily in great numbers frequented
the Fathers. Yea many departed the Realm, and forsook their Country to study
in the Societies Schools; nor could your Decrees or Threats stop them.

10. You say the Fathers joined themselves to the League, that is not to be
imputed to their fault, but to the iniquity of the times. But this I persuade
my self upon the assurance I have of the integrity of their Consciences, that
they will become such toward me, as it behooves them who mindful of benefits,
desire to show themselves most grateful.

11. Now some of you impose on the Fathers a new crime, and peradventure as yet
unheard of, saying, that they draw to their order young men of the most
forwardness and best dispositions. An unpardonable crime: yet I praise them and
esteem them particularly for this, that you condemn. Do not we, though in a
different matter, do the self same? A Captain that is to raise Soldiers, does
he not cull out the choicest, and leave the meanest and least hopeful? In your
Parliament, when you choose a new Court, or fill up an old, do you prefer the
unlearnedst, and least apt for business? If the Jesuits should put unlearned
Masters in their Schools, or in their Churches ignorant Preachers* would you
not with reason blame them? What offense is it that the Jesuits should provide
the fittest they can, both for Church and Schools.

12. That slander which concerns the Jesuits treasure, is as false as common.
Go visit all the Colleges in France, search all their treasures sum all
together, and you will scarce find twelve, or at most fifteen thousand Crowns I
know well how poor and slender furniture, and provision was both at Lions and
Bourge. Nevertherless 30 or 40 persons were to be fed in each of those
Colleges* whereas their yearly Revenues was scarcely sufficient for eight
Masters.

13. The Vow of obedience with which they tie themselves to the Pope, does not
oblige them to be more faithful to externes, then to us. Neither is there in
that Vow any thing contrary to the Oath which they will swear unto me. They
will attempt nothing (I am sure) against their Prince. That Vow to the Pope
binds them to go to barbarous and savage Nations that they may reduce them to
the Catholic Church. The whole World testifyeth that the remotest Regions of
the Indies, together with infinite Heretics, have been by their pains and
learned endeavors, brought to Christ's fold. I remember I have often said* that
if the Labor of Spanish Fathers be so profitable for Spain, why should not
France with reason expect the same? Is that Kingdom more fortunate and
flourishing than this? Spain is loved by the Spaniards, and why should the
French hate their Native soil?

14. But as you are wont to say, these men seek to be admitted into Provinces
and Kingdoms what way soever they can. Pray you is this an offense? It Is the
custom of all that follow the instinct of nature. I my self, by what means I
could, sought to get my Crown. Howsoever we cannot but admire the Fathers
constant patience, whereby they go through so great and hard matters, and bear
so many and so heavy Crosses.

15. Neither do I esteem them the worse, for that they be so observant of their
Rules and Constitutions. This is that whereby the Society does increase,
flourish and better it self every day more and more. For this Reason I thought
not good to change any of their Constitutions and Rules, though I have made
some change in others, which was not approved of all. But that is no matter.

16. The Fathers of the Society have many back Friends, among some that seem
Holy and Religious Persons, who speak ill of them. This no wise man will wonder
at. Our age is not come to that Sanctity, that Ignorance should ceass to hate
Learning, or corruption of manners leave to envy integrity of life. It was so
in times past, and so it is still. These Moaths are always gnawing on learned
works. No prosperity so circumspect that can escape the tooth of malice, hatred
and envy, always attend the highest things. I observed: when it was consulted
about the recalling of the Jesuits into France, that two sorts of men did
specially oppose themselves, Heretics, and loose living Churchmen: the one
was moved thereunto by their bad Faith, the other by their bad Life. But I am
so far from being hereby moved to alter my intended purpose, that I am more
confirmed in my resolution.

17. The Fathers of the Society, speak and think honorably of the Pope, so
they should, and so do I; I join with them, since I am certain that, in
averring and defending the Popes authority, they differ not from other
Catholic Divines.

18. Neither did their Doctrine ever give occasion to Clergy men to deny me
tribute. Nor is there any to be found, whom these Fathers Words or Books
animated to killing of Kings. Whatsoever some have patcht together to bring
them to Discredit, is all a Fiction and mere Fable. Thirty Years and more are
passed, since the Fathers began to instruct the Youth of France both in Virtue
and Learning. Of these same have gone through with all their Studies in their
Schools. Others have broke off, and applied themselves to Physic or Law. Tell
me whether any of those ever learnt of their Masters to lay hands upon Kings,
and kill them? I tell You the Fathers are so clear, that they are content to
appeal even to their own Enemies judgment. There are some Pulpit-Men among the
Heriticks, who were trained up in the Fathers Schools: Ask these Men their
judgments concerning the Jesuits Lives and Doctrine: But whose Cause is so
good as to desire to be tried by Enemies? Yet I am sure in their Case this has
been done, The Ministers have been asked their judgment of the Jesuits: And
they have given no other Answor, but, That the Jesuits Lives cannot be
Reprehended, and for their Doctrine, that it is in too cear a Sun to be
questioned. Cerces few can be found that will dare to stand to their Enemies
judgment, their security of Conscience must needs be great, that fears not any
Adversaries Verdict.

19. The Confession of Barriere, who atttempted something against my Person,
does not infringe that which I have said. For so far was any Jesuit from that
fact (which you nevertheless affirm) that one of these Fathers of good credit
advised me of it in time, and another of them dehorted and deterred Barriere
from his attempt, proposing to him Gods heavy Judgments due to such
Malefactors.

20. As for Chastel, all imaginable torments, were not able to wrest the least
Word against Varadius or any one Father of the Society. If this be not so, why
spared you the guilty? Why let you them go when you had them fast? why punished
you them not according to your Law and Court?

21. But to grant you that that never was; suppose some one of the Society had
attempted against my Person. Will you condemn all the Apostles for one Judas?
shall the punishment light on my head, for whatsoever any of my Soldiers shall
trespass in military license? I acknowledge the hand of God, whose will it was
to have me pressed and humbled at that time; the same hand raised me and set me
safe again. Gods goodness and providence be thanked. I have learnt to forget
and forgive injuries for Gods sake, as I willingly do for that King, who is
greater then my self. And now I will be so far from remembering injuries done
unto me or revenging the same, that I will daily offer up Prayers to God for my
Enemies. All of us have need of Gods mercy, which is no ways better to be
obtained, than by promptly and readily pardoning those who have offended us.

The Fourth LETTER, That the Jesuits are neither Factious, nor Enemies to
Bishops.
1. SR. There seems to be an indispensable necessity that differences should
sometimes arise amongst Gods Servants; for where there are different interests,
as it falls out in diverse communities, it is hardly possible, but there will be
clashing now and then to maintain them, and the Devil will be sure to blow the
coals of dissension to widen the breach. Saints upon earth have had their
controversies: Witness St. Paul and St. Barnaby, St. Peter and St. Paul, [Acts
5. Gal. 2.] St. Austin and S. Hierom. And the blessed Angels in Heaven are
recorded in holy Scripture to have resisted one another, when they did not
clearly understand Gods will; as it happened between the two Angel-Gardians of
the Jews and the Persians, who stood each of them for their Pupils, and opposed
one another for the space of one and twenty St. Hier. Theodor. S. Greg. S.
Thom. apud Cornel. a Lapid. Daniel. 10.
days; the Angel of the Jews striving for their delivery, least they should be
corrupted and perverted by those Infidels; and the Angel of the Persians
contriving their stay, that the Persians by conversing with them might be
converted to the true Faith. What wonder then if frail men are sometimes at
variance, when both parties take themselves to have right on their sides. This
has been more then once the case between Regulars and Seculars, to dispute
exemptions and privileges, while neither of them will yield what they conceive
to be their due, till their Supreme Pastor pronounce the sentence, and take up
the dispute. But why the Jesuits should bare the blame of those misfortunes
more than others. I do not see; only they are Jesuits, and therefore must have
the chief hand in all manner of mischief, if their enemies may be credited.

Sect. 9. 2. In the first place, Dr. St. objects the differences between the
Jesuits and the Secular Priests, begun (says he) at Wisbich Castle. But he is
much out of his story, for the Jesuits had no hand in the breach, as is
clearly to be seen in Mores History [ *l, 4. n. 17.] Some dispute indeed there
was, upon Mr. George Blackwels being established Superior over the Clergy,
under the title of Archpriest and if Fa. Parsons stood up in defense of his
Holiness authority in that occasion, he ought not to be blamed for it, but I
will never believe that he used such scolding reproachful language, as the Dr.
speaks of out of Watson, nor indeed half so foul language as is to be found in
his own works. Had he called it Folly, or a Bad spirit, to resist the Popes
Authority, he were not to be blamed, Sir, calling things by their own names, no
more than the Apostle, for his character of those of Candia, ^n his time. Tit.
1. 12. But that you may see how unlucky the Dr. is in his Authors, this Watson
was ecuted at Tyburn for having a hand in Sir Walter Rawleighs business, and
dyed very penitent, retracting with great korror what he had passionately
written against the Jesuits, and in particular against Fa. Parsons. But F.
Parsons was the man that hindered the Clergy from having a Bishop. No such
matter. There is a writing of his to be seen, in which he gave his Holniess
nine reasons for the convenience and necessity of having two Bishops in
England, and a Letter to Cardinal Alan about their maintenance. What the Dr.
insinuates of the Jesuits aim to govern the Clergy is as wide of truth. It Is far
from their spirit and vocation to seek any such authority, or to pretend any
more then to be their fellow laborers in the English vineyard, as sent thither
by the same common Master, Christ's Vicar upon earth, for the good of souls.

3. He enlarges himself yet more upon another later controversy, between the
Regulars and Seculars, about the Bishop of Calcedon, and makes a long Catalogue
of books writ pro and con, and it is no discredit to the Jesuits to see
Aurelius named amongst their Adversaries who they say proved afterward to be
that famous Jansenist the Abbot of St. Cyran. But because Urban the eight, has
commanded under censures, that no more should be written of that subject, I
forbear to meddle with it. Only, Sir, you may please to take notice how
ignorantly the Dr. says, the Pope only suppressed the books on both sides, but
durst not interpose at all in the main business, for fear of losing either
side. For was not the main controversy about the regulars jurisdiction, and the
validity of confessions heard by them, without the Bishops approbation? And did
not his Holiness in his Breve A. D. 1631. as is to be seen in Mores History, [
*l 10. an. 9.] declare all such confessions valid, and that Regulars having
their power immediately from the Sea Apostolic, needed no Episcopal
approbation to hear confessions. And farther that all Missioners were to use
their faculties and privileges in the same manner as they did in Gregory 13.
and Paul 5. time. Let the Dr. then for shame forbear to cry out as he does;
were not here controversies to be determined? to what purpose is that authority
that dare not be exercised when there is need of it? You see the Pope durst
interpose and exercse his authority and determine the main controversies.

Sect 10. 4. His third objection is the Jesuits particular opposition against
Bishops* but they have a ready answer, we have no such custom nor the Church
of God. 1 Cor. 11. They do not deny but they have had their difficulties with
some Bishops about their Privileges, which you will say they have no reason to
forgo, but have no spite to their authority, as the Dr. maliciously affirms. I
told you before how Father Parsons labored to have Catholic Bishops settled in
England, now I will give you a later Testimony, how far they are from opposing
any such authority in a part of their Provincial letters, 4. December. A. D.
1635. [Morus ibid. an. 9.] to the Pope's Nuncio then resident with the Qu^en of
England. None of ours, says he, has ever opposed himself against the
establishment of Episcopal authority, but we have either delivered our
opinions, when we were asked by those that had power to do it* or have written
by constraint, what we judged necessary to defend the faith and dignity of the
Sea Apostolic for which no body can blame us. Nor were we heretofore any let
or hinderance to the Bishop of Calcedon, or will we be hereafter to any other,
from freely exercising whatsoever power he shall receive from the Sea
Apostolic.

Now to the Drs. two instances, of the Jesuits unworthy dealing, with the
Archbishop of Manille and Bishop of Angelopolis: I confess it is a hard task,
to convince a Liar, that fetches his news out of another World, many will
rather choose to believe him, then go so far to disprove him. Yet in our case,
the very Authors themselves, out of whom he has copyed his stories, render them
nor only suspected but improbable: he might as well have taken them out ot the
Holland Gazet, which is usually well furnished with such matters. All I have to
say to that of the Archbishop of Manille, is to tell you* that the Moral
Practice of the Jesuits, is just such another Libell as the Mystery of
Jesuitism, and both burnt at Paris by the Hangman, in obedience to the Kings
Orders, though it seems, they have risen again out of their Ashes, and appear
in London like Phoenixes. The journall of St. Amor with the other story of the
Bishop of Angelopolis, is as little to be credited as having had the same fate
to be destroyed by the Hangman and who will trust a rank Jansenist, when he
writes against his professed enemies the Jesuits. But I have something more to
say to him and his story: for I have lately met with a writing of Father
Annats, who has clearly laid open his Faussetez and Impostures d'un Cahier,
etc.
manifest impostures, and proved the whole Machine of his accusations, to be
such a tottering Ruinous piece, and so ill contrived, that it falls to the
ground at the least touch. This you will presently see if you please to
observe, that all is built upon a letter, of the Bishop of Angelopolis to Pope
Innocent the 10th. which no wise man will believe, was ever written by the
Bishop, but forged at Port Royal, as there is just reason to suspect; For the
publisher was so strangely blinded with passion, to disgrace the Jesuits, he
did not mind, that his accusations would serve them for a very sufficient
answer. He makes the Bishop of Angelopolis complain, how shamfully he was
abused by the Jesuits of his Diocese. I confess the word of a Bishop carries a
great authority: but what if a greater Bishop than he were of a contra^y mind?
will it not much lessen his credit? this is our case; for the same Bishop of
Angelopolis, in the same letter, confesses the Archbishop of Mexico, stood
wholly for the Jesuits. What if besides this Archbishop, the Vice Roy, and all
the Kings Officers and Judges of his Courts, were also for the Jesuits? What if
all the Religious of other Orders, and the Inquistors, nay his own Chapter, all
sided with the Jesuits? Will not all these grave Testimonies be able to clear
them? The Bishop again professes in the same letter, that the Jesuits had
gained all these to their party, and that he was alone. What shall we then
think of a Letter, which in the same breath, both accuses and defends the
Jesuits, and so defends them, that the Accuser himself acknowledges he is
alone, against the whole Sovereign Ecclesiastical and secular power of the
Country? is it not a very pleasant continuance, that to make the Jesuits
criminal, all the most honorable and considerable Persons of the West Indies,
must be made their Accomplices and guilty of the same Crime? Believe me, had the
Jesuits stood with the Bishop against all those, Doctor Stillingfleet would
have cried out as loud against them.

Another ground to suspect, the Bishops Letter was forged, is the improbability
of the accusations: For who will easily believe, that the Jesuits either bribed
the Vice Roy, or offered a sum of money for the Bishops head, or forced him
into the Mountains, or put their Scholars in Mascarade to abuse him, or refused
to obey the Popes or the Kings orders, or preached Christ so as to conceal his
crucifixion, or caused other regulars to be whipped and banished that came into
China, or that they were so strangely fallen from their first Institute as to
need a Reformation. Methinks the Publisher of these Accusations (and the Dr.
too who takes them up at second hand) might have done well to have reflected,
on that judicious Observation of an old German Protestant, who when he heard
what strange tales were told of the Jesuits, and amongst the rest Cardinal that
Bellarmin, had in his time ravished I know not how many Virgins. Such Reports
says he, are of no advantage to our Cause; for when the World is once used to
such improbable Lies, they will hardly be brought after to believe what is
really true.

However the Publisher sticks not only to relate them but also to assure us,
that the Popes Breve 16. April Anno Dom. 1648. fully confirms whatever the
Bishop had objected against the Jesuits, which is so notoriously false, that I
wonder how he had the Face to say it, or the Dr. to repeat it after him. For in
the whole Breve, and Decree of the Congregation inserted in it, there is not
the least mention made of any such misdemeanors of the Jesuits, or any thing
insinuated to their disparagement, but only a Declaration of some Points not
derogating at all from those Privileges, which occasioned the Controversy,
and a Resolution of 26 doubts which is common to other Regulars as well as
Jesuits, and so little favorable to the Bishops pretensions, that Father
Alvarade, the Jesuits Procurator for Mexico not only proved 18 of the
Resolutions to be directly contrary to what he would have had, but also was
permitted to Print if in Rome it self. The World knows, Pope Innocent the X,
was not to an humor to dissemble such gross abuses, had they come to his
knowledge, a clea^ Argument (says Father Annate) that the Ship that that
brought the Letter from Mexico, delivered at Port Royal, or it it were eve^
sent to Rome, God heard his devout Prayer that penned it, in which he beseeches
Christ Jesus, that if what he writes does not aim at Gods glory it may never
arrive at the Popes hands, or if he receive it, he may not regard it but
despise it. I know the Dr. talks another Decree against the Jesuits, but
confesses it was put into the Index expurgatorius by Alexander the 7th. which
is a shrewd sign it was a surreptitious or counterfeit: Piece which his
Holiness would not own. I am sure, there is nothing against the Jesuits, in the
final determination of the whole controversy, signed by Cardinal Spadae, who
was head of that Congregation Anno Dom. 1652. after six years dispute; for
never could* the Congregation be drawn, to declare the validity of the Bishops
excommunications, or the Jesuits necessity of being absolved from them, or to
condemn the Jesuits carriage in that whole business. On the contrary side, I
find both Congregations speak very honorably of them; for this last styles the
Society a laudable and profitable Order, that Labors with great Fruit of
Souls, and exhorts the Bishops to embrace them as such. And that which was in
1648 concludes thus. The Holy Congregation seriously exhorts in our Lord, and
admonishes the Bishop that being mindful of Christian meekness, he carry
himself with a Fatherly affection toward the Society of Jesus, which according
to their laudable institute has labored, and still continually labors with so
much Fruit in the Church of God. And that considering it as a profitable help,
in the conduct of his Church, he treat them favorably and return to his former
Freindship, etc. Note that the Translator of the Breve where this is recited,
could not abide to see so clear a Testimony of the Jesuits good service,
actually performed for Gods Church. What does he? according to the Iansenian
dialect, he turns the word Labor at into Laborabat, and so translates it in the
Preterimperfect tense, to make his Reader believe, that though the Congregation
acknowledge, the Jesuits have formerly done the Church good service, yet all
that is past and gone, whereas the Congregation speaks expressly in the Present
tense, that they still labor without intermission: So far were those grave
Prelates it seems, from thinking there was any need of reforming the Jesuits,
as was objected. I may add unto all this one reflection more, which might serve
alone, to justify the Jesuits in their difference with the Bishop. Know then
that the King of Spains Counsel in India, being thoroughly informed of all
passages in those Countries, thought fit for the quiet and peace of his
Diocese, to recall the Bishops to Madrid, and there make him resign up his
Bishopric of Angelopolis, and content himself with another less Bishopric in
new Spain, which is a sign, he had not carried himself with so much
satisfaction as was expected.

I must not leave this point without clearing the Jesuits way of Preaching and
Converting Souls in China. This I cannot do better, then by producing the
Testimony of a learned and grave Dominican, who lived long in that Kingdom, and
was well acquainted with the Jesuits, who by the way, it seems used him civilly
for all he was of another Order, and did not cause him to be whipped or
banished, as their custom is if we believe Dr. Still. I Brother Dominious
Sar-Petrus alias of St. Peter^ Sicilian of the Order of Preachers, heretofore
etc. do declare unto all those, that shall see these present Letters. First,
That having been sent by my Superiors to Preach in this Kingdom, and having by
their command, for 8 years, diligently informed my self of all the
superstitions of their Sects, do judge, that the practice, which the Fathers
missionants of the Society of Jesus make profession to follow, in dispensing
with certain Ceremonies, with which the Christians in China, use to honor
their Philosopher Confusius, and their other deceased Ancestors, is not only
safe (as approved by the H. Congregation of the Universal Inquisition) but if
we regard the Principles of their prime Sects, much more probable then the
contrary, and not only profitable but also necessary, to open the Gate of the
Gospel to those Heathens, etc. Secondly, I attest that the Fathers of the
Society in this Kingdom of China, announce Christ crucisied unto the Pagans not
only by word of mouth, but in their many writings, and diligently instruct
their Neophyts in the mysteries of the sacred Passion* and in some Residences
have erected confraternities of the holy Passion, and that of late the
Persecutor of our holy Law called Yan Quam Sein, urged this chiefly, against
the Preachers of the Gospel, that they worshipped a man crucified, for the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, which he proved out of the Books of the Fathers of the
society, etc. Thirdly, I attest, and for as much as it is necessary, do confirm
it by Oath, that in giving these two Attestations, I was not led by any bodies
entreaty or persuasion, but only by the love of Truth. For considering that
the doubts which are moved in these matters, are only in point of Fact (as the
Congregation insinuates) and that in such moral things, the circumstances of
the Fact, are to be measured by the judgment of learned and prudent men: It
seemed to me very unreasonable, to condemn as superstitious, what so many and
so great Missioners of the society (with whom I have lived and familiarly
conversed these 3 years, whose Charity I have experienced, and whose Learning,
Piety, Zeal, good Behavior, not to say holiness, is well known to me) and so
many of their worthy Predecessors, have judged to belong only to a politic
and civilkind of worship. Wherefore knowing that upon occasion of certain
doubts, that Fr. Br. John Baptista de Morales, of the same Order and Province,
etc. propounded to the holy Cougregation of the universal inquisition Anno Dom.
1645. some not well affected to the Society, both in Europe and India, have
given out; that the Missionanes of the Society, in the Kingdom of China, did
not Preach Christ crucified, and permitted their Christians to play the
Idolators that I may not by my silence, seem to consent to their report, and
that I may with all as much as I can, clear the reputation of so great Fathers,
I have given this Testimony, submitting it to the more certain judgment of the
holy Roman Church. In Witness whereof I have given these Letters, and signed
them with my own Hand, in this House of Canton, where we are kept in banishment
and thraldom, for the true Faith 4. Aug. Anno Dom. 1668. B. Dominicus Sar
Patrus, etc. I find this Attestation, in Latin, in Estrix his Diatriba
Theologica newly printed at Antwerp [1 page 241.] and the Author who resides at
Lovain, is ready to show an authentical Copy, faithfully taken out of the
original, which is kept in the Jesuits atchievments at Rome. And I need go no
farther, to confute all the Drs. slanders, of the Jesuits behavior in China;
for what he says of the 17 Decrees against the Jesuits 1645. they were the
Answers to Morales his doubts mentioned in this Attestation, but nothing
against the Jesuits, as appears by the latter Decree^ of the same Congregation
under Alexander the 7th. 1656.

Sect. 11. His last Objection is about the Jesuits differences in matter of
Doctrine, for he says truly they not only dissent from the Jansenists in the
five known Propositions, but also differ from the Dominicans in two man ^oints,
the immaculate conception of our blessed Lady and Physical Predeterminations.
Sir, this Objection concerns other Catholic Drs. as well as the Jesuits, for
they all agree with the Jesuits that the five Iansenian Propositions condemned
by his Holiness are heretical, and many of them side also with the Jesuits
against the Dominicans, in the other two Controversies yet under debate.
However because the Jesuits are particularly named by the Dr. as the chief
Dissenters, you may expect a word or two from me in their justification. It is
their glory to have so stoutly opposed the Iansenists Doctrine, which has been
since blasted by the definitive Sentence of the Supreme Pastors of the Church.
The Dr. might as well have objected their dissenting from the Calvinists, for
since his Holiness his censure has been generally received by Catholics all
over Christendom, there can be no question but Iansenisme is condemned by the
Church, as well as Calvinisme, and are both equally to be esteemed Heresy, for
I suppose we all agree that the whole Church cannot err in condemning Heresy,
and when we say so, our meaning must be not to include the opposite Party, or
to require that they submit and declare that they believe contrary to what they
believed before, as the Dr. seems to require, page 447. otherwise we may
justify the Arians and all other Heretics, who were rarely known to have
submited to the judgment of the Church that condemned them, though assembled in
general Councils. It is clear then that such divisions as these between the
Church and those that separate themselves from her, are not prejudicial to the
Church's Unity, which is entirely preserved by a due submission of all her
members unto what the Church thinks fit to determine. It were easy here to
answer the Drs. question; let them name one controversy that has been ended in
their Church, merely by the Pope's decrees; for to go no farther, this very
controversy of the Jansenists has been ended by the Popes decrees, and so ended
that the Jansenists themselves have submitted to them, as is evident to all
those that are not ignorant in those affairs; for did they not (the Bishops as
well as others, that had stood out so long) at last submit and sign the
Formulaire, by which they not only acknowledged the 5 condemned Propositions to
be Heretical, but to be the very propositions of Iansenius, and did not his
Holiness upon the French Kings declaration of this their submission, by a
particular Breve, restore peace to the Gallican Church?

How shamefully then does the Dr. cry out; that there never was a fairer
occasion given to the Pope, to show his authority for preservation of the
Church's unity, then this of the sive propositions. And yet that he could never
be prevailed with to suffer the main controversy to be touched, and that there
are so many ways to avade his deffinitions, that his Authority signifies
nothing: for you see for all the Jansenists ways and tricks to evade, the Pope
showed his authority to preserve the Churches unity, and was prevailed with to
define the main controversy so far; that no body now dare call it in question
or pro^es^ himself a Iansenist, whatsoever he may be in his heart. But why says
he, does not the Pope, or at least general Concils put an end to all
controversies amongst Catholics? For example* why does he not determine the
differences about the Immaculate Conception and Predetermination, which have
made so great a noise in the world? Let him first tell me, why did not our
Blessed Savior leave all matters of Faith so clearly expressed in holy
Scriptures, as to prevent all disputes amongst Christians, or why did not the
first four general Councils (whose Authority the Dr. allows) give us a clear
Comment upon all difficult places which are found in the sacred Text, or why
does not Dr. St. himself, undertake out of Scripture, to reconcile all the
dissenting members of his Church, for since all parties agree the Scripture to
be Infallible (it is his own rule) there can be no more certain way for Unity.
Why I say does he not then, make use of this most certain way to keep unity in
his Church, where we see they condemn one another of damnable errors? I will
not take upon me to enter into the secret Counsels of Christ, and his holy
Spouse the Church, or to give you the reasons why they thought fit to leave
things as they are. But I may venture to guess why the Dr. with all his writing
and preaching, has not yet, nor never will void all controversies out of
Scripture; for where the difficulty lies in the sense of Scripture, it self (as
it is our case) let it be never so infallible, there cannot be a less certain
way to Unity, or more endless way of taking up disputes; then the Scripture,
unless it would speak for it self, and declare its own meaning, which will
never be. It is not so with Catholics, for the Pope or a General Council, can
declare their own meaning, if there be any doubt of it, as it happened in the
case of the five Propsitions, which the Jansenists would have drawn into
different senses, for his Holiness found a way to make them clearly understand
his meaning. And I think there never was Heretic condemned in a general
Council, that doubted whether he were condemned or no, as Protestants doubt,
whether Infants may be Baptized, whether Bishops are de jure Divino, etc. For
all their infallible Scriptures. To maintain Scripture to be a better way to
decide controversies, then the living Voice of the Church, is just as if a man
should contend, that the Law it self or God Almighty is a better means to end
Suits at Law then the Judges upon the Bench; for while the Law and God Almighty
are silent, unless the Judge pronounce sentence, the Suite must of necessity be
endless, and so must all controversies in Religions; for all the infallibility
of Scripture, so long as it does not explicate its own meaning, and answer all
difficulties.

As for the disputes between the Jesuits and the Dominicans, about
predetermination and the Immaculate Conception, it is strange such School
disputes should be still objected against the unity of our Church. I say School
disputes for so I must call them, till the Church please to determine them, for
the Dr. must know, that though these contentions are about matters of Faith in
reality, yet are they not matters of Faith quo ad nos, till they be proposed
unto us as such, and therefore although we contend about them, and are at
variance among our selves, yet our unity is still preserved by this, that both
parties are ready to submit their judgments to the judgment of the Church, when
ever she pleases to deliver the truth.

If this had been well considered by the Dr. he would not have taken so much
pains to prove so great a Paradox, as that there is as much union amongst
Protestants as Roman Catholics. In the interim the Church is careful to
prevent all inconveniences, which arise, sometimes out of the heat of such
eager disputes by severely forbidding both Parties to presume to censure one
another Tenets, and this under pain of excommunication and other penalties,
for this amongst obedient Children is sufficient to keep them in Peace and
Unity (for whatsoever they hold of the Popes infallibility) they all agree that
obedience and submission is due to his Authority, upon pain of being accounted
Schismatics, for not yielding obedience to the common Pastor and Head of the
Church. Protestants have no such way either to suspend or end their disputes,
but must of necessity wrangle it out to the Worlds end, for want of a living
Judge of Controversies. What the Dr. adds of the Jesuits holding a strange
opinion of the Popes infallibility in matters of Fact, is most false, for they
differ not from any other Catholic Divines, as I have often told you. Lastly,
for their persuading the People to defend the immaculate Conception with Fire
and Sword and with their Blood, with which he concludes his 5th. Chapter, it
needs no Answer; his Author has no credit as having been burnt at Paris for a
Libel by the Kings order, as I have told you. And now I promise you I will tire
you no more with my long Letters, having clearly and freely given you my
sentiments concerning all the Drs. slanders and objections against the Jesuits,

Farewell.
Postscript.
SIR, I have yet a Word or two to add upon the Receipt and Perusal of two Books
since the writing of this Letter. The first is a compendious Account of the
mission of China given at Rome this very Year 1672. to the sacred Congregation,
de propaganda fide, by Father Prosper Intercetta the Jesuits Procurator from
that Kingdom. By this it appears that the Jesuits do not always find that
commodious entertainment in China, which the Dr. dreams of; for this Author
witnesses that they commonly beg their sustenance of Neighboring Europeans,
and have not been without their Persecutions. For Anno Dom. 1664 four of them
were clapped up close Prisoners, with three Chains, a piece tied to their Necks,
three to their Hands, and three to their Feet: the chief of these F. Adam was
sentenced to a cruel death (though the Execution was hindered by a terrible
Earthquake, and other dreadful signs from Heaven, which made the People cry
out, (great is the God of Christians,) the other three were condemned to have
40 Bastinadoes and all the rest were forced out of their 41 Residences, and 159
Churches and banished unto Cantons, and there kept Prisoners, nor have we yet
news of their Releasement, though the last Letters from Pekin of the 23 November.
1670. give great hopes of more liberty, then ever to Preach our Christian
Faith, since the honorable Reception of the Portugal Ambassador in that
Court. It also appears to be false what the Dr. affirms of other Religious,
being kept out of the Kingdom by the Jesuits, for the same Author tells us that
before the late persecution, the Dominicans had 21 Churches and 11 Residences,
and the Franciscans 3 Churches and 1 Residence. Lastly, this Author reckons up
254980 converted by the Jesuits alone, from the Year 1581. to 1667. (not from
Laces and Ribbands,) but from Idolatry, to the worship of Christ crucified.

The other Book I mentioned contains a second Answer to the imfamous pretended
Letter of the Bishop of Angelopolis drawn out of his Annotations upon St.
Teresa's spiritual instructions, translated out of Spanish by Francis Pellicot
Almoner and Confessor in the Queens Court, and Printed in Paris by George
Josse at the Crown of Thorns. For there the Translator (who professes an
intimate acquaintance with the said Bishop) in his Preface, does not only deny
him to have been Author of that scandalous Letter to the Pope, but produces
three other Letters of his, written some Years after his contest with the
Jesuits, highly in their commendation, as you may see when you please. And
farther in the Bishops life, he shows how he retracted what he had unadvisedly
done against them, in opposing their Privileges out of the Bishops own words
which here follow. We are often so wedded to Palafox Annotat. to the 56 Ep. of
St. Teresa.
false persuasions, which self Love suggests to maintain a bad Cause, that it
is hard to root them out of our imagination, and reduce our selves to the
truth. This evil is very familiar with us, and I daily experience it in my
self, and particularly in a certain Cause; for why should I not publicly
acknowledge my Error, since I offended in the sight of the whole World. I say
it happened in a thing of this nature, that I found certain Reasons to oppose
my Adversaries (the Jesuits) which seemed to me good and holy, but really were
not so, but the effects of a vain and presumptuous Spirit. For I found
afterward, with the help of divine light, that the thing which I believed was
from God, was quite contrary to his service. And this false belief of mine
sprung from my self love, my passion, my pride, my vanity and my presumption.
What better Apology can be made for the Jesuits, than this humble Confession
and Retractation of the Bishop?

FINIS.

