AN Assembly Lecture OR A SERMON, Held forth at a CONVENTICLE. UPON THIS TEXT,
Saint's Practice, Chapter, 1. Verse 1. It is Lawful for the Saints to Cheat the
Wicked.

By a Maintainer, of the Saint's Privilege, and Liberty of Conscience.

Veritas, acerba.

Printed in the Year. 1674.

It is lawful for the Saints to Cheat the Wicked.
AS the Saints are Innumerable, so their Privileges are Infinite: The Stars of
the Sky may be told; in counting the Sands of the Sea, or the Dust of the
Field, we may come to one that is Last; the Ocean has its Bounds, but the
pretended Saints Privileges are beyond Measure, they are Boundless. There is
no State, no Power, no Law, can Rule them, but like the Wind which Blows where
it lists, they are freed from all Control, and subject to nothing but the
Directory of their own Will and Appetite.

This is the Compass by which they Steer, this is the Hand which shows the
Time, let the Sun of Truth say what it will. The Infalibility of the Pope is
much talked of, the Prerogative of the Grand Sultan is very High and Imperious,
but the Saints Privilege is Elevated above them all; and was it lawful to say,
that it always went astray, yet may we be assured, it never Errs, it is never
out of the way.

The Saints Privilege cannot be perfectly Defined, for there is nothing more
General, its Essence cannot be known: Only this we can say, that the Saints
Privilege, is the Saints Privilege.

But that you may have some Hints of this Metaphysical superstitious accident,
I will describe it (although imperfectly) yet as plainly as its Nature will
afford.

Some derive the word Privilege from Lex and Privata, and define it to be Lex
Privata homini irrogata; a Private Law given to a Man. But considering it is
the Saints Privilege (that singular Privilege) we are to handle, as most
agreeable and suiting to the Saint, I shall derive the word from Lex and
Privatio, and so define it to be Legis Privatio; a Privation, and taking away
of the Law, for it is therefore called Privilege, because it Exempts them from
the Power of the Law, and divides them from the common Condition of Mankind.

And here I am prevented of parting and distributing this general thing,
Privilege, into the several sorts; for I am fallen into the Mouth of Division
before I was aware, I am fallen amongst the Saints, and upon their Privilege,
which is so proper to them; that as that Distinguishes them from all the People
of the World, so they distinguish that from all other sorts of Privileges, and
both of them together, Cut, Divide, and Mangle the whole Universe into Parties,
Sects, and Factions.

This Saintly Privilege belongs to those Men who are commonly called
Seperatists, Phanaticks, etc. These are those Medusa's Heads, on which grow
many Snakes, Serpents, that are full of Venom, and yet have lovely Flattering
Outsides, such as would Deceive Eve again, if she Lived in Paradise; and do
beguile her Progeny at this day, devouring Widows Houses, even with their long
Prayers, and by Groans and Whinings, delude the Multitude, as Mahomet did with
Fits. A form of Godliness they have, but their Hearts are full of Impieties,
their Minds full of Treasons and Rebellion, their Hands full of Rapine, Blood,
Murders and Regicides; witness the Tragedy of the late Times.

But not to Describe them only by the Habits of their Minds, wheresoever you
see a man exalted in a Meeting House, doing penance in the surface of a White
Cap, environed with an Assembly-Cloak, or a Frize Coat, which helps in stead of
a Hum, or a Ha, to spend time, by pulling forwards the Coat, first on one
Shoulder, then on the other, whilst the more unwilling Matter, which sticks
below, is pulled up, and brought to Utterance: Wheresoever you see one thus
Clad, Whining and Groaning as if he Labored for Life; the posture of his Eyes
in one Extreme or other, either turning up the Whites to Amaze and Affright the
Spectators, or shutting of them close, as ashamed of himself, the Place and
Company. This is one of those Wolves in Sheeps Clothing: This is the Sounding
Brass and Tinkling Cymbal: This is one of the Adders which Grows on the Head I
mentioned before; and the Subject to which the Saints Privilege does appertain.

You may meet these Serpents Crawling up and down in other Shapes, differing
from the former, some with Beads in their Hands, others with no Superstitious
Relics I Will assure you; no, not so much as a Hatband on their Hats, or a
Ribond on the lower Covering of the outward Man; a Fry whose Lenten Faces show
they were Spawned of Shotten Herrings, and meet together only to compare
Uncouth Looks. There are many more, which I forbear to Enumerate, reserving
them for another place, and so I pass from the Unclean Cage where this Bird
(the Saints Privilege) Rousts, and come to its Object, about which it is
Employed, and the end for which it is used, as also the Principles from which
it moves.

The chief Use of this Privilege is, to compass and bring about the Designs of
the Saint: His Designs are twofold, namely, Profit and Honor; Avarice prompts
him to Enrich himself, and Pride puts him upon seeking Reputation in the World;
he loves to be Admired, and Esteemed amongst the Brethren, as a precious
Heavenly minded man; but in the mean time he Aims at Worldly Interest, and the
Obtaining some Benefit to himself: And to accomplish this, what better Course
can he take then Satan did when he first tempted Mankind, that is Allure them
with the discerning Knowledge of Good and Evil; and here he must Teach them what
is Good, and what is Evil: He is Good, and therefore must be followed; others
are Evil, and therefore must be avoided, and when he has persuaded the silly
Multitude into this Belief, then he is likely to have a fruitful Harvest, and
his Barns filled with a plentiful Crop, and his Projects will go on
successfully; but in this Carreer he will meet with many Obstructions; many
Laws will oppose him, Religion will hinder him, the Settled Government of most
States and Kingdoms will Thwart him; wherefore to clear the way, and overthrow
Laws, Religion and Kingdoms, he must Fly to the Saints Privilege, which being
Skilfully managed, will procure his Hearts desire.

Before the Apparition of this Harpy, was the Time Men call the Golden Age;
Religion was then Embraced for its own sake, not to cover other Designs; Men
strove to be Religious indeed, rather then to be thought so: The common Concern
of all was to serve Heaven, and love one another: Such! such, was the
Uniformity of that Age, Peace and Plenty kissed each other, and Universal
Obedience to the Laws, made the Governors happy, and the Subjects blessed. But
when this Saints Privilege started up, Ten Thousand Mischiefs did accompany it,
Pride, Envy, Strife, Covetuousness, and innumerable other Sins were its
Lifeguard; thence followed Faction, Schism, Treason, Rebellion, Murder of
Princes, Destruction of Religion, Laws, States, and Kingdoms.

As Lucijers ambition caused him to attempt the Dethroning of God Almighty, so
this Saints Privilege makes them set their Mouths against Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities, whilst Meekness, Humility, Religion, and true Christian
Piety persuade them otherwise.

Thus have we, so briefly as we could, Represented to you the Saints Privilege,
whereof we intend to speak; and although this Privilege is manifold, as you
have already heard, yet at this time we will only take a Branch of it, which is
that contained in the Text, namely,

It is lawful for the Saints to Cheat the Wicked. In which words, observe with
me Four Things: First the Act, namely, To Cheat. Secondly, The Actors, which
are The Saints. Thirdly, The Patient, or Object of this Action, namely, The
Wicked. And Fourthly, The Quality of the Act, that is, Lawful: It is lawful for
the Saints to Cheat the Wicked.

And first of the Act, To Cheat: Cheat is a word of a large Signification, it
comprehends all Sin, and extends to all Vicious Actions; there are many words
Equivalent to this, and are used in the same sense, as to Defraud, Cozen,
Deceive, Delude, Overreach, Beguile, Betray, and the like; and of Affinity
with these, are Deceits, Covin, Fraud, Delusion, Treachery, Imposture,
Hypocrisy, etc. And from hence Knaves, Impostors, Traitors, Deceivers,
Hypocrites, Dissemblers, etc. receive Denomination; and all these agree with
our Saint in the Text.

Cheating is the chief Instrument of the Devil, and the Engine by which he
brings about his greatest Works, by this he brought Destruction upon Mankind,
beguiling our first Parents with his Insinuating Flatteries, subtly taking
upon him the form of a Glittering Serpent; first catching the Eye, our Senses,
that thereby he might have Entrance, to lay hold upon our souls.

Oh! how prevalent are subtle Flatteries, especially those which come with such
specious pretenses, as this Serpents did: Yea, has God said, ye shall not Eat
of every Tree of the Garden? Does he say that if you do, ye shall surely die? I
tell you, nay, ye shall not die, For God does know that in the day ye Eat
thereof, then your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good
and Evil. I say, how prevalent and irresistible are such plausible Temptations!
otherwise, methinks the Commands of the great Creator, so newly Imposed,
immediately after the Creation, might have Deterred the Creature from sin; the
fear of Death, one would think, might have restrained the Appetite, let the
Object have been never so desirable; surely the posture of the Serpents Turning
and Twining, seeming to go one way and another, but in truth goes neither,
might have made them suspect him; No, Knowledge, and to be as Gods,, are such
Temptations, that Innocence it self cannot resist them.

Wherefore our Saint taking pattern from the great Deceiver, forms all his
Impostures and Delusions, in the same Mold that Satan did his, and sets before
the People the Temptations of Knowledge, Religion, the spirit of Light, to be
as Gods, Liberty, Freedom, etc. telling them that if they follow him, and do as
he directs, their Eyes shall be opened, and they shall know themselves to be
the only precious chosen people of God, freed from the spots and defilements of
the World, freed from the powers of the Earth, and from the Obligation of Laws,
either of the Church or State, whilst in the mean time, they make Room for
Rebellion, and Implicitly teach their Followers to disobey the Almighty and his
Vicegerents.

For which purpose there must be (and is already published) a new Book of
Ethics, to teach the World to break Laws with a good Conscience; wherein it
is Asserted, that penal Laws may be broken, and that by the Intent of the
Lawmakers, who imposes a Mulct or penalty upon the Offender, and thereby
commutes the Obedience for the Penalty. Excellent Doctrine! and I doubt not but
it will be well Improved; better cannot be Expected from a Tavern, Alehouse,
or Meeting House, where penal Laws are daily broken: But surely though the Law
be so in his Conscience, who is a notorious Offender, and must use Clouts to
wrap up the Sores of his Conscience; yet other men obey the Law, and are
subject to every Ordinance of Man for Conscience Sake, and do not wilfully
offend that they might pay the Penalty, but think the Law is Obligatory in
Conscience, and the Penalty is added by way of Aggravation, to Deter men from
the Offense: For if the Intent of the Lawgiver was not to have sincere
Obedience, his Laws would be rather Tricks to get Money, then Instruments for
the better Ordering and Governing Societies.

And if Obedience be Due in this manner to Laws (as without all doubt it is)
and the Scripture injoyns us to be subject to them: How dare we obstinately and
resolutely Disobey them? How dare we meet in Conventicles, which is forbidden
by the Law, being found by sad Experience dangerous to the State, and the
occasion of Strife and Division, those destructives of Humane Society? How dare
we? Why, I must appeal to our Saint in the Text, who has an Answer ready
prepared for him by his great Master; who, as I have already showed you:
Preached, Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat, etc. So our Saint, yea, does
the Law say we shall not meet, etc. I tell you, that you may; we have a
Privilege in Conscience, to Transgress and Break what Laws we please: It is
lawful for the Saints, etc.

Here I might Expose our Saint to shame enough, by discovering his Nakedness,
and pulling off that Vizard with which he does deceive the World; but when I
consider that it is impossible to Enumerate half his Cheats, and they are so
frequently Practiced that every one meets with them, I purposely forbear a
particular Account, referring you to the History of the late Times, where they
swarm.

And instead of a Catalogue, I present you with a Chariot, which like
Phaeton's, sets the World on Fire. This Chariot is the Saints Cheat I now speak
of, the Wheels are the Ignorance of the People, and the Admiration they have of
him: The Horses that draw this Chariot, are his Pride and Covetuousness: Our
Saint is the Driver, and a Conventicle is his Whip.

I have spoken of the Chariot already, which has a Stage almost in every Town
of all Countries, and Travels up and down the World, being carried to every
thing; by the Horses, Pride and Covetousness: I will now say somewhat of the
Wheels, Ignorance is a good Wheel, on this the Chariot runs swiftly; where the
People are Learned, the Chariot moves slowly, Letters are like Clogs, and good
Rudiments are such a Burden, that it cannot stir; where men are well Educated
in the Prinicples of Religion, our Saints Cheat can hardly pass, but amongst
the Ignorant it runs post. And this Wheell has a good Fellow, namely, the
Admiration which the People have for our Saint, for when he has once Insinuated
himself into them, so that they have a good Opinion of him and Admire him, then
the Chariot gets ground, and flies merrily; then all he says is Gospel, and
nay, more Authentic then the Gospel; for Calvin was so Admired by a -- (you
may know him by his Speech) that he professed if St. Paul were Alive, and to
Preach the same hour that Calvin did, he would leave St. Paul, and go to hear
Calvin: You may believe him, for Calvin's Writings are followed and preferred
before St. Paul's. Oh brave Wheel! well Greased! and Excellently well fitted to
the Chariot!

Of the Horses, Pride or Covetuousness, I cannot tell which Excels. Pride has
most Mettle, but Covetuousness is the surest Drawer. To be Applauded for
Excellent parts, for a Singular man, for a Gifted man, for a Leading man; to be
called Rabbi, to be esteemed a sure Guide of Souls, a true setter of Conscience,
to be Wiser then those that follow him; To have Silence made at a Conventicle,
and be set above the rest by Head and Shoulders; to have Liberty to Speak what
he pleases, and that more to the Nodification, then edification, of the
beholders, for they Edify little, but Nod much; I say these preheminences puff
up, and sometimes move the chariot briskly, a little pride many times induces a
great cheat, yet this Horse is often jaded; for although our Saints ambition
makes him aspire above Heaven it self, yet frequently have I known, when
covetuousness draws one way, and pride another, covetuousness has got the
better, and went away with the Chariot: To be head of an Assembly, sole
Teacher, and Instructor, not subject to Law or Magistrate, is very acceptable;
but a Good Living, a Fat Benefice, has made our Saint leave them all, and be
Subordinate to Legal Authority: Nay, this Horse has been so strong, that it
has drawn the Chariot to Simon Magus, to help our Saint in, even by one of his
Contracts.

Covetuousness has made him Prey upon the Brethren themselves, he has warmed
their Zeal so hot, by pressing the Duty upon them, of Raising Money to Build a
Conventicling House, that they have Contributed, and given him Money enough to
Build one; and when he has Built it, he has made Use of the House for himself,
and turned the Brethren out; telling them the House was not so Convenient as he
thought it would have been, and that he knew of another Place, much more
convenient, for the Service; and has wrought upon them so, that they have made
a new Collection, and Built another House: And thus our Saint has served them
Two or Three times, and Choused them of Two or Three Houses one after another.

Ah! This Horse Covetuousness, is an unruly Beast, he draws our Saint to all
manner of Viecs, to Lying, Hippocrisie, Falshhood in Dealing, nay, even to the
sins of the Flesh; many, yea, many a time has he drawn our Saint to his
Neighbor's Wife, and there so Kicked and Frisked, that he has thrown our
Saint upon her; Ah! threw him even upon her.

Truly, this Horse is so Ungoverned, that no man can Live in quiet near our
Saint, he Breaks down his Neighbors Fences, eats up his Grass, and his Corn,
and is so often taken Damage Fefant, that was he not a serviceable Horse, and
very profitable to our Saint, he would not keep him.

But so long as he Draws the Chariot well, our Saint will not part with him,
his Neighbor must endure him.

One Faculty this Horse has, which makes our Saint highly prize him, he is an
excellent stretcher of Conscience, no Bars and Tenter hooks can stretch Cloth
half so well; take him in a Morning when he is Fresh, and put him to our Saints
conscience, he will draw it so wide, that 'twill swallow any thing.

Having given you an Account of the Horses; in the next place, we come to
handle the Whip: And considering the Horses appear to be so good, so Mettlesom,
and such sure Drawers, one would think our Saint needed no Whip; Yet a Whip is
very needful, and that will appear to you in these particulars: I do not intend
to speak any thing in Disparagement of the Horses; for I agree there cannot be
Two more serviceable Horses in the World, and were they in an Ordinary man's
service, without all doubt a Whip would be altogether unnecessary. But you must
understand, our Saint is a very hard Rider, he Drives furiously, I never met
him in my life but that he was above three quarters speed, upon common
occasions he Rides post, and about Matters more then ordinary, he Rides as
Jockies ride Races; in a Furlong and a Half he leaves the man, that Rides for
the Midwife above a Furlong behind him. Now for such a Hot-spur as this, you
will agree that a Whip is requisite; But what Whip? Not any Whip, not a common
Whip, it must be a Whip of many cords, that has many Lashes, it must be a Whip
suitable to our Saints designs, and therefore surely a Whip of his own making
is best, and that is a Conventicle: For this has many Cords, many Lashes, it
has many Rich, and they serve as so many Cords for the Horse Covetuousness; It
has many Admirers of our Saint, and they serve as so many Lashes for the other
Horse Pride: These Motives are the Spurs that prick on the Palfreys which hurry
away the Chariot. Our Saint is never so Rampant as at a Conventicle; there his
Pride Snorts and Prances, spurns at Government, condemning and contemning all
those that are not of his Way, and scornfully pitying all those poor lost
Creatures that Gainsay a Meeting House. Ah poor souls! they live in sin, there
is no hopes of them, they know not Good from Evil, they are stupefied, and have
no sense of the Joy, and Refreshments, that we have at our Meetings, etc.

In the mean time Covetuousness claps his Tail betwixt his Legs, lays his Ears
close to his Head, and Leers at the Rich and Wealthy Brethren! he pulls the
Chariot hard, toward the Sisters Silver and Gold Bodkins, and with such
Concupisence, that sometimes he gets Bodkin, Sister and all.

It Is very fit I should now tell you how our Saint handles his Whip, and in
doing this, I must show you the place, where Policy has Taught our Saint to
put the Whip: That Alehouse, that Inn, that Tavern, is best Situated, and
most Dexterously contrived that has a Thorough-fair (as it is called) in it,
for by that convenience Custom is gained; so our Saint, that has all the
Tricks of a Tavern, or Tipling-house, has likewise this, and places his
Conventicle where there may be a Common Way or Passage through it, in hopes
thereby to Catch some silly Gudgeon or other, that comes near his Not, so
Mountebanks gain company; And he well knows that many Persons fall into the
Loose Sport of Pidgeon-Holes, merely upon the occasion of passing by them:
Therefore with wonted Craft does our Saint order his Conventicle.

It follows, that I accost the Driver, but he looks so Jehu-like, that I dare
not Meddle with him, qua Driver. I shall meet with him in the Text, being the
second Thing I desired you to observe therein: It is lawful for the Saints to
Cheat the Wicked.

I have at large Treated of the Act contained in the Text, namely, The Cheat: I
am now come to the Actors, and those you see are Saints; what kind of Saints,
partly appears by that has been said, and shall be showed here more fully.

Some divide Mankind into two sorts, viz. The Godly, and the Ungodly: In truth
and reality, our Saint must be Ranked under the latter Head, for ('it is too
plain) his Actions show him to be one of that Party. But he has a Privilege
(the Privilege I spoke of before) to be accounted and reckoned amongst the
Godly; and as one of that Form we must take him here, in respect of his
Privilege, to be Reputed so, but not in respect of his Practices, for they
show him to be quite another thing. I promised you to sub-divide those general
Heads of Separatist, Phanatick, etc. and present you with the several sorts and
fryes, that are contained under them; but seeing the Distinctions would be
Infinite (so much have they been ever given to Division) I should confound you
with sub-divisions, and new names: For every Sect takes up a new Name, with the
old Villainies, they change the Name, but retain the Sin: As those which were
called Pharisees of old, are now called Presbyterians, and the like in a
hundred Instances. Therefore I purposely pass by the particulars, and hope our
Saint will not Quarrel with me for it. But you may know them by these Marks.
Their Words and their Works never agree. They are Opiniated of themselves, and
condemn all others. A Lie in a Brothers Mouth, is truer, then Truth it self in
another man's. They suspect and conclude all men to be Wicked, but themselves.
They begin all their Mischiefs, in the Name of the Lord, when they Act the
greatest Wickedness in the World; they will bear down all, that it is the
greatest piece of Piety, and Religion in the World. That which is unjust in
another man's case, is most just in theirs. They will believe none but the
confiding men of their own Party. By these Marks and many more like them, you
may know the Saint meant in the Text. In a word, the World is his Stage, and he
is to Act the Devils part, a part that has been Acting ever since the World
began, and will not be Finished, until the Worlds end.

From the Actor or Agent, I turn to the Patient, the Persons that are to be
Cheated, and those are the Wicked: The Wicked! But who are they? In short, they
are all those that do oppose the Saints. Oppose them! In what? In any thing.
For if that which does agree with the Saints is Righteous, then that which does
disagree with the Saints is Unrighteous; hence it proceeds that our Saint does
and may Rail against Government, against the Laws, against Princes, against
Civil and Ecclesiastical Rulers, for these Oppose the Saint, and therefore are
wicked, yea, very wicked, and may be Cheated. But the Breakers of penal Laws,
as the Vintners that sell Wine above the Rates; the Merchants who steal
Customs; they that draw Ale without License; those that Play at forbidden
Games; they that keep Bawdy Houses, and Conventicles in them: These are not the
Wicked intended in the Text, no, they are not Wicked, they are Friends: These
agree with us, with our Saint to break Laws; a Tippling House, without License;
yea, a Bawdy House, where there is a Meeting, is like unto, nay, it is a
Meeting House.

The Quality of the Act was the last thing I propounded to speak to, and that
appears to be lawful: It is Lawful for the Saints, etc. Here you must
understand, that there is a Law written in the Mind, and a Law of the Flesh
written in the Members: Our Saint is not guided by the first Law, but by the
latter, viz. The Law of the Flesh which wars against that of the Mind, and by
this Law, It is Lawful for the Saints to Cheat, etc. Having Explained the
Terms, with as much Brevity, as Perspicuity would admit, and showed you the
sense of the Words in the Text, viz. First of the Act, and use of Cheating.
Secondly, who are the Wicked. Thirdly, who are the Saints spoken of in the
Text. I will now send out our Saint full Cry into the world, with Mouth as
wide, as ever any was, at the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate

It is Lawful for the Saints to Cheat the Wicked. I my Beloved, it is lawful,
full of Law, for the Saints to Cheat the Wicked; those ungodly VVretches,
those Drunkards, those profane Sabbath Breakers, those Adulterers, those
Enemies, and Persecutors of the Saints, that will not let the Saints enjoy
Liberty of Conscience; that deny us the comfort of Meeting, Me the comfort of
speaking to you, and you the comfort of hearing me; Me the comfort of seeing
you, and you the comfort of beholding me: Me, ah me! that in the Times of
Rebellion, had full liberty, to say, and to do, and to teach you to do what we
listed; Me! who had not the Bishops Lawn-sleeves, but their Lands. Ah precious
Times! When? When, shall we see those Golden days again?

In those days I was not accounted a Nonconformist, for I did conform to every
thing in Fashion, to every Device the prevailing Party (whereof I was chief)
could Invent; Conscience, then had no check, no tie, all things, were Lawful
that were Profitable, and the Saints desires, were their surest Guides.

Conscience had got the Head and Mastery of the Laws, and some of you (my
Beloved) do remember, that a Brother might have another man's Estate for asking:
Ah goodly Times! to be wished, to be hoped for again, but I leave the success
to your Prayers.

In those days the Text was not in Question, but in Practice: No need of a
Sermon upon it, the wicked durst not deny, that the Saints might cheat them;
their Goods, their Lands, yea, their Lives were at the Saints pleasure, and you
know we took them when we pleased.

It Is unnecessary to remind you by what means we obtained this Faculty,
otherwise you may remember, we did, and accomplished all, in the Name of the
Lord, we cried out, that Religion was in Danger, and set open the Mouths as
well of those who understood it not, as those who did; not a Kitchin-wench, not
a Groom, not a Scullion, but that could Preach, and although they knew nothing
else, yet could tell in what points true Religion was wronged, and how to mend
it.

We Railed against the Rulers, and their Government, and Bellowed and roared
for Liberty, as Hogs a Killing, and here we brought in conscience to squeak,
which so prevailed, that we Murdered Kings and Princes for conscience sake.

We destroyed the Government of Church and State, we Killed the Malignants and
took away their Estates, and this is the sum of the Saints Privilege.

And now my Beloved, is it not Lawful to Cheat them that oppose this? yea, it
is Lawful; It is profitable, and therefore Lawful.

And this shall be the only Argument I will use at present to confirm the Text,
my own and your Practices sufficiently Illustrate the truth.

One word of Application, and I have done.
Is it Lawful for the Saints to Cheat the Wicked? Why this may serve for a use
of Consolation, it will comfort us in our greatest Afflictions, let Poverty do
its worst we have a Privilege, will help us; common Thieves they must be
Hanged, but we have a Privilege to Cheat. This will fill our Bellies, 'twill
fill our Trunks, 'twill assist our Friends, and make Provisions for our
Posterity. Ah! what a Blessing do we enjoy! The Wicked in the Text they are
kept from it, they must not Cheat: They must starve rather then use this
Privilege they must obey the Law, for conscience sake, Conscience gives us
Liberty to Disobey. They must be subject to Magistrates, our Privilege exempts
us.

Secondly, Is it Lawful for the Saints to cheat, etc. Why then I Exhort you to
make use of your time, and enjoy this Privilege, whilst you live, for you
cannot have it in another World: Nay, if the Law or Reason prevail, amongst
Lawgivers, then the Wings of this Privilege will be clipped, therefore use it,
whilst you may, whilst Faction does last, whilst Sedition is predominant, and
brings preferment; That so ye may be Furnished with the Mammon of
Unrighteousness which will make Friends for you, when ye fail.

Thirdly, Is it Lawful (my Beloved) for the Saints to cheat the Wicked? Why
this may serve for Exprobation, how justly may we inviegh against the wicked in
the Text: Those that oppose our Right, and deny us this Privilege, I say how
justly may we inviegh against them, as the most Ungrateful people in the World!
In the late Times of Anarchy, when the Saints Privilege was Exalted, it is well
known, that all the wicked had forfeited, all the Rights, Privilege,
Liberties, Estates, and Lives, to us, and yet we, merciful men, spared them, we
did not take away all, from all: It Is true, we Killed some Thousands, we
Sequestered the Malignants, we Recovered the Kings and Bishops Lands, etc. But
what is that to the purpose? Are not they Merciful and Kind, who, when they may
destroy all, spare some? And did not we spare some when we had power, and it
was lawful for us to Kill all? And yet the wicked are ungrateful, that they
have forgot our Kindnesses, they make no Retaliation, but would if they could
take away from us even the use of Conventicles. Ha! my Beloved, what ungodly
Wretches are these! That would not allow us the Liberty of Meeting. Where we
have an opportunity, of comforting one another, of easing our Minds, and our
Bodies, and Refreshing one another: Where we are Fed with the precious
Doctine, in the Text, and you hear that, and many other such Truths proceed
from my Mouth, as if they were Gods Word and Divine Revelations. Ha vile! and
ungrateful wicked! that would hinder such Mercies, we seldom Pray, or Preach,
but that we remember them, in our Prayers and Sermons, and yet they return us
no thanks, so Unthankful and void of Grace are the wicked!

And since I am fallen upon the Subject of Ingratitude, to show our utter
dislike and abhorency of it, I will Reprove it even in you, even in the Saints,
that so you may be without spot, without blemish. You know (my Beloved) that by
the Act of Confirmation, of Ministers, the wicked were Restored to their
Benefices, and then was I put out of a good Parsonage, and if my conscience
would have been so wicked as to have conformed; yet could I not have gotten a
convenient Benefice, so contrary was that change to the profit and promotion of
the Saints. Wherefore I applied my self to you, and Incited you to the
Building of a Meeting House, and the maintaining of a Nonconforming Minister,
who should Instruct you, in all the ways of cheating the wicked, and Build you
up in Stubbornness, and Stiff-neckedness, and so make you a Choice, Select,
peculiar People, to Live and Die in Opposition to the Government of Church and
State.

To this you were easily persuaded, and by my pains and the Assistance, of
others, I got to help, of my Cloth, and Coif, you are well grounded in the
Rudiments of VVaywardness, and thoroughly Educated, in the Doctrine of the Text.
But before I could bring you to a perfect Habit; I and my fellow Laborers
spent many Drops of Sweat, I could not hold out my self, but was forced to ply
you with two or three stirrers up, one after another, and wirry you, as Dogs
the Bear, or Bull successively.

At first you considered our Extraordinary Labor, and (to your Praise be it
spoken) you Contributed very Bountifully to all our Wants and Necessities; I my
self at one Meeting, have had a Hundred Pounds of the Collection, for my own
share, and the Sweat of the other Undertakers, have likewise been Answered by
your Drops.

But now: Ah! It grieves me to tell you of it, I speak it with Tears in my
Eyes; you, even you, are very Backward in your Payments and Contributions. You
are grown worse then any other Conventicle. There is -- his Conventicle Raises
Eighty Pound a time, take one time with another: But many a time, ah! many a
time have I spent my self upon you, my Bowels have Yerned over you: I say many,
many a time, and yet I could not raise a Heart within you, to make a Purse of
Forty Pounds at most, no not Forty Pounds.

And are not these sad Times? Is not this a sad Age? When the Saints are so
slow to good Works. Mistake me not, the sadness does not arise from my Want of
that Abundance of Money, your Liberal Contributions, used to Supply me with,
but from this, that your Defect herein, is a Sign you are fallen from Grace,
it is a Sign your Zeal is not so Warm as it has been, it is a Sign the Doctrine
we Preach has not such an Influence upon you, as it ought. It Is a Sign of a
Dissolution, and that the World will be at an end. Ah! What shall I say? My
Heart is full, my Heart is full. But farewell.

FINIS

