SIX Familiar Essays UPON Marriage, Crosses in Love, Sickness, Death, Loyalty,
and Friendship,

Written by a Lady.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1696.

AN EPISTLE TO THE BOOKSELLER.
SIR,
I Am very sensible that when a woman appears in Print, she must certainly run
the Gauntlet, and therefore ought to be well armed; but if Mrs. Philips's
sense, and Mrs. Behn's wit (Joined with her assurance) was not sufficient to
protect them from the Critick's strokes, it may very well discourage me from
venturing my name in the front of this small trifle, knowing it to fall
infinitely short of what has been performed by others of my Sex, and that the
Censurers of our age are much more refined then they were formerly; but I
perceive Novelty generally takes, bow deformed soever it is, and the Bantam
Ambassadors had as many followers, as King Solomon could have had upon his
arrival; therefore I hope this book may sell, if it be but for the rarity of
its dress; and if it does, it may turn to your advantage, whether they can say
any thing to mine or not.

But, perhaps, Sir, you will desire me, to find some Patron under whose shadow
I may shelter my failings from too strict a scrutiny; in that case I must
flatter them first, that they may excuse me, after which it might trouble both
our consciences, and for that reason, if you please, I will let it alone, tho
at the same time, I confess no paper ever came out that had more need of a
Second, but I suffer it to be made public at the request of some few friends,
who must blush for me, since I live in such a retirement that no reflections
can reach my ears. However, because I would not be thought high minded, I will
humbly address my self to the Reader.

You Gentlemen, that are tollerably young and good natured, will kindly
overlook a woman's Errors (tho I have not expressed my self by the Rules of
Grammar) false English being particularly intailed upon the Sex. I hope my
Essay of Marriage will plead for me, and I assure you, I am one that never
promotes Rebellion against your Arbitrary sway, (whenever any of you make use
of it toward your wives, tho I own I think the mildest way is best) therefore
as I am for condescension, without making them uneasy, whom we permit to be our
Lords and Masters, in gratitude you must not be satirical upon your advocate,
lest after that you find never another woman, that will advise her friends to
so great obedience in the bonds of wedlock.

But for the old surly Sages, who will scarce allow a wife to write or read, or
understand any thing further then spreading Plasters, dressing Issues, etc. I
expect they will condemn me unheard, as a public Neusance and a breaker of
Evil customs in writing this book. I have only one thing to offer to them in my
excuse, which is, to entreat them to consider that when I am writing, I am
neither dressing, nor going abroad, and they esteem both to be as unlawful
employments, as scribbling (unless I made a Journal of their Lives); besides, I
hope I have obliged them, by giving them an opportunity of railing, that being
the chief thing they delight in.

And now for the Ladies, into whose hands I shall fall: I beseech them to be
merciful for their own sakes, as well as mine, and all woman-kinds; to clear us
from the aspersion of being always the quickest sighted into one another
infirmities, and to prevent the suspicion of their being piqu'd at (Patience I
recomcommend) in the Essay of Marriage, which would perhaps obstruct the
preferment of the Maids and Widows, if they owned it.

Some sort of Wives, I know will make open War with me, I mean those who
pretend to an Imperious management of their Husbands, but they are such
Monsters in nature they deserve no Apology, nor do I value their opinion.

This treatise was the product of a Meditation designed for the good of my self
and others; if my expressions has not fully explained my sense of the matter,
it is in vain to enlarge now, therefore I will conclude with the ingenious
Hudibras's Rule, that Brevity is very good,
When we are, or are not understood.


ERRATA.
P. 21. l. last, r. How little then p. 24. l. 3 f. then. r. the, p. 37. l. 2.
f. mistake r. not take, p. 58. l. 17. r. without touching Pitch, p. 60. l. 6.
r. his Grace, lb. l. 17. f. disease r. decease, p. 68. l. 16. f. proportion r.
promotion, p. 69. l. 15. dele Never continues in one stay, p. 74. l. 6. f. now
swearing r. Non-swearing, Ib. l. 12. f. and after his r. in hopes to, p. 83. l.
19. after, Were not, add, As often, etc. p. 86. l. 15. r. in me, p. 100. l. 18.
r. condescension. p. 102. l. 20. r. is an.

AN ESSAY OF Marriage, etc,
MArriage is Despised by some and by others too much Coveted; the first sin
against the Laws of Nature, and Divine Ordination; the last against their own
Quiet; for those, that are in extraordinary have for a Settlement, (as they
call it) do commonly Advance their Expectation of Happiness, much beyond what
they have Possessed in a Single Life, and many times the imaginary Heaven
proves a Hell.

And though your changing your Condition, Dear Madam, had an extraordinary
Prospect; yet I hear my last Letter, which was to wish you joy, found you in
Sorrow; but I know you are too well Principl'd not to remember the time will
come when the wicked cease from Troubling; the Weary will be at Rest; and if
your Husband continues so Industrious to Torment you, as the World represents
him, I believe you can expect little Rest till that time is come; unless it is
by the inward Peace of a good Conscience, which no one can take from you, a
Consolation which clamorous, gainsaying Wives, always loose; and which, I am
sure, cannot be recompensed by any Point they gain; and since the Laws of God
and Nations have given Man the Supreme Authority in Marriage, we ought not
first to accept them upon those Terms, and then Mutiny upon all Occasions, as
often as the Terms are uneasy to us; for though some Men are so kind as to make
our Yoke sit light upon us; yet we take them for better or worse; and
experience shows us, that the Odds are on the Worser side.

All this we should consider before we engage our selves in those strict Ties,
which obliges us to deny our own Inclinations, if They require it; and to make
it our Study to comply with Theirs. This Lesson even Human Policy will Teach
us, for if we make a Man's Home less agreeable to him, than any other place, we
furnish him with a good Excuse to go abroad; which can never be to the
advantage of the Family, for those men whom business does not call out to get
money, are sure to spend it; and he that is driven from home by a wife's ill
humor, is generally more Extravagant, and thinks, he has a better pretense to
be so, nay, sometimes the Provocation runs so high, as to make him Sacrifice
his Body and Soul too, as well as Estate to his revenge.

Some women indeed will divert themselves, and not seem to value it, and
instead of endeavoring to win their husbands by Complaisency, turn as
Extravagant as they, and strive to light the Candle at both Ends; tho they know
it must at last burn their fingers, and if they can neither Jump in affection
nor wit, will yet Sympathise with them in their folly and excursions; but they
seldom fail of suffering by their rashness, and the farther they run out, the
sooner they find a check upon their expenses, besides, if they should preserve
their honesty, yet they undergo the certain loss of their reputation, which is,
to be valued infinitely more than their Recreations; and if they hope at last
that this careless way will Reclaim the men; I fear they find themselves
mistaken, however, we ought not to do Evil, that good may come of it.

But, I, most of all, wonder at some of our Acquaintance, who seem to be sober
women, and to have good sense, and yet recommend it, as the best way to deal
with a passionate husband, to be more unreasonable and passionate than He. Such
bawling may perhaps silence some few men, and would be more pardonable if God
as well as man were to be silenced by it, but our Religion tells us, we must
not be overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good, which name I presume the
greatest Patroness of equal power dares not bestow upon contention, contention
sets all the world in a Flame, and is indeed good for nothing in the world, and
King Solomon (who is pretty often in the right) says it only comes from Pride.
God grant us, so true a sense of our unworthiness, as may abate that high
conceit which makes us unable to bear a contradiction; you will wonder perhaps
to hear me preach, and yet I cannot forbear to tell you that our Blessed
Savior Commands us, not to do, as we are done by, but as we would have others
do to us; and if they are sometimes wanting in the return, I doubt we are much
oftener remiss in setting the Example, not at all regarding the strict precepts
and pattetn he left us, of Love and Gentleness to each other, which himself
exercised to his most barbarous Enemies, during his stay upon the Earth, and
does still exercise in his intercession for us in Heaven; he bids us learn of
him, For he is meek and lowly, and our Souls shall find rest; And if meekness
is the way to be at rest, why should any Argument prevail with us to leave it,
or what can we hope to get by our perverseness, but the discomposing of both
our Bodies and Souls? St. James says, The tongue is an unruly Member, and set
on fire of Hell, which flame never appears so black, as when a woman takes the
liberty to speak, against her husband, all the picquant things which the Devil,
or her Resentment, which is a kind of Devil inspires her with. We commonly say,
that a madman is possessed, and every one, that is not in a rage himself, will
allow passion to be a temporary madness, that makes men act as irrationally as
Lunaticks, tho not as excusably as they; because they have not the same
miserable resistless distemper, to plead for the involuntary wrongs they do.
Now these their furious Representatives will perhaps tell you, that theirs also
is a natural Infirmity, a violent Distemper which they strive against, what
force they offer to their Inclinations themseves know best, for very little
effects of it are visible to others; however, these imperious men imagine, that
pretense will sweeten the matter, and make us swallow the bitter draught, but
what can justify women whom God has made of a milder temper, if they should
take pains to change their Dispositions, only in hopes of a little better
treatment for the present, (which they may fail of too) and at the same time
set aside that patient abiding of the meek, which God has promised with an Oath
that it shall not perish for ever? It must therefore necessarily be a distrust
of his promises to recompense our Patience, or preferring a little Momentary
satisfaction before any reward he designs us, that (after such encouragement)
can carry us to wrath and peevishness, which tho it may gratify our passion to
let it out, yet our reason will quickly wish it in a gain; if a husband is
unkind and difficult, it is a great affliction, and the holy Scripture tells
us, all things of that nature are grievous, but as contrary as they are to
flesh and blood, we are sensible they arise not from the dust, and that it is
not for us to contend with our Maker. He that can with a word control the Fury
of the Winds and Seas, can, with as little trouble, avert any storm that
threatens us, when he sees us fit for the mercy of a Deliverance; and if we
should attempt by any invention of our own to shake off the Yoke, or think by
struggling to make the Chain sit looser upon us; we should perceive our selves
much in the wrong, like birds taken in a net, who, by beating their feathers
off, increase their Misery, and at the same time disable themselves from making
their escape, those amongst us that have been so obliging, never to deserve an
ill word from our Persecutors, must acknowledge we every day merit God's
Chastisements, and know that wicked and unreasonable Men are a Sword of his,
and this Sword does indeed wound us the deeper, the more we love the hand which
he imploys to correct us; but how sharp soever it is we should not repine,
considering the first cause is to humble us, in order to draw us nearer to
himself. He has said those, that have suffered, have ceased to sin, and when we
arrive to that degree of perfection, we shall doubtless be free from all our
sufferings, but as long as we continue to offend, we shall be punished either
in this world, or, what is infinitely worse, in the world to come; where the
Worm never dies, and where the Fire is never quenched.

But setting all religious Motives to quietness a part, it is a very silly
thing for people to quarrel, who must be friends again, unless they are
indifferent in the point, choosing rather to live asunder than submit silently
to many things that they cannot approve; I will not pretend to Determine what
provocation is sufficient to justify such a breach, nor to say that such a
breach cannot be justified, since much better Women than my self have parted
from their husbands; but they seem sincerely to lament the separation, nor does
their carriage accuse them to have done it lightly, or upon the account of
taking their pleasures, which would soon be discovered, for, in such
Circumstances, many eyes are upon them, and they must live more reserved than
the rest of the world, or else they would quickly be liable to such a censure,
as must vindicate their husbands for leaving them.

And tho in all quarrels betwixt a man and his wife, if it come to a hot
dispute, there is faults in both Parties, yet the weaker vessel is so little
considered for being weak, that they are blamed sometimes much more than they
deserve; which censure they can no ways prevent so well as by a strict
observance of their duties, and endeavoring, in all their Actions to have a
Conscience void of offense, toward God and toward Men. Nothing upon Earth can
be said to afford a real satisfaction, only as our Imagination makes it appear
so at a distance, and this prospect of happiness is dressed by fancy in such
various shapes, that what would be a delight to one, would be a penance to
another; and age or possession does sometimes give the same persons such
different gusto's, that they grow sick of the very thing they languished for
before; this is probably the reason why old people are so much for denying
young ones, the Innocent Diversions they are grown weary of themselves; tho
perhaps at the same time they gratify their own foible in some other kind, at
least as ridiculous, but if there were any intrinsic worth in whatever worldly
thing, we are importunately Solicitous about, would any Parent be so inhumane
to abridge their Children of it, more than they do of the common mercies God
allows, of eating, drinking, and sleeping, which every body acknowledges to be
good; and so they must our other Enjoyments too, had not experience evinced an
imperfection in them enough to baulk our Appetites?

It is this contrariety in wills that makes Matrimony so uneasy, for when each
sets up a several Diana to worship, their hearts cannot be full of affection to
one another, and if both are bigoted to their own ways, it too often ruins
not only themselves, but their innocent children, a sad effect of their
Divisions which they are not aware of, and yet must dearly answer for hereafter.

But you, Madam, are not in danger of this error being of too complying a
nature, to bring your self and others into any inconveniency upon that score,
and I rejoice extremely to hear how unmoved you appear under so great a
Provocation; for I confess, I think a husband's keeping another before one's
eyes, is the unkindest thing he can do, yet even in that case, it is most
prudent to show no frowardness; for the mistress will be sure to entertain him
with mirth and caressing, which will make the wife's frowns seem more
intolerable, and such women never fail to magnify all Domestic Accidents.
These are indeed the chiefest estrangers of Conjugal Love, for Them the
Gentlemen put on their best Countenances, and with them they pass their most
pleasant hours, the indignation is reserved for the wife of the Bosom, who must
have a share in nothing but the Grievances, till at last they are partners in
their wants; which commonly attend such courses; some few instances we have had
of husbands who have been reclaimed by a wife's tenderness, before the intrigue
has gone too far, but I think, none was ever hectored out of it; but I suppose
the hen-peck'd Sparks, that are under such Correction, dare not presume to give
such offense. However, I am sure, you are very much in the right only to tell
him, with all imaginable Gentleness, your sentiments of the matter, and to pray
to God to convert him: Some Gentlemen, are so kind to their wives, as to
endeavor to conceal their falsehood, which if they do, it is very indiscreet
for the Ladies to be so curious to enquire into it, and they are none of their
friends that give them the information; he, that goes about to hide his Amor,
shows either a sense of shame, or regard to his Spouse, and that may in time
wean them from such Company; it is a sign at least he does not desire to grieve
her, which most men esteem their great Prerogative, and would loose half their
satisfaction in their intrigues, if the wife were not tormented by it, tho
there are those that have stretched the string till it has broke, and with such
treatment it can only be an extraordinary Principle, that keeps any woman from
returning the Compliment, to which Pride and Revenge will both incline her, for
a Gallant's Admiration repairs the affront which a husband puts upon her
Charms, by giving her place to another that is perhaps less handsome than her
self. This has been thought a plausible excuse by several women, that, upon
their husbands running astray, have diverted their Melancholy hours to the loss
of their honor; and the continual discord of their house, unless they agree
(like a couple I have heard of) to assist, rather than interrupt one another's
harlotery, which is an agreement more scandalous and more dangerous than any
quarrel. But whatever I have said of mutual failings, I do not make any
Comparison in favor of my own Sex; for I know the wrong is infinitely greater
in the wife, as she may bring another Man's child to inherit an Estate, and the
crime more detestable, Modesty being the highest Ornament of Womankind, which
makes their casting it off a sin both against God and Nature, and tho it
gratifies some of their passions, yet is sure to lead them into many strange
Inconveniences here; (besides what they must expect hereafter) I should not
have mentioned any thing upon this subject, but that you know more already of
your husband's taking liberty in that way, than I have spoke of; and I wish
with all my heart that it had been in my power, to have spared you the trouble
of being sensible that he is guilty, but he depends so much upon your goodness,
as to make your own eyes your informers, which I would never have been, having
felt too much of the plague of Jealousy to infect my friend, tho my case (and
yours I believe too) is not properly to be called Jealousy but Assurance; for
Jealousy is Suspicion, and I did not mistrust any thing of my husband's
falsehood, till it was too plain to deserve that name, and therefore did not
owe my torment to any inquisitiveness of my own, no more than I perceive you
do, I always thought it very foolish, to search into what would be so unwelcome
if it were discovered.

But now, since it has pleased the all-wise disposer of our fates, to make our
misfortunes visible to us, and all that knows us, let us in the first place
humbly beseech him, to grant that these afflictions may turn to the good of the
Souls, and in the next place, try, by all the engaging means we can, to
supplant the invaders of our rights, and recover our alienated Masters, in
which attempt, tho our kindness has hitherto proved ineffectual, yet if we
continue in spite of all their slights, to take care never to offend them, it
will certainly either before our Deaths, or after, give them a sense that we
merited a faithfuller return, and may be useful to them in making this, and all
their other vices more odious to their remembrance at last, tho mistresses and
wine may for a time divert these reflections for the present, but wine is a
small transgression when named after the other, unless it be in some ill
natured, ill tempered Man, whom drink always puts upon the fret and makes them
apt to quarrel with every thing they see, if it be true (as I hear by common
report) that your Spouse is often in that humor; I am sure, it is safest for
you at that time to avoid him, if he will permit it; but if he is resolved,
Drunk and Sober, to persecute you, there is no remedy but patience.

This sort of Debauchery is a very Slovenly Qualification; but is a virtue
compared to Gaming, for when that bewitches a Man, either with, or without the
Bottle, it makes his wife and children too (if he have any) much more unhappy;
He that Drinks and Plays both, ought to be confined as a Prisoner to his
Chamber, or else in a short time he may lie in the streets; not that I think,
it is a wife's office to secure him there, but, if he has a grain of
understanding left, he ought to secure himself, tho it were only in kindness to
his Family, and not be so shamefully and blindly led, by the rooks and setters
of the Town, who live plentifully out of their Cullys pockets, in the mean time
the poor wife is like to get but little rest, that has her husband fallen into
their Clutches, whether they send him home with his head full, or only with his
pocket empty, her disturbance is much the same, for tho they perhaps may manage
him so well as to make him pleasant in company, yet when they have bit him, he
begins to smart, as soon as he begins to cool and generally returns in fury to
his own bed; however, the person, that is sensible of her husband's being in
this hazard, must needs be disturbed all night by the apprehensions, that
before morning they may have nothing left, and toward day she hears him
cursing and damning his ill luck, when chance had nothing to do in the matter;
the Plot being laid too deep for the Dice to help him. Now having no money
left, one would think he should sleep the quieter (since he is not in fear of
thieves) but instead of that, he lies studying where to get a little more cash
to fetch the rest back, as he thinks, tho in reality it is to fling after that
which is never to be retrieved; if his wife has any Gold or Jewels, perhaps he
may condescend to give her good words that she may part with them, with the
more privacy (being out of Countenance at first to have his faults known) but
when she can no longer be serviceable to supply him, he grumbles at her most
necessary expenses, because he has so much the less to throw away.

This must be a cutting thing to those who have bred their children like people
of fashion; having the prospect of an Estate suitable to it; and when they grow
up, to see them reduced to beggary, by their father's obstinate vanity of
shaking his Elbows.

Yet in this, and all occasions there is a place where we may find comfort, if
we apply our selves rightly to it, and lay up our treasure where neither moth
nor rust can deprive us, nor any cruel husband squander it a way; He that
provides for the young ravens will not be less merciful to us and ours, when we
cry to him and depend upon him for succor, and to make us less Solicitous
about the time to come, he has told us that sufficient to the day is evil
thereof, and really I believe very few married women, find any one day without
evil enough, to exercise their patience with, for as soon as honey moon is over
the blades begin to show us, that tho they have Deify'd us hitherto, yet they
thought us no better than poor silly Mortals all the while, whom they flatter
only in order to oppress, and instead of the Airy promises they have elevated
us withal, when we think to take home our slaves, we perceive we have caught a
Tartar; perhaps some women that know my opinion will say, the worst of husbands
is good enough for me; because I am so much for an entire submission to their
wills in every thing that is not sinful, and I know this maxim is an
abomination to all high Spirited Ladies, and most odious to the unmarried; whom
the Gentlemen are so sweet upon, as make them believe they will be Governed by
them to all Eternity, which Imagination is too pleasing to be removed, by any
body's Experience but their own.

For my part, if I commit a fault against my Sex in being for so much
Resignation, they must pardon me, for all my acquaintance would answer for me,
if I appealed to them, that I cannot advise others to more obedience than I
practice my self; and I entreat them that despise me, as being a tame fool for
doing so, that they would banish all anger out of their breasts for one year,
and then tell me if they have not more content in forgiving then returning a
reproach: I do not pretend to be so free from gall, but that I could sometimes
express a resentment, if such thoughts were not suppressed by duty more than
fear, I mean the fear of anger, from those that are the first aggressors, but
being sudden heats distract the mind, and take it from the service of God; we
cannot watch too strictly against an inbred Enemy that will destroy us, if we
do not keep it under, whose Dictates we have less excuse to follow that are of
a colder, than they of a more fiery Constitution; yet without the assistance of
our Heavenly Father, the Devil would suggest Malice enough into any of us, to
make us like himself, whom let us carefully avoid in all temptations; and then
we shall be sure to meet once more to our Everlasting joy, then will all these
tribulations appear, if we can hear that happy sound, Blessed are ye that
mourn, for you shall be comforted, not that I take it to be meant for Mourning
after the goods of this Life, (tho I hope we shall be pardoned for natural
sorrow) but I trust in his mercy that in the midst of all tempestuous thoughts
within us, his comforts shall refresh our Souls. I fear I have already exceeded
the bounds of a Letter, for which I ought to make an Apology, but more words
would give you more trouble, therefore I will only beg you to excuse and Love.
Yours, etc.

AN ESSAY UPON Crosses in Love, IN A Letter to a Friend, whose Lover Married
another and left her Basely.
OUR Expectation of happiness is (generally) so ill placed from all things in
this Life, that it is no wonder we find perpetual Disappointments in them; but
when passion makes our choice, we have so very blind a guide as will inevitably
lead us to Destruction, and tho Love appears then gentlest and best natured of
all those Troops, which daily rises in Rebellion against Religion and Reason;
yet our affections are so much the right of our Almighty Creator, that as often
as we fix them immoderately upon any of the fading objects here below (how
tempting soever they seem to us) we are certainly guilty of Sacrilege toward
the Divine Goodness, which fault is commonly punished by the very thing we dote
upon.

This (my dear Friend,) I doubt has been your Case, and not yours alone; for
soon or late, few escape that mischief, especially amongst our weaker Sex,
whose tender Nature leaves them most exposed to Ruin, and though they see other
Ship-wreck'd before their Eyes, will venture out to Sea on the same bottom,
insensible of danger till themselves perish and sometimes fall unpitied.

Men have a thousand advantages over us, but in the affair of Court-ship they
add cunning to all their other Accomplishments, and are as truly Zealous to
deceive us, as if their Lives (and Souls too) would be made happy by the cheat;
a sad mistake I doubt they will find it at the Last (if perjury is to be
accounted for) tho your false Traitor like many others, looks upon that time of
reckoning at a great distance. Yet since he is not sure it is so, I wish for
his own sake at least he would reflect how he could receive that sentence, Thou
fool, this night thy perjured Soul shall be required of thee, but I suppose he
thinks himself excused as being more knave than fool, which Title indeed is so
highly due to him, that I believe none (that knows him) will do him such
manifest wrong as to dispute it; and I am sure, the blacker he appears, the
greater cause you have to bless that Providence, which permited him to break
the Contract (since you were not in the least accessory to the parting) for
without doubt, he, that proved so ill a Lover to the best of Mistresses, would
have made an intolerable husband to the best of wives, and his ill usage would
have cost you more tears than his Infidelity (I hope) will do; tho I am
sensible a heart, so generous and constant as yours, cannot easily efface the
deep impression he has made in it; that must be the work of time with God's
assistance, which I hope will never fail you, but my weak Arguments can avail
little; yet I beg you to accept them kindly as they are meant, and pardon this
Freedom, since it proceeds from a Friendship as sincere as your own thoughts;
For I do assure you, I am deeply touched with every thing that concern you, nor
is it without great regret, that I submit to my unhappy Circumstances detaining
me from being the Companion of your saddest hours, which I should endeavor
with all my power, to divert from so ill a subject; you say it is a daily
aggravation to your trouble, to think you suffered your self to be so blindly
imposed on, but that as I told you before is but our common, alas, too common
fate, tho all Impostours are not so industriously wicked, and you ought not to
condemn your own Judgment, for want of discovering a cheat, that blinded all
the witnesses of his pretensions to you; they must be well versed in Villainy
that could imagine a Man should take such extraordinary pains to gain your
kindness, for no other end but only to make you miserable in this world, and
himself so in the next; it is true, when a Man of no fortune Courts a woman that
is very Rich, prudence obliges her to stand upon her Guard, and to be well
informed of her Lover's Principles, before she gives Credit to his Vows; for
she that is content to lessen her self in Gratitude to a Man's affections, and
neglect her own Advancement, ought to take particular care she does not sell
her Estate and person for nothing; yet after all the caution she can possibly
use, she may (too late) find her self deceived, for he that seeks his own
Establishment seldom wants Hypocrisy to act what part he pleases.

I have lately seen a deplorable instance of this in poor old Delia, who at
fourscore married young Strephon in pity to his sufferings, being convinced by
a thousand proofs that he could not live without her (tho she has since had
abundant cause to repent of her Charity) but he was at the trouble of
Counterfeiting a good while, and had the art to look pale, sigh and languish
violently for her, her money I mean (the only charm she was mistress of) which
so dazzled his Eyes, that he had been married to her three days before he
perceived she wanted an Eye; however, his apprehension is grown much quicker
since, and now he discovers so many Imperfections in her, as he fancies will
justify all his ill usage, which is indeed sufficient to need a greater excuse.

When she reproaches him with his perfidiousness, he tells her, if her
understanding had not been as blind as her left Eye, she must have discerned
what he aimed at; when she scolds he laughs, and says, she had better forbear
barking now she has no teeth to bite; those that are near her tells me, he has
made her distracted; but I believe he found her so, or else she would never
have entertained him upon that account; he is just going to send her into the
Country to meditate upon her good Conduct, (thinking sallads and pudding a very
convenient diet for her gums) which will give him an opportunity to enjoy his
own pleasures, and her Estate with the greater freedom.

When a woman is Courted by a Man whose Circumstances are much above hers, she
should be very reserved, for it is ten to one his design is not honorable, or
if it be a modest denial will make him the more eager, as love was always
observed to increase by opposition; nor can we be too tender in the point which
concerns our reputation; these Sparks are generally more dangerous Enemies than
the last I mentioned, both as our Souls are of infinite consequence, more than
our well beings in this world and our own ambition, joining with their
flattery, helps to undo us; this bait perhaps did first ensnare half the lewd
women about the Town, amongst the rest Cloe, our Neighbor, is now a sufferer
by it.

When Philander began to visit her, all her friends gave her warning not to
trust any fair promises, nor permit her virtue so much as to be once attempted;
since as a learned pious Man says, he advances too far that comes to be denied,
for those inclinations may be checked in the beginning by a look, that upon
small encouragement will appear in the highest impudence; (as she found by sad
experience) but she was so besotted by the gaudy prospect, that she soon forgot
to keep her due distance and (consequently) he as soon lost his respect; she
feared Coyness would obstruct her Grandeur which she valued beyond all things,
and had that confidence in his vows to love her Eternally, that she believed
her self the mistress of his life and fortune; but he took so much advantage of
her security as to compass his own ends, and has since got an opportunity (by
the way of wheedle) to tare those papers he had given her as a proof of his
good intentions; which, if she had preserved till now, might have obliged him
to make her some small reparation for the wrong he had done her, tho he was too
cunning to write any thing that would absolutely have bound him to marriage
(however she did falsely understand it) but she was not so nice in keeping this
writing as she ought to have been, thinking she had a stricter tie upon him, by
the mighty passion he pretended; which she now finds, is, vanished into Air.

When he first avoided her Conversation she raved, and was almost ready to
destroy her self, she found all the ways she tried to recall him were
ineffectual, till at last quite tired with her importunities to return, he
plainly sent her word he was going to marry a Lady that was Rich and Virtuous,
that since she could pretend to neither of those Qualifications, she ought not
to complain; this message struck her with a sense of her own weakness, and the
good advice she had neglected; Oh, how happy such a bauk in her first amor,
might have proved, if she had grace enough to consider her Eternal good, and to
make a right use of her afflictions, but instead of imploring the mercy of that
God, whom she had so highly offended, she railed and cursed, accusing even the
Almighty Powers of Injustice, for not being more propitious to her folly and
wickedness, when she had passed a month in fruitless grief, upon examining her
own heart, she discovered that in spite of her Satyrs against mankind, she
could not live without them, nor leave that wretched course of life she was
entered into; therefore her looking-glass informing her, that tears had been a
very great enemy to her beauty, she immediately resolved to use all her Art to
repair that fault, and soon after appeared in the Box at the Playhouse, with
as much assurance as if she had no crime to blush for; it was there Pamphilus
saw her, Pamphilus, who was never insensible to the advances a Coquet made him,
became her humble admirer, and his pretensions agreeing extremely with her
designs, they quickly contracted a close Correspondence; she expecting nothing
beyond the present Enjoyment, made the most of her Diversions and his purse,
and they seemed as fond of one another as if their Souls had been united, but
alas, Love, which is built upon such a Foundation, can never continue long,
and accordingly theirs is already at an end, without much disturbance on either
side, their parting was so easy no body can tell which was weary first, they
both pretend to the Glory of Inconstancy, and to their comforts, are both
engaged in fresh intriegues.

Pardon me Dear Madam, for this Digression, in giving you an account of those
you have some knowledge of, tho their Actions show how little they improved by
good Acquaintance; a Letter from London ought to have some News, and I shall
think my self happy, if mine can amuse your thoughts for a small time, all the
world knows their cases are not in the least parallel to yours, yet if
another's greater errors can justify our failings, their want of foresight, to
so high a Degree, should make you esteem it a less weakness in your self, to be
deluded by a person, that seemed to every one (as well as you) to be so very
good, so very faithful; it was those well Counterfeited Accomplishments that
made him master of your Affections, but since you find him, that you took for
an Angel of light, was in reality a Devil, as the cause is removed, the effect
should cease; and nothing now appearing of what you valued, you should never
more remember him but with abhorrence, nor can you envy her who has the
misfortune to be his Wife; for besides his ill Temper which is unmasked (and
has been plentifully shown in his Carriage to you of late) all these terrible
Imprecations which he used to remove your suspicions of his Integrity, hang
heavy over his head, and will, I fear, involve his Family in Ruin; especially
since she knew, before she received him, what deep Engagements he must break
through to marry her: and I can scarce believe she could be so conceited of her
own Merits, to think he preferred her before you, upon any other account but
having a little more Money (though yours was equal to his Estate, if it had
been what he represented it when he first treated with your Relations): Had she
made use of her Reason, she would have hated so Mercenary a Lover; and had she
consulted either that or her Conscience, both would have joined in warning her
to fly a Serpent who had so barbarously bit another only for cherishing him,
in pity to his pretended pain: but hereafter she may see her Error, and smart
for the Wound she has helped to give you; yet as none of these things come by
Chance, and you know by whose permission they are transacted; I doubt not you
will look up to the (first) hand by whom the Blow was directed, and yield
quietly to it; I wish you could so far overcome your passion as to do it
thankfully; for all your Friends look upon it as a great Deliverance, and time
may convince you that it is so; but this I am confident you are sensible of
already, that it is designed for your good, and are so much a Christian, that
you will endeavor to make a right use of it; for whatever Idea, you have
entertained of Felicity in being his, will be abundantly greater as well as
surer, in your Contemplation of the Love and Goodness of God, who suffers us to
meet with Disappointments in this Life to make us seek our Happiness in
another. He only can give us true content, whom we seldom regard but when we
are driven to it by necessity: how remiss then should we be in doing our
Duties, if all our Undertakings were attended with success, which makes us so
eager in the pursuit of pleasure, that we can think of nothing else; tho almost
every day's Experience informs us, that it is impossible to find any delight
without a mixture of bitterness and sorrow, which one would imagine were
sufficient to drive us from placing our satisfactions in those things that
perish in the using; and the truer perfection we fancy to be in them, the more
sensible shock, each change, each deprivation gives us, what sordid poor
wretches must we then be, who, after the paying so dear for our knowledge, are
still ignorant, that what we covet incessantly is but vanity and vexation of
Spirit; this we are told by him, who had tried all the alluring Charms of Love
and Beauty, whose Quality and Riches gave him the opportunity to gratify every
Inclination, and set no bounds to his wishes; if he found such emptiness in
possession of them, it is no wonder every one of us, must discover the same
truth to our own cost, if we will mistake it upon his experience, let us
therefore resolve upon all occasions, to submit our wills as much as we can to
the will of our Heavenly Father; and then we need not fear but he will repair
all our Losses, and Redress all our wrongs, and in lieu of a deceitful Lover
whom you have lost, You will find a most Gracious God who is constant to all
those that are true to him, and severe upon all those that are false to others.

Your Humble Servant.

AN ESSAY OF SICKNESS A Letter to a Friend, who had been dangerously III.
AFter so long, so strict a Friendship, as has been Inviolably preserved
betwixt us; I hope it is not necessary for me to assure you, how eagerly I
wished to pass this Summer with you; but wherever I am my heart is firmly
yours, (that heart which by a thousand obligations is tied for ever to you). I
know your Husband's and Mother's tenderness would render my care of you very
needless as to the Nursing part, and my great impatience to see you, now you
are ill, is (chiefly) because I could better trust my own Eyes, than any
other's account how you are, (least they flatter me in pity to my trembling
Expectations) I must own my concern for you would make me unserviceable (if not
troublesome) had I been with you; tho none has a truer desire to assist you at
all times, but our Heavenly Father's will must be submitted to in this, as well
as every other occurrence that we meet with, and it will be no small trial of
my patience to go so much further from you. I, who think every Post an Age in
coming, shall now to my grief be infinitely more uncertain, how it may please
the great Phisician of our Souls and Bodies, to deal with you since my
Husband's Affairs obliges us to cross the Seas.

Whilst we continue in this World, we are subject to variety of Afflictions,
and whenever God sees fit to lay severe pain or sickness either upon our
selves, or those that are dear to us, we must be forced to acknowledge that we
are but miserable comforters, not being able to afford each other a moment's
ease or satisfaction; want of health vitiates the palate and takes off our
taste from all things valuable in this Life, imbittering every Enjoyment; as
for the noise and bussles which at another time divert, they do then become
Insupportable Disturbers of our Rest; and if formerly we have been never so
much entertained by them, yet we find not the least remains of Inclinations
left, but are willing if we can to lie still and forget 'em.

Riches and Honors, as tempting as they appear to the greatest votaries when
well, yet in sickness, if they are accompanied with their usual train of
Visitants and Courtship, instead of doing us good by gratifying our Ambition,
they help to foment the Distemper but are far from curing it.

And as Crowned heads are no more exempt from the sword of the destroying
Angel, than the poorest Beggars, we may learn from their Anguish how little we
ought to value Grandeur, which can give us no assistance in our Extremities; a
down-bed is not a better insurer of sleep in such a case, than a heap of straw
(to those that were always used to it) and a King that groans under a hopeless
sharp Disease (tho he has been never so absolute) is made quickly sensible, it
takes its Commission from a higher power than his, and must without Resistance
yield to its Assaults in spite of all the Doctors, who, it is ten to one to show
their Zeal, increase his Torments by their fruitless Operations; and
distinguish him from the Vulgar, by making him smart more; it is then, he
esteems himself wretched beyond any of his Servants, in their full strength,
and would (were it possible) change places with them; health, Alas! is a mercy
which is not regarded till it is lost.

Sickness, multiplies all our other Grievances, as well as renders us incapable
of pleasures, and the weakness of the body has such effect upon the mind, that
it sinks under those troubles that would not move it at another time, but our
Judgment decaying with us (which should fill the breast with well digested
thoughts) we shall too soon find its place supplied by wild Chimera's of our
own; and startle every moment at Giants of our own raising up, then every hasty
word affrights, and every whisper gives us an Alarm, and a show of the least
unkindness strikes us lower than it found us; nay, sometimes we are so unjust
to charge our best friends for failing in their Love or Diligence, when they
have toiled about us, to a degree that we cannot mention without thanks and
blushing after our recovery; and when the want of ability to help our selves,
forces us to become burdensome to others, instead of excusing the trouble; we
are apt to increase their uneasiness by continual fretting; this is the common
method through which the sick afflict their own Brains, and their Attendant's
cares, but God's name be blessed, who, as he always endued you with an
Extraordinary patience, does not suffer it to leave you in this Trial; for tho
Complaining may satisfy the fancy at the present, it must needs disorder the
whole frame of the Body, much more than lying quiet till he that made us, is
pleased to restore us to health and ease, but it is not in our power to do this
without his help.

Tumbling and Moaning, our misery is indeed so very natural that of our selves
we cannot forbear it, tho we know it rack's the head, indangers cold, and what
is worst of all, raises the Vapors, an Enemy we seldom have the skill to lay
again, Vapors that are alone, a Distemper which fills the Immagination with a
thousand terrifying whimsies; and not only Alters, but totally deprives us of
our senses, and appears like a forerunner of Death to them that see, as well as
they who feel, its most amazing symptoms, this sort of illness varies very
often and baffles both them that prescribe, and them that apply the Remedies;
and much less can they, who are overcome by the apprehensions of its fatal
Consequences, give a just account of themselves; for it seizes so deeply upon
their Intellects, that they read their doom in every sad look, and are ready to
grasp at the least Discouragement, to feed the conceit of their own being past
all hopes of Recovery: and this opinion when it is fixed, not only obstructs
the cure, but makes them resent it, if their friends do not altogether credit
the dismal Relation they give of their own Condition; which however they find
to their comforts, that they often represent more dangerous than it proves,
they think you do them a great deal of wrong, if you question their
understanding in the case; but the learned have been convinced by many years
experience, that vapors mimick all other Diseases, and deceive none so much as
those that have 'em; Melancholy will raise the Spleen in Sickness (and
sometimes in Health) to such a height that they almost die daily in their
belief, not in the Apostle's meaning, for tho the best of Christians are as
liable to this misfortune as any other, (it being a defect in Nature not in
Grace) I doubt it is a certain hindrance in all their Duties, which we hope,
however, that God will mercifully accept, if their desires are bent sincerely
toward him, according to their strength; for at his Throne the intentions are
more considered than a studied Speech, for he knows our necessities before we
ask, but oh! how happy are they whose minds living and dying are Composed in
his Service, whom no care nor pain Distracts, and are able, in all the
Providence of the Almighty, to say his will be done; not that the best amongst
us are capable of this Resignation, without a particular support from above, we
must only beseech him if he sees it consistent with our Soul's good, that these
houses of clay where he has placed them may molder away so gently, as to give
our better part as little emotion as is possible in such a separation, and that
he would in mercy translate them from Praising him on Earth, to sing Eternal
Hallelujahs to his Name in Heaven; which scene of Bliss exceeds our
Comprehensions, let us therefore humbly adore without pretending to search into
these sacred mysteries, and by a steady faith in our Redeemer's merits, expect
to receive what he has purchased, for as many as believe in him, and do his
will, if we have this Glorious Prospect before our Eyes, it will prove the
Richest Cordial to our drooping Spirits, and make up for all we suffer in our
passage, tho it is rugged and contrary to flesh and blood, whose dictates we
are subject to follow, as long as they are about us, which occasions repining
at our sufferings, till we loose that thought in remembering the price of our
high calling; not that I think a guess is to be made at any person's future
Estate by their Patience, or Impatience on a sick bed, much allowance is to be
given to their Dispositions and the nature of their illness; which if it
affects the head, it is no longer themselves that Act, and Consequently they
ought not to be accountable for it: at least not to us who are liable to the
same infirmities, and know not how soon the mildest of us may grow peevish
under an acute, or Languishing Distemper; but in this and all other Trials, it
is God alone that is a sure Rock, in the needful time of trouble, when humane
frailty stifles our reasoning, if he pleases to lay his hand under us, and let
his right hand sustain us, tho we walk in the valley of the shadow of Death,
yet shall we fear no Evil, for his Rod and and his Staff is sufficient to
comfort us.

Now when he lays his Rod without his Staff, who can abide it in such a day of
distress, there is no shelter; should we lean upon any other for help, they
would prove as spears to pierce our hearts, or as weak Reeds that will quickly
bend under us, leaving us destitute and exposed to Temptations and Sorrows;
particularly when we find a Deprivation of Health, which the Devil who knows
our blind sides very well, believed to be so unguarded a fort that he thought
himself assured Job's integrity would fall a victim to him by it, if he had
God's permission to attack him there; skin for skin says he, and all that a Man
has will he give for his Life; but tho neither the force nor cunning of this
Enemy, joined with the cruel reproofs of his friends, had the power to make him
charge God foolishly (how severely soever he was Tormented by them yet it did
compel him to break out in bitter Exclamations, against the day of his Birth,
and in the midst of his Resignation, he expressed a deep sense of his
Calamities; it is no wonder then if we Complain since that was done by so great
an Example of patience, of whom our Cteator declared, that there was at that
time none like him upon the Earth: and in this degenerate Age I fear there are
still fewer Imitators of his virtues, but as God has not given us the same
strength as he had, neither has he suffered us to fall into such Afflictions in
Body and Estate; for if he did, I doubt we should speak unadvisedly with our
Lips.

But too many, amongst us, seldom need his miseries to carry them to a fault;
that is now daily practiced without any excuse but mere Diversion, or an Idle
Custom, by men of all ranks, whose common Discourses are so stuffed with Oaths,
and horrid Imprecations, that one would conclude Job's wife were there
Spiritual guide, they show such readiness to curse God, and call not only for
Temporal but Eternal Death, invoking him at every word to damn and sink 'em,
little reflecting how dreadful a sentence they would bring upon their own
heads, if he should say, Amen: I doubt it would signify nothing, when they come
into another Region, to pretend they were not in earnest in what they spoke so
devoutly; yet after all, I am far from imagining they mean what they say; but
since some have been snatched out of the world, with those words in their
mouth, I think the danger considerable enough to be avoided, and I fancy these
Martyrs in the cause, making so horrible an Exit, could be no Encouragement to
their followers, who dare scarce vindicate the crime they Commit; I wish it had
more force to deter them from showing such irreverance to the most high God,
and mentioning the Blood of the Covenant as an unholy thing, by mixing it in
all their filthy jests, or sometimes using the wounds of the Meek, the Blessed
Jesus, to express their rage and lust, endeavoring one way or other, to draw
him in as a Confederate to Debauchery and Oppression, who knew no sin, neither
was any guile found in his Lips; and, as if this were not sufficient to make
them in danger of Hell fire, they add (the lesser weight) of not only dispising
their Brother, but breathing continual Execrations against him, upon every
frivolous occasion; and sometimes in good fellowship, as if they only cursed
him to the Devil that they might not be parted.

This is strange daring in the strongest Constitutions, but to hear those who
are scarce able to creep about, that look like Lazarus fetched from the Grave,
and are rotten enough to be worms meat before they come there; to hear these
poor Mortals venture to provoke and (seem sometimes to) defy the hand which has
almost crushed them to pieces already, is surely the height of Impudence, and
must cost them many sad thoughts, if they have but sense enough to think of
that place whither they are going, and to which their own curses have condemned
them; but I am afraid, whoever indulged themselves in this, or any other sin,
upon the hopes of a Deathbed Repentance, found it a very improper Season, and
would not advise their Friends to delay it so long; it must be very difficult
when the body and mind are wearied with their Distemper, to call the Conscience
to an account for what was so customary to them, that they were hardly sensible
when they did it, and could not in perfect health endure the Fatigue of
slightly recollecting their Souls.

But besides the more then ordinary pains, besides the hazard of not having
oppertunity given for this dilatory way of making our Peace, and our great
unfitness to begin this work, when we can have so little assistance from
within; some have been split upon another Rock, and fallen into a dreadful
despair of God's mercy, which is the most insufferable torment that flesh and
blood can feel, and is as much beyond Description, as the Heaven they think
they are excluded from; It may then truly be said, the whole Head is heavy, the
whole Heart is sick, and renders them incapable of one minutes ease; for the
Spirit of a Man may bear his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit, oh! Lord, who
can bear.

Nothing transcends their misery, except that Everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, which is so lively represented to their Imaginations,
that it gives them a taste of the flame and brimstone into which they fancy
they are Dropping; how prudent are they who consider and avoid this precipice;
for early or late, we shall all find what fruits we shall have of those things
whereof we are, or should be ashamed, but tho cursing and swearing is grown a
bold faced transgression, and people are not much given to be ashamed of it at
present, they will find in the end it must be accounted for, and they cannot
deny but it is the most unprofitable of all sins; for it damns a Man for a
little Air, or extorts a dear Repentance from them, without being enticed by
any pleasure into their fault.

A disturbed Conscience is certainly the saddest Circumstance of a sick friend,
and I heartily beseech God to keep me and all I am concerned in, from falling
into it, that we may never have a distrust of our Salvation through Jesus
Christ, nor presume groundlesly upon his Merrits, without lamenting and
forsaking our sins.

But your Life hitherto has been so strictly pious, that I do not in the least
apprehend you want a summons from me to look up to him, who is the Author and
the Finisher of your Faith, and to call upon him in all distresses: no, to my
Joy, I hear how constant you are to your Devotion in the midst of your pains,
and that you retain your ever quiet temper, under those variety of tortures,
that might discompose the strongest brains, that you show no repining at the
will of our Heavenly Father.

All this sedate frame of yours, being considered, it may appear very
impertinent in me, to mention several things that my pen slipped into; but I was
forcibly led into it by some unhappy instances, that I have lately seen of
those who in their health could talk irreverently enough of a leap in the Dark,
but in their sickness had a glimpse of fire, tho not of light, only so much as
served to convince them, that they were altogether out of their way; but God
who opened their Eyes, I hope did at the last forgive their offenses.

We have the Example of the repenting Theif upon the Cross, which must prevent
our passing Judgment upon one another, and yet those that are the witnesses of
their sufferings, who lie under the torment of a troubled Conscience, will find
little Encouragement to undertake their courses, tho there is a possibility of
pardon, but let us make our calling and Election more sure, and work before the
night comes, the night of Affliction either in body or mind, for when we are
declining in our healths, or clouded in our thoughts, how unfit are we to Judge
of, or to improve our Soul's Condition; what a sad turn shall we make, if
instead of remembering our Creator in the days of our Youth, we resolve to have
as little as we can to do with him, till wearied in the Devils Employments, and
assaulted by him for doing no more; We should cry, Lord have mercy upon us, and
betake our selves to Heaven, when we can stay no longer here, never looking for
Oil in our Lamps, till the Bridegrooms coming, from whose presence, God grant,
we may never be shut out. But I forget, much reading may incommode you, who
wish you all Health, and am Yours.

AN ESSAY UPON DEATH IN A Letter to a Friend, Who had Buried her Husband.
IMpute not my silence, Dear Madam, to any want, but the excess of kindness,
which makes me too much a Partner in your sorrow, to find words at all suitable
to the share I have with you in it; if therefore I am the last in Condoling
your great Loss, I do most faithfully assure you, it is no insensibility, but
the highest Degree of Love and Tenderness toward you, that occasioned it; the
grief that is least, is soonest expressed, and perhaps the more noise it makes,
the less mischief is sustained by it: had I been unconcerned, my pen and
thoughts had been freer; and (though I could have said nothing sufficient, to
stem so fierce a Tide as your just Lamentations) I might have offered some poor
reasons against other women's afflicting themselves so much, which I should be
ashamed to mention to you, having been a witness, how far your Husbands Love
and Merrits, excelled the best of Mankind I have ever met with, and I am so
sensible of your Reciprocal affection, that I know the power of God only can
support you under such a separation, which I believe, was much more terrible to
you then Death it self, that so lately seemed to look you in the face with its
severe Attendants of pain and sickness; and without doubt, if we may be
permitted to bewail any misfortune in this world, you will be excused for duly
resenting yours, but take heed, Dear Friend, your sorrow is not as one without
hope, and use your utmost endeavor to submit to the hand of the Almighty, with
as much resignation in this, as you did in your own Distemper, (tho that
assaulted but your Body, and this has peirced your Heart) but you ought to
remember, it was the same merciful God that gave you him, who has now taken him
to himself, and in the midst of your Afflictions, you have reason to bless the
Name of the Lord, for sparing you so long, and especially for preserving him
unsullied in this black Age, where he could scarce converse abroad without it,
nor consequently without danger of being defiled, since it is the constant
practice of our Modern Hero's, either to seduce others from, or ridicule them
in the way of Virtue: but, oh! how vain are their attempts, when they meet such
awful goodness as your Husband was master of, whose looks and Character
discouraged all appearances of vice, too much to admit a second attack, from
those Vultures that are indeed fit for no places but Charnel houses, where all
things are as corrupted and rotten as their Principles, and yet these Monsters
are too too often received into the noblest Palaces, where that their
deformities may not be observed; they take care to render their Proselytes, as
odious and infectious as themselves, and so join together to spread the
dreadful Contagion, as far as their acquaintance reaches; had your dear Husband
fallen a prey to them, he had been lost for ever to you, and to himself; but
now, tho his change must of necessity give you a very great trouble, for being
deprived of the best Companion, and the truest Friend that ever any woman was
made happy by, yet after a due debt paid to his memory, which I know can be
diverted by nothing upon Earth, I hope that trouble will find the most
comfortable allay in the consideration, that this parting is to his
unexpressable advantage, and has removed him from a transitory and imperfect,
to an Everlasting happiness, whither I doubt not you are daily preparing to
follow him; and since it has pleased God to deny you the further assistance of
such an Example and Counselor, to strengthen you in your Travel, he will
abundantly recompense that loss, by allowing you a greater measure of his, to
carry you thorough the trials and temptations to which you are exposed by the
way, unless you neglect to implore his help by giving up your self to a
Melancholy, that must needs discompose all your faculties at the same time,
weakening your body, and unhinging your mind; which fruitless grief, if the
Saints in Heaven have a sense of what passes here below, would be more
disapproved by him, whose disease is the occasion of it, then by any of your
surviving friends; and were it possible by your tears to recall him for one
minute, from that Scene of Glory, which he is now (as we reasonably imagine)
translated into, he must regard you as his bitterest Enemy, to interrupt him in
that state of Joy, which tongue cannot express, nor can it enter into the heart
of Man to conceive; but if he is capable of making any wishes concerning you,
we may conclude from his last words, that they all tend only to your attaining
a firmer Title, to the Love and Knowledge of our Creator, that you may enjoy a
settled peace in your mind, and so resign up your self to the will of God, in
this Gloomy providence, that your dear Spouse and you may hereafter dwell
together, in that state of pleasures that has no end nor interruption; and tho
the time of the afflicted seems most tedious, yet they have the consolation to
know that the miseries of this world must have an end, and so must our Mourning
too, and this I have learnt even from the Heathens, that all violent pains are
short, and all lasting pains, are lightsome; and from hence concluded that any
sort of pain might easily be endured, whether it were this argument, or
self-love that made them bear the loss of friends with such indifference, I
will not presume to determine; but I have met with some such heathenish people,
whose excessive tenderness to their own persons has prevented their grieving
for any others; now when ^ easiness in this case proceeds from that Principle,
I fear it will hardly come under the name of virtue, but ill nature; for we are
commanded to love our Neighbors as our selves, and none can lose the thing
they love without regret, which regret when it is for a friend, or those that
are nearly allied to us, I hope is inoffensive, and God who in mercy overlooks
many of our infirmities, will (I trust) pity and pardon this, which is the most
natural of them all, at least if it does not transport us beyond moderation,
but for those Christian Stoics I last mentioned, their tranquillity is not more
assured for a less share of humane gratitude, or natural affection, since I
never observed any of them without a darling passion, which affects them as
tenderly, tho not so commendably as the other; in some Coveteousness and in
others Pride, supplies the place of Friendship, which as it chears them when
they find success, so every disappointment torments and grieves their Spirits,
as much as the Death of our dearest friends does ours; and as mankind is the
most excellent of all created beings upon Earth, I think it is undisputable
that the degree of Love, which the supreme Lord of all things is pleased to
spare from himself, is much nobler employed in kindness to one another, then in
doting upon the unnecessary treasures, or the vain Ornaments of this Life, that
take up most of the time and wishes of them, whose humor cannot be moved by any
other spring. I grant that we ought not to expect any solid comfort from any of
the Enjoyments which we meet with here below, that the dearest friends must
unavoidably part, and we know not whose turn it will be to be left behind; for
as we came not into this world together, so we must not think to go together to
the next, and tho we are permitted to Love, and commanded according to our
Ability to assist each other, in this wearisom Pilgrimage, yet when it pleases
God to part us, we must yield to this common fate, notwithstanding the hardship
it seems to put upon us; and whilst we do enjoy the Conversation of our
friends, we should prize the Goodness more then the outward Qualifications of
those with whom we converse, still remembering they came not hither to do ours,
but our Master's business; who making no further use of their service, in
infinite Compassion, releases them from all the toils and restless cares, with
which flesh and blood is howerly encompassed; accordingly in paying our last
offices to the dead, the Church teaches us to say, For as much as it has
pleased Almighty God, in his great mercy to take to himself the Soul of our
dear Brother here departed, etc. By that acknowledging that Death is an effect
of God's great mercy, to all such to whom the following Text may be applied,
Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, for they
rest from their Labors; And if the Dissolution of the Righteous, is to exempt
them from Labors, tho our own interest makes us eager to detain them longer
with us; yet the sense of what they enjoy in Heaven, and the Inconveniences
that attends them, whilst they are upon the Earth, must be a great means to
silence our repinings; and to abate our grief: some indeed have so little peace
and satisfaction, during their stay amongst us, that themselves are ready to
say with Job, Wherefore is light given to him that is in Misery, and Life unto
the bitter in Soul, which long for Death, but it comes not, and dig for it,
more then for hid treasures, which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they
can find the Grave. In such extremities, surely those that love them best, can
bid them most cheerfully adieu, hoping that all their sufferings are ended with
their lives, and having patiently endured their Heavenly Fathers Correction,
shall now be received into his Joy; were it not for this blessed Expectation,
the Servants of God would commonly be most wretched, since their Cup is often
empty, and as often filled with an unpleasant Potion; whilst their ungodly
Neighbors have plentiousness of Rivers to drink, but tho we grieve the less
for the Death of an unfortunate Friend, yet his misfortunes make us grieve the
more for him, whilst he lives; a certain Demonstration that the days of man are
evil, as well as few, since Friendship, the most substantial pleasure in the
world, only gives us the trouble of lamenting the unhappy Life, or bewailing
the untimely Death of those we love: if our life then is constantly attended
with such perplexity, why should we be so apprehensive of our Death; and yet,
except those few that are extraordinarily harras'd, the rest of us are as
zealous to hug our chains; as if we dissembled when we complained of bondage,
like the old man in the Fable, tho groaning under the burden, yet we desire to
bear it longer, rather then have the fatal sisters cut the thread. It Is true,
we are told, that this aversion to Death is natural, since all Animals that
have sense enough to foresee their danger, endeavor to avoid it; whether it is
an instinct in nature which teaches them to fly from pain and oppression, or
the fear of Annihilation, is beyond my reach, but we know when their breath is
gone, they have no further being, and if we were Animals like them, we might
have the like Apprehensions too, but now the sting of Death is taken away from
us, by the blood of our Redeemer, who graciously opens the Door of Life, to all
such as patiently wait till their change shall come; and piously strive in the
mean time to make their change happy; for which reason we ought neither to be
discontented to live, nor unwillling to dye; and tho we must feel pain,
sickness, and whatsoever else we term misfortunes, with the same senses that
others do (for Religion humbles, but does not stupify) yet the knowledge that
we have deserved much more stripes from our great Judge, must make us resolve
to lay our hands upon our mouths, and our mouths in the dust; not being able to
offer one word in our own justification, but must say with the Publican God be
merciful to me a sinner; and when we have according to our Duties prostrated
our Souls before him, resigning our selves, and all that is dear to us, to his
most wise disposal; let us in Gods Name rise up cheerfully and make our own way
to Heaven, looking up to Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith, and to the
Examples of those blessed Saints that have gone before us, in which number you
have reason to think, your dear husband deserves a place; and therefore give me
leave to tell you, you are very much in the wrong, in permitting your tears to
flow upon the reflection of his Accomplishments, which he is now, (and not till
now) receiving the reward of; and since he has been faithful in improving those
gifts, that God endued him with, and as far as Man could do, has answered the
Character, which David in the fifteenth Psalm gives of him that shall rest upon
the Holy hill, as you cannot envy, so I hope, you will not lament his
proportion, nor grieve so excessively for his Death, which exalts him to such a
pitch of honor; and as you always thought it your happiness to have him easy
whilst he was with you endeavor at least) to show for his sake, you can submit
to have him so without you; Your most flattering hopes could promise you the
enjoyment of him but a very little longer, and if it were in your choice,
whether you would live five years with so good an husband, or ten years with a
worse, I know you would choose the former; and now since God has been so
gracious, not only to give you a Man that exceeded your wishes* but let you
pass thrice that number of years, in mutual Love without the least disgust; you
must not spend all the remainder of your time, in thinking upon what you have
lost; but consider how very few women are so blessed at all, and of those few how
seldom their happiness lasts so long as yours has done; so it pleases our
heavenly father to order it, that he may draw us by afflictions nearer to
himself, and never continues in one stay; being therefore we are so fully
convinced of the vicissitudes of this Life, let us receive every alteration
with such a steddiness of mind, as becomes the Servants of God, who has
promised to lay no more upon us, then he will enable us to bear, as I hope you
will experience that mercy, to assist you in this trial of your faith and
patience; and that you may find no decay, no want of either, is the hearty
prayer of Yours.

AN ESSAY OF LOYALTY IN A Letter to a Friend.
IT is very natural for the most curious Travelers, after having spent some
time abroad to return with joy to their native Country; but much more pleasant
to me who did not go out of it by my own choice, nor any hope of improvement;
and to add to the great satisfaction of seeing my Friends (in which number you
give me leave to place you), I fancied I should find a general content in the
Nation, which I left so highly disgusted in the last Reign; that being still
fresh in my thoughts, I am strangely amazed at my return to England, to see the
same Spirit of murmuring as busy as before; yet my surprise would be less, if I
heard none rail at this Government, but those that were preferred in the other,
if Treason were confined to Red Letter Men or Rags, such whose consciences or
necessities made them so zealous for a change in Religion, as to lead an
unfortunate bigoted Prince to design our ruin, and effect his own by their
dull Polliticks; or if they only were angry, who had a Jail-delivery by his
Indulgence, and now for want of it are returned to their proper habitations;
but to see the same people that dreaded these Armed Rake-hells, when they were
first listed for Soldiers, upon their enlargement, forget their own
apprehensions of the matter, and all the rest of those miscarriages which so
alarmed them, and wish to live again in the same terror, is unaccountable;
can they dislike the change because it came so easily, I am sure, they would
have embraced it once, tho it had been bought at the expense of blood; every
day expecting the loss of their Liberties and Religion; and who did imagine
this settlement could have been made without one stroke? was there ever such an
alteration known in any Kingdom, which was carried so gently as this has been;
and must we that are Protestants be ready to cut one another throats, because
the Roman Catholics did not attempt to do it, but lost that ground quietly
that they had been many years in gaining? without doubt it must be a great
disappointment to them, when they had raised their hopes so high, and saw that
King peaceably seated upon the Throne, who was almost looked upon by them as
their Messiah, to have him so quickly stopped in his achievements; and none can
condemn their hearty desires for his restoration, since they believe it the
only way to promote the Christian Faith; for, as for us Heretics (as they
please to call us) it is plain, they esteem us no better then Tartars, and so
indeed they found us, when they thought they had caught us not long ago; but
after all, they really are the modestest, or at least the cunningest in their
discourses of State affairs, of any I have met with amongst their party,
thinking I suppose to reap the advantage of all the others talking, without
running any hazard themselves. Now, if you ask these several sorts of
Gentlemen, what it is they wish for, you shall find they have several ends,
some of them are men that have by their extravagence spent their fortunes, and
almost their credit too, and therefore are in violent haste for a Civil War, in
hopes by plunder to supply their pockets, like Vultures that live upon the
Carcass, and are always watching for a battle, and therefore they speak aloud
as they would have it, that all things are running into confusion; others like
Crows love the fruits of the Earth, but hate the smell of Gunpowder, and these
affirm as possitively, tho not so loudly, that we shall be inevitably ruined,
unless things return into the same Channel they were in before, and would fain
insinuate that the only way to preserve the Nation, is with all possible speed
to recall K. J. (concluding he would reward them plentifully, for that piece of
secret service, besides what is due to them, for cursing and now swearing).

A third sort of this disaffected party, are the Commonwealth-men, a sort of
men like Moles that are always working under ground, and no kind of soil can
escape them; this made them undermine K. J. and after His, ruin the Monarchy,
and these vermin are now at the same work again, and think their game sure
after this King is dead, but have not patience to stay so long without heaving
at him, whilst he is alive, in which they join with the other party; tho as I
said before, they propose a very different end, the one intending to make
divisions in order to have K. J. and the other to have no King at all; both
wisely supposing we may alter this Government, as easily as we did the last,
when that was carried by the discontent of all the Nation; and if they pretend
the Nation now is under the same discontent, only for being loaded with Taxes,
as if King William should have kept out the French, by the virtue of hocus
pocus, and conjured an Army upon occasion without our paying of the charge, I
believe they will find themselves much mistaken, as to the number of their
Confederates, and consequently to the nature of their undertaking, and am sorry
so many of my Countrymen should fall under the censure of the Poet, A pampered
People, and debauched with ease,
No King can Govern, nor no God can please.


And if they complain so mightily now, I fear they will never be at rest, till
the War is brought home to their own doors, for tho some things may be done now
that one would wish otherwise, yet their remedy would be infinitely worse then
the disease; and were it possible for these whimsical people, to have a new
King as often as a Lord Mayor (and let him signify as little) they could not
pitch upon a Man that would content any one of them till the year were out;
unless he were to Reign himself, who would be much further from pleasing (even)
their own Club than they by whom our affairs now are managed; and how can we
expect a Magistracy free from faults, when every particular person must
acknowledge himself to have so many; if those without sin were to throw the
first stone, or go out of England, the King would have fewer subjects then Duke
Trincalo.

Besides all these I have named, there is a party whose design is extremely
foreign from any of the rest, and yet they and their appurtenances are as much
mutineers, as any of their Neighbors, and make a greater noise too (which is
very considerable toward carrying on the work) that is several select
Companies of Drunkards, who never fail to meet (according to appointment) over
a bottle, or a bowl of Punch to unravel the State; they think fit to have King
James come back again, to bring Champaigne Wine with him: for this horrible
Stuff they sell now, does not sharpen their Wits at all, and yet it is very
dear; Therefore, as Losers should have leave to speak, it were a thousand
pities to disturb them; for they pay treble Taxes that way, and do King William
more good in helping the Excise, than they can do any body Injury in drinking
to their Confusion*

They are resolved to stick to their Principle, for Loyalty and the Butt: The
Chief Grievance they suffer is the Scarcity of French Wine and Brandy, which is
a National Calamity; and the Country Gentlemen that can dispense with Ale and
Beer, have not Understanding enough to feel the Want of Right Claret and
Ragoustes.

I know not whether I should have Reckoned the Good Fellows as a distinct part,
being included in the Noble Family of the Rakes; Of the which, both Males and
Females, are (generally speaking) disaffected at present; a Warlike Prince not
suiting their Humors half so well as a Sham-Camp at Hounslow-Heath; For now,
by that time an Intrigue that is begun in the Winter, comes to perfection, and
they should take the Air together in the Spring, they must be hurried from
their Phillis's Arms, to drop in pieces in Flanders, where they are fitter for
the Hospital than the Field; and who can blame their dear Mistresses that have
no other Consolation left, for cursing the cause that parted them; some of the
remaining Beau's are in as languishing a condition, for new invented
diversions, as their Madams are for Variety of Lovers, both passionately
wishing for a return of Peace upon no other account, but that the agreeable
Monsieur may again refine the Nation; since of late we have not been blessed with
so much as a Dancing Masters Apprentice from France, to bring a Bon Mien
amongst us; how should any Spark Edify in Point of Galantry, by a few
Melancholy Hugonots that come hither for shelter, and have not these many
Years Conversed with the Beau Monde; nor can they learn any better Air from
King James's Disbanded Servants, who have not brought so considerable a thing
as a new Minuet over with them (notwithstanding they may have Commissions,
Declarations, etc.) Their business not lying toward Amors, makes them not so
welcome to people whose Souls are made of Commodes and Feathers* yet they
Caress them because their Clothes were made in France, (though perhaps they
were out of Fashion before they came from thence) hoping also, that they will
give their Master Intelligence, that (next to their Looking-glasses) they are
devoted to his Service; but more especially to their Young Master's, for Two
Special Reasons; One is, his wearing his Hat better, and the promising
Expectations of his doing every thing Ala Francoise; for sure such an Education
will make him in perfection: The other is, That in likelihood his Title will
not be set up a great while (if ever); and they are willing to put the Evil Day
(of discomposing their Wigs) as far as they can from them: but if Whispering,
and dispersing Treason will be of use to him, they and their Doxies do their
part; for several that do not care for fighting, will hazard being fined, or
the Fatigue of Pillorying; Tho it is no very decent posture for persons who
pretend to make so considerable a Figure in other places; Yet they talk, and
read Pamphlets, in hopes they shall have the good Fortune to escape still; And
if a Revolution happens to their Minds, they shall be paid a great deal more
than their Speeches, or Persecution for them is worth: That is, supposing they
should be taken Notice of at all, which I humbly conceive would be a question,
Some sorts indeed of their Ladies would be better gratified by changing of the
Scene at Court, where they could not be admitted in this Reign: But for the
Civil part of them, who would not come to Court because they did not love our
Queen, I am apt to believe their pre-possession made them keep this Distance;
for sure it was impossible to know Her, and wish Her Ill, who was, certainly,
the Greatest Blessing that ever England was favored with? And perhaps, if our
Sins in general, and their Ingratitude toward Her, had not provoked Almighty
God to take Her so quickly from us, She might, by Her Sweet Temper, have won
Her greatest Enemies; and by Her Admirable Example, new modelled all Womankind;
at least those that had the happiness to be often in her presence: For my part,
I shall not be so bold to make an Encomium of her Virtues; Her own Works praise
her in the Gates; and her High Character, which has scarce been hit by the
greatest Artist, must not be touched by my Unworthy Pen: Yet I must for ever
(in private) deplore Albion's Loss, and lament my own hard Fate to be so long,
and so far distant from the best Queen that ever adorned our Throne, and that I
could enjoy no greater share of the Sunshine which Enlivened all about her: I
coming home so near the sad Eclipse, as only to be made sensible of that
Goodness, and immediately to see it snatched from us.

This dismal Day influenced many of them, who living, could not give her a
Civil Word, and made them, by their Concern for her Death, show the secret
Notion they had of her Worth, though they had before industriously strove to
stifle it; but none could be so blind not to see such apparent merit, except
the most invete^ate Wretches upon the Earth.

But my Zeal for the Memory of the Queen, and Loyalty to the King, has
transported me beyond my own Interest; For I ought not to have turned out so
unfledged a Bird, as this small Essay, into the Critics Hands, who are some of
them provoked by the Subject, to handle it severely (though others, I hope, in
Justice to my Subject, and in pity to my Sex, will appear in its Vindication)
and if Submission will mollify the offended Wits, I will confess any Fault
they can charge this Paper with, that does not Reflect upon the Right of my
Cause; in which I must remain positive, and they cannot force me to do
otherwise as long as the Hangman is on my side: I do own that State Affairs are
altogether out of my Element; and that a Woman is much more properly employed
in House-wifry than News; but our Weakness is known to every body, that we love
to be in the Fashion, and one may as decently pretend to wear a Farthingale, as
to be ignorant in Politics; For, during my stay in London, I never saw a Visit
made without Canvasing one King or other, which set my Brains on working; and
now I am retired into a Corner of the World, I am willing to show I have same
little Remains of Breeding left, whilst the Generality of my Sex made it their
business to draw Men from their Allegiance that were Loyally inclined; and to
animate those that were not.

I did, as often as I met these Virago's, profess my self King William's
Champion; and in this Essay I have showed you some of my Reasons for it; And if
any object, That the Poorness of my Expressions has wronged his Cause, I dare
not contradict it; But I hope his Enemies may find, in time, that he is as much
above their Malice as my Commendation; who shall always pray for his Safety,
and the good Success of the English Nation: And in this wish I know you will
heartily join with,

Yours, etc.

AN ESSAY OF Friendship. BEING A Letter to a Friend, who was in Distress.
I Am extremely concerned to see you have so ill an opinion of me, as to hide
your self from me in your misfortune, and let me hear it by another hand; I
know not how to interpret this shyness in you, it makes me fear you never
esteemed me worthy of your friendship, if you could imagine the change of your
Circumstances should alter my Love; I had a different notion of our mutual
obligations, and should have thought it a wrong to your generous temper, to
have concealed any thing of consequence that had happened to me, tho it had been
to lessen me never so much in the world (which respects people according to the
port they live in); I hoped till now you had put the same confidence me, who
had nothing to recommend me to your favor, but the plain sincerity of Soul; if
you should not be welcome to me in the meanest habit, I could not deserve your
company at all; but far be such mercenary base inclinations from my breast, who
have more pleasure in dividing a small fortune with my friends, then in
hoarding up, or enjoying the greatest treasures without them; and since I never
valued any person for having a splendid equipage, I am extremely confounded to
find I have appeared so unlike my self to you, (for what else can make you
avoid me, when it is in my power to be serviceable to you, unless you question
my will to do it) I dare not quarrel with you now, lest it confirms your design
of breaking our correspondence, which is as dear to me as ever, yet give me
leave to complain of a greater loss then yours, the loss of my Friend; for now
I perceive it is in the power of adverse fortune, to draw you from me; and let
me tell you, those apprehensions that made you estrange your self, must at the
same time accuse me of Pride and Coveteousness, as well as ingratitude, the
first of which sins would be more unpardonable in me, then the rest of my Sex;
but I always knew my own defects well enough to stifle any such suggestions;
nor could I ever boast of any advantage so much, as being made happy by your
kindness; and since every Soul is not capable of faithfulness, the Character
you gave of me for being so, together with your distinguishing me in your
confidence, above the rest of your friends, did indeed elevate me with joy (tho
not to ostentation) but you have sufficiently mortifyed me now, by showing me
your trust was not absolute; and that you believed I loved you only as long as
you were in humor for Diversions, or else I had some sinister ends, which are
disappointed by this turn in your affairs; I think I can scarce be charged with
crimes I have a much greater antipathy to then these I have mentioned, as
Coveteousness is the root of all Evil, it is an Enemy to all good, (which I
must ever account Friendship to be) that person that delights only in money can
have no lasting satisfaction, for as it is the nature of riches to make
themselves wings, and fly away, the miser that locks them never so fast in his
trunk, is so sensible of their fleeting qualities, that he has as many racking
meditations about them, as if they were already out of his reach, his sleep is
interrupted and all ties of nature are broke; he regards a poor relation with
as much aversion and caution as he can do a theif; as for Fendship he has not
the impudence (or as he thinks weakness) to pretend to it, lest he bring in a
partner to his wealth; for many of those sordid wretches, will acknowledge such
an intimacy does oblige us to the utmost of our powers, to help each other, and
therefore they not being desirous to give a title to any part of their Estate,
will keep out of the temptation; by which means, they want the chiefest comfort
of humane life; a Coveteous Man after many years denying himself all
Conveniences (as well as duties) if he gets the reputation of being rich, may
be courted by them who have an expectation from him, but he receives their
addresses very warily, being conscious to himself, that he deserves nothing of
civility, and jealous still of a design upon his Coffers, where he knows his
only attraction lies; if he gets any presents upon trust of a double return at
his Death, this Janus may look with smiles upon his Benefactors, but his
affectionate face is always fixed toward his Gold; which yet he knows not how
soon he must leave, if it does not leave him first; but sometimes the miserable
wretch meets a disappointment in his darling hopes; and by an unforeseen fate
is reduced to the real want, which his greedy desire of money imposed upon him,
even in the midst of plenty; he may then too late wish he had made himself
friends, with the Mammon of unrighteousness, for he finds no body willing to
receive him, and does in vain groan for that blessing which he declined in his
prosperity, and would have proved of more advantage then all his ill got
treasure; I mean a true friend, for they will not be wanting to help and to
assist one another, in all exigencies, with their purse and advise; but they
that will know no body when it is in their power to oblige, will find no body
know them in their extremity; as a late French Author well observes, out of
whose ingenious writings I have collected some choice remarks, which I hope may
be not only an entertainment, but an assistance to you in your present
circumstances. The world is grown so very bad, that there is little faith left
amongst us; nor gratitude for any kindness, the best services are too often the
worst requited; we should therefore observe peoples behavior, in their
Correspondencies with others, not to imitate their treachery, but to stand so
much upon our guard that we may not be sufferers by it; Those that are too easy
to believe, do many times when it is too late find themselves mistaken, yet we
ought to be cautious in showing a distrust of the truth of another, that being
an unnecessary rudeness unto them, and if it amounts to the degree of
suspecting every body, it is an indication of falsehood in our selves, for a
liar can neither believe nor be believed; but upon the first report of any
thing, it is most prudent to suspend our Judgment, unless we know the integrity
of him that speaks it; yet the safest way of all to avoid being partial, is not
to make any conclusion till we hear both sides; how unjust are they, whose
understandings are so engaged toward one party, that truth can make no
impression on them; but continue wedded to their opinion, beyond the power of
reason to separate them from it; the best interpretation that can possibly be
put upon such pernicious practices, is a defect in their capacity; tho it is ten
to one their honesty is chiefly suspected and most in fault: The greatest part
of our life is spent in information, and that which is visible to us is least
essential; we take most things on the words of others, and that makes us
generally imposed upon; we commonly know the truth of what we see, but seldom
of what we hear, especially if it come from far (which should make us more
circumspect in what we give credit to) for when a relation of a thing has
passed through several hands, it has so many glosses put upon it by the
passions, or interest of them that recount it, as makes it never arrive pure
and unmixt to our ears; Let us therefore consider, whether they which speak of
any person, or thing are unbiased; and if they are not, we must give grains of
allowance for their praises, and much more for their dispraises, since the
depraved temper of most men is stronglier inclined to be spightful, then good
natured; it is those slanders that are spoken behind our backs (to undiscerning
men) that does us mischief, for a wise person will gain a greater advantage
from the censure of their enemies, for what they do amiss, if they hear it,
then a fool will take from the advice of his friends, which seldom prevails
with him; the envious holds a glass to show us our faults, and we ought to
correct them in our selves, and not retaliate their railings.

We should endeavor to live peaceable with every body, and disoblige none
willingly; for any person is capable of being an enemy, but not all of doing
friendships; nor is it prudent to be over forward in engaging our selves in any
ties, either in Love or Friendship (more then what Christianity commands us to
have for all men) yet when we have made a Protestation of Amity, no generous
Soul will brake the correspondence, tho they meet some inconveniences in it;
but if the division is inevitable, will be sure it shall be justifyable on
their sides; however, both parties will be condemned, where there is a rupture
betwixt friends, either for want of consideration in the beginning, or of
constancy in the end; the spectators of their differences do every one
represent it as they please, (or at least as they think), and they Judge
according as they Love; it is better to decline making a promise then to repent
of it afterward; a disobliged friend often proves the worst of enemies, and
where you find a disappointment in them, a coldness is better then a quarrel;
for contention generally ruins our reputation, emulation causing people to
discover those failings, that our civility had made them overlook; the heat of
dispute Animates the Spirits, and raises up that infamy which was dead before;
our Antagonists thinking to confound if they cannot confute us, begin with a
manifesto of invectives, (that is supposing them as ill as they set us forth to
be) for those are Arms unworthy a virtuous person to make use of; Let us
therefore strive to have a concern with none that are not so, their goodness
being a defense against ill language as well as falsehood; for they would
always act like themselves; but there is no security, when we treat with those
that are not guided by Reason nor Justice* with such we should not have a
difference, and much less contract a friendship, for whatsoever affection we
must express, we must remember all is not Gold that glisters, and theirs is
subject to a base alloy, which is apparent enough to make us fly them, that
have no Principles of honor, for honor is the truest pledge of faithfulness,
and we can be safe with none without it.

The greatest benefit we can receive from riches, is their enabling us to do
more good then those that have less; a good estate is a charge that we must
give an account of, and leads us into many inconveniences, if we have no
friend to regulate our unruly Appetites. A person that is rich is certainly
flattered, and they must love us very well, that will venture their own
interests to represent us truly to our selves; which is the most requisite of
any knowledge, tho it is unwillingly received by most people; a proud Man is
hurried into many other vices, because none dares show him the odiousness of
his carriage; for he that keeps all his acqaintance at a distance, if he is
falling down a precipice has no body near enough to stop him; but a friend will
kindly advertise us of those evils, for the which an enemy would expose us, and
perhaps the very people who have betrayed us into it, shall be the first to
trumpet our disgrace; such treatment is absolutely against the Laws of
Friendship, since that injoyns us to conceal, as well as strive to rectify each
others errors; and is a chain that proves of greater security to us, the more
firmly it is linked; he that stands alone, cannot be so strong as he that is
supported, nor is any help (from this world) so ready and substantial, as that
which proceeds from a true affection; tho alas, there is but little of that to
be found in the age we live in, and it is this decay of kindness, which
occasions the ruin of so many families, for if there are several branches, it
is not likely they should all be prosperous, but where they are united they
seldom fall; we were born, next to serving God, to serve our Neighbors, and
especially those of our own blood, which may be Policy as well as Duty, since
we all want assistance in our turns, and a rich person has as much need of
Counsel as one in a meaner Station has of relief; but whatsoever our
Circumstances are, we should omit no opportunity of being serviceable to the
rest of mankind; those that have a considerable fortune to dispose of, should
let their friends enjoy a necessary share of it so easily, that it may not
appear like a gift, but as if they had an equal Title to it; and in all
conditions we should aid the distressed to the utmost of our power, never
following their examples, who are morose to all about them, not only to avoid
the trouble of obliging, but from an Antipathy they have to all good nature;
directly opposite to the Divine goodness, who is incessantly communicating his
benefits to us; we ought in prudence to manage our Conversation with such an
agreeable pleasantness (bounded by discretion) that people may delight in our
companies; for all the goods of this life would be worth nothing, if we were to
possess them alone, but we are sure to have either friends or enemies about us;
and almost every day ingages the world to be more or less kind to us; let us
therefore carry our selves so, that tho we do not desire to make many
confidents, we may at least gain the esteem of all that know us; for with
friends all things are well accepted that are meant so; they put no ill
constructions upon each others words; kindness sweetens all our cares, and
takes away the constraint we are in before them, that are indifferent or
spightful to us; as in Summer we must provide against Winter, we should make
our selves so well beloved in prosperity, as to reap the fruit of it in
adversity; if we have an alteration in our affairs, which are subject to
mutation as long as we continue upon Earth, and some have been forced to crouch
to those they once disdained to smile on; Humility and Complacensy have this
reward, that they never fail to bring glory to those that exercise them, they
add a luster to the brightest ornaments, and if a change of fortune happens,
their beauty is not sullied by Poverty; for the honor of an humble person
remains, tho all their other circumstances are altered, and an obliging word or
look costs us nothing; therefore we may afford that; when we are reduced never
so low, it will not only procure us esteem whilst we live, but make us be
lamented when we die; a mild and charitable person imprints such Love, such
Reverence in all that know him, as will not end with his life, but his memory
will be respected; and when he goes from this world, it will be to his own
comfort and other peoples grief; whilst a severe haughty man, tho he hugs
himself with the conceit of keeping others in awe, will not only fall
unpittied, but being considered for nothing besides his power to do mischief,
if his Station alters, will find that fear turned into hatred; nor can his
death be regretted, it being for the public good to have so ill an example
removed.

If incivility proceeds from Pride, it is a base effect from a worse cause,
which never proves of advantage to those that nourish it; if it is from
ignorance, we shall be despised for not informing our selves better, since
those who have not had an opportunity of fine breeding, may learn a civil
candescention; and that we owe to every body, even our very enemies, for we
must pity and assist them in their necessities, and neither affront them nor
proclaim their failings; it is a sign of our leading an ill life, if we carry a
register of the wicked actions of others, and it is the consolation of fools
only to be satisfied with their own sins, because another's are of something a
deeper dye; yet too many are as violent in decrying those debaucheries they
imitate, as if they were provoked by the steps they made in Vice beyond
themselves, and whilst they rail, still run to overtake them.

Let us on the contrary, be strict in observing our own ways, and easy in the
interpretation we put upon others.

A generous person will speak well of those that are not his friends, as far as
truth permits, and where he cannot, will be silent; since it is much better to
be so, then to say that which will prostitute our Neighbors reputation; but to
magnify his faults with all the severity we can invent, is to make our tongues
like the poison of a Serpent, whose bite is mortal, and will render us as
detestable as they are.

A wise man will be moderate to all his discourses, and particularly in giving
the Character of others, not being transported into a heat, whether they are
friends or enemies he mentions; nor hyperbolizing in the commendation of people
that are deserving, for excessive praise awakens curiosity, and provokes envy
to look into their failings; and every one appears the worse that has been too
much extolled before hand; but besides the disadvantage we bring upon our
friends, in having so mighty expectations to satisfy, if they fall short of
what we have represented them, we must bring our own sincerity or Judgment in
question; but we should least of all describe our selves, since we are so
unable to Judge rightly in that point, to commend our selves in an abominable
vanity; and to discommend our selves, is to beg a complement, and both ways we
put the company in pain, either to forbear laughing at our conceitedness, or to
find something to say, which they think will answer our expectations, tho they
do not believe one word of it themselves, but they who delight to hear no
bodies tongue in motion, but their own, are liable to these and many other
errors; and the most watchful may sometimes need a friend to reprimand them;
for tho Conversation is the ordinary exercise of life, we must consider how
small a slip in it may ruin our reputation, which is of inestimable price, and
is never in more danger then when we keep company with those that have none of
their own to lose; whatsoever charms they possess, if virtue is wanting, our
fame will quickly be like theirs, and friendship will then divide the ill, as
well as the good of this world betwixt us; why should we for any diversions
encourage a reprobate person, and run the risque of being esteemed so our
selves.

It is every bodies happiness to have wise friends, if they have wit enough to
be advised by them; they which love truly are firm as a Diamond, and as hard to
break; but some capricious people are like glass, so brittle and dangerous to
touch, that it is impossible to have a correspondence with them, without being
in constraint; the least punctilio that you omit, makes a flaw in the
acquaintance, they are continual discontents to themselves and others; they who
would keep their favor must study their humors, and dares scarce stir before
them, lest they should be offended at their motions; they are fond of nothing
but themselves, and being slaves to their own wills, expect their friends
should be so too; we should be careful whom we receive into that intimacy; if
they are well principled, the correspondency will be mingled with pleasure and
profit; but amongst the generallity of people, freedom in discourse is of ill
consequence, lest we furnish them with Arms to destroy us, if they become our
Enemies; and we often see those that express kindness to us to day, are most
ready to do us an injury to morrow, and they are capable of making the more
cruel war upon us, if they know our weakness: Tho we may be sensible when we
are treated ill, and show a reasonable resentment, yet in all quarrels, we
should leave a door open for reconciliation, and put a curb to all thoughts of
revenge; for if we give liberty to such inclinations, we may do that in our
passion that may out-ballance the delight of punishing another; and a religious
person finds a greater satisfaction in pardoning, then in returning an affront,
rejoicing when they have an opportunity to overcome evil with good.

But some are very far from this temper, who will take part with those that are
in the wrong, if their enemies have a dispute with him, only to oppose the man
they hate, not reflecting that they hurt themselves most, if he has the sense
to espouse the right side; they show great folly that are against him, only for
contradiction sake, which would be more inexcusable then if they did it,
through a defect in their understandings; but those who are guided by virtue
and goodness, will act quite otherways, knowing a positive spightfulness makes
all conversation uneasy, and many times those that think to show their wit by
disputing, proclaim their ill nature only, and give their adversary cause to
triumph; we should rather imitate the Be then the Spider, as the Be
industriously sucks the sweets from every flower, so let us make the best of
all cross accidents, and then the counsels of our friends will prove as honey
to us; but they whose envious disposition observe the worst they can in every
discourse, are like the Spider that swells with the Venom, he extracts where're
he goes: they that cannot bear a private, friendly reproof, are as big with
conceitedness, as any of those insects I mentioned, can be with the most
Poisonous Exhalation: It is a misfortune to be allied to such a Person, but
when we fall into his Hands, we must not spend our Time in Fruitless
Lamentations; For Complaints do often cause Disdain, and the World is so
Inhumane, that instead of moving Compassion, the Injuries we Receive from one,
encourages another (of as ill a principle) to accumulate our wrongs; it is best
to conceal the rudenesses we suffer, and cannot remedy, and acknowledge the
favors that are conferred upon us; which is Policy, as well as Gratitude,
since it many times excites those that hear us to be as kind; but that proud
heart who will not own his obligations to his friends, does justly deserve to
be contemned by every body; and when he finds himself slighted upon that score,
it must be an aggravation to his misery, to consider how much his own
insensibility contributed to his ruin.

They who do their duties, are the best prepared to undergo what we call the
frowns of fortune, and making a good use of their afflictions, will find a
happy end of them; and enable us to be serene in those hurricanes of life, that
are apt to shock the steddiest brain, where we can meet no haven of safety, but
in the hand of Divine Providence; let us therefore wait patiently upon him,
till he pleases to make a turn in our affairs, knowing that we can as much calm
the raging of the Seas as alter his will.

Fretting at our Circumstances renders our Judgment less able to Act, and
decays our health, a troubled water may grow clear without, but never with
stirring in it; yet sorrow is scarce supportable alone, therefore they are
doubly wretched that have none to ease their mind in trouble; and tho other
people may be so barbarous to neglect, or use them worse for what they suffer
already, if they have made a good choice in placing their friendship, they need
not apprehend such a treatment; tho indeed there is so much baseness in this
age, that they ought to know them very well in whom they confide.

Some are incapable of keeping a secret, their minds being like an unsealed
letter, it is not prudence to commit any thing of Consequence to them; these
are quickly to be found out, and are as certainly despised; a cunning person,
is yet more dangerous, for they pretend to design our interests, whilst they
promote their own, tho it be to our destruction.

But religious persons will preserve their Faith inviolable to their friend,
and never disclose what they are entrusted with, which gains them the esteem of
all that knows it; but if they had nothing paid them, in return they will not
fail to discharge a good conscience, and not only conceal their friends
concerns, but account it a great felicity to be serviceable to them (as without
all doubt it is a much more substantial pleasure to give, then to receive a
favor) a compassionate temper never sees another in discontent, without
bearing a part with him; but friendship should carry us yet further, and divide
the care and grief equally betwixt us.

Nor shall you ever find me wanting in demonstrating the truth of what I have
so often professed; for I did not instance these maxims as things of course;
but because many of the rules suited with my own thoughts, and I shall omit no
opportunity to convince you, that according to the strictest rules of
Friendship,

I am Yours.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Folio's.
THucydides, Greek and Latin, Collated with five entire MSS. Copies, and all
the Editions extant; also illustrated with Maps, large Annotations and Indexes,
by the Editor, J. Hudson, M. A. and Fellow of Vniversity-Colledge in Oxford. To
which is added an exact Chronology of the said History by the Learned Henry
Dodwel. Printed at the Theater in Oxford.

Athenae Oxonienses: Or an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops, who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford, from about 1480 to the
end of 1690, giving an Account of the Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and Death of
all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives, with the
Fate and Character of their Writings. The Work is so complete, that no Writer
of Note of this Nation, for 200 Years is omitted; in 2 Volumes.

A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam; by Monsieur de la Loubere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King, to the King of Siam; in 1687, and
1688. wherein a full and curious account is given of their Natural History, as
also of their Music, Arithmetic, and other Mathematick Learning; in 2 Tomes,
illustrated with Sculptures. Done out of French by A. P. Fellow of the Royal
S^ciety.

Malebranch's Treatise concerning the Search after Truth; the whole Work
complete: To which is added his Treatise of Nature and Grace, being a
Consequence of the Author's Principles contained in the Search; together with
F. Malebranch's Defenses against Mr. de la Ville; and several other
Adversaries. All Englished by T. Tailor, M. A. of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford,
and Printed there.

Quarto's.
A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament, in two
parts, by F. Simon of the Oratory.

Certain Considerations for the better Establishment of the Ghurch of England,
by the Lord Bacon; with a new Preface, by James Harrington, Esquire

Octavo's and Twelves.
TWenty Four Sermons upon several occasions, in two Volumes, by Dr. R. South.

Sermons and Discourses on several occasions, by Dr. Stradling, Dean of
Chichester, together with an Account of the Author, by James Harrington, Esquire

Sermons and Discourses on several occasions, by Dr. Meggot, Dean of Winchester.

Waller's Poems complete.

Bona's Guide to Eternity, Englished by Sir Roger L'Estrange.


