AN ACCOUNT Of the Taking of Captain Holland, Who (it is said) is the very Man
by whose Hands was the late Earl of Essex Murdered.
It Is now too notoriously known to the World to be denied, that they who were
advanced for these several Years past into the highest Seats of Justice, have
profaned that great Name, Poisoned its Streams, and deceived the People whom
they should have Informed, both by Vindicating the Authors of this Bloody
Murder, from the Guilt and Suspicion of it, and by Defaming and Wounding the
Memory of a most Noble, Innocent, and Guiltless Person (whose Spittle, some
time before, they were Ambitious to lick up) with the Infamy of Fe lo de se,
it is to them that the Enemies of Protestancy, and English Rights owe the
Success of all these Attempts: And its they whom the Nation ought to Accuse of
being the Instruments of Betraying us to Popery and Slavery; and instead of
detecting, they have became Advocates for Assassinates, and Concealers of
Massacres, that we may even say with Jeremiah, Be astonished, O ye Heavens at
this, and be ye borridly afraid.

But that God who has said, There is nothing covered that shall not be
Revealed; nor any thing hid which shall not be known or come abroad; even that
God to whom Vengeance belongs, has by his good Providence, brought to light the
very Villain (whom it is not to be doubted but will be proved) that Murdered
the late Noble and Innocent Earl of ESSEX: This Monsters Name is Holland, and
generally known by the Name of Captain Holland, a Creature of the Earl of
Sunderlands, from whom he has had very great Rewards; and it is generally said,
and I doubt not but will be proved, that he has received a Pension of Five
Pounds per Week, for these several Years past, from the said Earl.

This Holland is a bold daring resolute Man, has a very sharp Eye, and stern
Countenance; he has been a Man of Intreague all his Lifetime, and One who has
been already Convicted of the greatest of Villainies: First, Of Counterfeiting
and making False-Guinies. Secondly, In being a chief Actor in Cheating the
Silk-Man of Lawrence-Lane, by Insinuating to him, that he, with some others,
had a Warrant from the Earl of Sunderland, to seize him for speaking
Treasonable Words, from whom (on pretense of getting him off on the Account of
his Interest with the said Earl) he got some Moneys down, and Bonds for Three
Hundred Pounds; which afterward being detected, his Accomplices were Exemplary
Punished, but himself Pardoned. A Third time for Robbing Dr. Gattaker of
Lime-street, by Debauching the Maidservant, with the Assistance of one Davis;
for which, they all Three were Condemned at the Old Baily, and Davis and the
Maidservant Executed, but our Noble Captain had his wonted good Fate of a
Pardon, by the Interest of his Old Friend the Earl of Sunderland.

Warrants having been given out, and Messengers in search for this Captain
Holland, he was at last (by the Indesatigable Industry of a Noble Lord) taken
in a House about the middle of Essex-street, near St. Clement's-Church
Yesterday Noon, where he remains till further Orders come (from those
Honorable Committee of Peers, that take all the Examinations about the Earl of
Essex's Murder) to what Prison he must be carried.

LONDON, Printed for J. Bowers, 1689.


