REASONS AGAINST AGREEMENT With a late Printed Paper, entitled Foundations of
Freedom: Or the AGREEMENT Of the PEOPLE. Whereby it does appear, that the
Particulars proposed in the said Paper are not Foundations of Freedom, but of
Tyranny and slavery to the People; being destructive to Religion, Laws,
Liberty, and Government; against our Covenant and Protestations, and very
dangerous and unsafe for the Kingdom.

By WILLIAM ASHHURST Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, 1648. And now reprinted in the Year of
our Lord, 1659. At the charge of Sir Francis Nethersole Kinght; and by him
humbly recommended to the serious consideration of all, and every Member of the
present House of Commons; and of all other wise and true hearted Englishmen:
As no less considerable at this time then at that when they were published by
the Author.

To the Reader.
I Have no more to say to the Reader, but that when I had considered the
Printed Paper, entitled, Foundations of Freedom, or an Agreement of the
People; I was very much unsatisfied with it, and so were others I met with. And
finding that the differences upon it would fall out amongst those who are
obliged to friendship and agreement, both for the good of the Kingdom and their
own good, I thought it unchristian and unsafe, to let so great
dis-satisfactions lie privately heating together, until they might kindle into
an hotter flame of discontent, especially it having ever been (as it is still)
my opinion (which I have not hid) that differences in this case should be ended
by Reason, not by Opposition: And seeing the Publisher of the Paper calls upon
every man for his Reasons against it, I have here brought him mine under my
hand, wherein although I am sensible that I may discover my own weakness and
folly, yet I ever hating all private Contrivances, or to do any thing of
public Concernment in a Corner, have judged it more honest (and that shall
ever go for wisdom with me) to use plain dealing, which if it be (according to
the Proverb) a jewel, I am sure, was never more precious then at this time.

W. A.

REASONS AGAINST Agreement, with a late Printed Paper, Entitled, An Agreement
of the People.
THe Publisher of this Paper called, An Agreement of the People, tells us, that
it was tendered to the Consideration of the General, and Council of the Army;
but before it was Approved by them (which I hope it never will) he held it just
to be published, that men might offer their Reasons Against it: wherein he is
so ingenuous; that however both the Epistle and Paper might give occasion to
some personal Reflections, yet I will only give him fairly my reasons why I
cannot Agree to his Paper; having for the more clear proceeding first laid down
the most principal parts of this Agreement, which (as I take it) is briefly,
That the people who shall subscribe this Paper shall Agree, To take away this
Parliament, and to choose an equal Representative consisting of 300. men, who
shall have full power without the consent or concurrence of any other person or
persons (either King or House of Peers) to make, repeal, alter, and declare
Laws: and that none do resist their Laws or Orders upon pain of death, except
such Representatives expressly violate this Agreement, and they shall have power
to choose a Council of State for the managing of public affairs: But that they
shall not have power to continue in force, or make any Laws, Oaths, and
Covenants, whereby to compel by penalties, or otherwise any person to any thing
in or about matters of Faith, Religion, or Gods worship, or to restrain any
person from the professing his Faith, or exercise of Religion, according to his
conscience in any house or place, except such as are or shall be set apart for
the public worship, nevertheless the instruction or directing of the Nation in
a public way for the matters of faith, worship, or discipline, so it be not
compulsive, or express Popery, is referred to their discretion: with like
restriction in other matters of less consequence.

I am very much unsatisfied with this Paper, both for the manner and matter of
it, for these reasons.

1. Reas. Because it proposes, that the people (or rather some small part of
them) without any color of Law or Right, should agree together to alter the
present Government, and to take away a legal right from Buroughs to choose
Members to the Parliament; which admitted, they may with as much Justice and
Right agree to take away any Law, or any man's life or estate, by which Rule we
could enjoy nothing but at the will of any number of men that would call
themselves The People. And upon the same ground that those who shall subscribe
this Agreement may call themselves the People, might those who shall refuse to
subscribe it, and those who are not admitted to subscribe it, both call
themselves the People, and at any time hereafter pretend like right to do the
same, or like things; which must lay a foundation of certain confusions.
Neither can there be assurance of any settlement whatsoever in this way, for
what those who call themselves the People Agree upon now, they may alter within
a month, or sooner if they please.

2. Reas. Because if there were a right by this way to alter the Government (as
there is not) yet it is not reasonable to attempt so great a matter, the
Consequences whereof must be of so vast concernment to the Kingdom before the
inconveniences of the present Government have been plainly discovered, and
solemnly debated: And being found out, trial had been made whether by the
present unquestionable power there might not have been found a remedy either by
some Additions, or smaller A^tions, without putting things to so great an
hazard as an (...) ^tion in the Supreme Power^ must bring, and that without
offering any reason for it.

Neither is there only these general reasons against the whole Paper, but if
the subject matter of it, and the proceedings intended thereupon were lawful,
yet there are many Reasons against the particulars in it, which I shall proceed
with.

3. Reas. Because it does propose to take away (not only this King) but all
Kings, and the House of Peers out of the Supreme Judicatory of this Kingdom,
and that for ever, without showing any necessity of it; which the Papists,
Delinquents, and ill-affected persons amongst us (well perceiving how great a
distraction it would bring) did frequently charge upon this Parliament as their
design, whereupon to vindicate themselves from such aspertions, they have made
and published several Declarations, that they would not alter the Government of
the Kingdom by King, Lords and Commons; And this Kingdom having had so many
hundred years experience of this present Government, in the most part of which
time they having lived in peace and plenty; and when any wars have heretofore
happened between the King and the People, no such alterations being ever
desired or attempted. It is not imaginable that they will now desire to change
it for they know not what, for so are all alterations of Government until the
conveniences or inconveniences be found out by experience. All I will further
add upon this Reason is, that this poor wasted Kingdom does not stand in need
of so great a division and distraction in the course of all proceedings at
home, and to incur such dangers from abroad, as would in reason be the
Consequences of this Alteration.

4. Reas. Because this Paper proposes the absolute taking away of the power
and privileges of the Parliaments of England, which we are bound to preserve
and maintain, not only as Englishmen, but as Christians; most part of the
Kingdom having solemnly sworn it to the most high God, and one to another in
the Vow and Protestation of the 5. of May 1641. wherein we further vow and
protest, to oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring unto
condign punishment all such as shall either by force, Practice, or Councels,
Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the contrary. And likewise in
the Solemn League and Covenant of 27. of September, 1643. not only we in this
Kingdom, but the most part of the Kingdom of Scotland have sworn to preserve
the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments in both Kingdoms. Now the Paper
does not only propose, to take away the Rights and Privileges, but the
Parliaments of England themselves, as they were constituted when these Oaths
were taken, to which the words according to the literal sense of them (which is
the rule of Oaths) must relate, for we could not swear to that which was not,
or to something that was only like a Parliament therefore no man (as I
conceive) who has taken either the vow and Protestation, or the Solemn League
and Covenant, can agree to this agreement, unless he dare make himself guilty
of most palpable and notorious Perjury.

5. Reas. Because it proposes the taking away this unquestionable Legal
Parliament only by a forceable agreement, without any Authority; And in the
room of it to settle a representative which has not so much as a color of
Legal right: by which means, Although force and Power may hinder this
Parliament, from acting, yet the being of it cannot be taken away, but by the
like Law that made it. So as we shall have a Representative that will pret^nd
to a Legislative power, and a Parliament who ought to have it both in being at
once, which may lead the Kingdom into miserable uncertainties and distractions,
when any number that will make an House of Commons, and any number that will
make an House of Peers assembled in any place within Westminster, will have
more power to make and repeal Laws then these Representatives, Although all
were done that the Paper desires.

6. Reas. Because there is such a desperate encroachment upon the Liberties of
the people of England, proposed in the Election of this Representative; it
being a known Maxim in Law, that no power could lawfully impose upon the
Liberties or properties of the people of this Kingdom, but either by their
particular Consent, or general Assent in Parliament where every man is
represented. But by this Paper, as well all those who have been most faithful
to the Parliament and Kingdom, and hazarded their lives and estates in this
cause (if in Conscience they cannot subscribe this Agreement) as the
Delinquents and Papists that are most of all obnoxious to the Law, shall be
debarred from Electing or being elected, yet they shall have Laws and taxes
imposed upon them, and by them who for number are the least party in the
Kingdom, and by those to whom they give no consent nor trust, which is as
perfect slavery, as any Tyrant could impose upon them.

7. Reas. Because the declaring of Agreement with this Paper by Subscription,
will not only be a means more to draw, but also to keep those who have adhered
to the Parliament in this cause in parties, factions and divisions: For after
they are once all distinguished by Subscribers, or non-subscribers, it will
make them more strange one to another, and to withdraw that affection and
confidence from each other that is necessary for them as Christians, and as
wise men; who should rather study how to find out ways of Union for their
mutual preservation against the common Enemy, then take this course which I
fear may prove a way of great danger to us, because it will increase
jealousies in those who must be non-subscribers, that though they are now only
mind incapable of public trust and employment, yet they are not secure, but
they may be proceeded against further afterward by the new Representative unto
high (if not the highest) punishments: which doubts and fears will increase if
the Supreme power be wholly put into the hand of a party who differ from them
in principles of Religion and civil Government, and they have no visible
security beforehand to enjoy Religion and their Liberties; the want of
securing whereof, as it made many of them refuse to agree with the King, so
will it bind them from agreement with any power on Earth; upon which ground it
is to be feared they cannot but look upon themselves as under oppression, both
in their Liberties, properties, and Consciences: wherein I speak the more
freely, that every man might labor and endeavor to prevent such breaches,
especially amongst those which fear God, and that none of them might adhere to
this Paper, wherein it is especially to be noted, that all the distractions,
divisions, evils and inconveniences that shall happen upon either subscribing
or not subscribing, is only to those who have been united in this cause, the
common enemy being thereby strengthened, united, and kept from the test of this
subscription.

8. Reas. Because this will tend to the utter subverting and taking away
Magistracy and Government out of the Kingdom, not only by placing such a
supreme power (under whom all subordinate do act) as at least will be disputed;
And thereby that distance and reverence that God has put upon his Ordinance of
Magistracy being removed, it is like to fall into contempt; But by this Paper
the Laws and Orders of this Representative shall not bind, or be of any force
even to those who agree and subscribe to the Paper. For although it seems to
put the penalty of death upon the resisters of their Orders, yet there is one
little exception that makes it lawful for all men (especially that have power)
to resist and disobey them, the words are these: Except such Representative
shall expressly violate this Agreement; which leaves every man to be a Judge of
it, there being by this Paper no other power intended to be above this
Representative to judge it; Nor does it appoint either how, or by whom, this
judgment all be made: Therefore every man that will but say they have broken
this Agreement, and has power to make it good, shall not offend, but justify
his disobedience, opposing of their Laws or Orders by force. And where there is
this principle that Judgment is out of the legal Judges, there can be no
Magistracy, Authority, or Government. It is true, that (there being no
perfection in any thing here below) all Judges and Supreme Authorities may
err, and do evil, but if upon that ground any multitudes should be their
Judges, is not the reason as good and much more strong, that those multitudes
(who cannot be judged) may err, and do evil, by how much they are acted by
fancy, and as they are possessed by others, And according to their sudden and
present Apprehensions, rather then by principles, Reason, or Judgment; neither
are they bound by those considerable interests to seek the good and
tranquillity of the Kingdom, that usually those have who are called to be
Judges; and especially they are not so obliged in duty to God, because the
Magistrates are called by God to be Judges, therefore they must judge
righteously, as they will answer it to him upon highest penalty, The loss of
their souls. I might further show, that by the Moral Law, the Law of nature,
and the positive Laws of God, Judgment does wholly rest in the Magistrate. But
this point being only for the more abundant clearing, yet not of absolute
necessity to this Reason, I will insist no further upon it, there being enough
to demonstrate, that if no man ought to be punished for opposing any Law or
Order of this Representative, if they break this Agreement, and that every man
may be his own Judge whether they have broken this Agreement or no; then
although there may be a color, yet there is really no Authority in this
Representative. And if not in this, which is to be made the Supreme, then much
less have any inferior Judicatories that shall act under them; and so that
great Ordinance of God, Magistracy, whereby he preserves humane society, shall
be taken out of this Kingdom.

9. Reas. Because this Paper allows a tolleration of Popery, only with a
restriction to the Magistrate, that he shall not instruct or direct it
publicly; But both he, and all the people that will, may profess, and practice
it in their houses, which is a large step to introduce the public profession
of it; especially seeing that by gaining thus much, this just plea will lie for
the freedom of it: That there is no reason to except Popery, when those that
are guilty of Atheism, the deniers of God, or any Person in the Trinity, The
greatest blasphemers, and cursers of God, with those that profess any heresy
or error have their liberty, and are not excepted, and therefore by these
principles (in Justice) Popery must likewise go out free, although it may be
judged no policity to speak it out at this time. When I consider this, together
with the other parts of this Paper, which only tends to divide those who have
adhered to the Parliament and Kingdom in this cause, and see what care is
taken (to the end we might be the better destroyed) that nothing be proposed
which might divide the common Enemy amongst themselves, but they must remain
entire, and united (which I did intend for a distinct Reason against the
Paper.) This is a plain discovery to me, that the whole was made and contrived
by some Jesuit, with the advice of some of the Kings old Counselors, although
it is possible that some honest men may be cousened into the acting of it for
them. But to return to the point, Here we have a Magistrate that has neither
complusive nor restrictive power in matters of Religion, but both he and the
people are freely left to be of any Religion that they please, or of no
Religion if they please; yet the Magistrate (if it stand with his discretion)
shall have a Toleration to instruct and direct in a public way (all that will
be instructed and directed by him (for all are left to their liberty) in
matters of Faith, Worship, or Discipline, whereby he is at liberty to instruct
according to truth, or in any error, so that for the present it be not Popery,
yet in truth the best contrivance to build up Popery; at last upon the ruins
of Religion by Atheism and profaneness which the more it is considered, the
more it will be abhorred by all honest and godly men in the Kingdom. If I had
more patience I might say much more upon this Reason, but I think this is
enough.

10. Reas. Because it will leave Ireland to the Rebels: and the Protestant
party and Forces there, to misery and ruin: not only by our distractions, but
because the managing of the War of Ireland is in this Parliament, wherein the
new Representative will have no Authority.

11. Reas. Because it tends to divide us from Scotland; the particulars held
forth in this Agreement being directly contrary to the declared principles both
of that State and Church, and destructive to all the faithful in that Kingdom
both Ministers and people, that have adhered to us in this Cause.

12. Reas. Because it destroys the cause for which we have fought, wherein so
many Noble and Gallant Gentlemen, and others, have not only hazarded, but lost
their lives. The quarrel first beginning upon the Kings imposing on the Power
and Privileges of Parliament, and interrupting their proceedings. Afterward
those that joined with the King in this War (although it was so foul an act
destructive to the Liberties of the Kingdom, that they professed the contrary,
yet it was apparent that they) did fight to destroy this Parliament; Therefore
to join with others to take away this Parliament by a forcible agreement, is to
do the enemies work, and give them the Cause. And is against the great Trust
which has been, and is given by the Parliament to all the Soldiers that have
had, or have Commissions from then, wherein they are specially entrusted to
fight for The preservation of this Parliament. And when all Soldiers do well
consider, that without the Authority of this Parliament their Taking up Arms
were Treason, and their killing of men were murder; and that it is the
Authority by which they have endemnity and present pay, and security for their
Arrears, and that as the change of Authority would make many questions in other
things, so would it do in these. It being also evident, that as the Parliament
cannot well be without their forces, so they cannot be without the Parliaments
Authority. Upon all these considerations, the Soldiers have reason to be
against this Paper, which proposes by agreement to take away the Cause they
have fought for.

13. Reas. Because although there were a quiet possession of all that is
desired in this Paper, yet it were not like to stand long, the interests of all
that are most considerable, obliging them to be against the keeping of this
Agreement. For instance, In reason all Kings will be against it, for they, and
their Heirs, and Successors are utterly excl^ded out of this Government. The
Peers will be against it, there being likewise an exclusion of the House of
Peers. The soldiers will be against it, because it offers forcibly to take
away the Parliament they have fought for, whose Authority gave them a being as
Soldiers, and under whose Authority they act. The Magistrates or people of
that quality capable of government will be against it, because it leaves at the
best but the color of a Magistrate, with no power but such as is alterable,
and revokeable at the pleasure of any multitude. The faithful and conscientious
Ministers will be against it, for as it gives them no protection, countenance,
encouragement, or assistance by the Magistrate; so it leaves all their people
to the practice and profession of blasphemy, Atheism, Heresy, Error and
Profaneness without control. And it is like that most of the Religious and
discreet people will be against it, because it neither provides for increase of
piety, nor give security for the enjoyment of Liberty or Property, nor hopes of
Union, which might bring a settlement and peace. And what sorts of people are
left whose interest it would be to preserve this Agreement, I leave any one to
consider, whether they will not be only such, who because they cannot bring
themselves within the protection of the Laws established and present Government,
will possibly sign this Agreement, that so they may bring the Law and
Government to their wills and corupt interests; for so indeed they do that
subscribe this Agreement. No obedience being to be given to this Representative
but in their keepinging this agreement; and there being no other Judges thereof
but the Subscribers, who in the result of all have the Law in their own wills:
Upon all which grounds there is no hope that this Agreement if it were made (as
is desired) would either preserve it self, or that any who were most
considerable, could be obliged to keep it, so as nothing could be expected from
it but to be a foundation for new confusion.

I will close these Reasons with this profession, That I am far from arguing
that this Parliament should not (in this manner) be taken away out of any base
or low end, that I might still continue a Member of it, for I dare and do
appeal to God, who is the searcher of all hearts, that I know no outward thing
to befall me, that I should account my self more happy in, then to be legally
discharged from that Service. But in this way to tear up the very foundations
of all Government, and to rear up so miserable a thing in the room, It behooves
every true-hearted Englishman that sees it to be sensible, not for his own, but
for the Kingdoms sake: and that really set me on work at this time.

I shall now only add some short general observations upon several
particulars I find at the end of this Paper prepared already for this new
Representative; wherein are desires to this purpose.

That no man's life be taken away but for Murder. That no man be Imprisoned for
Debt: That no Tithes be paid: That there be no restriction (which is no
regulation) of Trade. That there be no Lawyers, nor Law, but new Rules in
English, to be made by the new Representative; And twelve men in every Hundred
to be Judges of all causes, who are likewise intended to supply the Offices of
all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Deputies, etc. These are the desires
of them who labor for a new Representative instead of Parliaments. And it
seems they hope to choose such a Representative as will grant them all. Indeed
if these must be had, I agree there is a necessity (by some means or other) to
take away this Parliament; for I believe that they would never grant such
things, as the making of Laws in the favor of Treasons, Burglaries, Felonies,
Sodomy, Buggery, Rapes, and such like abominations, from which the punishments
of death is (by these men) desired to be taken off, especially considering that
the many good Laws which have been made under highest penalties (as now they
stand) no not hinder nor deter men from those foul offenses which are daily
and frequently committed in all parts of the Kingdom; and therefore there
rather appears need of stricter provision against them.

But when the new Representative shall take these things into consideration,
they may find that there will be no need to take away any penalties from a
Malefactor, by a Law to keep them from Justice, if they do but grant the
hundred Courts as is desired (who can but sit seldom) and thereupon all
Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, etc. who are Officers ever ready, and by
whose Authority the Malefactors are apprehended, examined, committed, and
brought to Justice; being taken away, the Offenders are like to go free without
any such Law. Especially when these Hundred Courts act the parts not only of
all the Lawyers, but of all the Judges in the Kingdom; And all this Justice to
be done, and lie in the breasts of twelve men in every Hundred, who may be
chosen of men that can neither write, read, nor have any estates responsable,
if they should be found guilty of Bribery, or any other high misdemeanors: by
this means we are like to have Justice at all adventure, be it right or wrong.
If I should go over the rest of the aforementioned particulars, I should not
keep my word, for there is so much to be said against every of them, that I
could not be short, nor is it very necessary to be done: for in the bare
reading of them it does too much appear, that they are working to a universal
Licentiousness, as well in the Civil State, as in matters of Religion; by
which liberty, all truth, and every man's property, with the Government which is
the band of humane society, will be destroyed. I had thought to have closed
here, but I cannot conclude without a word upon that particular proposed, that
no Tithes be paid; because I believe that taking away the Ministers of the
Gospel with their maintenance, lies at the bottom of it: I say so upon this
ground. Because I did yet never speak with any man who was for the taking away
Tithes from Ministers, without as good maintenance first provided in a settled
and certain way, (which I could never yet hear propounded) but he was for the
taking away the Ministers themseves; and therefore they will not allow that the
Minister is an office ordained by God (although nothing be more clear in his
Word) but call them State Ministers, or (as this Paper) public Ministers, as
though they were only by some politic or civil constitution, and might be
taken away at pleasure: then which, nothing can be more contrary to the truth,
neither is it only clear, that there are those in the Church of Christ, whose
office it is to be Ministers of the Gospel, but likewise that by an Ordinance
of Christ, They that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And however
it be of a Divine Right, that Minsters should have a maintenance, yet the
proportion, distribution, use, and enjoyment of it is from, and by a civil
right, whereupon they hold and possess their Tithes by the Laws of the
Kingdom; and have as legal a Freehold in their Tithes, as any man has to his
Land. And the Law does provide full as good a remedy to the Minister for
recovering his right of the Tithes, as to any Impropriator, or other man in the
Kingdom, for any thing he enjoyes. But the Paper says, it is a grievance and
oppression. I believe it is a grievance to those men that Ministers live, or
have any thing; But how comes it to be an oppression? Is it oppression to pay
to others what is legally due to them? These men may consider, that if Tithes
be taken from the Ministers, or Impropriators, yet there is neither right nor
Justice, that they by whom they are payable should have them to their own use,
for they have nothing that might make or derive a right or title to them. They
never paid any Consideration for them, they did not purchase, nor were they
conveyed to them: when their Land was bought, it was under this charge, that
Tithes should be paid out of it. In a word, there may as much be said in
justice reason, or equity, why they should not pay any quit Rents, Rent
Charges, Annuities, or other charges that lies upon their land, as why they
should not pay Tithes: And do but give them Tithes upon their crying out that
it is a grievance and oppression, and they will in a short time (I am
confident) upon the same grounds, cry out upon all other payments and charges
out of their Land; and it is like the Rent to the Landlord will not be paid
long after, for they will be all alike a grievance and oppression.

I do observe that there are two notable pieces of justice in the consequence
of this particular of theirs.

First, that the Impropriator shall be satisfied (yet I know not how, where, or
by whom) before his Tithes be taken away. Yet the poor Minister that holds his
by as good Law and right shall have his first taken from him, and play an
after-game for his maintenance which might gain their point; when by that means
they might be driven from their Churches to go abroad to beg, because they
cannot work.

And the other is, that they would have this new Representative to take Tithes
from the Ministers, to whom they belong in justice and right, and to give them
unto other people who have no right at all to them. And when they have got the
Ministers Tithes, then they propose that they may have maintenance. Provided
always, that (it being against their Conscience) they may pay them nothing.
Nor others pay any thing, all payments being oppressive, and they are to have
nothing but in an unoppressive way. By all which appears, that they intend to
take away the Ministers, and get their means to themselves for their pains. I
do not in this plead my own case, for I do and shall willingly pay Tithes but I
receive none.

I have thus looked into these Foundations of Freedom, and told you in part
what I have seen, wherein I must leave every Reader to his own judgment: I
shall only upon the whole matter give you mine. That under the color of laying
new foundations, all the old Foundations of Religion, Parliaments, Laws,
Liberties, and Property: are strongly endeavored to be undermined, plucked up
and destroyed. And all the materials I find brought to this new building are
such (in my judgment) as only tend to Licentiousness; therefore it shall be
against my will if I live in it, or near it, because it has no ground work.
For here is a Government without Authority, A Magistrate without power; If a
Minister, yet without maintenance. A People left to be of any Religion, or of
all Religions, or of no Religion as they please. It is therefore (in my
judgment) altogether unsuitable to any who desire to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world. Yet notwithstanding I would not be so angry
with those that should offer it, as to resolve presently to fall out with them.
I would remember that it has still been our enemies work to divide us, England
from Scotland, and one from another: Let it still be our work to unite, and not
be so wicked and unwise, as to ruin a righteous cause, and our selves with it.
But let us lay aside this Paper, and all dividing and party Projects, and make
it our study how to satisfy and secure one another, that we may live in love
and peace; Which as it has ever been my hearty desire, so it shall ever be my
faithful endeavor, and most earnest prayer to that God, who out of all these
shakings is only able to bring a good settlement to this poor distracted
Kingdom.

FINIS.

