SOME REFLECTIONS UPON Marriage, Occasioned by the Duke and Duchess OF
Mazarine's CASE; Which is also considered.

LONDON: Printed for John Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1700.

Advertisement.
THese Reflections being made in the Country, where the Book that occasioned
them came but late to Hand, the Reader is desired to excuse their
Vnseasonableness as well as other Faults; and to believe that they have no
other Design than to Correct some Abuses, which are not the less because Power
and Prescription seem to Authorize them. If any is so needlessly curious as to
enquire from what Hand they come, they may please to know, that it is not good
Manners to ask, since the Title Page does not tell them: We are all of us
sufficiently Vain, and without doubt the Celebrated Name of Author, which most
are so fond of, had not been avoided but for very good Reasons: To name but
one; Who will care to pull upon themselves an Hornet's Nest? It Is a very great
Fault to regard rather who it is that Speaks, than what is spoken; and either
to submit to Authority, when we should only yield to Reason; or if Reason press
too hard, to think to ward it off by Personal Objections and Reflections. Bold
Truths may pass while the Speaker is Incognito, but are seldom endured when he
is known; few Minds being strong enough to bear what contradicts their
Principles and Practices without recriminating when they can. And though to tell
the Truth be the most Friendly Office, yet whosoever is so hardy as to venture
at it, shall be counted an Enemy for so doing.

SOME REFLECTIONS UPON MARRIAGE, Occasioned by the Duke and Duchess of
Mazarine's CASE; which is also considered.
CUriosity, which is sometimes an occasion of Good, and too frequently of
Mischief, by disturbing either our Own, or our Neighbor's Repose, having put
me upon reading the Duke and Duchess of Mazarine 's Case; I thought an
Afternoon would not be quite thrown away in pursuing some Reflections that it
occasioned. The name of Mazarine is considerable enough to draw the Eyes of the
curious, and when one remembers what a noise it had made in Europe, what
Politic Schemes have been laid, what vast designs brought about by the
Cardinal that bore it; how well his measures were concerted for the Grandeur of
that Nation, into which he was transplanted, and that he wanted neither Power
nor Inclination to establish his own Family and make it as considerable as any
Subjects could possible be, and what Honors and Riches he had heaped together
in order to this, one cannot but enquire how it comes about that he should be
so defeated in this last design; and that those to whom he entrusted his Name
and Treasure, should make a figure so very different from what might have been
expected from them. And though one had not Piety enough to make a Religious
Reflection, yet Civil Prudence woul'd almost enforce them to say, that Man
being in Honor has no Understanding, but is compared unto the Beasts that
Perish. He blesses his Soul, and thinks himself a happy Man, imagining his
House will endure for ever, and that he has established his Name and Family.
But how wise soever he may be in other respects, in this he acts no better than
the Ignorant and Foolish. For as he carries nothing away with him when he dies,
so neither will his Pomp and Glory descend as he intended. Generous and Worthy
Actions only can secure him from Oblivion, or what is worse, being remembered
with Contempt; so little reason have we to envy any Man's Wealth and Greatness,
but much to Emulate his Wisdom and Virtue.

The Duchess of Mazarine's Name has spread perhaps as far as her Uncle's, and
one cannot help wishing that so much Wit and Beauty, so much Politeness and
Address, had been accompanied and supported by more valuable and lasting
Qualities; one cannot but desire that her Advocate instead of recriminating had
cleared the imputations laid on her, and that she her self, who says enough in
her Memoirs, to show she was unfortunate, had said more to prove her self
discreet. They must be highly ill-natured who do not pity her ill fortune at
the same time that they must blame her Conduct, and regret that such a Treasure
should fall into his hands who was not worthy of it, nor knew how to value and
improve it; that she who was capable of being a great Ornament to her Family
and Blessing to the Age she lived in, should only serve (to say no worse) as an
unhappy Shipwreck to point out the dangers of an ill Education and unequal
Marriage.

Monsieur Mazarine is not to be justified, nor Madam his Spouse excused. It is
no question which is most Criminal, the having no sense, or the abuse of a
liberal Portion, nor any hard matter to determine who is most to be pitied, he
whom Nature never qualified for great things, who therefore cannot be very
sensible of great Misfortunes; or she, who being capable of every thing, must
therefore suffer more and be the more lamented. To be yoked for Life to a
disagreeable Person and Temper, to have Folly and Ignorance tyrannize over Wit
and Sense; to be contradicted in every thing one does or says, and bore down
not by Reason but Authority; to be denied ones most innocent desires for no
other cause, but the Will and Pleasure of an absolute Lord and Master, whose
follies a Woman with all her Prudence cannot hide, and whose Commands she
cannot but despise at the same time she obeys them, is a misery none can have a
just Idea of, but those who have felt it.

These are great Provocations, but nothing can justify the revenging the
Injuries we receive from others, upon our selves: The Italian Proverb shows
much better way Vuoi far vendetta del tuo nemico governati been. If you would
be revenged of your Enemies, live well. Had Madam Mazarine's Education made a
right improvement of her Wit and Sense, we should not have found her seeking
Relief by such imprudent, not to say Scandalous Methods, as the running away in
Disguise with a spruce Cavalier, and rambling to so many Courts and Places, nor
diverting her self with such Childish, Ridiculous or Ill-natured Amusements, as
the greatest part of the Adventures in her Memoirs are made up of. True wit
consists not merely in doing or saying what is out of the way, but in such
surprising things as are fit and becoming the Person from whom they come. That
which stirs us up to Laughter most commonly excites our Contempt: to Please,
and to make Merry are two very different Talents. But what Remedies can be
administered, what Relief expected, when Devotion, the only true support in
Distress, is turned into Ridicule? Unhappy is that Grandeur which makes us too
great to be good; and that Wit which sets us at a distance from true Wisdom.
Even Bigotry it self, as contemptible as it is, is preferable to Profane Wit;
for that only requires our Pity, but this deserves our Abhorrence.

A Woman who seeks Consolation under Domestic troubles from the Gaieties of a
Court, from Gaming and Courtship, from Rambling and odd Adventures, and the
Amusements mixed Company affords, may Plaster up the Sore, but will never heal
it; nay, which is worse, she makes it Fester beyond a possibility of Cure. She
justifies the Injury her Husband has done her, by showing that whatever other
good Qualities she may have, Discretion, one of the Principal, is wanting. She
may be Innocent, but she can never prove she is so; all that Charity can do for
her when she is Censured is only to be silent; it can make no Apologies for
suspicious Actions. An ill Husband may deprive a Wife of the comfort and quiet
of her Life; may give her occasion of exercising her Virtue, may try her
Patience and Fortitude to the utmost, but that is all he can do: it is her self
only can accomplish her Ruin. Had Madam Mazarin's Reserve been what it ought to
be, Monsieur Herard needed not to have warded off so carefully, the nice
Subject of the Lady's Honor, nor her Advocate have strained so hard for
Colors to excuse such Actions as will hardly bear 'em; but a Man indeed shows
the best side of his Wit, though the worst of his Integrity, when he has an ill
Cause to manage. Truth is bold and vehement; she depends upon her own strength,
and so she be placed in a true Light, thinks it not necessary to use Artifice
and Address as a Recommendation; but the prejudices of Men have made them
necessary: their Imagination gets the better of their Understanding, and more
judge according to Appearances, than search after the Truth of Things.

What an ill Figure does a Woman make with all the Charms of her Beauty and
Sprightliness of her Wit, with all her good Humor and insinuating Address;
though she be the best Oeconomist in the World, the most entertaining
Conversation; if she remit her Guard, abate in the Severity of her Caution and
Strictness of her Virtue, and neglect those Methods which are necessary to keep
her not only from a Crime, but from the very suspicion of one!

Are the being forbid having Comedies in her House, an ill natured Jest,
dismissing of a Servant, imposing Domestics, or frequent changing them,
sufficient Reasons to Authorize a Woman's leaving her Husband and breaking from
the strongest Bands, exposing her self to Temptations and Injuries from the
Bad, to the contempt, or at the best to the pity of the Good, and the just
Censure of all? A Woman of sense one would think should take little
satisfaction in the Cringes and Courtship of her Adorers, even when she is
single; but it is Criminal in a Wife to admit them, interested Persons may call
it Gallantry, but with the modest and discreet it is like to have a harder
Name, or else Gallantry will pass for a scandalous thing, not to be allowed
among Virtuous Persons.

But Madam Mazarine is dead, may her Faults die with her; may there be no more
occasion given for the like Adventures, or if there is, may the Ladies be more
Wise and Good than to take it! Let us see then from whence the mischief
proceeds, and try if it can be prevented; certainly Man may be very happy in a
Married State; it is his own fault if he is at any time otherwise. The wise
Institutor of Matrimony never did any thing in vain; we are the Sots and Fools
if what he designed for our Good, be to us an occasion of falling. For
Marriage, notwithstanding all the loose talk of the Town, the Satyrs of Ancient
or Modern pretenders to Wit, will never lose its due praise from judicious
Persons. Though much may be said against this or that Match, though the
Ridiculousness of some, the Wickedness, of others and Imprudence of too many,
too often provoke our wonder or scorn, our indignation or pity, yet Marriage in
general is too sacred to be treated with Disrespect, too venerable to be the
subject of Raillery and Buffonery. It is the Institution of Heaven, the only
Honorable way of continuing Mankind, and far be it from us to think there
could have been a better than infinite Wisdom has found out for us.

But upon what are the Saytrs against Marriage grounded? Not upon the State it
self, if they are just, but upon the ill Choice, or foolish Conduct of those
who are in it, and what has Marriage, considered in its self, to do with that?
Let every Man bear his own Burden: If through inordinate Passion, Rashness,
Humor, Pride, Coveteousness, or any the like Folly, a Man makes an Imprudent
Choice, Why should Marriage be exclaimed against? Let him blame himself for
entering into an unequal Yoke, and making Choice of one who perhaps may prove a
Burden, a Disgrace and Plague, instead of a Help and Comfort to him. Could
there be no such thing as an happy Marriage, Arguments against Marriage would
hold good, but since the thing is not only possible, but even very probable,
provided we take but competent Care, Act like wise Men and Christians, and
acquit our selves as we ought, all we have to say against it serves only to
show the levity or impiety of our own Minds, we can only make some flourishes
of Wit, though scarce without Injustice, and though we talk prettily it is but very
little to the purpose.

Is it the being tied to One that offends us? Why this ought rather to
recommend it to us, and would really do so, were we guided by Reason, and not
by Humor or brutish Passion. He who does not make Friendship the chief
inducement to his Choice, and prefer it before any other consideration, does
not deserve a good Wife, and therefore should not complain if he goes without
one. Now we can never grow weary of our Friends; the longer we have had them
the more they are endeared to us; and if we have One well assured, we need seek
no farther, but are sufficiently happy in Her. The love of Variety in this and
in other cases, shows only the ill Temper of our own Mind, we seek for settled
Happiness in this present World; where it is not to be found, instead of being
Content with a competent share, cheerfully enjoying and being thankful for the
Good that is afforded us, and patiently bearing with the Inconveniences that
attend it.

The Christian Institution of Marriage provides the best that may be for
Domestic Quiet and Content, and for the Education of Children; so that if we
were not under the tie of Religion, even the Good of Society and civil Duty
would oblige us to what that requires at our Hands. And since the very best of
us are but poor frail Creatures, full of Ignorance and Infirmity, so that in
Justice we ought to tolerate each other, and exercise that Patience toward our
Companions to Day, which we give them occasion to show toward us to Morrow,
the more we are accustomed to any one's Conversation, the better shall we
understand their Humor, be more able to comply with their Weakness and less
offended at it: For he who would have every one submit to his Humors and will
not in his turn comply with them, though we should suppose him always in the
Right, whereas a Man of this temper very seldom is so, he is not fit for a
Husband, scarce fit for Society, but ought to be turned out of the Herd to live
by himself.

There may indeed be inconveniences in a Married Life; but is there any
Condition without them? And he who lives single, that he may indulge
Licentiousness and give up himself to the conduct of wild and ungoverned
Desires, or indeed out of any other inducement, than the Glory of GOD and the
Good of his Soul, through the prospect he has of doing more Good, or because
his frame and disposition of Mind are fitted for it, may rail as he pleases
against Matrimony, but can never justify his own Conduct, nor clear it from
the imputation of Wickedness and Folly.

But if Marriage be such a blessed State, how comes it, may you say, that there
are so few happy Marriages? Now in answer to this, it is not to be wondered
that so few succeed, we should rather be surpised to find so many do,
considering how imprudently Men engage, the Motives they act by, and the very
strange Conduct they observe throughout.

For pray, what do Men propose to themselves in Marriage? What Qualifications
do they look after in a Spouse? What will she bring is the first enquiry? How
many Acres? Or how much ready Coin? Not that this is altogether an unnecessary
Question, for Marriage without a Competency, that is not only a bare
Subsistence, but even a handsome and plentiful Provision, according to the
Quality and Circumstances of the Parties, is no very comfortable Condition.
They who Marry for Love as they call it, find time enough to repent their rash
Folly, and are not long in being convinced, that whatever fine Speeches might
be made in the heat of Passion, there could be no real Kindness between those
who can agree to make each other miserable. But as an Estate is to be
considered, so it should not be the Main, much less the Only consideration, for
Happiness does not depend on Wealth, that may be wanting, and too often is,
where this abounds. He who Marries himself to a Fortune only, must expect no
other satisfaction than that can bring him, but let him not say that Marriage,
but his own Covetous or Prodigal Temper, has made him unhappy. What Joy has
that Man in all his Plenty, who must either run from home to possess it,
contrary to all the Rules of Justice, to the Laws of GOD and Man; nay, even in
opposition to Good nature, and Good breeding too, which some Men make more
account of than all the rest; or else be forced to share it with a Woman whose
Person or Temper is disagreeable, whose presence is sufficient to four all his
Enjoyments, and if he have any remains of Religion, or Good manners, he must
suffer the uneasiness of a continual watch, to force himself to a constrained
Civility!

Few Men have so much Goodness as to bring themselves to a liking of what they
loathed, merely because it is their Duty to like; on the contrary, when they
Marry with an indifferency, to please their Friends or increase their Fortune,
the indifferency proceeds to an aversion, and perhaps even the kindness and
complaisance of the poor abused Wife shall only serve to increase it. What
follows then? There is no content at home, so it is sought elsewhere, and the
Fortune so unjustly got, is as carelessly squandered. The Man takes a loose,
what should hinder him? He has all in his hands, and Custom has almost taken
off that small Restraint Reputation used to lay. The Wife finds too late what
was the Idol the Man adored, which her Vanity perhaps, or it may be the
Commands and Importunities of Relations, would not let her see before; and now
he has got that into his possession, she must make court to him for a little
sorry Alimony out of her own Estate. If Discretion and Piety prevails upon her
Passions she sits down quietly, contented with her lot, seeks no Consolation in
the Multitude of Adorers, since he whom only she desired to please, because it
was her duty to do so, will take no delight in her Wit or Beauty: She follows
no Diversion to allay her Grief, uses no Cordials to support her Spirit, that
may sully her Virtue or bring a Cloud upon her Reputation, she makes no appeals
to the mis-judging Crowd, hardly mentions her Misfortunes to her most intimate
Acquaintance, nor lays a load on her Husband to ease her self, but would if it
were possible conceal his Crimes, though her Prudence and Virtue give him a
thousand reproaches without her Intention or knowledge; and retiring from the
World, she seeks a more solid Comfort than that can give her, taking care to do
nothing that Censoriousness or even Malice it self can misconstrue to her
prejudice. Now she puts on all her Reserves, and thinks even Innocent Liberties
scarce allowable in her Disconsolate State; she has other Business to mind: Nor
does she in her Retirements reflect so much upon the hand that administers this
bitter Cup, as consider what is the best use she can make of it. And thus
indeed Marriage, however unfortunate in other respects, becomes a very great
Blessing to her: She might have been exposed to all the Temptations of a
plentiful Fortune, have given up her self to Sloth and Luxury, and gone on at
the common rate, even of the better sort, in doing no hurt, and as little good.
But now her kind Husband obliges her to Consider, and gives opportunity to
exercise her Virtue; he makes it necessary to withdraw from those Gaities and
Pleasures of Life, which do more mischief under the show of Innocence, than
they could if they appeared attended with a Crime; discomposing and dissolving
the mind, and making it incapable of any manner of good; to be sure of any
thing Great and Excellent. Silence and Solitude, the being forced from the
ordinary Entertainments of her Station, may perhaps seem a desolate condition
at first, and we may allow her, poor weak Woman! to be somewhat shocked at it,
since even a wise and courageous Man perhaps would not keep his ground; we
would conceal if we could for the Honor of the Sex, Men's being baffled and
dispirited by a smaller Matter, were not the Instances too frequent and too
notorious.

But a little time wears off all the uneasiness, and puts her in possession of
Pleasures, which till now she has unkindly been kept a stranger to. Affliction,
the sincerest Friend, the frankest Monitor, the best Instructor and indeed the
only useful School that Women are ever put to, rouses her understanding, opens
her Eyes, fixes her Attention, and diffuses such a Light, such a Joy into her
Mind, as not only Informs her better, but entertains her more than ever her
Ruel did, though crowded by the Men of Wit. She now distinguishes between Truth
and Appearances, between solid and apparent Good; has found out the instability
of all Earthly Things, and will not any more be deceived by relying on them; can
discern who are the Flatterers of her Fortune, and who the Admirers and
Encouragers of her Virtue; accounting it no little blessing to be rid of those
Leeches, who only hung upon her for their own Advantage. Now sober Thoughts
succeed to hurry and impertinence, to Forms and Ceremony, she can secure her
Time, and knows how to Improve it; never truly a Happy Woman till she came in
the Eye of the World to be reckoned miserable.

Thus the Husband's Vices may become an occasion of the Wife's Virtues, and his
neglect do her a more real Good than his Kindness could. But all injured Wives
don't behave themselves after this Fashion, nor can their Husbands justly
expect it. With what Face can he blame her for following his Example, and being
as extravagant on the one Hand, as he is on the other? Though she cannot justify
her Excesses to GOD, to the World, nor to her self, yet surely in respect of
him they may admit of an excuse. For to all the rest of his Absurdities, (for
Vice is always unreasonable,) he adds one more, who expects that Virtue from
another which he will not practice himself.

But suppose a Man does not Marry for Money, though for one that does not,
perhaps there are thousands that do; let him Marry for Love, and Heroic
Action, which makes a mighty noise in the World, partly because of its rarity,
and partly in regard of its extravagancy, and what does his Marrying for Love
amount to? There Is no great odds between his Marrying for the Love of Money, or
for the Love of Beauty, the Man does not Act according to Reason in either
Case; but is governed by irregular Appetites. But he loves her Wit perhaps, and
this you will say is more Spiritual, more Refined; not at all if you examine it to
the Bottom. For what is that which now adays passes under the name of Wit? A
bitter and ill-natured Raillery, a pert Repartee, or a confident talking at
all, and in such a multitude of Words, it is odds if something or other does not
pass that is surprising, though every thing that surprises does not please; some
things are wondered at for their ugliness, as well as others for their Beauty.
True Wit, durst one venture to describe it, is quite another thing, it consists
in such a Sprightliness of Imagination, such a reach and turn of thought, so
properly expressed, as strikes and pleases a judicious Taste. For though as one says
of Beauty, it is in no Face but in the Lover's Mind, so it may be said of some
sorts of Wit, it is not in him that speaks, but in the Imagination of his
hearer, yet doubtless there is a true Standard-Wit, which must be allowed for
such by every one who understands the Terms. I don't say that they shall all
equally like it; and it is this standard-Wit that always pleases, the Spurious
does so only for a Season.

Now what is it that strikes a judicious Taste? Not that to be sure, which
injures the absent, or provokes the Company, which poisons the Mind under
pretense of entertaining it, proceeding from or giving Countenance to false
Ideas, to dangerous and immoral Principles. Wit indeed is distinct from
Judgment, but it is not contrary to it; it is rather its Handmaid, serving to
awaken and fix the Attention, that so we may Judge rightly. Whatever Charms,
does so because of its Regularity and Proportion; otherwise, though it is
extraordinary and out of the way, it will only be star'd on like a Monster, but
can never be liked. And though a thought is ever so fine and new, ever so well
expressed, if it suits not with decorum and good Manners, it is not just and fit,
and therefore offends our Reason, and consequently has no Charms, nor should
afford us any entertainment.

But it must not be supposed that Women's Wit approaches those heights which
Men arrive at, or that they indulge those Liberties the other take. Decency
lays greater restraints on them, their timorousness does them this one, and
perhaps this only piece of Service, it keeps them from breaking through these
restraints and following their Masters and Guides in many of their daring and
masculine Crimes. As the World goes, your Witty Men are usually distinguished
by the Liberty they take with Religion, good Manners, or their Neighbor's
Reputation: But, GOD be thanked, it is not yet so bad, as that Women should
form Cabals to propagate Atheism and Irreligion. A Man then cannot hope to find
a Woman whose Wit is of a size with his, but when he doats on Wit it is to be
imagined he makes choice of that which comes the nearest to his own.

Thus, whether it be Wit or Beauty that a Man's in Love with, there is no great
hopes of a lasting Happiness; Beauty with all the helps of Art is of no very
lasting date, the more it is helped the sooner it decays, and he who only or
chiefly chose for Beauty, will in a little time find the same reason for
another choice. Nor is that sort of Wit which he prefers of a more sure tenure,
or allowing it to last, it will not always please. For that which has not a
real excellency and value in it self, entertains no longer than that giddy
Humor which recommended it to us holds; and when we can like on no just, or on
very little Ground, it is certain a dislike will arise, as lightly and as
unaccountably. And it is not improbable that such a Husband may in a little
time by ill usage provoke such a Wife to exercise her Wit, that is, her Spleen
on him, and then it is not hard to guess how very agreeable it will be to him.

In a Word, when we have reckoned up how many look no further than the making
of their Fortune, as they call it; who don't so much as propose to themselves
any satisfaction in the Woman to whom they Plight their Faith, seeking only to
be Masters of her Fortune, that so they may have Money enough to indulge all
their irregular Appetites; who think they are as good as can be expected, if
they are but according to the fashionable Term, Civil Husbands: When we have
taken the number of your giddy Lovers, who are not more violent in their
Passion than they are certain to Repent of it: When to these you have added
such as Marry without any Thought at all, further than that it is the Custom of
the World; what others have done before them; that the Family must be kept up,
the ancient Race preserved, and therefore their kind Parents and Guardians
choose as they think convenient, without ever consulting the Young ones
Inclinations, who must be satisfied or pretend so at least, upon pain of their
displeasure, and that heavy consequence of it, forfeiture of their Estate:
These set aside, I fear there will be but a small remainder to Marry out of
better considerations, and even amongst the few that do, not one in a hundred
takes care to deserve his Choice.

But do the Women never choose amiss? Are the Men only in fault? That is not
pretended; for he who will be just, must be forced to acknowledge, that neither
Sex is always in the right. A Woman indeed cannot properly be said to Choose,
all that is allowed her, is to Refuse or Accept what is offered. And when we
have made such reasonable allowances as are due to the Sex, perhaps they may
not appear so much in fault as one would at first imagine, and a generous
Spirit will find more occasion to pity, than to reprove. But sure I transgress
-- it must not be supposed that the Ladies can do amiss, he is but an ill-bred
Fellow who pretends that they need amendment! They are no doubt on it always in
the right, and most of all when they take pity on distressed Lovers; whatever
they say carries an Authority that no Reason can resist, and all that they do
must needs be Exemplary! This is the Modish Language, nor is there a Man of
Honor amongst the whole Tribe that would not venture his Life, nay and his
Salvation too in their Defense, if any but himself attempts to injure them. But
I must ask pardon if I cannot come up to these heights, nor flatter them with
the having no faults, which is only a malicious way of continuing and
increasing their Mistakes.

Women, it is true, ought to be treated with Civility; for since a little
Ceremony and outside Respect is all their Guard, all the privilege that is
allowed them, it were barbarous to deprive them of it; and because I would
treat them civilly, I would not express my Civility at the usual Rate. I would
not under pretense of honoring and paying a mighty Deference to the Ladies,
call them fools to their faces; for what are all the fine Speeches and
Submissions that are made, but an abusing them in a well-bred way? She must be
a Fool with a witness, who can believe a Man, Proud and Vain as he is, will lay
his boasted Authority, the Dignity and Prerogative of his Sex, one Moment at
her Feet, but in prospect of taking it up again to more advantage; he may call
himself her Slave a few days, but it is only in order to make her his all the
rest of his Life.

Indeed that mistaken Self-Love that reigns in the most of us, both Men and
Women, that over-good Opinion we have of our selves, and desire that others
should have of us, makes us swallow every thing that looks like Respect,
without examining how wide it is from what it appears to be. For nothing is in
truth a greater outrage than Flattery and feigned Submissions, the plain
English of which is this; I have a very mean Opinion both of your Understanding
and Virtue, you are weak enough to be imposed on, and vain enough to snatch at
the Bait I throw; there is no danger of your finding out my meaning, or
disappointing me of my Ends. I offer you Incense it is true, but you are like to
pay for it, and to make me a Recompense for your Folly in Imagining I would give
my self this trouble, did I not hope, nay were I not sure, to find my own
account in it. If for nothing else, you will serve at least as an exercise of my
Wit, and how much soever you swell with my breath, it is I deserve the Praise
for talking so well on so poor a Subject. We who make the Idols, are the
greater Deities; and as we set you up, so it is in our power to reduce you to
your first obscurity, or to somewhat worse, to Contempt; you are therefore only
on your good behavior, and are like to be no more than what we please to make
you. This is the Flatterer's Language aside, this is the true sense of his
heart, whatever his Grimace may be before the Company.

Not but that it is possible, and sometimes matter of Fact, to express our
selves beyond the Truth in praise of a Person, and yet not be guilty of
Flattery; but then we must Think what we say, and Mean what we Profess. We may
be so blinded by some Passion or other, especially Love, which in Civil and
Good-natured Persons is apt to exceed, as to believe some Persons more
deserving than really they are, and to pay them greater Respect and Kindness
than is in strictness due to them. But this is not the present Case; for our
fine Speech-makers dote too much on themselves to have any great passion for
another, their Eyes are too much fixed on their own Excellencies, to view
another's good Qualities through a Magnifying-Glass, at least if ever they turn
that end of the Perspective toward their Neighbors, it is only in respect and
reference to themselves. They are their own Centres, they find a disproportion
in every line that does not tend thither, and in the next visit they make you
shall hear all the fine things they said repeated to the new Object, and
nothing remembered of the former but her Vanity, or something else as
Ridiculous, which serves for a foil, or a whet to Discourse. For let there be
ever so many Wits in the Company, Conversation would languish, and they would
be at a loss, did not a little Censoriousness come in at a need to help them.

Let us then treat the Ladies as Civilly as may be, but let us not do it by
Flattering them, but by endeavoring to make them such as may truly deserve our
hearty Esteem and Kindness. Men ought really for their own sakes to do what in
them lies to make Women wise and Good, and then it might be hoped they
themselves would effectually Study and Practice that Wisdom and Virtue they
recommend to others. But so long as Men have base and unworthy Ends to serve,
it is not to be expected that they should consent to such Methods as would
certainly disappoint them. They would have their own Relations do well, that is
their Interest; but it sometimes happens to be for their turn that another
Man's should not, and then their Generosity fails them, and no Man is apter to
find fault with another's dishonorable Actions, than he who is ready to do, or
perhaps has done the same himself.

And as Men have little reason to expect Happiness when they Marry only for the
Love of Money, Wit or Beauty, as has been already shown, so much less can a
Woman expect a tolerable life, when she goes upon these Considerations. Let the
business be carried as Prudently as it can be on the Woman's side, a reasonable
Man cannot deny that she has by much the harder bargain. Because she puts her
self entirely into her Husband's Power, and if the Matrimonial Yoke be
grievous, neither Law nor Custom affords her that redress which a Man obtains.
He who has Sovereign Power does not value the Provocations of a Rebellious
Subject, but knows how to subdue him with ease, and will make himself obeyed;
but Patience and Submission are the only Comforts that are left to a poor
People, who groan under Tyranny, unless they are Strong enough to break the
Yoke, to Depose and Abdicate, which I doubt would not be allowed of here. For
whatever may be said against Passive-Obedience in another case, I suppose
there is no Man but likes it very well in this; how much soever Arbitrary Power
may be disliked on a Throne, Not Milton himself would cry up Liberty to poor
Female Slaves, or plead for the Lawfulness of Resisting a Private Tyranny.

If there be a disagreableness of Humors, which in my mind is harder to be
born than greater faults, as being a continual Plague, and for the most part
incurable; other Vices a Man may grow weary of, or may be convinced of the evil
of them; He may forsake them, or they him, but his Humor and Temper are
seldom, if ever put off, Ill Nature sticks to him from his Youth to his gray
Heirs, and a Boy ^hat's Humorous and Proud, makes a Pee^ish, Positive and
Insolent Old Man. Now ^f this be the case, and the Husband be ^ull of himself,
obstinately bent on his own way with or without Reason, if he be ^ne who must
be always Admired, always Humored, and yet scarce knows what will please him;
if he has Prosperity e^ough to keep him from considering, and to furnish him
with a train of Flatterers and obsequious Admirers; and Learning and Sense
enough to make him a Fop in Perfection; for a Man can never be a complete
Coxcomb, unless he has a considerable share of these to value himself upon;
what can the poor Woman do? the Husband is too wise to be Advised, too good to
be Reformed, she must follow all his Paces, and tread in all his unreasonable
steps, or there is no Peace, no Quiet for her, she must obey with the greatest
exactness, it is in vain to expect any manner of Compliance on his side, and the
more she complies the more she may; his fantastical humors grow with her
desire to gratify them, for Age increases Opiniatry in some, as well as it
does Experience in others. Of such sort of folks as these it was that Solomon
spoke, when he said, See thou a Man wise in his own conceit, there is more
hope of a Fool than of him; That is, the profligate Sinner, such a one being
always a Fool in Solomon's Language, is in a fairer way of being convinced of
his folly, and brought to reason, than the Proud Conceited Man. That Man indeed
can never be good at heart, who is full of himself and his own Endowments. Not
that it is necessary, because it is not possible for one to be totally ignorant
of his own good Qualities, I had almost said he ought to have a Modest sense of
'em, otherwise he cannot be duly thankful, nor make the use of them that is
required, to the glory of God, and the good of Mankind; but he views them in a
wrong light, if he discerns any thing that may exalt him above his Neighbors,
make him overlook their Merit, or treat them with Neglect or Contempt. He
ought to behold them with fear and trembling, as Talents which he has freely
received, and for which he is highly Accountable, and therefore they should not
excite his Pride, but his Care and Industry.

And if Pride and Self-conceit keep a Man who has some good Qualities, and is
not so bad as the most of his Neighbors from growing better, it for certain
confirms and hardens the Wicked in his Crimes, it sets him up for a Wit, that
is, according to Modern acceptance, one who rallies at all that is serious, a
contemner of the Priests first, and then of the Deity himself. For Penitence
and Self-condemnation are what his Haughtiness cannot bear, and since the
Crimes he has been guilty of have brought on him the reproaches of his own
Mind, since he will not take the regular way to be rid of them, which is by
Humbling himself and making his Peace with Heaven, he bids defiance to it, and
would if he could believe there is no future State, no after Retribution,
because he knows that a heavy lot is in justice due to him.

If therefore it be a Woman's hard Fate to meet with a disagreeable Temper, and
of all others the Haughty, Imperious and Self-conceited are the most so, she is
as unhappy as any thing in the World can make her. When a Wife's Temper does
not please, if she makes her Husband uneasy, he can find entertainments
abroad, he has a hundred ways of relieving himself, but neither Prudence nor
Duty will allow a Woman to fly out, her Business and Entertainment are at home,
and though he make it ever so uneasy to her she must be content and make her
best on it. She who Elects a Monarch for Life, who gives him an Authority she
cannot recall however he misapply it, who puts her Fortune and Person entirely
in his Power; nay even the very desires of her Heart according to some learned
Casuists, so as that it is not lawful to Will or Desire any thing but what he
approves and allows, had need be very sure that she does not make a Fool her
Head, nor a Vicious Man her Guide and Pattern, she had best stay till she can
meet with one who has the Government of his own Passions and has duly regulated
his own Desires, since he is to have such an absolute Power over hers. But he
who doats on a Face, he who makes Money his Idol, he who is Charmed with vain
and empty Wit, gives no such Evidence, either of Wisdom or Goodness, that a
Woman of any tolerable Sense should care to venture her self to his Conduct.

Indeed, your fine Gentleman's Actions are now a days such, that did not Custom
and the Dignity of his Sex give Weight and Authority to them, a Woman that
thinks twice might bless her self, and say, is this the Lord and Master to whom
I am to promise Love, Honor and Obedience? What can be the Object of Love but
amiable Qualities, the Image of the Deity impressed upon a generous and godlike
Mind, a Mind that is above this World, to be sure above all the Vices, the
Tricks and Baseness of it; a Mind that is not full of it self, not contracted
to little private Interests, but in imitation of that glorious Pattern it
endeavors to Copy after, expands and diffuses it self to its utmost capacity
in doing Good. But this fine Gentleman is quite of another Strain, he is the
reverse of this in every Instance. He is I confess very fond of his own Dear
Person, he sees very much in it to admire; his Air and Mien, his Words and
Actions, every Motion he makes declares it; but they must have a Judgment of
his size, every whit as Shallow, and a Partiality as great as his own, who can
be of his Mind. How then can I Love? And if not Love, much less Honor. Love
may arise from Pity or a generous Desire to make that Lovely which as yet is
not so, when we see any hopes of Success in our Endeavors of improving it; but
Honor supposes some excellent Qualities already, something worth our Esteem,
but alas there is nothing more Contemptible then this trifle of a Man, this
mere Outside, whose Mind is as Base and Mean as his external Pomp is
Glittering. His Office or Title apart, to which some Ceremonious Observance
must be paid for Order's sake, there is nothing in him that can command our
Respect. Strip him of Equipage and Fortune, and such things as only dazzle our
Eyes and Imaginations, but don't in any measure affect our Reason, or cause a
Reverence in our Hearts, and the poor Creature sinks beneath our Notice,
because not supported by real Worth. And if a Woman can neither Love nor
Honor, she does ill in promising to Obey, since she is like to have a crooked
Rule to regulate her Actions.

A mere Obedience, such as is paid only to Authority, and not out of Love and a
sense of the Justice and Reasonableness of the Command, will be of an uncertain
Tenure. As it cannot but be uneasy to the Person who pays it, so he who
receives it will be sometimes disappointed when he expects to find it, for that
Woman must be endowed with a Wisdom and Goodness much above what we suppose the
Sex capable of, I fear much greater than e're a Man can pretend to, who can so
constantly conquer her Passions, and divest her self even of Innocent
Self-love, as to give up the Cause when she is in the right, and to submit her
enlightened Reason, to the imperious Dictates of a blind Will, and wild
Imagination, even when she clearly perceives the ill Consequences of it, the
Imprudence, nay Folly and Madness of such a Conduct.

And if a Woman runs such a Risque when she Marrys Prudently, according to the
Opinion of the World, that is, when she permits her self to be disposed of to a
Man equal to her in Birth, Education and Fortune, and as good as the most of
his Neighbors, (for if none were to Marry, but Men of strict Virtue and
Honor, I doubt the World would be but thinly Peopled) if at the very best her
Lot is hard, what can she expect who is Sold, or any otherwise betrayed into
mercenary Hands, to one who is in all, or most respects unequal to her? A Lover
who comes upon what is called equal Terms, makes no very advantageous Proposal
to the Lady he Courts, and to whom he seems to be an humble Servant, for under
many sounding Complements, Words that have nothing in them, this is his true
meaning, He wants one to manage his Family, an Housekeeper, an upper Servant,
one whose Interest it will be not to wrong him, and in whom therefore he can
put greater confidence than in any he can hire for Money. One who may breed his
Children, taking all the care and trouble of their Education, to preserve his
Name and Family. One whose Beauty, Wit or good Humor and agreeable
Conversation will entertain him at Home when he has been contradicted and
disappointed abroad; who will do him that Justice the ill-natured World denis
him, that is, in any one's Language but his own, sooth his Pride and Flatter
his Vanity, by having always so much good Sense as to be on his side, to
conclude him in the right, when others are so Ignorant, or so Rude as to deny
it. Who will not be Blind to his Merit nor contradict his Will and Pleasure,
but make it her Business, her very Ambition to content him: Whose softness and
gentle Compliance will calm his Passions, to whom he may safely disclose his
troublesome Thoughts, and in her Breast discharge his Cares; whose Duty,
Submission and Observance will heal those Wounds other Peoples opposition or
neglect have given him. In a Word, one whom he can entirely Govern and
consequently may form her to his will and liking, who must be his for Life, and
therefore cannot quit his Service let him treat her how he will.

And if this be what every Man expects, the sum of his violent Love and
Courtship, when it is put into Sense and rendered Intelligible, to what a fine
pass does she bring her self who purchases a Lord and Master, not only with her
Money, but with what is of greater Value, at the price of her Discretion? Who
has not so much as that poor Excuse, Precedent and Example; or if she has, they
are only such as all the World condemns? She will not find him less a Governor
because she was once his Superior, on the contrary the scum of the People are
most Tyranical when they get the Power, and treat their Betters with the
greatest Insolence. For as the wise Man long since observed, a Servant when he
Reigns is one of those things for which the Earth is disquieted, and which no
Body is able to bear.

It is the hardest thing in the World for a Woman to know that a Man is not
Mercenary, that he does not Act on base and ungenerous Principles, even when he
is her Equal, because being absolute Master, she and all the Grants he makes
her are in his Power, and there have been but too many instances of Husbands
that by wheedling or threatening their Wives, by seeming Kindness or cruel
Usage, have persuaded or forced them out of what has been settled on them. So
that the Woman has in truth no security but the Man's Honor and Goodnature, a
security that in this present Age no wise Person would venture much upon. A Man
enters into Articles very readily before Marriage, and so he may, for he
performs no more of them afterward than he thinks fit. A Wife must never
dispute with her Husband, his Reasons are now no doubt on it better than hers,
whatever they were before; he is sure to persuade her out of her Agreement, and
bring her, it must be supposed, Willingly, to give up what she did vainly hope
to obtain, and what she thought had been made sure to her. And if she show any
Refractoriness, there are ways enough to humble her; so that by right or wrong
the Husband gains his will. For Covenants between Husband and Wife, like Laws
in an Arbitrary Government, are of little Force, the Will of the Sovereign is
all in all. Thus it is in Matter of Fact, I will not answer for the Right of
it; for if the Woman's Reasons upon which those Agreements are grounded are not
Just and Good, why did he consent to them? Was it because there was no other
way to obtain his Suit, and with an intention to Annul them when it shall be in
his Power? Where then is his Sincerity? But if her Reasons are good, where is
his Justice in obliging her to quit them? He neither way acts like an equitable
or honest Man.

But when a Woman Marrys unequally and beneath her self, there is almost
Demonstration that the Man is Sordid and Unfair, that instead of Loving her he
only Loves himself, trapans and ruins her to serve his own Ends. For if he had
not a mighty Opinion of himself, (which temper is like to make an admirable
Husband,) he could never imagine that his Person and good Qualities could make
compensation for all the advantages she quits on his account. If he had a real
Esteem for her or valued her Reputation, he would not expose it, nor have her
Discretion called in Question for his sake; and if he truly Loved her he would
not reduce her to Straits and a narrow Fortune, nor so much as lessen her way
of Living to better his own. For since GOD has placed different Ranks in the
World, put some in a higher and some in a lower Station, for Order and Beauty's
sake, and for many good Reasons; though it is both our Wisdom and Duty not only
to submit with Patience, but to be Thankful and well-satisfied when by his
Providence we are brought low, yet there is no manner of Reason for us to
Degrade our selves; on the contrary, much why we ought not. The better our Lot
is in this World and the more we have of it, the greater is our leisure to
prepare for the next; we have the more opportunity to exercise that God-like
Quality, to taste that Divine Pleasure, Doing good to the Bodies and Souls of
those beneath us. Is it not then ill Manners to Heaven, and an irreligious
contempt of its Favors, for a Woman to slight that nobler Employment, to which
it has assigned her, and thrust her self down to a meaner Drudgery* to what is
in a very literal Sense a caring for the things of the World, a caring not only
to Please, but to Maintain a Husband?

And a Husband so chosen will not at all abate of his Authority and right to
Govern, whatever fair Promises he might make before. She has made him her Head,
and he thinks himself as well qualified as the best to Act accordingly, nor has
she given him any such Evidence of her Prudence as may dispose him to make an
Act of Grace in her Favor. Besides, great Obligations are what Superiors
cannot bear, they are more than can be returned; to acknowledge were only to
reproach themselves with ingratitude, and therefore the readiest way is not to
own but overlook them, or rather, as too many do, to repay them with Affronts
and Injuries.

What then is to be done? How must a Man choose, and what Qualities must incline
a Woman to accept, that so our Married couple may be as happy as that State can
make them? This is no hard Question* let the Soul be principally considered,
and regard had in the first Place to a good Understanding, a Virtuous Mind, and
in all other respects let there be as much equality as may be. If they are good
Christians and of suitable Tempers all will be well, but I should be shrewdly
tempted to suspect their Christianity who Marry after any of those ways we have
been speaking of. I dare venture to say, that they don't Act according to the
Precepts of the Gospel, they neither show the Wisdom of the Serpent, nor the
Innocence of the Dove, they have neither so much Government of themselves, nor
so much Charity for their Neighbors, they neither take such care not to
Scandalize others, nor to avoid Temptations themselves, are neither so much
above this World, nor so affected with the next, as they would certainly be did
the Christian Religion operate in their Hearts, did they rightly understand and
sincerely Practice it, or Acted indeed according to the Spirit of the Gospel.

But it is not enough to enter wisely into this State, care must be taken of
our Conduct afterward. A Woman will not want being admonished of her Duty, the
custom of the World, Economy, every thing almost reminds her of it. Governors
do not often suffer their Subjects to forget Obedience through their want of
demanding it, perhaps Husbands are but too forward on this occasion, and claim
their Right oftener and more Imperiously than either Discretion or good Manners
will justify, and might have both a more cheerful and constant Obedience paid
them if they were not so rigorous in Exacting it. For there is a mutual
Stipulation, and Love, Honor and Worship, by which certainly Civility and
Respect at least are meant, is as much the Woman's due, as Love, Honor and
Obedience is the Man's, and being the Woman is said to be the weaker Vessel the
Man should be more careful not to grieve or offend her. Since her Reason is
supposed to be less, and her Passions stronger than his, he should not give
occasion to call that supposition in Question by his pettish carriage and
needless Provocations. Since he is the Man, by which very Word Custom would
have us understand not only greatest strength of Body, but even greatest
firmness and force of Mind, he should not play the little Master so much as to
expect to be cocker'd, nor run over to that side which the Woman used to be
ranked in; for according to the Wisdom of the Italians, Volete? si dice a gli
ammalati: Will you? Is spoken to sick Folks.

Indeed Subjection, according to the common Notion of it, is not over easy,
none of us whether Men or Women but have so good an Opinion of our own Conduct
as to believe we are fit, if not to direct others, at least to govern our
selves. Nothing but a sound Understanding, and Grace the best improver of
natural Reason, can correct this Opinion, truly humble us, and heartily
reconcile us to Obedience. This bitter Cup therefore ought to be sweetened as
much as may be; for Authority may be preserved and Government kept inviolable,
without that nauseous Ostentation of Power which serves to no end or purpose,
but to blow up the Pride and Vanity of those who have it, and to exasperate the
Spirits of such as must truckle under it.

Insolence it is true is never the effect of Power but in weak and cowardly
Spirits, who wanting true Merit and Judgment to support themselves in that
advantage ground on which they stand, are ever appealing to their Authority,
and making a show of it to maintain their Vanity and Pride. A truly great Mind
and such as is fit to Govern, though it may stand on its Right with its Equals,
and modestly expect what is due to it even from its Superiors, yet it never
contends with its Inferiors, nor makes use of its Superiority but to do them
Good. So that considering the just Dignity of Man, his great Wisdom so
conspicuous on all occasions, the goodness of his Temper and Reasonableness of
all his Commands, which makes it a Woman's Interest as well as Duty to be
observant and Obedient in all things, that his Prerogative is settled by an
undoubled Right and the Prescription of many Ages, it cannot be supposed that
he should make frequent and insolent Claims of an Authority so well established
and used with such moderation, nor give an impartial By-stander (could such an
one be found) any occasion from thence to suspect that he is inwardly conscious
of the Badness of his Title; Usurpers being always most desirous of
Recognitions and busy in imposing Oaths, whereas a Lawful Prince contents
himself with the usual Methods and Securities.

And since Power does naturally puff up, and he who finds himself exalted,
seldom fails to think he ought to be so, it is more suitable to a Man's Wisdom
and Generosity to be mindful of his great Obligations than to insist on his
Rights and Prerogatives. Sweetness of Temper and an obliging Carriage are so
justly due to a Wife, that a Husband who must not be thought to want either
Understanding to know what is fit, nor Goodness to perform it, cannot be
supposed not to show them. For setting aside the hazards of her Person to keep
up his Name and Family, with all the Pains and Trouble that attend it, which
may well be thought great enough to deserve all the respect and kindness that
may be, setting this aside, though it is very considerable, a Woman has so much
the disadvantage in most, I was about to say in all things, that she makes a
Man the greatest Complement in the World when she condescends to take him for
Better for Worse. She puts her self entirely in his Power, leaves all that is
dear to her, her Friends and Family, to espouse his Interests and follow his
Fortune, and makes it her Business and Duty to please him! What
acknowledgments, what returns can he make? What Gratitude can be sufficient for
such Obligations? She shows her good Opinion of him by the great Trust she
reposes in him, and what a Brute must he be who betrays that Trust, or acts any
way unworthy of it? Ingratitude is one of the basest Vices, and if a Man's Soul
is sunk so low as to be guilty of it toward her who has so generously obliged
him, and who so entirely depends on him, if he can treat her Disrespectfully,
who has so fully testified her Esteem of him, she must have a stock of Virtue
which he should blush to discern, if she can pay him that Obedience of which he
is so unworthy.

Superiors indeed are too apt to forget the common Privileges of Mankind, that
their Inferiors share with them the greatest Benefits, and are as capable as
themselves of enjoying the supreme Good; that though the Order of the World
requires an Outward Respect and Obedience from some to others, yet the Mind is
free, nothing but Reason can oblige it, it is out of the reach of the most
absolute Tyrant. Nor will it ever be well either with those who Rule or those
in Subjection, even from the Throne to every Private Family, till those in
Authority look on themselves as placed in that Station for the good and
improvement of their Subjects, and not for their own sakes; not as the reward
of their Merit or that they may prosecute their own Desires and fulfill all
their Pleasure, but as the Representatives of GOD whom they ought to imitate in
the Justice and Equity of their Laws, in doing good and communicating Blessings
to all beneath them: By which, and not by following the imperious Dictates of
their own will, they become truly Great and Illustrious and Worthily fill their
Place. And the Governed for their Part ceasing to envy the Pomp and Name of
Authority, should respect their Governors as placed in GOD's stead and
contribute what they can to ease them of their real Cares, by a cheerful and
ready compliance with those their endeavors, and by affording them the
Pleasure of success in such noble and generous Designs.

For upon a due estimate things are pretty equally divided; those in Subjection
as they have a less Glorious, so they have an easier task and a less account to
give, whereas he who Commands has in a great measure the Faults of others to
answer for as well as his own. It Is true he has the Pleasure of doing more good
than a Private Person can, and shall receive the Reward of it when time shall
be no more, in compensation for the hazards he runs, the difficulties he at
present encounters, and the large Account he is to make hereafter, which
Pleasure and Reward are highly desirable and most worthy our pursuit; but they
are Motives which such as usurp on their Governors, and make them uneasy in
the due discharge of their Duty, never propose. And for those other little
things that move their Envy and Ambition, they are of no Esteem with a just
Considerer, nor will such as violently pursue, find their Account in them.

But how can a Man respect his Wife when he has a contemptible Opinion of her
and her Sex? When from his own Elevation he looks down on them as void of
Understanding, and full of Ignorance and Passion, so that Folly and a Woman are
equivalent Terms with him? Can he think there is any Gratitude due to her whose
utmost services he exacts as strict Duty? Because she was made to be a Slave to
his Will, and has no higher end than to Serve and Obey him? Perhaps we arrogate
too much to our selves when we say this Material World was made for our sakes;
that its Glorious Maker has given us the use of it is certain, but when we
suppose that over which we have Dominion to be made purely for our sakes, we
draw a false Conclusion, as he who should say the People were made for the
Prince who is set over them, would be thought to be out of his Senses as well
as his Politics. Yet even allowing that he who made every thing in Number,
Weight and Measure, who never acts but for some great and glorious End, an End
agreeable to his Majesty, allowing that he Created such a Number of Rational
Spirits merely to serve their fellow Creatures, yet how are these Lords and
Masters helped by the Contempt they show of their poor humble Vassals? Is it not
rather an hindrance to that Service they expect, as being an undeniable and
constant Proof how unworthy they are to receive it?

None of GOD's Creatures absolutely considered are in their own Nature
Contemptible; the meanest Fly, the poorest Insect has its Use and Virtue.
Contempt is scarce a Human Passion, one may venture to say it was not in
Innocent Man, for till Sin came into the World, there was nothing in it to be
Contemned. But Pride which makes every thing serve its purposes, wrested this
Passion from its only Use, so that instead of being an Antidote against Sin, it
is become a grand promoter of it, nothing making us more worthy of that
Contempt we show, than when poor, weak, dependent Creatures as we are! we look
down with Scorn and Disdain on others.

There is not a surer Sign of a noble Mind, a Mind very far advanced toward
Perfection, than the being able to bear Contempt and an unjust Treatment from
ones Superiors evenly and patiently. For inward Worth and real Excellency are
the true Ground of Superiority, and one Person is not in reality better than
another, but as he is more Wise and Good. But this World being a place of Trial
and governed by general Laws, just Retributions being reserved for hereafter,
Respect and Obedience many times become due for Order's sake to those who don't
otherwise deserve them. Now though Humility keeps us from over-valuing our selves
or viewing our Merit through a false and magnifying Medium, yet it does not put
out our Eyes, it does not, it ought not to deprive us of that pleasing
sentiment which attends our Acting as we ought to Act, which is as it were a
foretast of Heaven, our present Reward for doing what is Just and Fit. And when
a Superior does a Mean and unjust Thing, as all Contempt of one's Neighbor is,
and yet this does not provoke his Inferiors to refuse that Observance which
their Stations in the World require, they cannot but have an inward Sense of
their own real Superiority, the other having no pretense to it, at the same
time that they pay him an outward Respect and Deference, which is such a
flagrant Testimony of the sincerest Love of Order as proves their Souls to be
of the highest and noblest Rank.

A Man therefore for his own sake, and to give evidence that he has a Right to
those Prerogatives he assumes, should treat Women with a little more Humanity
and Regard than is usually paid them. Your whifling Wits may scoff at them, and
what then? It matters not, for they Rally every thing though ever so Sacred, and
rail at the Women commonly in very good Company. Religion, its Priests, and
these its most constant and regular Professors, are the usual Subjects of their
manly, mannerly and surprising Jests. Surprising indeed! not for the newness of
the Thought, the brightness of the Fancy, or nobleness of Expression, but for
the good Assurance with which such threadbare Jests are again and again
repeated. But that your grave Dons, your Learned Men, and which is more your
Men of Sense as they would be thought, should stoop so low as to make
Invectives against the Women, forget themselves so much as to Jest with their
Slaves, who have neither Liberty nor Ingenuity to make Reprizals! that they
should waste their Time and debase their good Sense which fits them for the
most weighty Affairs, such as are suitable to their profound Wisdoms and
exalted Understandings! to render those poor Wretches more ridiculous and
odious who are already in their Opinion sufficiently contemptible, and find no
better exercise of their Wit and Satyr than such as are not worth their Pains,
though it were possible to Reform them, this, this indeed may justly be wondered
at!

I know not whether or no Women are allowed to have Souls, if they have,
perhaps it is not prudent to provoke them too much, least silly as they are,
they at last recriminate, and then what polite and well-bred Gentleman, though
himself is concerned, can forbear taking that lawful Pleasure which all who
understand Raillery must taste, when they find his Jests who insolently began to
peck at his Neighbor, returned with Interest upon his own Head? And indeed Men
are too Humane, too Wise to venture at it did they not hope for this effect,
and expect the Pleasure of finding their Wit turn to such account; for if it be
Lawful to reveal a Secret, this is without doubt the whole design of those fine
Discourses which have been made against the Women from our great Forefathers
to this present Time. Generous Man has too much Bravery, he is too Just and too
Good to assault a defenseless Enemy, and if he did inveigh against the Women it
was only to do them Service. For since neither his Care of their Education, his
hearty endeavors to improve their Minds, his wholesome Precepts, nor great
Example could do them good, as his last and kindest Essay he resolved to try
what Contempt would do, and chose rather to expose himself by a seeming want of
Justice, Equity, Ingenuity and Goodnature, than suffer Women to remain such
vain and insignificant Creatures as they have hitherto been reckoned. And truly
Women are some degrees beneath what I have thus far thought them, if they do
not make the best use of his kindness, improve themselves, and like Christians
return it.

Let us see then what is their Part, what must they do to make the Matrimonial
Yoke tolerable to themselves as well as Pleasing to their Lords and Masters?
That the World is an empty and deceitful Thing, that those Enjoyments which
appear so desirable at a distance, which raised our Hopes and Expectations to
such a mighty Pitch, which we so passionately coveted and so eagerly pursued,
vanish at our first approach, leaving nothing behind them but the Folly of
Delusion, and the pain of disappointed Hopes, is a common Outcry; and yet as
common as it is, though we complain of being deceived this Instant, we do not
fail of contributing to the Cheat the very next. Tho in reality it is not the
World that abuses us, it is we abuse our selves, it is not the emptiness of that,
but our own false Judgments, our unreasonable desires and Expectations that
Torment us; for he who exerts his whole strength to lift a Straw, ought not to
complain of the Burden but of his own disproportionate endeavor which gives
him the pain he feels. The World affords us all that Pleasure a sound Judgment
can expect from it, and answers all those Ends and Purposes for which it was
designed, let us expect no more than is reasonable, and then we shall not fail
of our Expectations.

It is even so in the Case before us; a Woman who has been taught to think
Marriage her only Preferment, the sum-total of her Endeavors, the completion
of all her hopes, that which must settle and make her Happy in this World, and
very few, in their Youth especially, carry a Thought steddily to a greater
distance; She who has seen a Lover dying at her Feet, and cannot therefore
imagine that he who professes to receive all his Happiness from her can have
any other Design or Desire than to please her; whose Eyes have been dazzled with
all the Glitter and Pomp of a Wedding, and who hears of nothing but Joy and
Congratulation; who is transported with the Pleasure of being out of Pupillage,
and Mistress not only of her self but of a Family too: She who is either so
simple or so vain, as to take her Lover at his Word either as to the Praises he
gave her, or the Promises he made for himself: In sum, she whose Expectation
has been raised by Court-ship, by all the fine things that her Lover, her
Governess and Domestic Flatterers say, will find a terrible disappointment
when the hurry is over, and when she comes calmly to consider her Condition,
and views it no more under a false Appearance, but as it truly is.

I doubt in such a View it will not appear over-desirable if she regards only
the Present State of Things. Hereafter may make amends for what she must be
prepared to suffer here, then will be her Reward, this is her time of Trial,
the Season of exercising and improving her Virtues. A Woman that is not
Mistress of her Passions, that cannot patiently submit even when Reason suffers
with her, who does not practice Passive Obedience to the utmost, will never be
acceptable to such an absolute Sovereign as a Husband. Wisdom ought to Govern
without Contradiction, but Strength however will be obeyed. There are but few
of those wise Persons who can be content to be made yet wiser by Contradiction,
the most will have their Will, and it is right because it is their's. Such is
the vanity of Humane Nature that nothing pleases like an entire Subjection;
what Imperfections will not a Man overlook where this is not wanting! Though we live
like Brutes we would have Incense offered us, that is only due to Heaven it
self, would have an absolute and blind Obedience paid us by all over whom we
pretend Authority. We were not made to Idolize one another, yet the whole
strain of Courtship is little less than rank Idolatry: But does a Man intend to
give, and not receive his share in this Religious Worship? No such Matter;
Pride and Vanity and Self-love have their Designs, and if the Lover is so
condescending as to set a Pattern in the time of his Addresses, he is so Just
as to expect his Wife should strictly Copy after it all the rest of her Life.

But how can a Woman scruple entire Subjection, how can she forbear to admire
the worth and excellency of the Superior Sex, if she at all considers it? Have
not all the great Actions that have been performed in the World been done by
them? Have not they founded Empires and over-turn'd them? Do not they make Laws
and continually repeal and amend them? Their vast Minds lay Kingdoms wast, no
bounds or measures can be prescribed to their Desires. War and Peace depend on
them, they form Cabals and have the Wisdom and Courage to get over all these
Rubs which may lie in the way of their desired Grandeur. What is it they cannot
do? They make Worlds and ruin them, form Systems of universal Nature and
dispute eternally about them, their Pen gives worth to the most trifling
Controversy, nor can a fray be inconsiderable if they have drawn their Swords
in it. All that the wise Man pronounces is an Oracle, and every Word the Witty
speaks a Jest. It is a Woman's Happiness to hear, admire and praise them,
especially if a little Ill Nature keeps them at any time from bestowing due
applauses on each other. And if she aspires no further she is thought to be in
her proper Sphere of Action, she is as wise and as good as can be expected from
her.

She then who Marrys ought to lay it down for an indisputable Maxim, that her
Husband must govern absolutely and entirely, and that she has nothing else to
do but to Please and Obey. She must not attempt to divide his Authority, or so
much as dispute it, to struggle with her Yoke will only make it gall the more,
but must believe him Wise and Good and in all respects the best, at least he
must be so to her. She who cannot do this is no way fit to be a Wife, she may
set up for that peculiar Coronet the ancient Fathers talked of, but is not
qualified to receive that great reward, which attends the eminent exercise of
Humility and Self-denial, Patience and Resignation the Duties that a Wife is
called to.

But some refractory Woman perhaps will say how can this be? Is it possible for
her to believe him Wise and Good who by a thousand Demonstrations convinces her
and all the World of the contrary? Did the bare Name of Husband confer Sense on
a Man, and the mere being in Authority infallibly qualify him for Government,
much might be done. But since a wise Man and a Husband are not Terms
convertible, and how loath soever one is to own it, Matter of Fact will not allow
us to deny that the Head many times stands in need of the Inferior's Brains to
manage it, she must beg leave to be excused from such high thoughts of her
Sovereign, and if she submits to his Power, it is not so much Reason as
Necessity that compells her.

Now of how little force soever this Objection may be in other respects,
methinks it is strong enough to prove the necessity of a good Education, and
that Men never mistake their true Interest more than when they endeavor to
keep Women in Ignorance. Could they indeed deprive them of their Natural good
Sense at the same time they deny them the due improvement of it, they might
compass their End; otherwise Natural Sense unassisted may run into a false
Track, and serve only to punish him justly, who would not allow it to be useful
to himself or others. If Man's Authority be justly established, the more Sense
a Woman has the more reason she will find to submit to it; if according to the
Tradition of our Fathers, (who having had Possession of the Pen, thought they
had also the best Right to it,) Women's Understanding is but small, and Men's
Partiality adds no Weight to the Observation, ought not the more care to be
taken to improve them? How it agrees with the Justice of Men we enquire not,
but certainly Heaven is abundantly more Equitable than to enjoin Women the
hardest Task and give them the least Strength to perform it. And if Men
Learned, Wise and Discreet as they are, who have as is said all the advantages
of Nature, and without controversy have, or may have all the assistance of
Art, are so far from acquitting themselves as they ought, from living according
to that reason and excellent Understanding they so much boast of, can it be
expected that a Woman who is reckoned silly enough in her self, at least
comparatively, and whom Men take care to make yet more so, can it be expected
that she should constantly perform so difficult a Duty as entire Subjection, to
which corrupt Nature is so averse?

If the Great and Wise Cato, a Man, a Man of no ordinary firmness and strength
of Mind, a Man who was esteemed as an Oracle, and by the Philosophers and great
Men of his Nation equaled even to the Gods themselves; If he with all his
Stoical Principles was not able to bear the sight of a triumphant Conqueror,
(who perhaps would have Insulted and perhaps would not,) but out of a Cowardly
fear of an Insult, ran to Death to secure him from it; can it be thought that
an ignorant weak Woman should have patience to bear a continual outrage and
Insolence all the days of her Life? Unless you will suppose her a very Ass, but
then remember what the Italians say, to Quote them once more, since being very
Husbands they may be presumed to have some Authority in this Case, L' asino pur
pigro, Stimulato tira quelche calcio; an Ass though slow if provoked will kick.

We never see or perhaps make sport with the ill Effects of a bad Education,
till it come to touch us home in the ill conduct of a Sister, a Daughter, or
Wife. Then the Women must be blamed, their Folly is exclaimed against, when all
this while it was the wise Man's Fault who did not set a better Guard on those
who according to him stand in so much need of one. A young Gentleman, as a
celebrated Author tells us, ought above all things to be acquainted with the
State of the World, the Ways and Humors, the Follies, the Cheats, the Faults
of the Age he is fallen into, he should by degrees be informed of the Vice in
Fashion, and warned of the Application and Design of those who will make it
their Business to corrupt him, should be told the Arts they use and the Trains
they lay, be prepared to be Shocked by some and caressed by others; warned who
are like to oppose, who to mislead; who to undermine, and who to serve him. He
should be instructed how to know and distinguish them, where he should let them
see, and when dissemble the Knowledge of them and their Aims and Workings. Our
Author is much in the right, and not to disparage any other Accomplishments
which are useful in their kind, this will turn to more account than any
Language or Philosophy, Art or Science, or any other piece of Good-breeding and
fine Education that can be taught him, which are no otherwise excellent than as
they contribute to this, as this does above all things to the making him a
wise, a virtuous and useful Man.

And it is not less necessary that a young Lady should receive the like
Instructions, whether or no her Temptations be fewer, her Reputation and Honor
however are to be more nicely preserved; they may be ruined by a little
Ignorance or Indiscretion, and then though she has kept her Innocence, and so is
secured as to the next World, yet she is in a great measure lost to this. A
Woman cannot be too watchful, too apprehensive of her danger, nor keep at too
great a distance from it, since Man whose Wisdom and Ingenuity is so much
Superior to hers, condescends for his Interest sometimes, and sometimes by way
of Diversion, to lay Snares for her. For though all Men are Virtuosi,
Philosophers and Politicians in comparison of the Ignorant and Illiterare
Women, yet they don't all pretend to be Saints, and it is no great Matter to
them if Women who were born to be their Slaves, be now and then ruined for
their Entertainment.

But according to the rate that young Women are Educated; according to the way
their Time is spent, they are destined to Folly and Impertinence, to say no
worse, and which is yet more inhuman, they are blamed for that ill Conduct they
are not suffered to avoid, and reproached for those Faults they are in a manner
forced into; so that if Heaven has bestowed any Sense on them, no other use is
made of it, than to leave them without Excuse. So much and no more of the World
is shown them, as serves to weaken and corrupt their Minds, to give them wrong
Notions, and busy them in mean Pursuits; to disturb, not to regulate their
Passions, to make them timorous and dependant, and in a word, fit for nothing
else but to act a Farce for the Diversion of their Governors.

Even Men themselves improve no otherwise than according to the Aim they take,
and the End they propose; and he whose Designs are but little and mean, will be
the same himself. Though Ambition, as it is usually understood, is a Foolish, not
to say a Base and Pitiful Vice, yet the Aspirings of the Soul after true Glory
are so much its Nature, that it seems to have forgot it self and to degenerate,
if it can forbear; and perhaps the great Secret of Education lies in affecting
the Soul with a lively Sense of what is truly its Perfection, and exciting the
most ardent Desires after it.

But, alas! what poor Woman is ever taught that she should have a higher Design
than to get her a Husband? Heaven will fall in of course; and if she make but
an Obedient and Dutiful Wife, she cannot miss of it. A Husband indeed is
thought by both Sexes so very valuable, that scarce a Man who can keep himself
clean and make a Bow, but thinks he is good enough to pretend to any Woman, no
matter for the Difference of Birth or Fortune, a Husband is such a
Wonder-working Name as to make an Equality, or something more, whenever it is
pronounced.

And indeed were there no other Proof of Masculine Wisdom, and what a much
greater Portion of Ingenuity falls to the Men than to the Women's Share, the
Address, the Artifice, and Management of an humble Servant were a sufficient
Proof it. What good Conduct does he show! what Patience exercise! what Subtilty
leave untried! what Concealment of his Faults! what Parade of his Virtues! what
Government of his Passions! How deep is his Policy in laying his Designs at so
great a distance, and working them up by such little Accidents! How
indefatigable is his Industry, and how constant his Watchfulness, not to slip
any Opportunity that may in the least contribute to his Design! What a handsome
Set of Disguises and Pretenses is he always furnished with! How concealed does
he lie! how little pretend, till he is sure that his Plot will take! And at the
same time that he nourishes the Hope of being Lord and Master, appears with all
the Modesty and Submission of an humble and unpretending Admirer!

Can a Woman then be too much upon her Guard? Can her Prudence and Foresight,
her early Caution be reckoned unnecessary Suspicion, or ill-bred Reserve by any
but those whose Designs they prevent, and whose Interest it is to declaim
against them? it being a certain Maxim with the Men, though Policy or Good
Breeding allow them not to avow it always, that the Women were made for their
Sakes and Service, and are in all respects their Inferiors, especially in
Understanding; so that all the Compliments they make, all the Address and
Complaisance they use, all the Kindness they profess, all the Service they
pretend to pay, has no other Meaning, no other End, than to get the poor Woman
into their Power, to govern her according to their Discretion. This is all pure
Kindness indeed, and therefore no Woman has Reason to be offended with it; for
considering how much she is exposed in her own, and how safe in their Keeping,
it is the wisest thing she can do to put her self under Protection. And then if
they have a tolerable Opinion of her Sense, and not their Vanity but some
better Principle disposes them to do something out of the way, and to appear
more generous than the rest of their Sex, they will condescend to dictate to her,
and impart some of their Prerogative Books and Learning. It Is fit indeed that
she should entirely depend on their Choice, and walk with the Crutches they are
pleased to lend her; and if she is furnished out with some Notions to set her a
prating, I should have said to make her entertaining and the Fiddle of the
Company, her Tutor's Time was not ill bestowed: And it were a diverting Scene
to see her stripped like the Jay of her borrowed Feathers, though he good Man has
not ill Nature enough to take Pleasure in it. You may accuse him perhaps for
giving so much Encouragement to a Woman's Vanity, but your Accusation is
groundless, Vanity being a Disease the Sex will always be guilty of; nor is it
a Reproach to them, since Men of Learning and Sense are overrun with it.

But there are few Women whose Understandings are worth the Management, their
Estates are much more capable of Improvement, No Woman, much less a Woman of
Fortune, is ever fit to be her own Mistress, and he who has not the Vanity to
think what much finer things he could perform had he the Management of her
Fortune; or so much Partiality and Self-love, as to fancy it cannot be better
bestowed than in making his; will yet be so honest and humble as to think that
it is fit she should take his Assistance, as Steward at least. For the Good Man
aspires no further, he would only take the Trouble of her Affairs off her hand;
and the Sense of her Condescension and his great Obligations will for ever
secure him against acting like a Lord and Master.

The Steps to Folly as well as Sin are gradual, and almost imperceptible, and
when we are once on the Decline, we go down without taking notice on it; were it
not for this one could not account for those Strange unequal Matches we too
often see. For there was a time no doubt, when a Woman could not have bore the
very thought of what she has been afterward betrayed into, it would have
appeared as shocking to her as it always does to other People; and had a Man
been so impolitic as to discover the least intimation of such a Design, he had
given her a sufficient Antidote against it. This your Wise Men are well
satisfied of, and understand their own Interest too well to let their Design go
barefaced, for that would effectually put a bar to their Success. So innocent
are they that they had not the least thought at first of what their Good
Fortune afterward leads them to! They would draw upon him, (if they wear a
Sword) or fly in her Face who should let fall the least hint that they had such
Intentions; and this very Eagerness to avoid the Suspicion, is a shrewd Sign
that there is occasion for it.

But who shall dare to show the Lady her Danger, when will it be seasonable to
give her friendly Notice? If you do it e're she is resolved, though with all the
Friendship and Tenderness imaginable, she will hardly forgive the Affront, or
bear the Provocation; you offer her an Outrage, by entertaining such a Thought,
and it is ten to one if you are not afterward accused for putting in her Head
what otherwise she could never have dreamed of. And when no direct Proof can be
offered, when matter of Prudence is the only thing in question, every Body has
so good an Opinion of their own Understanding as to think their own way the
best. And when she has her Innocence and fair Intentions to oppose to your
Fears and Surmises, and you cannot pretend to wish her better than she does her
self, to be more disinteress'd and diligent in your Watchfulness, or to see
farther in what so nearly concerns her, what can be done? Her ruin is commonly
too far advanced to be prevented, e're you can in Good-breeding reach out a
hand to help her. For if the Train has took, if she is entangled in the snare,
if Love, or rather a Blind unreasonable Fondness, which usurps the Name of that
noble Passion, has gained on her, Reason and Persuasion may as properly be
urged to the Folks in Bethlem as to her. Tell her of this World, she is got
above it, and has no regard to its impertinent Censures; tell her of the next
she laughs at you, and will never be convinced that Actions which are not
expressly forbid can be Criminal, though they proceed from, and must necessarily
be reduced to ill Principles, though they give Offense, are of ill Example,
injure our Reputation, which next to our Innocence we are obliged as Christians
to take the greatest care of, and in a word do more mischief than we readily
imagine. Tell her of her own Good, you appear yet more ridiculous, for who can
judge of her Happiness but her self? And whilst our Hearts are violently set
upon any thing, there is no convincing us that we shall ever be of another
Mind. Our Passions want no Advocates, they are always furnished with plausible
Pretenses, and those very Prejudices, which gave rise to this unreasonable
Passion, will for certain give her Obstinacy enough to justify and continue in
it. Besides, some are so ill advised as to think to support one Indiscretion
with another, they would not have it thought they have made a false Step, in
once giving countenance to that which is not fit to be continued. Or perhaps
the Lady might be willing enough to throw off the Intruder at first, but wanted
Courage to get above the fear of his Calumnies, and the longer she suffers him
to buz about her, she will find it the harder to get rid of his Importunities.
By all which it appears that she who really intends to be secure, must keep at
the greatest distance from Danger, she must not grant the least indulgence,
where such ill uses will be made of it.

And since the case is so, that Woman can never be in safety who allows a Man
opportunity to betray her. Frequent Conversation does for certain produce
either Aversion or Liking, and when it is once come to Liking, it depends on the
Man's Generosity not to improve it farther, and where can one find an Instance
that this is any security? There are very many indeed which show it is none.
How sensible soever a Woman may appear of another Indiscretion, if she will
tread in the same Steps, though but for a little way, she gives us no assurance
that she will not fall into the same Folly, she may perhaps intend very well,
but she puts it past her Power to fulfill her good Intentions. Even those who
have forfeited their Discretion, the most valuable thing next to their Virtue,
and without which Virtue it self is but very weak and faint, it is like were
once as well resolved as she, they had the very same Thoughts, they made the
same Apologies, and their Resentment would have been every whit as great
against those who could have imagined they should so far forget themselves.

It were endless to reckon up the diverse Stratagems Men use to catch their
Prey, their different ways of insinuating which vary with Circumstances, and
the Ladies Temper, but how unfairly, how basely soever they proceed, when the
Prey is once caught it passes for Lawful Prize, and other Men having the same
hopes and projects see nothing to find fault with, but that it was not their
own Good Fortune. They may exclaim against it perhaps in a Lady's hearing, but
it is only to keep themselves from being suspected, and to give the better
Color to their own Designs. Sometimes a Woman is cajoled, and sometimes
Hectored, she is seduced to Love a Man, or awed into a Fear of him: He defends
her Honor against another, or assumes the Power of blasting it himself; was
willing to pass for one of no Consequence till he could make himself
considerable at her cost: He might be admitted at first to be her Jest, but he
carries on the humor so far till he makes her his; he will either entertain or
serve her as occasion offers, and some way or other gets himself entrusted with
her Fortune, her Fame or her Soul. Allow him but a frequent and free
Conversation, and there is no manner of Question but that his Ingenuity and
Application will at one time or other get the Ascendant over her.

And generally the more humble and undesigning a Man appears, the more
improbable it looks that he should dare to pretend, the greater Caution should
be used against him. A bold Address and good Assurance may sometimes, but does
not always take. To a Woman of Sense an artificial Modesty and Humility is a
thousand times more dangerous, he only draws back to receive the more
Encouragement, and she regards not what Advances she makes toward him, who
seems to understand himself and the World so well as to be incapable of making
an ill use of them. Would it not be unreasonable and a piece of Ill-breeding to
be shy of him who has no pretentions, or only such as are Just and Modest? What
hurt in a Visit? Or what if Visits grow a little more frequent? The Man has so
much discernment, as to relish her Wit and Humor, and can she do less than be
Partial to him who is so Just to her? He strives to please and to render
himself agreeable, or necessary perhaps, and whoever will make it his Business
may find ways enough to do it. For they know but little of Human Nature, they
never consulted their own Hearts, who are not sensible what advances a
well-manag'd Flattery makes, especially from a Person of whose Wit and Sense
one has a good Opinion. His Wit at first recommends his Flatteries, and these
in requital set off his Wit; and she who has been used to this high-season'd
Diet, will scarce ever relish another Conversation.

Having got thus far to be sure he is not wanting to his good Fortune, but
drives on to an Intimacy, or what they are pleased now adays, though very
unjustly, to call a Friendship; all is safe under this sacred Character, which
sets them above little Aims and mean Designs. A Character that must be
conducted with the nicest Honor, allows the greatest Trusts, leads to the
highest Improvements, is attended with the purest Pleasures and most rational
Satisfaction. And what if the malicious World, envious of his Happiness, should
take Offense at it, since he has taken all due Precautions, such unjust and
ill-natured Censures are not to be regarded; for his part the distance that is
between them checks all aspiring desires, but her Conversation is what he must
not, cannot want, Life is insipid and not to be endured without it; and he is
too much the Lady's Friend, has too just a Value for her to entertain a
Thought to her disadvantage.

Now if once it is come to this, GOD help the poor Woman, for not much Service
can be done her by any of her Friends on Earth. That Pretender to be sure will
be the Darling, he will worm out every other Person, though ever so kind and
disinterested. For though true Friends will endeavor to please in order to
serve, their Complaisance never goes so far as to prove injurious; the beloved
Fault is what they chiefly strike at, and this the Flatterer always sooths; so
that at last he becomes the most acceptable Company, and they who are conscious
of their own Integrity are not apt to bear such an unjust Distinction, nor is
it by this time to any purpose to remonstrate the Danger of such an Intimacy.
When a Man, and for certain much more, when a Woman is fallen into this Toil,
that is, when either have been so unwary and indiscreet as to let another find
out by what Artifices he may manage their Self-love, and draw it over to his
Party, it is too late for any one who is really their Friend to break the Snare
and disabuse them.

Neither Sex cares to deny themselves that which pleases, especially when they
think they may innocently indulge it; and nothing pleases more than the being
admired and humored. We may be told of the Danger, and shown the Fall of
others, but though their Misfortunes are ever so often or so lively represented
to us, we are all so well assured of our own good Conduct, as to believe it
will bring us safe off those Rocks on which others have been Shipwrackt. We
suppose it in our Power to shorten the Line of our Liberty when ever we think
fit, not considering that the farther we run, we shall be the more unwilling to
Retreat and unable to judge when a Retreat is necessary. A Woman does not know
that she is more than half lost when she admits of these Suggestions; that
those Arguments she brings for continuing a Man's Conversation, prove only that
she ought to have quitted it sooner; that Liking insensibly converts to Love,
and that when she admits a Man to be her Friend, it is his Fault if he does not
make himself her Husband.

And if Men even the Modestest and the Best, are only in pursuit of their own
Designs, when they pretend to do the Lady Service; if the Honor they would
seem to do her, tends only to lead her into an Imprudent and therefore a
dishonorable Action; and they have all that good Opinion of themselves as to
take every thing for Encouragment, so that she who goes beyond a bare Civility
though she meant no more than Respect, will find it Interpreted a Favor and made
ill Use of, (for Favors how Innocent soever, never turn to a Ladies
advantage;) what shadow of a Pretense can a Woman have for admitting an
intimacy with a Man whose Principles are known to be Loose and his Practices
Licentious? can she expect to be safe with him who has ruined others, and by
the very same Methods he takes with her? If an Intimacy with a Man of a fair
Character gives Offense, with a Man of an ill One, it is doubly and trebly
Scandalous. And suppose neither her Fortune nor Beauty can Tempt him, he has
his ill-natured Pleasure in destroying that Virtue he will not Practice, or if
that cannot be done, in blasting the Reputation of it at least, and in making
the World believe he has made a Conquest though he has found a Foil.

If the Man be the Woman's Inferior, besides all the Dangers formerly
mentioned, and those just now taken notice of, she gives such a Countenance to
his Vices as renders her in great measure partaker in them, and it can scarce
be thought in such Circumstances a Woman could Like the Man if she were not
reconciled to his Faults. Is he her Equal and no unsuitable Match, if his
Designs are fair, why don't they Marry, since they are so well pleased with
each other's Conversation, which only in this State can be frequently and
safely allowed? Is he her Better, and she hopes by catching him to make her
Fortune, alas! The poor Woman is neither acquainted with the World nor her
self, she neither knows her own Weakness nor his Treachery, and though he gives
ever so much Encouragement to this vain Hope it is only in order to accomplish
her ruin. To be sure the more Freedom she allows, the more she lessens his
Esteem, and that is not likely to increase a real, though it may a pretended
kindness; she ought to fly, if she would have him pursue; the strictest Virtue
and Reserve being the only way to secure him.

Religion and Reputation are so sure a Guard, such a security to poor
defenseless Woman, that whenever a Man has ill Designs on her, he is sure to
make a Breach into one or both of these, by either endeavoring to corrupt her
Principles to make her less strict in Devotion, or to lessen her value of a
fair Reputation, and would persuade her that less than she imagines will secure
her as to the next World, and that not much regard is to be given to the
censures of this: Or if this be too bold at first, and will not pass with her,
he has another way to make even her Love to Virtue contribute to it is ruin, by
persuading her it never Shines as it ought unless it is exposed, and that she
has no reason to Boast of her Virtue unless she has tried it. An Opinion of the
worst consequence that may be, and the most mischievous, which seems calculated
to feed her Vanity, but tends indeed to her utter Ruin. For can it be fit to
rush into Temptations when we are taught every day to pray against them? If the
Trials of our Virtue render it Illustrious, it is such Trials as Heaven is
pleased to send us, not those of our own seeking. It holds true of both Sexes,
that next to the Divine Grace a Modest Distrust of themselves is their best
Security, none being so often and so shamefully Foiled, as those who depend
most on their own Strength and Resolution.

As to the Opinion of the World, though one cannot say it is always just, yet
generally it has a Foundation, great regard is to be paid to it, and very good
use to be made of it. Others may be in fault for passing their Censures, but we
certainly are so if we give them any the least just occasion. And since
Reputation is not only one of the Rewards of Virtue, that which always ought,
and generally does attend it, but also a Guard against Evil, an Inducement to
Good, and a great Instrument in the Hand of the Wise to promote the common
cause of Virtue, the being Prodigal of the one looks as if we set no great
value on the other, and she who abandons her good Name is not like to preserve
her Innocence.

A Woman therefore can never have too nice a Sense of Honor; provided she does
not prefer it before her Duty; she can never be too careful to secure her
Character not only from the suspicion of a Crime, but even from the shadow of
an Indiscretion. It Is well worth her while to renounce the most Entertaining,
and what some perhaps will call the most Improving Company, rather than give
the World a just occasion of Suspicion or Censure. For besides the injury that
is done Religion, which enjoins us to avoid the very Appearance of Evil, and to
do nothing but what is of good Report, she puts her self too much in a Man's
Power who will run such a risque for his Conversation, and expresses such a
value for him, as cannot fail of being made use of to do her a mischief.

Preserve your distance then, keep out of the reach of Danger, fly if you would
be safe, be sure to be always on the Reserve, not such as is Morose and
Affected, but Modest and Discreet, your Caution cannot be too great, nor your
Foresight reach too far; there is nothing, or what is next to nothing, a little
Amusement and entertaining Conversation lost by this, but all is hazarded by
the other. A Man understands his own Merit too well to lose his time in a
Woman's Company were it not to divert himself at her cost, to turn her into a
Jest or something worse. And wherever you see great Assiduities, when a Man
insinuates into the Diversions and Humors of the Lady, Liking and Admiring
whatever she does, though at the same time he seems to keep a due Distance, or
rather exceeds in the profoundest Respect, Respect being all he dare at present
pretend to, when a more than ordinary deference is paid, when something
particular appears in the look and Address, and such an Obsequiousness in every
Action, as nothing could engage a Man to, who never forgets the Superiority of
his Sex, but a hope to be Observed in his turn: Then, whatever the Inequality
be, and how sensible soever he seems to be of it, the Man has for certain his
Engines a Work, the Mine is ready to spring on the first opportunity, and it is
well if it be not too late to prevent the poor Lady's Ruin.

To wind up this Matter, if a Woman were duly Principled and taught to know the
World, especially the true Sentiments that Men have of her, and the Traps they
lay for her under so many gilded Complements, and such a seemingly great
Respect, that disgrace would be prevented which is brought upon too many
Families, Women would Marry more discreetly, and demean themselves better in a
Married State than some People say they do. The foundation indeed ought to be
laid deep and strong, she should be made a good Christian, and understand why
she is so, and then she will be every thing else that is Good. Men need keep no
Spies on a Woman's Conduct, need have no fear of her Virtue, or so much as of
her Prudence and Caution, were but a due sense of true Honor and Virtue
awakened in her, were her Reason excited and prepared to consider the Sophistry
of those Temptations which would persuade her from her Duty, and were she put
in a way to know that it is both her Wisdom and Interest to observe it. She
would then duly examine and weigh all the Circumstances, the Good and Evil of a
Married State, and not be surpised with unforeseen Inconveniences, and either
never consent to be a Wife, or make a good one when she does. This would show
her what Human Nature is, as well as what it ought to be, and teach her not
only what she may justly expect, but what she must be Content with; would
enable her to cure some Faults, and patiently to suffer what she cannot cure.

Indeed nothing can assure Obedience, and render it what it ought to be, but
the Conscience of Duty, the paying it for GOD's sake. Superiors don't rightly
understand their own Interest when they attempt to put out their Subjects Eyes
to keep them Obedient. A Blind Obedience is what a Rational Creature should
never Pay, nor would such an one receive it did he rightly understand it is
Nature. For Human Actions are no otherwise valuable than as they are
conformable to Reason, but a blind Obedience is an Obeying without Reason, for
ought we know, against it. GOD himself does not require our Obedience at this
rate, he lays before us the goodness and reasonableness of his Laws, and were
there any thing in them whose Equity we could not readily comprehend, yet we
have this clear and sufficient Reason on which to found our Obedience, that
nothing but what is Just and Fit, can be enjoined by a Just, a Wise and Gracious
GOD, but this is a Reason will never hold in respect of Men's Commands unless
they can prove themselves Infallible, and consequently Impeccable too.

It is therefore very much a Man's Interest that Women should be good
Christians, in this as in every other Instance, he who does his Duty finds his
own account in it; Duty and true Interest are one and the same thing, and he
who thinks otherwise is to be pitied for being so much in the Wrong; but what
can be more the Duty of the Head, than to Instruct and Improve those who are
under Government? She will freely leave him the quiet Dominion of this World
whose Thoughts and Expectations are placed on the next. A Prospect of Heaven,
and that only will cure that Ambition which all Generous Minds are filled with,
not by taking it away but by placing it on a right Object. She will discern a
time when her Sex shall be no bar to the best Employments, the highest Honor; a
time when that distinction, now so much used to her Prejudice, shall be no
more, but provided she is not wanting to her self, her Soul shall shine as
bright as the greatest Hero's. This is a true, and indeed the only
consolation, this makes her a sufficient compensation for all the neglect and
contempt the ill-grounded Customs of the World throw on her, for all the
Injuries brutal Power may do her, and is a sufficient Cordial to support her
Spirits, be her Lot in this World what it may.

But some sage Persons may perhaps object that were Women allowed to Improve
themselves, and not amongst other discouragments driven back by those wise
Jests and Scoffs that are put upon a Woman of Sense or Learning, a
Philosophical Lady as she is called by way of Ridicule, they would be too Wise
and too Good for the Men: I grant it, for vicious and foolish Men. Nor is it to
be wondered that he is afraid he should not be able to Govern them were their
Understandings improved, who is resolved not to take too much Pains with his
own. But these it is to be hoped are no very considerable Number, the foolish at
least; and therefore this is so far from being an Argument against their
Improvement, that it is a strong one for it, if we do but suppose the Men to be
as capable of Improvement as the Women, but much more if according to Tradition
we believe they have greater Capacities. This, if any thing, would stir them up
to be what they ought, not permit them to wast their Time and abuse their
Faculties in the Service of their irregular Appetites and unreasonable Desires,
and so let poor contemptible Women who have been their Slaves, excel them in
all that is truly Excellent. This would make them Blush at employing an
immortal Mind no better than in making Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the
Lusts thereof, since Women by a Wiser Conduct have brought themselves to such a
reach of Thought, to such exactness of Judgment, such clearness and strength of
Reasoning, such purity and elevation of Mind, such Command of their Passions,
such regularity of Will and Affection, and in a word to such a pitch of
Perfection as the Human Soul is capable of attaining even in this Life by the
Grace of GOD, such true Wisdom, such real Greatness, as though it does not
qualify them to make a Noise in this World, to found or overturn Empires, yet
it qualifies them for what is infinitely better, a Kingdom that cannot be
moved, an incorruptible Crown of Glory.

Besides, it were ridiculous to suppose that a Woman, were she ever so much
improved, could come near the topping Genius of the Men, and therefore why
should they envy or discourage her? Strength of Mind goes along with Strength
of Body, and it is only for some odd accidents which Philosophers have not yet
thought worth while to enquire into, that the Sturdiest Porter is not the
Wisest Man. As therefore the Men have the Power in their Hands, so there is no
dispute of their having the Brains to manage it. There is no such thing as good
Judgment and Sense upon Earth, if it is not to be found among them: Do not they
generally speaking do all the great Actions and considerable Business of this
World, and leave that of the next to the Women? Their Subtilty in forming
Cabals and laying deep Designs, their Courage and Conduct in breaking through
all Ties Sacred and Civil to effect them, not only advances them to the Post of
Honor and keeps them securely in it for twenty or thirty Years, but gets them a
Name, and conveys it down to Posterity for some Hundreds, and who would look
any further? Justice and Injustice are administered by their Hands, Courts and
Schools are filled with these Sages; it is Men who dispute for Truth as well as
Men who argue against it; Histories are writ by them, they recount each others
great Exploits, and have always done so. All famous Arts have their Original
from Men, even from the Invention of Guns to the Mystery of good Eating. And to
show that nothing is beneath their Care, any more than above their reach, they
have brought Gaming to an Art and Science, and a more Profitable and Honorable
one too, than any of those that used to be called Liberal. Indeed what is it
they cannot perform, when they attempt it? The Strength of their Brains shall be
every whit as Conspicuous at their Cups as in a Senate House, and when they
please they can make it pass for as sure a mark of Wisdom, to drink deep as to
Reason profoundly; a greater proof of Courage and consequently of
Understanding, to dare the Vengeance of Heaven it self, than to stand the
rallery of some of the worst of their fellow Creatures!

Again, it may be said, if a Wife's case be as it is here represented, it is
not good for a Woman to Marry, and so there is an end of Human Race. But this is
no fair Consequence, for all that can justly be inferred from hence, is that a
Woman has no mighty Obligations to the Man who makes Love to her, she has no
reason to be fond of being a Wife, or to reckon it a piece of Preferment when
she is taken to be a Man's Upper-Servant; it is no advantage to her in this
World, if rightly managed it may prove one as to the next. For she who Marries
purely to do Good, to Educate Souls for Heaven, who can be so truly mortified
as to lay aside her own Will and Desires, to pay such an entire Submission for
Life, to one whom she cannot be sure will always deserve it, does certainly
perform a more Heroic Action than all the famous Masculine Heroes can boast of,
she suffers a continual Martyrdom to bring Glory to GOD and Benefit to Mankind,
which consideration indeed may carry her through all Difficulties, I know not
what else can, and engage her to Love him who proves perhaps so much more worse
than a Brute, as to make this Condition yet more grievous than it needed to be.
She has need of a strong Reason, of a truly Christian and well-tempered Spirit,
of all the Assistance the best Education can give her, and ought to have some
good assurance of her own Firmness and Virtue, who ventures on such a Trial;
and for this Reason it is less to be wondered at that Women Marry off in have,
for perhaps. if they took time to consider and reflect upon it, they seldom
would.

To conclude, perhaps I Have said more than most Men will thank me for, I cannot
help it, for how much soever I may be their Friend and humble Servant, I am
more a Friend to Truth. Truth is strong, and sometime or other will prevail,
nor is it for their Honor, and therefore one would think not for their
Interest, to be Partial to themselves and Unjust to others. They may fancy I
have made some discoveries which like Arcana Imperii ought to be kept secret,
but in good earnest, I do them more Honor than to suppose their lawful
Prerogatives need any mean Arts to support them. If they have Usurpt, I love
Justice too much to wish Success and continuance to Usurpations, which though
submitted to out of Prudence and for Quietness sake, yet leave every Body free
to regain their lawful Right whenever they have Power and Opportunity. I don't
say that Tyranny ought, but we find in Fact, that it provokes the Oppressed to
throw off even a Lawful Yoke that sits too heavy: And if he who is freely
Elected, after all his fair Promises and the fine Hopes he raised, proves a
Tyrant, the consideration that he was one's own Choice, will not render more
Submissive and Patient, but I fear more Refractory. For tho'it is very
unreasonable, yet we see it is the course of the World, not only to return
Injury for Injury, but Crime for Crime; both Parties indeed are Guilty, but the
Aggressors have a double Guilt, they have not only their own, but their
Neighbor's ruin to answer for.

As to the Female-Reader, I hope she will allow I Have endeavored to do her
Justice, nor betrayed her Cause as her Advocates usually do, under pretense of
defending it. A Practice too mean for any to be Guilty of who have the least
Sense of Honor, and who do any more than merely pretend to it. I think I have
held the Balance even, and not being conscious of Partiality I ask no Pardon
for it. To plead for the Oppressed and to defend the Weak seemed to me a
generous undertaking; for though it may be secure, it is not always Honorable to
run over to the strongest Party. And if she infers from what has been said that
Marriage is a very Happy State for Men, if they think fit to make it so; that
they govern the World, they have Prescription on their side, Women are too weak
to dispute it with them, therefore they, as all other Governors, are most, if
not only accountable, for what is amiss. For whether other Governments in their
Original, were or were not conferred according to the Merit of the Person, yet
certainly in this case Heaven would not have allotted the Man to Govern, but
because he was best Qualified for it. So far I agree with him: But if she goes
on to infer, that therefore he has not these Qualifications, where is his
Right? If he misemploys, does he not abuse it? And if he abuses, according to
modern Deduction, he forfeits it, I must leave her there. A peaceable Woman
indeed will not carry it so far, she will neither question her Husband's Right
nor his Fitness to Govern, but how? Not as an absolute Lord and Master, with an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical sway, but as Reason Governs and Conducts a Man, by
proposing what is Just and Fit. And the Man who acts according to that Wisdom
he assumes, who would have that Superiority he pretends to, acknowledged Just,
will receive no injury by any thing that has been offered here. A Woman will
value him the more who is so Wise and Good, when she discerns how much he
excells the rest of his noble Sex; the less he requires, the more will he Merit
that Esteem and Deference, which those who are so forward to exact, seem
conscious they don't deserve. So then the Man's Prerogative is not at all
infringed, whilst the Woman's Privileges are secured; and if any Woman think
her self Injured, she has a Remedy in reserve which few Men will envy or
endeavor to Rob her of, the Exercise and Improvement of her Virtue here, and
the Reward of it hereafter.

The End.

