THE Country-Parson's ADMONITION TO HIS Parishioners.

Malach. II. 7. The Priest's Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek
the Law at his Mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

Hebr. XIII: 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves;
for they watch for your Souls.

London, Printed in the Year 1686.

THE COUNTRY-PARSON'S ADMONITION TO HIS Parishioners.
YOU cannot but observe the restless importunity of the Romish Clergy, to gain
Proselytes to their Church. And it is probable, that you your selves e're long,
may happen to hear from them. For they have different forms of Address, very
plausible and insinuating, fitted to the Capacities of all sorts of Persons.
And therefore that you may not be surprised with these Charmers, nor imposed on
by their methods of Deceit; I do think it my Duty thus to caution you against
them, by desiring you to observe these two Directions.

1. A Holy Life. 2. A modest dependence upon your Spiritual Guide.
As to the first of these, let me admonish you in the words of St. James, Show
me thy Faith by thy Works.

For it signifies nothing what Men's Profession is, if their Practice is not
answerable. And he who is in earnest to save his Soul, will doubtless be as
much afraid of Debauched Courses, as of erroneous Opinions: Since those do as
much, nay more than these, occasion his Damnation.

I do therefore beg of you, That as you do profess your selves Members of the
Church of England, so you would take great Care, that your Lives and
Conversation may be answerable to its Doctrine.

The sum of which Doctrine, as it relates to Practice, you do find in the
Church-Catechism, in answer to those two Questions. What is thy Duty toward
God? and What is thy Duty toward thy Neighbor? Which I would advise you very
often to read, and seriously to consider. And when by the Assistance of God's
Blessed Spirit, you have transcribed those Answers into your Lives; Let me then
assure you, That the Ten Commandments thus practiced, are the best Exposition
of your Creed. If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God, John 7. 17. For he that has, to him shall be given: and
he that has not, from him shall be taken, even that which he has, Mark 4. 25.
i. e. He who makes a right use of that Grace and Knowledge which God has given
him: He who values and improves it, and is truly thankful for it, To him shall
be given more. And he that has not; i. e. He who has not made a right use and
improvement of his Grace or Knowledge; from him shall be taken, even that which
he has.

But because you must not expect, that God should now teach and instruct you in
an extraordinary and miraculous manner, as he did the Apostles, but mediately,
and in the use of Means: You are therefore to consider what those Means are,
which God has appointed for your Direction and Instruction. The chief of which
(to omit others) is,

A modest Dependence upon the Ministerial Function.

I shall not now insist upon the public Offices of the Church, nor your
Obligation to attend them; as Prayers, Sacraments, Preaching, etc. But shall
only direct you how to behave your selves, when any one designs to seduce you
from the Communion of the Church of England.

And the Expedients I would propose, are these:

1. Let it be your earnest and daily Prayer unto God, to give you his Grace, to
hold fast the Profession of your Faith, without Wavering; that you may continue
in the same unto your Lives End.

2. When you read the Holy Scriptures, and do find some Place which is too
difficult for you; do not then pretend to Interpret it your selves. But beg the
Direction of your Spiritual Guide; and desire him to show you how it is to be
understood.

3. As far as possible avoid all Disputes about Religion. Be not carried about
with every Wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. i. e. Do not hearken to the Whispers
of every bold Pretender.

Which to Persons of your Capacity is very seasonable Advice. For, To convince
Gainsayers, and to answer Objections, is a matter of Skill and Exercise: And
therefore You (being a working People, who sweat for your daily Bread) may with
great modesty acknowledge to your Catholic Missionary, that you have neither
Leisure nor Ability for such Disputes. And consequently you may desire him,
since he is disposed to discourse of Religion, that he would rather help your
Devotion, than disturb your Belief.

You may assure him, That you shall not think your Faith the less firm and
orthodox, because you cannot return an Extemporary answer to the premeditated
Objections of a learned Adversary.

It Is possible that such a subtle Disputant, as he is, might pretend to prove
to you; That Grass is not green. And he might urge such Arguments as would
really baffle you; and to which you could not return any tolerable Answer. But
yet for all his Sophistry, though he might silence, he would not satisfy. For
you would still believe your Senses, and could not think it of any other Color.

If this will not make him to desist; But that he will still be urging the
great Privileges of the Romish Church: The Security of her Faith; The
excellency of her devotion; The great Learning and Piety of her Clergy, etc. To
this you may reply

4. That you understand very little of the Privileges of the Church of Rome.
That to know the State of any Foreign Church, requires more Skill and Reading
than can be expected from Persons of your mean Condition. That you are Members
of the Church of England, which is a true Catholic and Apostolic Church. That
into this Church you were admitted by Baptism; and with this Church you have
held Communion in all her Offices. And consequently to separate from this
Church, without some urging cause, is downright Schism.

For Schism, in the proper notion of it, is, A causless separation from that
part of the visible Church, of which you are Members.

And therefore he who has a mind to make you his Proselytes, and will talk
pertinently, and to the Point; before he can pretend to invite you to the
Church of Rome, he must first convince you, That it is your Duty to separate
from the Church of England. In order to which, he must plainly prove, That the
Church of England is no sound Member of the Church Catholic; and consequently,
That Salvation cannot ordinarily be had in the Church of England: at least not
with such safety, certainty, and advantage, as it may in the Church of Rome.

To prove this he must convince you, That the Doctrine of the Church of England
is either defective or false. If he pretends that it is defective; he must then
show, that there are some Truths necessarily to be believed, as Articles of
Faith, which the Church of England does not receive as such: And also that
there are some necessary Duties, or Parts of Worship, which the Church of
England either wholly omits, or else does not require under any such Necessity.
And let him here instance to you; what those Articles and Parts of Worship are,
wherein our Church is thus defective.

But if he affirms, Secondly, That the Doctrine of the Church of England is
False, he must then prove, That the Church of England does require some
unlawful Condition of her Communion; and that either in Faith or Worship.
Plainly thus: He must make it appear, that her Faith is erroneous, and contrary
to the written Word of God; The Faith once delivered to the Saints: Or else
that her Worship is unlawful, Superstitious, or Idolatrous. And let him here
likewise give you an instance, and distinctly show you, what particular Article
of our Faith is thus erroneous: and what particular part of our Worship he
thinks unlawful. And when he has made his Exceptions, you may then tell him

5. That your Memory is but short; and if he please therefore to give you in
Writing what he has now said, together with one or two of his best Arguments
upon those Points; you may then consider them at your Leisure.

If he refuses to give you such a Paper, suspect him for a Cheat, and that he
comes with a design to impose upon you. For Truth does not Fear the Light, but
submits its Tenants to the strictest Examination.

But if he grants your Desire; then bring that Paper to Me, and give me the
opportunity to tell you my Thoughts of it. And I do here beg and entreat you,
nay (as one who must answer for your Souls, if they Perish through my Neglect)
I require and charge all you in this Parish committed to my Care; that you
would be so Faithful both to your selves and me, as not to be too confident of
your own Skill: nor to think any Argument unanswerable, because you your selves
are not able to answer it.

In the affairs of this World, you do judge it Prudent to consult other Men in
their several Professions, Physicians, Lawyers, etc.

Should some crafty Companion pretend to your Estates, you would not at the
entering of his Action, grant him Possession; but would consult the Learned in
the Law, how to defend your Title.

Pray therefore do not part with your Religion for a Trick. But be as careful
of your Souls as you are of your Estates.

Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wavering; for he is
Faithful that Promised. Heb. 10. 23.
FINIS.

