Evangelium Armatum.

A Specimen; or Short COLLECTION Of several Doctrines and Positions destructive
to our GOVERNMENT BOTH CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL;

Preached and Vented

By the known Leaders and Abetters of the pretended REFORMATION such as, Mr.
Calamy. Mr. Jenkins. Mr. Case. Mr. Baxter. Mr. Caryll. Mr. Marshall. And
Others, etc.

LONDON, Printed for William Garret, 1663.





THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AT this notable season and great crisis both of Church and State, in which
Parties are so high, Factions so restless, and Discontents so general, I know
none so likely a means to resettle and confirm our shaking Fabric, as to
disabuse the People, and to redeem their Understandings from a Captivity to
those guides, who have Preached and Lectured them into these miseries and
confusions. I have observed, though it be true Piety alone that must save men,
yet it is the show and pretense of Piety that governs them. A maxim so verified
by the late transactions among us, that the great Basis and groundwork of all
the Villainy that has been acted upon the stage of these miserable Kingdoms, has
been to beget and fix in the People this Belief, that the great Design drove on
by the Actors of it, was the advancement of the Purity of Religion, and the
Power of godliness. So that the People were brought at length to digest Civil
War, the cutting of Throats, wresting away Estates, and the Murder and
Banishment of Princes, so long as all this was called Reformation But since it
is not imaginable, how men could quit the first infusions of honest education,
and debauch the known Principles of Nature and Religion, so as not at first to
tremble and start at these Villainies, it follows that they must needs have been
insensibly wrought up to them by some predominant Persuasion, that by degrees
lessened, and at length totally subdued those preconceived Dictates of Nature
and Religion to a compliance with such Practices: And this was no other than a
blind and Furious Opinion of the extraordinary Piety of those Teachers, who
pretending more intimate acquaintance with God, and immediate possession by his
Spirit, as Plenipotentiary Commissioners, and Ambassadors from Almighty God,
animated the People to the late Rebellion. And still they endeavor to
captivate their Pity, by a bold and impudent insinuation of these two things,
That they are the People of God, and That they are persecuted. For experience
shows that the Opinion of Persecution naturally moves men to Pity, and Pity
presently turns into Love, and whom men love, they are easily brought to
defend. But I doubt not to any unprejudiced Reader so to divest them of these
pretenses, and stripping them of their sheeps clothing to represent them as
naked as Truth, and as deformed as Error and Seduction. For the first of these,
Their being the People of God. I demand whether true Piety is consistent with
the known abetment of Principles and Practices directly contrary to the law of
Nature, and the word of God: and then whether the Preaching taking up Arms, and
raising a War against our Lawful Prince, be not a sin deeply dyed with both
these Qualifications. That the latter of these is undeniable, and the former
justly chargeable upon them, let the ensuing System of Principles speak, which
they vented from the Pulpit, and their Auditors Commented upon by all the
hideous massacres since acted by them in the strength of those Doctrines and
assertions. I say, let men impartially read them over and see, Whether that
Religion can be called Pure, that is so far from Peaceable. And for a further
Test of their Piety; I demand Whether an Oath be not the most sacred and
dreadful Obligation that can be fastened upon the Conscience of man: and
whether their Oath of Allegiance were not such an one? upon which Concessions,
I demand further, what strain of Piety could warrant these Ministers to send
their Congregations (as the chief of them did) with full discharge from the
Bonds of that Oath, to wage war against their King? what Prerogative in
Religion could authorize them to obtrude an Oath and Covenant contradictory to
their former Oaths, upon those Consciences, that groaned with horror and
reluctance under the sense of their former Obligations? Till they can here
either deny the matter of Fact, which has been writ in Characters of blood
legible to all the World; or can reconcile these matters of Fact to
Christianity, I demand of them in the presence of God and man, what account
they will give before the great Tribunal of God for having with so much
solemnity of Prayer, show of Piety; and profession of Zeal, deceived the People
into these execrable practices, enough to stink the Protestant name out of the
World; and what excuse the clear light of Reason, and of the Word, can leave to
those who resigned themselves up to be deceived by them? But as the Conscience
being once broken up, easily lies open to any after Breach: So they having
deflowred it with the first perjury of the Covenant, stuck not much at the
Engagement, a Promise as contradictory to the Covenant, as the Covenant it self
had been to their Oaths of Allegiance and Canonical obedience: and lastly their
recognizing and doing homage to Cromwell, who had settled himself with the
Power, though not the Title of King, and with an House of Lords, seemed no less
to throw off, and contradict their Engagement. We see here the compass of their
Religious swallow. All oaths could down with them, but none hold them: out of
all which they could with the greatest facility find a way to creep forth, and
interpret away the obligation of an Oath, as easily, as if it were an Act of
Parliament. But the only thing these thorough-paced swearers at length stick
at, is the Subscription lately required by Law, made and enacted by Parliament,
and confirmed by the Royal assent, that is, by all the legislative Power this
Nation owns. This they cannot subscribe to: why? because they cannot renounce
an Oath imposed by part of a Rebel Parliament, without, and against the Royal
assent, and by which they swore off all former lawful Oaths, binding
themselves to prosecute that Rebellious War. This they will not, they cannot
renounce; and therefore desire only for a while to be dispensed with, and
Indulged, till they come to be in a capacity once more to put it in Execution.
How far Persons owning such an obliga^ion, and venting such maxims and
Doctrines as are here faithfully and truly represented out of their printed
Sermons, are like to advance, or perhaps at all to comport with, the Peace of
the Kingdom, is left to the serious Consideration of those, with whom the
preservation of that Peace is entrusted, and whose Prudence being alarm d with
such spiritual fireballs, will (we hope) begin to look about, and to
distinguish between Conscience and Contempt. If any should now plead their
being instrumental to the reduction of his Majesty, for their vindication from
the charge of these assertions, too notorious to be denied, and too impious to
be defended; though I could answer, that I am not at all beholding to a
Surgeon for setting that leg, which he himself first put out of joint: yet I
desire them to remember that they never attempted the Restoration of his
Majesty, till they were visibly in the very jaws of the Fanatics, who were
then seizing upon their Tithes and Churches, the last morsel of the spiritual
Revenue; so that it is shrewdly to be suspected, that had not the Tythe-pig
cried louder in their ears, than either their Conscience, or the word of God,
they had never been awakened to attempt that, which since it has been effected,
so many of them have not obscurely repented of. And so much may suffice to
answer their Pretenses to Piety, and the power of Godliness. To their next
plea, that they are now persecuted, I shall only make this reply; That I desire
the World to take notice, that those Persons, who turned almost all out of
their livings, that adhered to their lawful Sovereign; who sent suc^, with
their Wives and Families a begging, as durst not deflower their Consciences
with downright Perjury; and having sworn Canonical Obedience to the most
Reformed Church in the World, durst not by a contrary Oath, swear and endeavor
its extirpation. Those also who procured that murdering Order from a bloody
Tyrant and Usurper, that every Episcopal Divine should not only be incapable of
a Benefice, but also disabled to exercise any act of his ministerial Function,
as Preaching, Baptizing, or the like, nor yet suffered to get some little
subsistence by teaching School: no, nor lastly to live in any Gentleman's house,
who out of Pity might take him in to keep him from Starving. All which are such
unheard of Instances of barbarous Tyranny, that the Spite of the Heathen
Neros, Dioclesians, Julians, (all circumstances considered) was much inferior
to them. Now, I say, I desire the World to take notice, that those who were
partly the Authors, partly the Procurers of these hideous, remorseless Actions,
are those poor, gentle, suffering Lambs of Christ that now bleat out
Persecution. Having thus answered their pleas, or rather their Noise, I shall
in a word or two give an account of the following book. It presents us first
with a short Collection of the Sayings and Doctrines of the great Leaders and
Abetters of the Presbyterian Reformation, of their pious and peaceable maxims,
which like razors set with oil, cut the throat of Majesty with so keen a
smoothness: and then to bring up the rear of this spiritual Brigade, and
withal, to show further, that the cause of our Church is so united to that of
the Crown, that the same who malign one, strike as boldly at the other, I have
thought fit to bring the Papists and the Hobbians upon the same Stage, as
venting Doctrines no less pernicious to the Civil, than to the Ecclesiastical
State. For a testimony of which, I have here given a Taste of each of them: of
the first, out of Mr. White: of the second, out of the Author of the Leviathan,
and great Propagator of the Kingdom of Darkness. I selected the writings of Mr.
White, as being the most Compendious and effectual way of Probation. For if He
who writes, and pretends enmity against the Jesuits, for being Disturbers of
the Peace of States and Kingdoms, and underminers of the Prerogative of Kings,
and so by this, catches at the reputation of being moderate; I say, if this
Person shall yet be found a pestilent assertor of such maxims as eat out the
Rights and Titles of all lawful Princes, then let men take an estimate of
their known Treasons and King-killing Doctrines, from the Poison and Virulence
of their very moderation. And therefore I earnestly entreat the Reader
diligently to peruse that Paragraph that exhibits to him the collection of Mr.
Whites Principles. I have this now in the last place to add, that the Reader
must not here expect a full rehearsal of these men's Doctrines, but only a Taste,
or Specimen. He that can endure the raking of Dunghils longer than I can, let
him have recourse to their Writings, let him lanch out into the Ocean of the
Presbyterian Pamphlets and Sermons, an Ocean in which the Papists may see the
face of their disloyal Doctrines, as in a Glass, and in which the Leviathan
himself may sport, and take his pastime.

There seems to be a more than ordinary Significance in that Saying of the
Prophet, that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and that, I conceive, not
only for its equal malignity, but also for its peculiar Analogy and cognation:
for if we reflect upon the late Instances of it amongst our Selves, we shall
find that the People could never be brought to Rebel, till their Preachers had
first Bewitched them. But I hope the World will be so far unbewitched, as to
read this Collection, with their farewell-Sermons lately printed together, and
exposed to sale with so much Ostenta^ion: Of which I shall say this, that they
may very properly be called Fare-well-Sermons, since experience is like to
manifest, that their Con-gregations never fared so well, as when such Seducers
preached their Last.

Mr Edmund Calamies Theses.
Page 22. THE Lords and Commons are as the Master of the House.

2. The Parliament whom the people choose are the great and only Conservators of
the peoples liberties.

p. 38. They are the chief Magistrate, Custodes and vindices utriusque tabulae,
p. 37. for they are the Ministers of God for good, and revengers to execute
wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. (which being by Saint Paul
expressly spoken of the Highest Powers, he applies to that part of the two
Houses that sat at Westminster, without, nay, against the Kings command.)

p. 9. That all those that fought under the Kings banner, against this
Parliament, fought themselves into slavery, and did endeavor by all bloody and
treacherous ways to subvert Religion and Liberties.

p. 12. That the King, that should have been a head of gold, was an iron head
to crush its own body in pieces.

p. 18. Those that made their peace with him at Oxford (by returning to their
Loyalty,) were Judasses of England, and it were just with God to give them
their portion with Judas.

p. 13. Those that engaged in this Cause, and in the Covenant (which was an
oath for their goods,) were unjustly charged with Rebellion.

p. 38. That it was Gods cause, and it shall prevail at last.

p. 29. That it is commendable to fight for Peace and Reformation, against the
Kings command.

These are Mr. Calamies Doctrines in his Sermon preached before the Lords, Dec.
25. 1644. printed by ^hristopher Meredith by his own appointment; directly
contrary to St. Peter, who tells us, that the King is the Supreme, and not any
one, or two Houses of Parl^ament without him; contrary to St. Paul, who ^ells
us, that whosoever (severally, or conjunctly) shall resist, much more that
shall fight against this Highest Power, resist the ordinance of God, and shall
receive damnation; and contrary to our oath of Allegiance, wherein we
acknowledge the King, to be the only Supreme Governor of this Nation.

Mr. Jenkins Theses out of his humble Petition, when he was Prisoner; Printed
October. 15. 1651.
1. THat the Parliament of the Common Wealth of England without the King, 1651.
were the Supreme Authority of this Nation.

2 That Gods providence, (that is, his permission of events and success) are
antecedent declarations of his good will and approbation.

3 That the providence of God as evidently appeared in removing the King, and
then investing their Honors with the Government of this Nation, as ever they
appeared in the taking away, or bestowing of any Government in any History of
any age of the World.

4 That a refusal to be subject to this Authority, under the pretense of
upholding the Title of any one upon earth, is a refusal to acquiesce in the
wise and righteous pleasure of God, such an opposing of the Government set up
by the Soverein Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have peace, either in
acting in, or suffering for.

5 That it is our duty to yield to this Authority all active and cheerful
obedience in the Lord, even for conscience sake.

Mr. Marshal Sermon. on Ps. 102. v. 16, 17. March 26. 1645.
P. 39. 1. THose in Authority, in things of this life, have command, and may
act ad modum imperii; In matters of Religion, all their power is ad modum
ministerii, they must not dispose of the affairs of the Church, but at the
direction of the Word only.

2 They are limited to the Word, and men under their Authority, must, before
they obey their orders, examine them by the Word, and find them both lawful
and expedient in their use for edification.

p. 41. 3. As Josia put to death those that followed Baal, so may the
Parliament those, that will not return to the Lord, and leave Antichristianism.

p. 45. That Antichristianism that was sworn in the Covenant to be ^ooted out
(was the established Government in the Church.)

Mr. Edmund Calamies Speech at Guild Hall, October the sixth, 1643.
Gentlemen,
YOU have heard a worthy Gentleman of the House of Commons, it is desired by
this grave and Reverend Assembly of Ministers, that three of the Ministers of
this Assembly should likewise speak unto you concerning this great business,
and notwithstanding my indisposition of body, being required by them, though
that Gentleman of the House of Commons has spoken so abundantly to the
purpose, yet notwithstanding I am here come to speak something, the rather to
declare my willingness to appear in this Cause, that is every way so just, and
every way so honest, and so good, that I may truly say, as the Martyr did, that
if I had as many lives, as I have hairs on my head, I would be willing to
sacrifize all these lives in this Cause; You know the story of Craesus, that
though he never spoke in his life, yet when he saw his Father ready to be
killed, it untyed the strings of his tongue, and then he cried out, that they
would not kill his Father; you are not ignorant that England and Ireland lie a
dying, and though I never appeared in this place, yet I bless God that has
given me that health, this day, to speak something in this Cause, for the
reviving of the dying condition of England, and Ireland; It is such a Cause as
is able to make a very Infant eloquenr, and a dumb man to speak that never
spoke in all his lise; The matter I am desired to speak to, is, concerning the
Contribution, to persuade you to be liberal toward the bringing in of the
Scots, to help us in this our great necessity; The truth is, it is a great
shame that England should stand in need of another Nation, to help it to
preserve its Religion and Liberties: That England, that has been enriched with
the Gospel of Peace, and the peace of the Gospel for so many years; that
England, that has been blessed with so many rare Ministers of God, so many
precious, and powerful servants, that have preached the Word of God in season
and out of season; that England, that has professed the Gospel with so much
power and purity; that England should stand in need of the help of their
Brethren of Scotland, for to preserve that Gospel that they have professed so
many years; I confess to me it seems a very strange Prodigy, and a strange
wonder; but it has pleased Almighty God for the sins of England, for our great
unthankfulness, and for our unthankfulness under these means, and for the great
blood-guiltiness, and Idolatry, and Superstition of this Nation, it has
pleased God to suffer a great ^art of the Kingdom to be blinded, especially
those parts, where the Word os God has not been preached in a powerful manner;
and there are many in the King^om, that will not be persuaded, that there is an
intention to bring in Pop^ry, and to bring in Slavery; Many of them (I say)
think that though the Popish Army should prevail, and the plundering Army
should (...), yet they think all would go well with Religion, and with their
Liber^es; I say it has pleas^d God to ^uffer abundance in the Kingdom, to be
blinded with this opinion, out of a just judgment to punish us for our
unthankfuln^ss, and for our ingr^titude; and this is the reason that so many
men stand Neuters, and that ^o many are Malignants, and disaffected to this
great Cause, in so much that I am concluded under this, that there i^ittle
probability to finish this Cause, without the coming in of the Scots, (as you
heard so worthily by that Member of the House of Commons;) The sons of Zerviah
are grown so strong, what through our fearfulness, what through our
covetousness, what through our malignity, that there is little hope (I say) to
finish this great Cause, or to bring it to a desired peace, without the help of
another Nation, and by the assistance of God, by the help of another Nation it
may be done; These are two mighty, two omnipotent Arguments, to prevail with
you to contribute your utmost aid and assistance to that Cause; since it cannot
speedily be done without their help, and by Gods blessing, it may speedily be
done by their help.

What would the Kings party do, if they could engage another Nation to their
help? 21000. if they could engage them to our ruin, what would they not do?
How much more should we be willing to contribute our greatest help to engage a
Nation, that indeed is part of our own Nation, within the same Island, and our
Brethren so (...), and so well affected to this Cause, what should we not be
willing to do to engage so great a party? I would entreat you to rememb^r, that
it is not many years ago, since our Brethren of Scotland came hither into
England, in a warlike manner, and yet with peaceable affections, and that you
would remind your selves* what good they did to you when they were then in
England, they were the chief Causes of this Parliament, that now we do enjoy and
of all the good that has been reaped by this Parliament; (as you may well
remember) By their coming in you know this Parliament was procured, and their
se^ond coming in (through Gods mercy) may be a means to confi^m this Parliament,
and to establish it, and to uphold it in its dignity, and in the privileges of
it, and to keep it from being ruined; and if the Parliament be ruined, you all
well know that our Religion, and our Liberties are ruined, for the Parliament is
the great Conservatour of Religion and Liberties; and I may truly say (s you
know Caligula did once wish, that all Rome were one n^ck that he might cut it
of^ at one blow) They that intend to ruin the Parl^ment, they ruin your
Religion and Liberties, and all England at on^ blow; Now (I say) as their first
coming was a means to produce this Parliament so their second coming in (through
Gods blessing) may be a means to (...) it, and to confirm it; And when they
were here, you know how faithfully they carried themselves, and when they had
done their work, how willingly they went away without doing any hurt, and I
doubt not of the same faithfulness, nay, you ought all to believe, that they
will likewise, when they have done the work they are calle^ to in England, they
will likewise with the same faithfulness depart, for it is Religion that brings
them here, and the same Religion will make them willingly leave us, and go home
to their own Country, when they have done that work for which they came. I am
assured that the great hope at Oxford is, that they will never prevail for the
getting of Money for to bring them in; and if they once see the matter of Money
effected, and if they once hear of the Scot^ coming in, it will work such a
terror there, as I am assured, that it will (through Gods mercy) produce a
notable compliance of that Party with the Parliament for an effectual peace,
such as all the godly of the Land shall bless God for.

I foresee there are many Objections that may be brought to hinder this work,
many mountains of opposition that will lie in the way: And likewise that the
Malignants will buz many things in your ears, if it be possible to put some
great rub in the way, to hinder the effecting of this work but I hope, the love
you have to God, and to your Religion, and to the Gospel, and to your wives and
children, will sw^llow down all these objections, and conquer them all; I Will
name some few objections, and give you some short answer.

Some it may be, will put you in mind, to call in question the lawfulness of
contributing toward the bringing in of the Scots to this Nation; But for this,
I Will give you an easy answer, Certainly Gentlemen, it is as lawful for the
Parliament to call in our brethren of Scotland to their help, as it is lawful
for me, when my house is on fire, and not able to quench it my self, to call in
my neighbor to quench my house, that is ready to burn down; The Kingdom is all
on fire, we are not able with that speed to quench it, as we wish, we call in
our brethren in Scotland to help us to quench the flames that are kindled among
us; It is as lawful as it is for the Master and Mariners of a Ship, when it is
ready to sink through a mighty Tempest, to call in other Mariners to help to
keep the Ship from sinking; It is the condition of our Kingdom now, it is ready
to sink, and it is our desire that our Brethren of Scotland would come in to
our aid, to keep it from sinking.

Others it may be will object and say to you, it is rebellion, especially to
call in another Nation to your help. But I beseech you give me leave to put you
in mind, that when the Scots came last into England, there was a Proclamation
out against them, wherein they were called Rebels, and there were prayers to be
said in our Churches (as you well remember) in which we were to pray against
them as Rebels, and there was Money likewise contributed then, for to hinder
their coming in, and to raise an Army to drive them out of the Kingdom, and I
doubt not but you may remember, all the ill-affected did contribute Money to
keep them out of this Kingdom, and from tarrying in; but it pleased Almighty
God through his great mercy, so to change and alter the state of things, that
within a little while, the Nation of Scotland, even by Act of Parliament, they
were proclaimed and made the true and Loyal Subjects of the King, and in those
Churches in which they were prayed against as Rebels, even in those very
Churches, they were pronounced the good Subjects of the King; this I doubt not
but you remember, and I doubt not, but through the mercy of God, the Lord
raising up our hearts, I doubt not but the same effect will come of their
second coming into this Kingdom; and they that now tell you they are Rebels,
and you do an act of Rebellion, in the contribution to the bringing of them in,
I doubt not but you shall see an Act of Parliament to call them his Loyal
Subjects, (wherein I hope our King will concur with his Parliament) and likewise
Prayers made, nay, a day of thanksgiving, as was after their first coming, a
day of Thanksgiving for the mercy of God, in stirring up their hearts to be
willing to come unto our help.

But it may be some others will object and say, why should we that are
Ministers, engage our s^lves so much in this business? to see a Reverend
Assembly of grave Ministers to appear here in so great an Assembly. This it may
be, will be a mighty objection to some, but I beseech you give me leave to give
you a short answer; did I not think that that shall be said this day, would
mightily conduce to peace, for my part, I would not have been the mouth of the
Assembly; did I think any other way to produce a solid and a settled peace, a
Religious peace, I that am a Minister of peace, an Ambassador of peace, I would
not have been a Trumpeter to this business this day: the truth is, if you would
have peace with Popery, a Peace with slavery; if you would have a Judas peace,
or a Joab his peace, you know the Story, he kissed Amasa, and then killed him;
if you would have a peace that may bring a massacre with it, a French peace, if
you would have such a peace, it may be had easily; but if you would have a
peace that may continue the Gospel among you, and may bring in a Reformation,
such as all the godly in the Kingdom do desire, I am concluded under this, and
am confident that such a peace cannot be had without contribution toward the
bringing in of the Scots, and that is the reason, for the promoting of this
peace, this blessed peace, that we have appeared here this day: and methinks
(Gentlemen) the very sight of these worthy Divines, methinks so many Divines,
so many Orators, so many silent Orators to plead with you, to be willing to
engage your selves to the utmost to help forward the Nation of Scotland to come
to our help. And likewise I would put you in mind of the 10 th. of Numbers,
there you shall read that there were two silver Trumpets; and as there were
Priests appointed for the convocation of their Assemblies, so there were
Priests to sound the silver Trumpets to proclaim the War. And likewise in the
20 th. of Deuteronomy, you shall find there, that when the children of Israel
would. go out to War, the sons of Levi, one of the Priests, was to make a
speech to encourage them. And certainly, if this were the way of God in the Old
Testament, certainly much more in such a Cause as this, in which Cause Religion
is so intwin'd, and indeed so interlac'd, that Religion and this Cause, they
are like Hippocrates his twins, they must live and dye together. And
(Gentlemen) if Religion were not concerned in this Cause, and mightily
concerned; and if Religion did not live and dye with it, we had not appeared
this day; And I hope this will be a sufficient answer unto this Objection.

But there is another Objection which I will answer, and then briefly give
leave to my other Reverend Brethren, that likewise are prepared to speak here.
The great Objection of all is this, that the City is already exhausted, and so
much money has been lent already, that there is no hope of lending any more;
this is the grand Objection. But truly (Gentlemen) for my part, this is one of
the chief Arguments I have to persuade you to lend a little more, because you
have lent so much: give me leave to put you in mind of that Story, in the 2
Kings 13. the Story of King J^ash, that came to visit the Prophet Elisha, when
he was ready to breath out his last, the Prophet Elisha gives him a bow and
arrows, and bids him shoot, he shoots, and bids him smite, he smites the ground
thrice, and then he ceased, the Prophet was exceeding angry with him, and tells
him, you should have smote the ground 5 or 6 times, and then you should have
utterly consumed the Assyrians, whereas now you shall smite them but three
times. Give me leave to apply this, Gentlemen, you have smote the ground
thrice, you have lent once, twice, and thrice, indeed you have been the fame of
England, and the Repairers of England, and the Ornaments of England, you have
lent much, but let me tell you, you must smite the ground 5 or 6 times, if ever
you look to consume the Assyrians, if ever you look to bring this War to a
happy Peace, that your posterities may rejoice in this Peace, you must shoot
one arrow more, and then through Gods blessing, you may utterly consume these
enemies, that you and your posterity may rejoice in a happy peace; It is a
famous story of Johannes Eleemozinarius, that when he had given even almost all
he had to the poor, his friends were exceeding angry with him, and told him he
had undone himself, what was his answer? O (says he) I have not yet shed my
blood for Jesus Christ; Jesus Christ he emptied himself of his Divinity, to
make us rich, he became poor, and shed his blood for you; You have not yet made
your selves so poor as Jesus Christ was, that had no house to lodge in, and he
did all this for your sakes; You have not yet shed your blood for the Cause of
Christ; We read that Moses was willing to be blotted out of the book of life,
for the Cause of God; and we read of Paul, that he was w^lling to be accursed,
for the people of Isreal's sake; And will you not be willing to venture your
earthly provisions for so good a Cause as this is, which (I say) England was
never engaged in the like?

Religion has produced all the wealth you have, all your wealth is but the
child of Religion; we have a saying, Religio peperit divitias, and divitiae
devorarunt matrem; Religion has begot wealth, and the Daughter has devoured
the Mother; and filia devoravit matrem; but give me leave, and I hope (through
Gods blessing) you will invert this saying, Religion has got you all the
wealth you have, you Gentlemen, and I hope the Daughter now will preserve the
Mother; I hope Riches will preserve Religion, and not destroy Religion. A
famous example of Polanus Nolinus, that when he had given all that he had away,
and being asked, why he would give so much to the poor? he gave this answer, Ut
levius ascenderem scalam Jacobi, that I might the easier get up Jacobs ladder;
And let me assure you, in the word of a Minister, the contributing to this
Cause for Gods sake, and for the glory of God, and for the peace of the Gospel,
(I say) will be a means to make you the sooner ascend up Jacobs Ladder; not for
the giving of the money, but for the evidence of your Faith, through the merits
of the Lord Jesus Christ, by your giving of the money; And certainly that man
will never get up Jacobs Ladder, that has the rust of his money to bear
witness against him, at the day of Judgment, especially at such a time as
this. Give me leav^ to put you in mind of one other story, and that is of one
Bernardinus Ocanus, that was so liberal to the poor, that every penny that he
gave to the poor, he would call it a holy penny, and a happy penny, and he would
bless God, that he had that penny to give; indeed he was a Papist, and his
ordinary spe^ch was, O happy penny, that has purchased immortality to me;
inde^d this speech was not good, for it is not our money that does purchase
heaven, that is an evidence of the truth of our Faith, that lays hold upon
Christ for salvation; But let me tell you, if ever (Gentlemen) you might use
this speech, O happy penny, you may use it now; Happy money that will purchase
my Gospel, happy money that will purchase Religion, and purchase a Reformation,
to my posterity, O happy money, and blessed be God that I have it to lend! And
I count it the greatest opportunity that ever God did offer to the godly of
this Kingdom, to give them some money to lend to this Cause; And I remember in
this Ordinance of Parliament, you call it Advance money; It is called an
Ordinance to advance money toward the maintaining of the Parlaments forces;
and truly it is the highest advance of money, to make money an instrument to
advance my Religion; the Lord give you hearts to believe this.

You shall have the Faiths of both Kingdoms engaged in this Cause, the Kingdom
of Scotland, and the Kingdom of England, and surely the public Faith of
Scotland will secure the public Faith of England; I speak now of secondary
causes through Gods blessing. I am informed by the Commissioners of Scotland,
that the Nation of Scotland are now tak^ng the Covenant, (that we took the last
Lords day in this City:) And you know that a Scotch Covenanter is a terrible
thing; you know what mighty things they did, by their last Covenant; you know
that the name of a Covenanter, the very name of it, did do wonders; And I am
assured by them, that there is not one person in the Kingdom of Scotland, that
is not a Covenanter, and there shall not one abide among them, that will not
take this Covenant, and there shall not one of those 21000 that are to come
over in this Cause, not one of them shall come, that will not take this
Covenant, but they must take th^s Covenant before they come; O that the
consideration of these things, might work up your hearts to a high degree of
Charity, to a superlative degree, and that the Lord would make you more active
and more liberal in this great Cause; For my part, I speak it in the name of my
self, and in the name of these reverend Ministers, we will not only speak to
persuade you to contribute, but every one of us, that God has given any estate
to, we will all to our utmost power, we will not only say ite, but venite, we
will not only speak to you to lend, but every one of us, as we have already
lent, so we will lend to our utmost power, and bless God that we have it to
lend; for indeed it is now a time of action, and not of speaking only, because
it is an extraordinary business, therefore here is an extraordinary appearance
of so many Ministers, to encourage you in this Cause, that you may see how real
the godly Ministry in England is unto this Ca^se.

The Gospel it is called a Pearl of price, by our Savior Christ, and I hope
all you Merchants will part with your goodly pearls to buy this pearl of pr^ce;
You Tradesmen, the Gospel is called a Treasure hid in the field, so our Savior
Christ calls it, I hope you will be willing to part with your earthly
treasures, to preserve this blessed treasure that is hid in the field; you have
parted with some goodly pearls already, I hope you will part with your other
goodly pearls. There is an excellent Story of one Nonius a Roman Senator, that
had a pearl that (...) did prize above his life, and when Anthony the Triumvir,
one that was then in great power, when he sent to Nonius to have the pearl, he
would not send it him, and he told him, that if he would banish him, he would
be willingly banished, so he might save his pearl, if he would take away his
life, he would die with his pearl; he did not regard his Country, so he might
have his pearl; he regarded nothing, so he might have his pearl; but he would
not part with his pearl, whatever he parted withal; This pearl it is the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, that you have professed in this City, and I hope you
have professed it with power; and certainly, you have the name of those that
have professed the Gospel in the greatest purity of any under heaven; This
pearl is this Gospel, I hope you will part with all willingly and cheerfully,
rather than part with the Gospel, though you go to prison, carry the Gospel
with you, nay, though you lose your lives, it shall be with the Gospel, and for
the Gospel; I hope so.

There is one Argument more, and then I have done, and that is from the
inveterate hatred they have at Oxford, against the City of London, and against
you for your good, because you have been so well-affected to this Cause.
Gentlemen, I beseech you give me leave (that am no Statesman, nor acquainted
with the affairs of policy, yet give me leave) to put you in mind of this, that
surely the plundering Army at Oxford conceive that they shall find a great
treasure here in the City, though many pretend they have no money; Though
certainly you have done well, and lent much, yet the plnndering Army give out,
that if they get possession of the City, they shall find a treasury to be able
to pay all they have been at: And if ever you should be driven (which God
forbid) to make your peace, it would cost you twenty times as much then to
procure your peace, and such a pe^ce it may be, that would be rather a War than
a Peace, and a death better than that peace, which now you may have for a very
little, a most happy Peace.

There is a famous story of Zelimus Emperor of Constantinople, that after he
had taken Egypt, he found a great deal of tre^sure there, and the Soldiers
came to him, and asked him, what shall we do with the Citizens of Egypt, for
we have found a great treasure among them, and we have taken their Riches? O
(says he) hang them all up, for they are too rich to be made slaves; and this
was all the thanks they had for the riches they were spoiled os; And it may be,
though some of you that stand Neuters, or some of you that are disaffected to
the Cause of the Parliament, may think that if the Lord for our sins, should
give up this City unto the Army that is with the King, you may think that you
shall escape, yet be assured that your goods will be Roundheads, though you be
not, your goods will be Gybellins, though you be Guelfs, as the story is;
Certainly, there will be no distinction, in the plundering of your goods,
between you and others; and therefore let me beseech you, that as the Lord has
made you instruments to do a great deal of good already, for indeed you are the
preservers of our Religion, and you are the preservers of our Parliament, by
your liberality, and by your former contributions, and by your assistance, and
the Lord has made you mighty instruments of our good, let me beseech you, that
you would persevere, and now we are come to the Sheat Anchor, we are now come
to the last cast, I beseech you, you would persevere, and hold out; and O that
my words might add somewhat to help forward this contribution! It has pleased
God to make me a settled Minister in this City, and I have now been here almost
five years in this City, and though I had never ^one any good in my place, I
should now think it a great fruit of my coming to this City, if after five
years unprofitableness, I might speak somewhat this afternoon, that might
enlarge your hearts to a greater measure of liberality; All I will say is this:
We Divines say, that Perseverance is the only grace that Crowns a Christian;
Methushelah lived nine hundred ninety and nine years, if he had fallen away
from Grace, at the nine hundred ninety and nine years end, all the good that he
had done before, had been quite forgotten; I know that God will so uphold his
children, that they shall never fall away, but I bring it as a supposition,
that suppose that Methushelah had forsaken his righteousness, all he had done
before, had been quite forgotten; but God has made a promise, never to forsake
his Children, and that grace he has begun in them, he will finish, and I doubt
not but that God, that has put it into your hearts to be so liberal already,
and do so much in this Cause, and to be so cordial, and so real, and to exceed
all other parts of the Kingdom, I hope that same God will now finish that good
work he has begun, and will crown all his Graces in you, with the Grace of
Perseverance; and that God that has been the Author of all the good you have
done, I doubt not but that God will be the finisher: and I beseech God to give
a blessing to that has been spoken.

Mr. Baxter's Theses of Government and Governors in General, Collected out of
his Book called the Holy Commonwealth.
I. Governors are some limited, some de facto unlimited: The unlimited are
Tyrants and have no right to that unlimited Government. P. 106. These. 101.

II. The 3. qualifications of necessity to the being of Sovereign Power are, 1.
So much understanding, 2. So much will or goodness in himself, 3. So much
strength or executive power by his interest in the People or others, as are
necessary to the said ends of Government. P. 130. These. 133.

III. From whence he deduceth 3. Corollaries, ( viz.)

1. When Providence depriveth a man of his understanding and intellectual
Capacity, and that statedly or to his ordinary temper, it makes him materiam
indispositam and incapable of Government, though ^ot of the name. These. 135. 2.
If God permit Princes to turn sowicked as to be incapable of governing so as is
consistent with the ends of Government, he permits them to depose themselves.
These. 136. 3. If Providence statedly disable him that was the Sovereign from
the executing of the Law, protecting the just, and other ends of Government, it
makes him an incapable subject of the power, and so desposeth him. These. 137.
IV. Whereunto he subjoyns, that though it is possible and likely that the
guilt is or may be theirs, who have disabled their Ruler by delerting him, yet
he is dismissed and disobliged from the charge of Government; and particular
innocent members are disobliged from being Governed by him.

V. If the person ( viz. the Sovereign) be justly dispossessed, as by a lawful
War, in which he loses his right, especially if he violate the Constitution
and enter into a Military state against the People themselves, and by them be
conquered, they are not obliged to restore him, unless there be some special
obligation upon them besides their Allegiance. These. 145.

VI. If the person dispossessed, though it were unjustly, do afterward become
incapable of Government, it is not the Duty of his Subjects to seek his
restitution. These. 146. No not although ( says he) the incapacity be but
accidental, as if he cannot be restored but by the Arms of the Enemies or God
or of the Commonwealth.

VII. If an Army (of Neighbors, Inhabitants, or whoever) do (though
injuriously) expel the Sovereign, and resolve to ruin the Commonwealth,
rather than he shall be restored; and if the Commonwealth may prosper without
his restoration, it is the Duty of such an injured Prince for the Common good
to resign his Government, and if he will not, the people ought to judge him as
made incapable by Providence, and not to seek his restitution to the apparent
ruin of the Commonwealth. These. 147.

Where by the way we are to note, he makes the people judge of this and all
other incapacities of the Prince, and consequently when or for what he is to be
Deposed, or not Restored by them.

VIII. If therefore the rightful Governor be so long dispossessed, that the
Commonwealth can be no longer without, but to the apparent hazard of its
ruin, we ( that is, we the people, or we the Rebels that dispossessed him) are
to judge that Providence has dispossessed the former, and presently to consent
to another. These. 149.

IX. When the People are without a Governor, it may be the duty of such as
have most strength, ex charitate, to protect the rest from injury. These. 150.
And consequently they are to submit themselves to the Parliament, or to that
Army which deposed or dispossessed or murdered the rightful Governor.

X. Providence by Conquest or other means does use so to qualify some persons
above others for the Government when the place is void, that no other persons
shall be capable competitors, and the persons ( does not he mean the Cromwels?)
shall be as good as named by Providence, whom the People are bound by God to
choose, or consent to, so that they are usually brought under a divine
obligation to submit to such or such, and take them for their Governous, before
those persons have an actual right to Govern. These. 151.

XI. Any thing that is a sufficient sign of the will of God, that this is the
person, by whom we must be Governed, is enough (as joined to Gods Laws) to
oblige us to consent and obey him as our Governor. These. 153.

XII. When God does not notably declare any person or persons qualified above
others, there the people must judge as well as they are able according to Gods
general rules. These. 157.

XIII. And yet All the people have not this right of choosing their Governors,
but commonly a part of every Nation must be compelled to consent, etc.

XIV. Those that are known enemies of the Common good in the chiefest parts of
it, are unmeet to Govern or choose Governors, but such are multitudes of
ungodly vicious men. Page 174. So that if those that are strongest ( though
fewest) call themselves the Godly Party, all others besides themselves are to
be excluded from Governing or choosing of Governors. And amongst the ungodly
that are to be thus excluded, he reckons all those that will not hearken to
their Pastors ( he means the Presbyterian Classis) or that are despisers of the
Lord's Day, that is, all such as are not Sabbatarians, or will not keep the
Lord's Day after the Jewish manner, which they prescribe, and which is condemned
for Judaism by all even of the Presbyterian persuasion in the world, but those
of England and Scotland ouely.

XV. If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall
sinfully disposse's him, and contrary to their Covenants, choose and Covenant
with another, they may be obliged by their latter Covenant notwithstanding
their former; and particular subjects that consented not in the breaking of
their former Covenants, may yet be obliged by occasion of their latter choice
to the person whom they choose. These. 181.

XVI. If a Nation injuriously deprive themselves of a worthy Prince, the hurt
will be their own, and they punish themselves; but if it be necessarily to
their welfare, it is no injury to him. But a King that by war will seek
reparations from the body of the People, does put himself into an hostile
State, and tells them actually that he looks to his own good more than theirs,
and bids them take him for their Enemy, and so defend themselves if they can.
Page 424.

XVII. Though a Nation wrong their King, and so quoad Meritum causa, they are
on the worser side, yet may he not lawfully war against the public good on
that account, nor any help him in such a war, because propter finem he has the
worser cause. These. 352.

And yet as he tells us ( page 476.) we were to believe the Parlaments
Declarations and professions which they made, that the war which they raised
was not against the King, either in respect of his Authority, or of his Person;
but only against the Delinquent Subjects, and yet they actually fought against
the King in person, and we are to believe ( says Mr. Baxter page 422.) that
men would kill them whom they fight against.

Mr. Baxter's Doctrine concerning the Government of England in particular.
HE denies the government of England to be Monarchical in these words.

I. The real Sovereignty here amongst was us in King, Lords, and Commons. Page
72.

II. As to them that argue from the Oath of Supremacy and the title given the
King, I refer them ( says Mr. Baxter) to Mr. Lawson's answer to Hobb's
Politics, He might have referred them to himself; p. 460. where he g^ves the
same answer to the same objection.
where he shows that the Title is often given to the single Person for the
honor of the Commonwealth, and his encouragement, because he has an eminent
interest: but will not prove the whole Sovereignty to be in him: and the Oath
excludes all others from without, not those whose interest is implied as
conjunct with his -- The eminent dignity and interest of the King above others
allowed the name of a Monarchy or Kingdom to the Commonwealth, though indeed
the Sovereignty was mixed in the hands of the Lords and Commons. Page 88.

III. He calls it a false supposition, 1. That the Sovereign power was only in
the King, and so that it was an absolute Monarchy. 2. That the Parliament had
but only the proposing of Laws, and that they were Enacted only by the Kings
Authority upon their request. 3. That the power of Arms and of War and Peace
was in the King alone. And therefore ( says he) those that argue from these
false suppositions, conclude that the Parliament being Subjects, may not take up
Arms without him, and that it is Rebellion to resist him; and most of this they
gather from the Oath of Supremacy, and from the Parlaments calling of
themselves his Subjects; but their grounds ( says he) are sandy, and their
superstructure false. Page 459, and 460.

And therefore Mr. Baxter tells u^, that though the Parliament are Subjects in
one capacity, yet have they their part in the Sovereignty also in their higher
capacity, Ibid. And upon this fa^se and traiterous supposition he endeavors to
justisie the late Rebellion, and his own more than ordinary activeness in it.
For,

IV. Where the Sovereignty ( says he) is distributed into several hands (as
the Kings and Parlaments) and the King invades the others part, they may
lawfully defend their own by war, and the Subject lawfully assist them, yea
though the power of the Militia be expressly given to the King, unless it be
also expressed that it shall not be in the other. These. 363.

The conclusion ( says he) needs no proof, because Sovereignty, as such, has
the power of Arms and of the Laws themselves. The Law that says the King shall
have the Militia, supposes it to be against Enemies, and not against the
Commonwealth, nor them that have part of the Sovereignty with him. To resist
him here is not to resist power, but usurpation and private will; in such a
case the Parliament is no more to be resisted than he. Ibid.

V. If the King raise War against such a Parliament, upon their Declaration of
the dangers of the Commonwealth, the people are to take it as raised against
the Commonwealth. These. 358.

And in that case (says he) the King may not only be resisted, but cease to
be a King, and enters into a state of War with the people. These. 368.

VI. Again, if a Prince that has not the whole Sovereignty be conquered by a
Senate that has the other part, and that in a just defensive War, that Senate
cannot assume the whole Sovereignty, but supposes that government in specie to
remain, and therefore another King must be chosen, if the former be incapable,
( These. 374.) as he tells us, he is, by ceasing to be King, in the immediately
precedent These.

VII. And yet in the Preface to this Book he tells us that the King withdrawing
( so he call the murdering of one King and the casting off of another) the
Lords and Commons ruled alone; was not this to change the species of the
Government? Which in the immediate words before he had affirmed to be in King,
Lords and Commons; which constitution ( says he) we were sworn, and sworn, and
sworn again to be faithful to and to defend. And yet speaking of that Parliament
which contrary to their Oaths changed this Government by ruling alone, and
taking upon them the Supremacy, Vid. Presace to the Holycommonwealth. p. 6.
he tells us that they were the best Governors in all the world, and such as
it is forbidden to Subjects to depose upon pain of damnation.

What then was he that deposed them? one would think Mr. Baxter should have
called him a Traitor, but he calls him in the same Preface, the Lord Prorector,
adding, That he did prudently, piously, faithfully, and to his immortal honor
exercise the Government, which he left to his Son, to whom ( as Mr. Baxter
says page 481.) he is bound to submit as set over us by God, and to obey for
conscience sake, and to behave himself as a Loyal Subject toward him, because
( as he says in the same place) a sull and free Parliament had owned him:
thereby implying, That a maimed and manacled House of Commons, without King and
Lords, and notwithstanding the violent expulsion of the secluded Members, were
a full and free Parliament; and consequently, that if such a Parliament should
have taken Arms against the King, he must have sided with them. Yea, though
they had been never so much in fault, and though they had been the beginners of
the War, for he tells us in plain and express terms,

VIII. That if he had known the Parliament had been the beginners of the War and
in most fault, yet the ruin of the Trustees and Representatives, and so of all
the security of the Nation being a punishment greater than any faults of theirs
against the King could deserve from him, their faults could not disoblige him (
meaning himself) from defending the Commonwealth. Page 480.

And that he might do this lawfully, and with a good Conscience, he seems to be
so confident, that in his Preface, he makes as it were a challenge, saying,
that if any man can prove that the King was the highest power in the time of
those Divisions, and that he had power to make that war which he made, he will
offer his head to Justice as a Rebel.

As if in those times of Division the King had lost or sorfeited his
Sovereignty, and the Parliament had not only a part, but the whole Sovereignty
in themselves.

IX. Finally Mr. Baxter tells us, Page 486. That having often searched into his
heart, whether he did lawfully engage into the War or not, and whether he did
lawfully encourage so many thousands to it; he tells us, I say, that the issue
of all his search was but this, -- That he cannot yet see that he was mistaken
in the main cause, nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if it
were to do again in the same state of things. He tells us indeed in the same
place, that if he could be convinced he had sinned in this matter, he would as
gladly make a public recantation, as he would eat or drink: which seeing he
has not yet done, it is ^vident he is still of the same mind, and consequently
would upon the same occasion do the same things, viz. sight, and encourage as
many thousands as he could to fight against the King, for any thing that calls
it self, or which he is pleased to call a full and Free Parliament: as likewise
that he would own and submit to any Usurper of the Sovereignty as set up by
God, although he came to it by the murder of his Master, and by trampling upon
the Parliament. Lastly, That he would hinder as much as possibly he could the
restoring of the rightful Heir unto the Crown. And now whether a man of this
Judgment, and of these affections, ought to be permitted to Preach or no, Let
any, but himself, judge.

Mr. Stephen Marshal in his Thanksgiving Sermon on Psalm. 124. verse. 6, 7, 8.
before the House of Commons, Sept. 7. 1641. Upon the peace concluded between
England and Scotland.
PAge 40, 41. Many are grieved at the great things God has done for us, as in
the eighth of Ezekiel v. 14. A company of women sat weeping for Tammuz, cause
they had lost their Idol.

Page 45. This year have we seen broken the yokes which lay upon our Estates,
Liberties, Religion, and Conscience.

Page 49. Look to your families, do as Jacob did at Bethel, when he paid his
vow of thanksgiving unto God, he made all his family bury their Idols under an
Oak.

Mr. Stephen Marshal in his Sermon Preached to the House of Commons at their
day of Thanksgiving, June 15. 1643. For the discovery of a dangerous,
desperate, and bloody Design, tending to the utter subersion of the Parliament,
and of the famous City of London.
THe viol now pouring out is the Lords work, and he will see it done, doubt ye
not. Page 9.

The first Engineers that battered the walls of this great Babylon, Who were
they but the poorer and meaner sort of people that at the first joined with the
Ministers to raise the building of Reformation? page 15.

In Scotland what great things has the Lord lately done, by very weak means,
hardly the fifth part of the Nobility appearing for them, scarce one fourth part
of the Kingdom owning the Cause? Page 18.

Were not the Book of Service, and the Book of Canons obtruded on them, the
Occasion of their late mercies? and the Tyranny of a few of their Prelates, a
means to unburthen them of their whole Prelacy? Page 18.

To what a dead low ebb were We brought, our liberty almost swallowed up, and
turned into slavery, our Religion into Popery? Page 18.

The Prelates late Canons and Oath, purposely contrived for the perpetuating of
their Hierarchy, and their other treacherous endeavors against the State,
joining with the Papists, and with them laboring to bring all into Confusion,
has helped thus far toward the taking them away both Root and Branch. Page 19.

The Roman Emperors wasted the Saints in ten several persecutions, but all
these were nothing in comparison of this destroyer, all their loins not so
heavy as the little fiuger of Antichrist. Page 25.

You are in part (Honorable and well-beloved) one of the Angels who are to pour
out the vial of the wrath of God. Page 37.

Had this bloody contrivance took effect, this Honorable Assembly had been made
as a Parliament of Paris, the greatest Instruments of the Kingdoms Slavery and
vassallage for time to come. Page 39.

Think now how deeply you are engaged, and brought under the curse of God, if
you perform not this Solemn Covenant, think how horrid a thing it will prove
sor any of you to stand perjured men before God in matters of such consequence.
Page 41.

All Protestant Writers do agree, that we are under the pouring out of some one
or more of these seven Vials, some think the fourth Vial is now pouring out on
the Antichristian world, others the fifth on the throne of the Beast. Page 44.

I dare speak it as confidently as I believe the Revelation to be Divine
Scripture, that what Viol so ever is now pouring out, the issue will be,
Antichrist shall lose, and Christ shall gain. Page 45.

Mr. Stephen Marshal in his Sacred Panegyric, Preached to the two Houses of
Parliament, his Excellency the Earl of Essex, Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen,
etc. Upon occasion of their Feasting, to testify their thankfulness to God,
for their Union and Concord, Janu. 18. 1643. on 1. Chron. 12. 38, 39, 40. All
these came with a perfect heart to Hebron to make David King over Israel, etc.
DAvid persecuted by Saul did not only take up Arms for his own defense, but
many of the choicest men of the Tribes did join with him, and all this while
King Saul was alive, and David but a private man, and one that had sworn
Allegiance to him. Page 7.

Now beloved give me leave to speak my thoughts freely, I will set aside my
Text, and the matter I have in hand, and yet I will confidently affirm, that
our days now are better than they were seven years ago, because it is better to
see the Lord executing Judgment, then to see men working wickedness, and to
behold a People lie wallowing in their blood, rather than apostating from God,
and embracing Idolatry and Superstition, and banishing the Lord Jesus from
amongst them. Page 18.

If there be any in this Assembly that thinks not this a sufficient Retribution
and Satisfaction for all his twentieth part, for all his contributions, for all
his payments and hazards, I s^y he is blind, I s^y his heart is not right with
God, he has no share in this business. Page 20.

Carry on the work still, leave not a rag that belongs to Popery, lay not a bit
of the Lords building with any thing that belongs to Antichrist, but away with
it, Root and Branch, Head and Tail, till you can say, Now is Christ set upon
his throne. Page 21.

* Noble and resolute Commanders, go on to fight the battles of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for so I will not now fear to call them. Page 21. --

* All Christendom, except the Malignants in England, do now see that the
question in England, is, whether Christ or Antichrist shall be Lord and King.
Page 21.

Ten thousand times cursed are they who have provoked Our Sovereign to raise
Arms to destroy his Nobles, and Commons, and Divines, and this most honored
City, and even all who have been faithful. Page 28.

Mr. Stephen Marshal after Naseby fight, in a Thanksgiving Sermon, on Psalm.
102. 18.
ALL the Countries where the Gospel had prevailed, have faithsully stood to God
in his cause, the rest nursed up under Popery and Superstition, both Lords
Commons and Gentlemen, and whole Commons, did endeavor to fight themselves
into slavery, and labor to des^roy the Parliament, that is themselves, and all
that is theirs.

Mr. Marshal in his Sermon on Micah. 7. 1, 2. 1644.
BElieve this cause must prosper, though we were all dead, our Armies
overthrown, and even our Palaments dissolved, this cause must prevail.

Mr. Edmund Calamy in his Sermon before the House of Peers, June 15. 1643. on
Joshua 24. 15.
REligion is that which is pretended on all hands, The defense of the
Protestant Religion, this news we hear daily from Oxford, and for this purpose
there is an Army of Papists to defend Protestant Religion, just as the
Gunpowder Treason, that would have blown up the Parliament for the good of the
Catholic Religion. Page 24.

Few Noblemen and Gentlemen appear on the Parliament side, not many mighty, not
many Noble, thus it was in Christ's time, the great men and great Scholars
crucified Christ. Page 30.

The Cause you manage, is the Cause of God, the glory of God is embarked in
the same Ship in which this cause is, and you may lawfully say as Joshua does,
Josh. 7. 9. What will thou do unto thy great name? and Numb. 14. 15, 16. And as
Joshua said to Israel, Numb. 14. 7. So does God to you, fear not, fear not, the
people of the land, for they are bread for us, their defense is departed from
them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not. Page 53.

I may say without uncharitableness, you have the major part of Gods people on
your side. Page 55.

He that dies fighting the Lords battle, dies a Martyr. Page 57.

Mr. Thomas Case in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Commons House in Parliament,
before his Sermon on Ezekiel. 20. 25.
GOd in you has graciously begun to make good that Evangelical promise, Zech.
12. 8. In defending this his English Jerusalem he has made him that was weak
among you, as David, you have conquered the Lion and the Bear, and shall not
that uncircumcised Philistine (that numerous Beast) who has not ceast to
blaspheme the Armies os the Living God, become like one of these? behold ^ he
lies grovelling at your feet, there wants nothing but cutting off his head.

They cried down the S^bbath as a ridiculous, or at least, a superfluous
Ceremony. Page XI. * thus they make the King glad with their wickedness, and he
that could bring Jeroboam an argument to justify his Idolatry he was a
well-come man at Court. Page 12.

Mr. Case on Ezra 10. 2, 3. Preached before the House of Commons.
SOme have sinned seducingly: and Jesuits could never have been more
desperate, I am sure they might have been less guilty, they have sinned against
their light, murdered their Principles they have sucked in with their Mothers
milk* spare them not I beseech you, though they crouch and cringe, and Worship
you as much as they have done their high Altars. Page 15.

Ah Brethren! I would not have you redeem their lives with your own heads. Page
16.

How the Presence and Preaching of Christ did scorch and blast those Cathedral
Priests, that unhallowed generation of * Scribes and Pharisees, and perfected
their Rebellion, into that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost. Page 33.

Mr. Case on Dan. XI. 32. 1644. Before the House of commons on a day of
Thanksgiving, for the Victory given to Sir William Waller against the Army of
Sir Ralph Hopton.
HAd not the Spirit of the Lord wrought to a wonder of wisdom and power, we
might have sat down long before this, made our Wills, an^ bequeathed our poor
children, every one of them Popery and Slavery for their sorrowful Patrimony.
Page 9.

Cursed be he that withholdeth his Sword from blood, that spares, when God
says strike; that suffers those to escape whom God has appointed to
destruction. Page 24.

Mr. Case on Isa. 43. 4. In a Thanksgiving for taking Bridgwater and Sherbourn.
* WHat a sad thing is it my Brethren, to see our King in the head of an Army
of Bahylonians, refusing as it were to be called the King of England, Scotland,
Ireland, and choosing rather to be called the King of Babylon? Page 18.

Prelacy and Prelatical Clergy, Priests and Jesuits, Ceremonies and
Service Book, Star Chamber and High Commission Court, were mighty impediments
in the way of Reformation, God has mightily brought them down. Page 19.

* The Father having given to him ( Vid. Christ) all power both in heaven and
in earth, and the rule and Regiment of this Kingdom he has committed to
Monarchies, Aristocracies, or Democracies, as the several combinations and
associations of the People shall between themselves think good to elect and
erect. God leaves people to their own Liberty in this Case. Page 26.

Mr. Thomas Case, Psalm. 107. 30, 31. in his Thanksgiving Sermon for Surrender
of Chester.
* ALas, alas, they have put out the eyes of his Majesty, and carried him away
Captive; our King is in Babylon among Idolaters and Murderers; we have no King.

Mr. Joseph Caryl in his Sermon on Nehe. chap. 9. verse. 38. Preached at the
taking of the Covenant, October. 6. 1643.
THere is much sin in making a Covenant on sinful grounds, and there is more
sin in keeping it; but when the preservation of true Religion, and the
Vindication of just Liberties, meet in the groundwork, yea may swear, and not
repent, yea if you swear, yea must not repent. Page 18.

Take the Covenant, and ye take Babylon, The Towers of Babylon shall quake, and
her seven hills shall move. Page 21.

It is Shiboleth to distinguish Ephramites from Gileadites. Page 22.

When we provoke God to bring evil upon us, he stays his hand by considering
the Covenant. Genesis 9. 15. Now as the remembrance of the Covenant on Gods part
stays his hand, so the remembrance of the Covenant will be very effectual, on
our part, to stay our hands, tongues, hearts from sin. Page 27.

Not only is that Covenant which God has made with us, founded in the blood
of Christ, but that also which we make with God. Page 33.

Mr. Caryl on Revel. XI. verse. 16, 17. before the House of Commons, April 23.
1644.
OUr war has been proved over and over (to Unbiast consciences) to be just.
Page 15.

We may answer all Queries about the Reign of Christ thus, the blind begin to
have their eyes unscal'd, the lame do walk at liberty, proud ones are ab^s'd,
the mighty ones are put from their seats, errors discountenanced, ^ruths
inquired after, Ceremonies and Superstitions are cast out, monuments of Popery
and Paganism cast down. Page 35.

Mr. Caryl on Luke 10. 20. Rejoice not that the Spirits are made Subject unt^
you, etc.
* THere is very little difference between Devils and wicked men. I may say
without breach of charity, Devils Incarnate are made subject this day, and
their Subjection is the subject of this days rejoicing. Page 22.

Mr. Charles Herle before the House of Lords, Jan. 15. 1643. on Psalm. 95. 1. O
come let us sing unto the Lord, etc.
* IN vain shall you in your Fasts, with Joshua, lie on your faces, unless you
lay your Achans on their backs, in vain are the high praises of God in your
mouths, without a two edged Sword in your hand. Page 31.

The same again he has in Sermon on Genesis 22. vors. 2. before the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, page 23. adding * the blood that Ahab spared in Benhad ad stuck as
deep and heavily on him, as that which he spilt in Naboth.

Mr. Herle in his Preface before his sermon on 2 Samuel 21. 16, 17. Preached
before the Commons, November. 5. 1644.
HE is neither true Protestant nor true Englishman, that does not with all
thankfulness and admiration, look upon the greatness of the contribution, which
the concurrent streams of our Sister Nation of Scotland brings to both those
interests of Church and State. Page 14.

* Do justice to the greatest. Saul's sons are not spared, no nor may Agag or
Benhadad, though themselves Kings. Zimri and Cosbi, though Princes of the
People, must be pursued into their Tents. This is the way to Consecrate your
selves to God. Page 16.

Mr. Herle on 1 Kings 22. 22. I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the
Prophets; Before the Commons, 1644.
*IF the Devil can but once get a Prophet to leave Gods Service for the Kings,
he has taken a Blew already, and is ready for as deep a Black as Hell can give
him. Page 28.

* There can be nothing plainer than that the Houses of Parliament without the
Kings personal concurrence are still a Court of Judgment. Page 38.

* The Houses are not only requisite to the acting of this power of making
Laws, but coordinate with his Majesty in the very power of acting. Page 42.

Mr. Jerem. Buroughs on Isa. 66. verse. 10. in a Thansgiving.
THere was corruption both in Church and Commonwealth, Idols were set up in
Dan and Bethel, i. e. in the places of Judgment, and in the House of God. Page
37.

*The greatest blow that ever was given to Antichristian Government, is that
which now it has had, Babylon is fallen, is sallen, so fallen as it shall
never rise again. Page 44.

This is the Curse of God on that party, notwithstanding God sets himself
against them, yet they will not come in and repent, for God takes no pleasure
in them, to give them repentance. Page 58, 59.

Mr. Obed. Sedgewick on Esther 9. verse. 1. in a Thanksgiving sermon, Jan. 15.
1643.
*NEver were there grosser Idols in Rome than those things as they were used by
some, and what is abused by superstition ought not to be retained. Page 33.

Mr. Alexander Henderson before the Lords and Commons, Thursday 18. of July
1644. on Mat. 14. 21. In his preface to that sermon.
THe principal theme and matter of the Solemnity of the day, we take for an
answer of the prayers of the faithful in the three Kingdoms.

Mr. John Strickland of New Sarum in his Thanksgiving, November. 5. 1644. on
Psalm. 46. 7.
*THe execution of Judgment is the Lords work, and they shall be cursed that
do it negligently, and cursed shall they be that keep back their Sword from
blood in this cause, you know the story of Gods message unto Ahab for letting
Benhadad go upon Composition. Page 26.

* Such a generation of men there were amongst us, that by compliances with
Idols and Idolatry went about to drive God away, and what consistence can there
be between the Ark and Dagon, between God and Idols? Page 32.

Mr. Matthew Newcomen on Neh. 4. XI. November. 5. 1642.
A Dam ^ontzen a Jesuit has drawn a plot, for cheating of a people of the true
Religion by Art of Legerdemain, the Method this, be pleased to observe how
exactly the late times have moved according to these Rules.

When Abbeys were demolished they found in their vaults and ponds heaps of
Sculs and bones, monuments of their smothered cruelty, I doubt not but the
abolishers of High Commission have found as manifest evidence of their cruel
practices, heaps of the blood of Innocents. Page 30.

Those Traitors (of the fifth of November) laid their Fireworks in the Bowels
of the earth, these have laid theirs in the bosom of our Sovereign, whereby
they have Captivated not only the multitude, but the Throne it self. Page 35.

Mr. Joh. Ward before the House, of Lords on Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
It Is n^w more than manifest that Rome and Hell had long since taken counsel,
by working to extirpate all Protestant Religion; as for dissolving Our Laws,
the introducing Arbitrary Government, it was but a design on the by to Cajole
and hire the Court to their party. Page 16.

* The Scots were necessitated to take up Arms for their just defense, and
against Antichrist and the Popish Priests. Page 18.

A Lamp has been seen to walk between the divided pieces, many Testimonies of
the goodness of our God in the remembrance of his Covenant. Page 21.

Mr. John Bond Master of the Savoy, before the House of Commons, on Isaiah 25.
9. 1645. October. 8.
* COme hither you malignant Atheists, come hither, g^ash your teeth, and let
your eyes rot in their holes. Page 5.

My suit is (concerning the Covenant) that it may not be obtrude^ without due
preparation, as the Spaniards baptized the Americans b^ droves. Page 36.

Give them time first to disgorge themselves of their direful AntiCovenant
perjurious combinations. Page 36.

Let them first shave their heads, and pair their nails, as the strang^ Virgin
of old was commanded to do, and so let them enter into that sacred and dreadful
Covenant. Page 37.

If hereafter the Tide of Victory shall turn again, and you shall b^ brought
low, yet I beseech you remember this day in which you are to give thanks for
five Victories, that there was a day when God served you in with five Pheasants
in a dish, with a feast of fat things. Page 38.

Mr. Francis Woodcock before the House of Commons, Feb. 19. 1645. on Genesis 49.
23. In his Preface to the County and City of Chester aster the surrender of
Chester.
THe Church in the foremost times was harrased by Rome heathen, in these last
days by Rome Antichristian. Page 8.

Have not we of this Kingdom been bought and sold has it not been attempted,
yea effected in great measure to bring us, as Joseph, into Egyptian Slavery,
were they not English Prelates that conspired to sel^ their Brethren into
Romish Slavery? Page 12.

Some of your Brethren have come in and submitted to you, Stars of the first
Magnitude, and may it not be expected the Sun and Moon nill do so too? if they
do not, they may do worse, if they do not, it will never be worse for you. Page
20.

Mr. Samuel Faircloth, on Josh. 7. 25. before diverse of the House of Commons.
MOses fell on his f^ce, as Joshua here, and makes God cry out Let me alone;
will this Cure it? no, Moses sees for all his prayers, Israel will not be cured
without a full and total extirpation of all the accursed things and Persons
also. Page 25.

* The Lord rent the Kingdom from Saul for sparing one Agag, and for w^nt of
through extirpation of all the accursed things, he lost both than^s for what he
had done and Kingdom also. Page 27.

It Is not partial Reformation, and execution of justice upon some offenders
will afford us help, except those in Authority extirpate all Achans with Baby
lomsh Garments, Orders, Ceremonies, Gestures, be rooted out from among us. Page
28.

* To you of the Honorable House, Up, for the matter belongs to you, We, even
all the Godly Ministers of the Country, will be with you. Page 29.

Think of it, in your Committees, to save them and theirs from trouble by
troubl^ng them, as Joshua, to wit, by a through abolishment, and extirpation of
them. Page 29.

The East wind did not sooner cure Egypt of the Frogs of Nilus, than this
course would England of all the Achans and Frogs of Tiber -- There being no
virtue wherein men resemble the Lord more lively, as in executing of justice,
and in extirpation of those Achans you will cut off the wicked, and procure the
felicity of the chosen. Page 34.

Trouble they will bring upon us for time to come, if they be not now cut off,
all may see that an Universal destruction, extirpation of Us, our Religion,
Peace, and Laws, was intended by them, and shall not Joshua justly extirpate
Achans eye for eye, tooth for tooth? that justice may measure them, the measure
they would have measrr'd to us, is not only (...) but necessary, if ninety and
nine were taken away, and but on^ A^han left, he would trouble us. Page 36.

Consecrate your selves to day unto the Lord, and if all Achans could be hanged
up coram isto sole, let none remain until too morrow however. Page 47.

The Lord is persuing you, if you execute not vengeance on them betimes. Page
48.

Why should life be further granted to them whose very life brings death to all
about them. Page 50.

Mr. Will. Bridges on Revel. 4. 8.
BAbylon is fallen, as Rome in her Latitude with all her Merchants, and those
that Symbolize with her is here to be understood.. Page 6.

Worthies of Israel, it lies on you to enquire out this Babylonish company, and
to repay them an eye for an eye, tooth for tooth, burning for burning, ear for
ear, liberty for liberty, and blood for blood. Page 10.

Though as little ones, they call for pity, yet as Babylonish they call for
justice even to blood. Page XI.

If a thing be indifferent in it is own nature, and the doing thereof offensive
to a weak Brother, Authority can not write jus divinum upon it, for to offend a
weak Brother is to destroy him. Page 15.

Whenever you shall behold the hand of God in the fall of Babylon, say, True,
here is a Babylonish Priest crying out alas, alas, my living, I have wife and
children to maintain, I but all this is to perform the judgment of the Lord.
Page 30.

There shall be, who when the Vial shall be poured out on the beast, shall gnaw
their tongues, and blaspheme the God of heaven. Page 33.

Nath. Homes Doctor in Divinity, on 2 Pet. 3. verse. 13. 1641.
AN ill Scholar is not said to be gone from the University, till he be gone eum
pannis with his clothes, no more is enormity gone from the Universality of
Ecclesiastics, till it be gone cum pannis, not a rag of Superstition left
behind. Page 31.

This Position That humane honest Intention may devise forms of devotion, has
brought all the Judaism, Turcism, and Papism into the Church. Page 33.

These Ecclesiastical Offices, Ceremonies, and Discipline, are set up by the
Pope, and are an appendix, or tail of Antichrist. Page 33.

Now is the promised time of the Churches Reformation in Christendom. P. 34.

Mr. H. Burton in his Sermon on Psalm. 53. 7, 8. Jun: 20. 1641.
AFter the firstborn of Egypt were slain, the children of Israel were
delivered, and for the chiefest of these Incendiaries, certainly the Primogenit
being taken away we may well hope for a glorious deliverance. Page XI.

* Gods people lie under bondage of Conscience in point of Liturgy. Secondly,
In bondage of Conscience under Ceremonies. Thirdly, Of Conscience under
Discipline. Fourthly, Of Conscience under Government. Page 21.

Mr. S. Sympson on Prove. 8, 15, 16. By me Kings Reign.
* LEt no Law hinder you, si jus violandum, and if Law be to be broken, it is
for a Crown, and therefore for Religion. Page 23.

* You are set over Kingdoms, to root out, pull down, destroy and throw down,
do it quickly, do it thoroughly. Page 24.

* That which is best, though evil, will be counted good after Reformation, as
he is counted innocent, who scapes at trial. Page 25.

* Among the Jews all were in the Church that were fit to live, now none must
be but Saints. Page 29.

One thing that has hindered the Church, has been too much respect to
Antiquity. Page 30.

An other thing that hinders the Church, has been a desire of Uniformity by
this, Judaism and Gentilism got into the Church, that they might accord
together. Page 31.

Mr. Case in his Sermon on 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. Concerning Jehosaphats Caveat to
his Judges; Preaching to a Court Martial.
YOu know, said he, how the Midianites (the King and his Party) with whom you
have to do, have vexed you with their wiles, and labored to obstruct you, yet
to cut Us all off in our passage into the Land of Promise, that blessed
Reformation, which the Parliament Consult for, Assembly Dispute for, Armies
Fight for, and all good Christians Pray for; Oh! therefore do you honor God in
avenging your Brethren upon these Midianites in doing execution on the enemies
of Christ and the Kingdom.

Out of the Book called Scripture and Reason pleaded for Defensive Arms, or the
whole Controversy about Subjects taking up of Arms; Published by diverse of
their learned Divines, and ordered to be Printed by the Committee of the
House of Commons, April 14. 1643. Which Order is subscribed by John White.
TO Doctor Fern:'s Objection, That though it be said, they intend not to hurt
the Kings Person, yet might I not as well have hurt his Person in the day of
Battle, a^ any of them that were swept away from ab^ut him by the fury of the
Ordnance, which put no difference twixt King and Common Soldiers. Page 19.

They answer by faying, That though this is the hardest case that can be put
against Defensive Arms, yet, (first) By what Rule of Conscience or God is a
state bound to sacrifize Religion, Laws, and Liberties, rather than endure that
the Prince his Life should come into any possibilities of hazard, by defending
them against those that in his Name are bent to subdue them? Page 18.

Secondly, If he will needs thrust himself upon the hazard, when he needs not,
whose fault is that? -- And (a little after in the same
Answer,) As if a King disguized should offer any private violence, a watchman
that would not (or even might not) hurt him being known, were without blame, if
he knocked him down or killed him, as he might in like case a disorderly
private person. Now in Battle, to many or most, (and especially to the Gunners
that give fire to the Ordnance) he is altogether disguised, and so they are
blameless in reference to his personal hurt; that fault is wholly his own, and
those wicked Counselors that have thrust him upon the fury of the Battle. Page
20.

To Doctor Ferne's saying, It is a mavelous thing, that among so many
Prophets reprehending the Kings of Israel and Judah for their Idolatry,
cruelty, and oppression, none should call upon the Elders of the people, for
this duty of resistance.

They Answer, That even in the reign of the best Kings, not only the Peoples
hearts were usually unprepared, and in their greatest seemings, hypocritical
and treacherous, -- but also the Princes Elders and Nobles were exceedingly
corrupt, -- Now if they were so bad in good times, who can marvel if they were
stark naught, where the King was naught, and helpers, forwarders of his
Idolatries, Cruelties, and Oppressions? And why should it then be expected that
the Prophets should call upon them to resist the King, being on their side, and
they on his. Page 20. 21.

It is not absolutely true, that men are bound Universally, as by an Ordinance
of God, to set up, live under Government, in the Doctors sense, that is
absolutely, and without power to resist. Page 31.

Either all mankind are not bound to be under Government (and all the Doctors
te^ts and reasons are alleged in vain) or else Kings and Monarchs are also
under some Government, at least of the Representative Body of their people,
according to what was before alleged from our Lawyers, Rex non habet superiorem
praeter legem, and The Law saith^ (...) h^bet Rex superior^m praeter Deum.
Curiam Comitum and Baronum, etc. Page 32.

We argue not that the people have power to recall that Regal Authority wholly,
upon any Case of Mal-administration; All that we plead for is, Power to
administer a part of it upon Necessity, which he will not administer for good,
but rather for evil. And there are not many
things that were altogether ours, and in our disposing before we part with
them, but are still so far Ours, to use them again in our
Necessity, for that turn at least. (Page 35.)

A Prince only inherits what was given the first of the Nation, or others
since by consent of the people; and by written Law or Custom he must claim any
power he will exercise, or else he cannot plead any right title to it, and his
qualification of power admits of Increase or Decrease, as he and the people
agree and consent. His power is altogether derived by Election and Consent,
first and last, whence I will infer
no more but as before, that therefore in Case of necessity the people may use
so much of it as may suffice to save themselves from Ruin.
(Page 39.)

The late Usurpers owned as a Holy State set up by Almighty God.
MAster Sam. Slater in a Sermon Preached at S. Edmunds Bury in Suffolk upon the
13. of October. 1658. Being a day set apart for Solemn Fasting and Humiliation,
and seeking a blessing upon His Highness the Lord Protector. This Sermon he
intitles The Protectors Protection, or the Pious Prince guarded by a Praying
People. In this Sermon, Page 57, and 58. He has these words, Oh! pray for your
Governors, and in a more special manner, for him whom God has made chief over
you, and by his Providence called to the Supreme place of Magistracy in the
Nation. God has been pleased of late to make a sad breach among Us, taking
away from Us our former Pilot, the late Renowned Protector, who when he had
fought the Nations Battles, carried us through the wilderness, preserved us from
the rage and fury of our Enemies, and brought us within s^ght of the promised
Land, gave up the Ghost, laid down his leading Staff, and his life together,
with whose fall the Nation was shaken: his death covered all the faces of sober
and considerate Persons with paleness, and their hearts with sadness, as if
Peace, Prosperity, Resormation, the Gospel, all lay drawing on, and would be
buried in the same grave with him. But b^essed be God, Divine Grace vouchsafed
to cast an eye toward us, and to visit us in our low estate: there is another
Pilot placed in his room; While he directs the Course, let us fill the Sails
with our Praying breath. Moses, it is true, is dead, but we have a Joshua
succeeding him; let us pray that what the other happily begun, this may more
happily finish, and bring the accomplishment of all your right-bred hopes: and
what they said to Joshua, let us say unto his Highness, According as we
hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee, only the Lord
they God be with thee, as he was with Moses. Jos. 1. 17. And page 60. Our
Prince rises gloriously, pray that he might not set in a cloud: Our hopes
concerning him are great, pray that they may not be blasted. Thus He.

Mr. Baxter in his Five Disputations of ChurchGovernment and Worship, in the
Epistle Dedicatory to Richard Cromwell, He delivers the sense of his Party in
these words.
MAny are persuaded you have been strangely kept He ressembleth Richa^d to
Solomen and Oliver to David.
from participating in any of our late bloody Contentions, that God might make
you a Healer of our Breaches, and employ you in that Temple-work, which David
Himself might not be Honored with. And he adds -- This would be the way to
lift you highest in the Esteem and love of all Your people, and make them see
that You are appointed by God to be an Healer and Restorer, and to glory in
You, and to bless God for you as the Instrument of our chiefest good. -- My
earnest Prayers for your Higness shall be, that you may rule us as One that is
ruled by God, etc.

The same Mr. Baxter in his Holy Commonwealth, in the Epistle Dedicatory or
Preface to the Army, ( page 6.) He called those Usurping Powers, that were then
laid by, The best Governors in all the world, that have the Supremacy, whom to
Resist or Depose is forbidden to Subjects on pain of Damnation, and page 8. He
cries out, shall the best of Governors, the greatest of mercies seem
intolerable? O how happy would the best of ohe Nations under heaven be, if they
had the Rulers that our Ingratitude has cast off. And page 484. speaking of
the Usurpers (whomsoever he meant) he says, He is bound to submit to the
present Government, as set over us by God, and to obey for Conscience, and to
behave himself as a loyal Subject toward them.

In the book entitled, The Marrow of Modern Divivinity, By Eulogies and
approbations Printed before the Book which commend it to all Readers.
publicly commended by Mr. Caryl, Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Strong, Mr. Sprigg, and
Mr. Samuel Prittie.
EVangelista (in the Dialogue) being a Minister of the Gospel, does instruct
Neophytus or the young Christian in these following words. Page 201. In case
you be at any time by reason of the weakness of your faith, and strength of
your temptations, drawn aside, and prevailed with to transgress any of Christ's
Commandments, beware you do not thereupon take occasion to call Christ's love to
you into question, but believe as firmly that he loves you as dearly as he did
before you thus transgressed: For this is a certain truth, as no good in you,
or done by you, did or can move Christ to love you the more, So no evil in you
or done by you, can move Him to love you the less, etc.

There are other things in that Book, as that Page 161. Page 119.
The Law of Christ neither justifies nor condemns. And that in the Covenant
betwixt Christ and his, there is no more for man to do, but only to know and
believe that Christ has done all for him.

Out of Mr. Baxters Five Disput. of Right to Sacraments, Dispute 3. Page 329.
HE that has oftentimes been drunk may have true grace, and be in number of
the godly, and Page 330. How many professors will rashly rail, and lie in their
passions; how few will take well a reproof, but rather defend their sin? How
many in these times that we doubt not to be godly have been guilty of
disobedience to their guides, and of Schism, and doing much to the hurt of the
Church? a very great sin. Peter, Lot, and it is like David did often commit
greater sins. And Page 326, 327. A man must be guilty of more sin than Peter
was in denying, and forsivearing Christ, that is notoriously ungodly, ye^, then
Lot was, who was drunk two nights together, and committed incest twice with his
own daughters, and that after the miraculous destruction of Sodom, of his own
wife, and his own miraculous deliverance; Nay, a man that is notoriously
ungodly (in the
sense in hand) or unsanctified, must be a greater sinner th^n Solomon was,
with his seven hundred wives, and his three hundred concubines, and gross
Idolatries, when his heart was turned away from the Lord God of Israel, which
appeared to him twice, and commanded not to go after other Gods, but he kept
not that which the Lord commanded.

Mr. Baxters Five Disputations of Church Government and Worship, are thus
Dedicated, To His Highness Richard Lord Protector of the CommonWealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; The Epistle begins,
SIR,
THese Papers are ambitlous of accompaning those against Popery into your
Highness presence for the Tender of their Service.

This would be the way to lift You highest in the esteem and love of all your
people, and make them see, that you are * appointed by God to be an Hea'er and
Restorer, and to glory in you, and to bless God
for you as the Instrument of our chiefest good.

Your Zeal for God will kindle in your Subjects a Zeal for you. Parlaments will
love and honor you, Ministers will heartily pray for you, and teach all the
people to love, and honor, and obey you.
I crave your Highness favorable aceptance of the tendered service of a ^
faithful Subject to your Highness,


Rich. Baxter

In Mr. Baxters Key for Catholics, and Epistle Dedicatory to the same Richard.
IT is only the necessary defense of your life, and * dignity, and the lives
of all the Protestants that a^e under your Protection
and Government, and the Souls of men that * I desire: -- You have your
Government, and we our lives, because the * Papists are not strong enough --
Give not leave The King and his Pa^ty clea^ly meant to be the Papists*
to every seducer to do his worst to damn men's souls, when ^ou will not
tolerate every Traitor to draw * your Armies or people into * Rebellion -- If
You ask who it is that presumes thus to be your Monitor, It is one that *
rejoices in the present happiness of England, and * earnestly
* wishes that it were but as well with the rest of the world, and that
^ Clea^ly abetting the murdering of the King.
honors * all the providence of God, by which we have been brought to what
we are; and he is one that * concurring in the common hopes of greater
blessings yet to these Nations under * your Government, was encouraged to do
what you daily allow your Preachers to do, and to
concur with the rest in the Tenders ( and some performance) of his Service --
That God will make you a Ruler and preserver of his Churches here at home, and
a successful helper to his Churches abroad is the earnest Prayer of your
Highness * faithful Subject,


Richard Baxter.

Out of the Quarrel of the Covenant delivered in three sermons, Sept. 27. and
30. Oct. 1. 1643. By Thomas Case, one of the Assembly of Divines.
TO murmur at the Covenant Mr. Case calls the voice of Rebellion. Page 19. The
Covenant it self he calls a pure and heaven'y Ordi^ance. Page 21.

Out of Mr. Case his Book of the Covenant, delivered in three sermons. A. D.
1643.
IS Prelacy indeed the way of Gospel-government, etc? What is it then that has
destroyed all Gospel Orde^, and Government, and Worship in these Kingdoms, as
in other places of the Christian world, even down to the ground, has it not
been Prelacy? Page 45.

Object. But there be that will tell us these have been the faults of the
Persons and not of the Calling. Page 46. Answ. 5. Was not that Calling as bad
as the Men? You may as well say so of the Papacy in Rome, for surely the
Prelacy of England which we swore to extir ate, was the very same Fabric, and
Model of ^cclesiastical Regiment, that is in the Antichristian world; Yea, such
an evil it is, that some Divines, Venerable for their great Learning, as well
as for their eminent holmess, did conceive sole Episcopal Jurisdiction to be
the very seat of the Beast, upon which the fifth Angel is now pouring out his
Vial, which is the reason that the Men of that Kingdom gnaw their ^ongues for
pain, and blaspheme the God of heaven. Page 47.

His Majesty is bound by his Coronation Oath to confirm these Laws, Quas vulgus
elegerit, which the Commons shall agree upon,
and present unto his Majesty. Page 49.

So has Prelacy flattered it self, finding such a party to stand up on it is
side among the * rotten Lords and Commons, the debauched
Gentry, and abused people of the Kingdom. -- As thy sword Prelacy has made
many women childless, many a faithful Minister peop'eless, (etc.) So thy Mother
Papacy shall be made childless among harlots, ^ your Diocese Bishop'ess, and
your Sees Lordless, and your Places shall know you no more. Come my Brethren, I
say* and fear not to take this * Agag (Prelacy I mean, not the Prelates) and *
hew it in
pieces before the Lord. Page 51.

None can withdraw from, much less oppose this Service, but such as bear evil
will to Sion, and would be unwilling to see the ruin and downfall of
Antichrist, which this blessed Covenant does so evidently threaten. Page 63.

A fifth Motive to quicken us to this Duty, may be even the Practice of the
Antichristian State and Kingdom; Popery has been dextrous to propagate and
spread it self by this means -- And Prelacy (that * whelp)
has learned this Policy of it is mother Papacy that Lioness, to corrobate and
raise it self to that height we have seen and suffered, by these Artifice^ --
it being an inconfiderable number either of Ministers, or People, (the Lord be
merciful to us in this thing) that have had eyes to discover the Mystery of
Iniquity which these men have driven. Page 64. *

He that has been a Malignant or Neutral let him be so no more, for I protest
against every man that after his striking of this so Solemn and Sacred a
Covenant with the most high God, shall dare knowingly, to persist in any of
these mentioned abominations (that is, adheering to the King, etc.) he is an
enemy to Jesus Christ, a Traitor to the Kingdoms, a State Murderer, and a
destroyer of himself and his Posterity, and at his hands if they miscarry God
will require the blood of all these. Page 101.

* It brings Letters of Testimonial with it, etc. The waters of this Covenant
has been a notable purgation to the Rebels there, (in Scotland) it has been a
Shibboleth to discover them, and a Sword in the hand of the Angel of the
Covenant to chase or slay them.

The walls of Jericho have fallen flat before it. The Dagon of the Bishops
Service Book brake it is neck before this Ark of the Covenant. Prelacy and *
Prerogative have bowed down, and given up the Ghost
at it is feet; And what changes has it wrought in the Church and State! what a
Reformation has followed at the heels of this glorious Ordinance? Page 65, 66.

Epist. Dedicat. Thousands of your Nation are preparing their Brotherly
addresses to pay the same debt to the whole Kingdom, now almost in as great an
exigence as ever the Gibeonites were when their five Kings with all their
united fo^ces were within few days march, to take a bloody and unnatural
Revenge for their entering into Covenant with Joshua only; we beseech you
account it not our distrust or jealousy, if sometimes you hear us complaining
with the mother of Sisera, Why are their chariots so long in com^ng, why stay
the wheels of their chariots? That is, why come not in the Scottish A^my against
the King?

Out of the Trial of Mr. Love, before the Highcourt of Justice in
Westminster Hall. Printed Aug. 1652.
MAjor Huntington in his Examination as witness against Love, says thus, page
32. I was told by Major Alford, that Bain^ (another witness) told them, he was
very sorry he should meddle in that business, and that they would never prosper
that had any thing to do with him (meaning the King) for that the sins of him
and his father were so great.

Mr. Love told Adams a Witness against him, thus,

That if the Presbyterians were in Arms again, by the blessing of God, the
Cava^eering party might be prevented from getting the day. Page 38.

Mr. Love in his defense says thus,

God is my witness, I never drove a malignant design, I never carried on a
malignant interest, I detest both; I still retain my old Covenanting
Principles, from which through the grace of God I will never depart, for any
terror or persuasion whatsoever, etc.

I do retain as great a keeness, and shall whilst I live, and as strong an
opposition against a malignant interest, whether in Scotland or in England or
in any part of the world, against the Nation where I live, and have to ^his
day, as ever I did in former times.

I have all along engaged my estate and life in the Parlaments quarrel against
the Forces raised by the King. I gave my All: And I did
not only deem it my duty to Preach for the Lawfulness of a Defensive War, but
unless my books and wearing apparel, I contributed all that I had in the world.
-- I have at this day a great sum due to me from the State, which is still kept
from me, and now my life endeavored to be taken from me. And yet for all this
I repent
not of what I have done; though I could from my soul wish, that the ends of
that just war, had been better accomplished, etc. Page 67.

When I was Scholar in Oxon and Master of Arts (I do not speak it out of vain
ostentation, but merely to represent unto you, that what I ^as I am, and what I
am I was) I was the first Scholar that I know o^, or ever heard of in Oxon, who
did publicly refuse in the Congregation-house to subscribe unto those
impositions, or Canons, imposed by the Archbishop touching the Prelates and
Common Prayers; And for which though they would not deny me my Degree, yet I
was expelled the Congregation-house, never to sit as a member among them, etc.
About the beginning of the Wars between the late King and the Parl^ment, I was
the first Minister that I knew of in England, who was accused of Preaching of
Treason and Rebellion, merely for maintaining in a Sermon in Kent, at Tenerden,
the lawfulness of a defensive War, * at the first breaking out and irruption of
our troubles. I, etc. That have in my measure ventured my All, in the same
quarrel that you were e^gaged in, and lifted up my hands in the same Covenant,
that took sweet counsel together, and walked in fellowship one with another,
etc.

Attorney General ( Prideaux) in Page 102. Thus,

The Treason is in this, The Scots come in with intent to subvert the
Government (meaning Cromwels) Charles S^ewart to be made King, to subvert the
Government, etc.

I have prayed unto God many a day, and kept many a Fast, wherein I have sought
God that there might be an agreement between the King and the Scots upon the
Interest of Religion, and terms of the Covenant. Page 125. Thus,

I die cleaving to all those Oaths, Vows, Covenants and Protestations that were
imposed by the Two Houses of Parliament, as owning them, and dying with my
judgment for them; to the Protestation the Vow and Covenant, the Solemn League
and Covenant. And this I tell you all, I had rather die a Covenant-keeper, th^n
live a Covenantbreaker.

Page 162. Thus, I die with this persuasion, that the Presbyterial Government
makes most for purity, and unity, throughout the Churches of the Saints.

Mr. Marshal in a Sermon before the House of Peers, October. 28. 1646. On that
Text Psalm. 8. 2. Out of the mouth of Babes -- have thou ordained strength --
That thou might still the enemy, etc.
HE propounds this Quaere, Wherein lies the Power which proceeds out of the
mouth of these Babes? His answer is, There are sive things, which all are the
fruit of the mouth, and by them the^e Babes have overcome the enemy and the
avenger, 1. Preaching, 2. Confessing or Professing, The Name, Truth and cause
of God, and his Christ. 3. Praising, Singing out Praise, etc. 4. Praying, and
5. Covenanting. Then he brings in an Objection, If these be all the weapons and
strength whereby the Saints do overcome, why do you use any other means to
overcome your enemies? Why rest you not contented with this? either these are
not all, or you are not Christians, nor true to your Principles; -- Time was
when Preces and Lachrymae, Prayers and Tears, were all the weapons which the
Church did use; but now when you have spoke all these things of the power of
Preaching, and Praying, and Consessing, and Covenanting, you are glad to betake
your selves to Arms, to see what they will do, to help those out, whence it is
apparent, you dare not rest in these as sufficient helps. To this Mr. Marshal
He makes it Law^ul to do that a^ men, which we are (...) to do by (...) L^ws of
Ch^istianity.
answers thus, we acknowledge, that as we are Christians (in that capacity; for
as they distinguished the King into a double Capacity, so they did themselves
too, into a natural and a Christian capacity, and in that Capacity, says He)
we use no other weapons than these we have told you of, these only are proper
and peculiar to us ^s we are Christians; but the ^e (...) the 5 Commandment.
weapons which we enjoy as we are Christians, do not deprive us of those we
enjoy in the capacity as Men. -- And we challenge in this no more than we may
lawfully use, if we were Swe^t incourage^ent.
Papists or Turks, if we were Pagans, Jews or Indians: we challenge not this to
belong to Christianity, as peculiar to it, we have learned, that by the Law of
Nature and Nations, men may defend themselves against unjust violence; if the
Turks should invade a Country of Christians, they will tell him, that as they
are Christians, Their Praying and Professing and Singing and Covenanting, These
Spiritual weapons out of their mouth will quell them; but as they are men, they
have a liberty to Excellent comp^risons ^ between ones natural Prince (to whom
he has (...)) and a Turk, or a Thief.
defend themselves against him, and vim vi repellere; Or if a Christian man
were traveling upon the high way, and a Thief should demand of him, how as a
Christian, he could defend himself from his Enemies; He would tell him, by
Faith, by Prayer, by the word of God, by weapons out of his mouth; but if the
Thief assault him and take his life or his purse, ^s he is a man he will use
his sword, and Christianity will sanc^ifie this use of his sword to him, etc.
Thus Mr. Marshal ubi supra. Page 27, 28.

And to secure his Party from fear of future vengeance, or damnanation,
threatened to the Resisters of Sovereign Authority, Romans 13. 2. He interprets
that Text, not of the damnation of hell, but of the Sentence See Dr. Ham. of
Resisting the Magistra^e under (...) of Relig^on.
of the Sovereign Power; and that they might not b^ frighted with the fear of
that Temporal Judg^ment neither, He promises them success and victory, in the
Name of Almighty God, as abovesaid.

Out of Mr. Calamyes Apology against Mr. Burton. 1646.
FOr my own particular I crave leav^ to declare to all that shall read these
lines, what I have done to manifest my repentance, and let Master Burton then
judge whether it be a repentance to be repented of, or no.

First, I went to Bury, and there made in a Sermon, a recantation, and
retraction of what I had done, in the hearing of thousands. And this I did
before the times turned against Episcopacy, not out of discontent, nor because
I was disappointed of my expected preferment at Court.

Secondly, After my coming to London at the beginning of this Parliament I was
one of those that did join in making Smectymnuus, which was the first deadly
blow to Episcopacy in England of late years.

Thirdly, My house was a receptacle for godly Ministers in the worst of times:
here was the Remo^strance framed against the Prelates: here were all meetings.
I was the first that openly before a Committee of Parliament did defend that our
Bishops were not only not an Order distinct from Presbyters, but that in
Scripture a Bishop and Presbyter were all one. I blush to speak of these
things, but the judicious Reader will consider how I am provoked to it, and
will pardon me.

As for the Service Book, let M. Burton know, that at a meeting at my house, it
was resolved by above a hundred Ministers, after a long debate upon diverse
weighty considerations, that all that could in their judgments submit to the
reading of some part of it, should be entreated for a while to continue so to
do. To this our dissenting Brethren, then present did agree, and one of them
made a speech to manifest his concordance. This is enough to give any man
satisfaction for the late laying of it down.

Out of Mr. Jeremiah Burroughes his speech in Guild Hall on Friday the sixth of
October, 1643.
A People they are (speaking of the Scots) that began to rise for their
Liberties, when the generality of this people here, were ready basely to bow
down their backs, and put their necks under the yoke: and had it not been that
they had been willing to have endured the brunt, we had all been slaves (it is
like) at this day.

Their Liberties are settled, why they, though on the other side of Jordan, they
are not therein satisfied, to sit still, but are willing to come themselves,
and come into the brunt, and hazard themselves, for the se^ling of their
brethren in the inheritance of the Lord likew^se.

What warrant have we to take up Arms to maintain Religion? that is not at
present to be discussed, but only this, to satisfy and stop all their mouths
with one word: Thus far none can deny it, but it is lawful to take up arms, to
maintain that Civil right we have to our Religion, and this we do; For we have
not only a right to our Religion, by the Law of God, but we have a Civil right
to this our Religion, that other Christians have not had.

If it shall be said, I, but a great deal is done, but to little purpose all
this while; O (my brethren) say not so, it is an unthankful voice, this, for
much has been done, there has been a check given to the adversary, the stream
of tyranny and slavery it has been stopped, your lives have all this while
been preserved by what has been done.

Little cause have we to be discouraged, for those we have to deal with, their
spirits are base and vile; why should we fear those uncircumcised Philistines?

If you say, Well, but were it not better we bent all our forces to some
Accommodation? To that we answer you thus: You have to deal not only with his
Majesty, but with a Popish party that are about him, and what security you can
ever have of your peace, (as was worthily said before) except the Scottish
Nation comes in for to fasten it, it is easy for any one to judge. I will tell
you but one story about that, and because it is suitable unto you, I will
therefore relate it here: It is a Story that I find in the Chronicles, that in
the days of King Edward the sixth, King Edward sends to this City for assistance
against the Lords; and the Lords send to the City for their assistance
likewise; and the CommonCouncel was called, (I suppose in this place,) and
there stands up, as the story says, a wise discreet Citizen, in the
Common Counsel, and makes this speech unto them; First, he acknowledges that
the cause was right for the Lords, for the Kingdom, though it were against the
will of the King, because the King would not then put in execution those Laws
that should be, but hindered them, but yet (says he) let me remind you of that
that I have read in Fabians Chronicle, (it was one George Stadley that stood
up, let me remind you of that) when there was a fight between the Lords and the
King, the Lords send for assistance to the City, the City granted their
assistance, the Lords prevailed, the King was taken, and his Son a Prisoner;
afterward they were both released upon Composition, and amongst other things,
this was one, that howsoever the City should be preserved, that the City should
suffer nothing for what they had done; and this Composition was confirmed by
Act of Parliament, but (says this Citizen) what came of it? did the King
forgive? No, nor forget, for afterward all our Liberties were taken away,
strangers were set over us, for our Heads and Governors; the bodies and the
estates of the Citizens were given away, and one misery followed after another;
and so we were most miserably persecuted; and here was their Accommodation.

Have not many of you spent your blood in this Cause, yea, how many young ones
in this City have lost their blood? Methinks a spirit of indignation should
rise in you, to vindicate the loss of the blood of your Servants and Children,
many precious ones, that might have lived many years, to have done good service
for the Lord.

Know there shall come a day, wherein you shall be calling and crying to God
for mercy; the success of this evenings work will be recorded against that day,
when you shall cry for mercy.

Out of Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick his speech in Guildhall on Friday the sixth of
October, 1643.
I Know many Objections might be made; You have done much already, and the sum
is great; I say no more, There is nothing great, to a mind that is great, and
the Cause is great, and though the sum of money be great, yet their love is
greater, than all you can lay out to answer their love; And say not (grumbling)
we have done often and often; I say to you, as Christ said to him that asked
him, How often must I forgive my brother? Why, seventy times seven times; So
will I say for this public Cause, you must do, and you must do, and yet you
must do, and yet you must do, as long as there is a penny in thy purse, as long
as there is strength in thy hand, as long as there is breath in thy body, you
must be all Servants to Christ, and Servants to the Churches of Jesus Christ.

The Independents Conclusions from the Presbyterian Principles. Mr. John Dury's
Considerations concerning the present Engagement; with Mr. Caryl's Imprimatur,
An. Dom. 1649.
THe Oath of Allegiance, as you know, did bind all men as Subjects in Law, to
be true and faithful to the Kings Person, to his Heirs and Successors, as they
were invested with the authority which the Law did give them: nor was it ever
meant by the Parliament which Enacted the Oath of Allegiance, that any should be
absolutely bound to the King and his Heirs, as they were men, to be true and
faithful to their Personal Wills; but only to them and their Wills, as they
had a Legal standing: that is, to the Authority conferred upon them by the
consent of the People, which was testified in and under a Law; whereunto the
King and his Heirs were bound for the Kingdoms good by Oath. So that the
Obligations of King and Subjects are mutual, and must needs stand and fall
together, according as the condition by which they are begotten is kept or
broken; which is nothing else but the Law, according to which he and his
Subjects agree, that he shall be their King, and they shall be his Subjects.
For as you were sworn to the King, so he was sworn to you; as you were bound to
be faithful to him, so he was bound to be faithful to his trust; nor is he your
Liege further than he is faithful thereunto. If then he be found unfaithful to
his trust, you are ipso facto absolved from your Allegiance unto him; and if,
according to Law, he receives not his Authority, you are not in Law his
Subjects at all. Now the just and natural foundation of all Laws, is the Reason
of the Body of every Nation in their Parliament, which has the sole Right to
propose and choose the Laws by which they will be Ruled. Where it has been (as
I suppose) a perpetual custom in this Nation, for the Commons at all times, to
ask and propose the making of Laws; and for the Lords and King to give their
consent thereunto: The Lords as the Judges in cases of transgression, and the
King as the Executor and public Trustee for the administration of the common
good and wealth thereby; for in a Kingdom there is a Commonwealth, as the
intrinsical substance of the Being thereof; for which all things are to be done
by King and Lords, as the public servants thereof; and Ministers not Masters
of State therein. If the King then should set himself wilfully to be above this
Reason of the Nation, which is the only Original of the Law, and refuse
obstinately the Laws which they shall choose to be settled, he puts himself ipso
facto, out of the capacity of being a King any more unto them; and if this can
be made out, to have been the way wherein the late King set himself, and that
it was the design of the House of Lords, to uphold and enable him to follow
that way, it is evident, that so far as he did by that means actually un-King
himself, as to this Nation, so far also they that assisted him in that design,
did un-Lord themselves in the State thereof; and if this was the guilt of the
House of Lords, by other practices and proceedings more than by an
indifferency and compliance with the Hamiltonian invasion, to help the King to
such a power, I know not what to answer for them*

It is then undeniable that the third Article of that National Covenant, was
^ever meant by those that made it, or that took ir, to be opposite to the sense
of the Oath of Allegiance, but altogether agreeable thereunto. What then the
meaning of that Article is, must needs also be the true sense of the Oath of
Allegiance. That Article then does oblige you, to preserve the Right and
Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom in your Calling,
absolutely and without any limitation; but as for the Kings person and
Authority, it does oblige you only thereunto, conditionally, and with a
limitation; Namely, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and
Liberties of this Kingdom. If then the King did not give to the Representatives
of the Nation that assurance which was satisfactory and necessary that their
Religion and Liberties should be preserved, none of his Subjects were bound
either by their Allegiance or Covenant, to defend his person and the Authority
which was conferred upon him. The Oath of Allegiance therefore was bottomed
upon the Laws, which the Representatives of the Nation in Parliament had chosen
to be observed concerning their Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdom;
which he refractorily either casting off, or seeming to yield unto, in such a
way that no trust could be given him, that he would keep what he yielded unto;
the Parliament did actually lay him aside, and voted, that no more Addresses
should be made unto him, from which time forward he was no more an object of
your Oath of Allegiance, but to be looked upon as a Private man: and your Oath
by which you were engaged to be true and faithful to the Law, by which the
Religion and Liberty of the Kingdom was to be preserved, did still remain in
force: which if it may be the true substantial sense of the present Engagement,
which you think is contradictory to this Oath and to the National Covenant,
then you are to look well to it, that you be not mistaken; for to an
indifferent eye, it may be thought so far from being opposite to the true sense
of either, that it may be rather a confirmation of the ground, for which both
the Oath of Allegiance, and the third Article of the National Covenant was then
binding.

And then also this I am confident of, to be able to let you see further, that
although you may think that the effect of this Engagement is materially
contrary to some intention which you had in the third Article of the Covenant;
yet that by the Act of the Engagement, you are so far from breaking your
Covenant, that except you take it, and observe it faithfully, you will not
only materially, but formally break that very Article of the Covenant, for
which you scruple the taking of the Engagement.

For the words must be taken in the sense which they can directly bear, and
which do impart the main end for which the Covenant was taken; for the main end
of this very Article whereof you make a scruple, was evidently to preserve the
Parliament and Commonwealth for it self, and (i^ need so required) also without
the King.

Now this is that which the Engagement does directly also require; for which
cause I say, that by virtue of this very promise, you are bound to take the
present Engagement; and if you take it not, that you make your self a
transgressor of that very Article which you pretend to keep; for if you refuse
to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth as it is now established, you do
what in you lies to make the remaining Knights of Parliament, and the
beginnings of our settlement void; which though at first it was not intended to
be without a King, yet it was clearly presupposed in the Article it self, as
possible to be without him, and consequently, that although he should not be,
yet that the Commonwealth by the Rights of Parliament and the Liberties of the
Nation should be preserved, which is all that now is sought for by the
Engagement.

Where you may take notice, that although you and I as private men, ought not
to make our selves judges of the rights which superiors pretend to have, in and
to their places; yet that they are not without a Judicature over them in those
places, for the subordinate Officers belonging to a State, are bound to judge
of the Rights of those that are over them; both by which they stand in their
places of Supremacy, and by which they proceed in their actings toward
Subjects, lest they be made the instruments of Arbitrary power and tyranny, and
then also the law-making power, which in all Nations resides by the Law of
Nature in the convention of the Representatives of the whole body of the people
(whether it be made up of the heads of families, or of chosen Deputies, who are
entrusted with a delegated power from all the rest) does make or unmake Rights,
in all places and persons within it self, as it from time to time does see
cause.

HAving thus surveyed the dangerous Positions and Principles of the
Presbyterians and their brethren, that it may be evident to the world that the
enemies of our Church, are equally enemies to our Monarchy, it will not be
amiss to lay down some of the Principles of the Papists and the Hobbians. In
which not to multiply citations, we will, for one of the first of these take
father White, who is counted the most moderate of them, in his Book Entitled
the Grounds of Obedience and Government; And for the next Mr. Hobbs himself, in
his Books, one called Leviathan, and the other de Cive, which he so magnifies,
that he affirms that part of Philosophy to which the handling of the Elements
of Government and Civil Societies belongs, is no older than that Book. Of the
dispossession of a Supreme former Governor, and of his Right, by Mr. White a
Romanist, page 132. etc. in His Grounds of Obedience, etc.
NOw, our Question supposes the Governor not to have come to that extremity:
but, either to have been good or innocent: or that it is doubtful whether his
excesses deserved expulsion: or, at least, if they did deserve it of
themselves, yet the circumstances were not fitting for it; but the expulsion
happened either by the invasion of a stranger, or the ambition of a Subject, or
some popular headless tumult; for, these three ways a Magistrate comes,
forcibly and unjustly, to be outed of his power.

And first, if the Magistrate have truly deserved to be dispossessed; or it be
rationally doubted that he has deserved it, and he be actually out of
possession: In the former case it is certain, the Subject has no obligation to
hazard for his restitution, but rather to hinder it: For, since it is the
common good that both the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim at; and
clearly, out of what is expressed, it is the common harm, to admit again of
such a Magistrate; every one, to his power, is bound to resist him.

The next case is, if he be innocent and wrongfully deposed, nay let us add,
One who had governed well and deserved much of the Commonwealth: yet he is
totally dispossessed; and so, that, it is plain, in these circumstances, it
were better for the common good to stay as they are, than to venture the
restoring him, because of the public hazard. It is clear, in this case, there
is comparison between the general good of the Commonwealth, on the one side,
and the particular of this man or family on the other. Let us, then, put the
case on his part; and see, If he be generous, if he has settled in his heart
that every single man ought to prefer the Common Interest before his particular
safety, profit, or honor; if he be fit for a Governor, that is, one that is
to espouse the common good as his own individual; what he will, in honor and
conscience, resolve: whether he be not obliged absolutely to renounce all right
and claim to Government; and, if he does not, he be not worse than an Infidel:
For, if he that has no care of his Domestics, be reputed so; with how much
more reason, he that is ready to plunge a whole Nation in blood, for his own
Interest?

Let us cast the accounts on the other side; and see, that the Subjects aim
ought to be the public peace, and quiet enjoyment of their lives and
interests: It will appear that, if he be bound to renounce his claim, they
cannot be obliged to maintain it: and besides, that they are wilfully blind,
if, where the whole concernments of themselves, their wives and children, lie
at the stake, they will venture all for an aereal fancy, without regard to the
end of Government, public peace; merely for the means, this man's Government,
without whom the End may be obtained. It cannot, therefore, be rational on
either side, for a dispossessed Governor to be restored with hazard.

But, the capital in this matter is, that truly there is no justice on either
the Magistrates or Peoples side, to bind to the restoring him: both these
depending on the promise made, and the force of the promise being none, since
the ground of it is changed. For, the substance of the promise made to a
Magistrate, is, To obey him as a Magistrate, that is, as far as is fitting for
the Commonwealth and peace; he being nothing but the instrument of the common
good: Now, take away that fitness for the Commonwealth, and that which gave
strength to the promise is gone, and the promise it self is no more a promise,
nor can any obligation arise from it. Who knows not, that the promise of any
man depends on his intention, his intention on his knowledge, his knowledge
reaches no farther than his consideration and present memory when he makes
the promise? So that, in nature, a promise reaches only to presupposed and
thought on circumstances: and who, when he swears to a Magistrate, expects
to see him dispossessed and turned off?

So that, this is manifest, a Magistrate actually dispossessed has no right to
be restored, nor the Subject any obligation to seek to restore, but oppose him.
For, what is man, or rather mankind (for, so we have styled a nation) better
than a herd of sheep or oxen, if it be to be owned, like them, by masters? What
difference is there between their Masters selling them to the Butcher, and
obliging them to venture their lives and livelyhoods for his private Interest?
We know it is natural, that the part should venture for the whole; but that the
whole should venture the loss of it self to save the part, I cannot understand.
The Governor is the highest and noblest part, yet but a part; the People is
the whole, the End, (though not by office, yet by worth and dignity) the Master
and Lord, for whom those who are Lords by office are to be vested and divested
in Lordship, when it is necessary for the common good. Who thinks otherwise,
deserves not the name of a man.

Of a Supreme Governor dispossessed, page 147. etc. Mr. Whites Grounds of
Obedience, etc.
WHen the structure of the Commonwealth is dissolved, that is, disjoynted from
him, then any who has suffered wrong in the fore-declared manner may be party
against him and proceed as if there were no Commonwealth; by the Law, which,
in a Wilderness, warranteth us to kill a Tiger or Robber that seeks to kill
us, not pretending Law for our action, but that it is manlike and rational.
Neither ought it be called punishment that is done against a d^spossessed
Magistrate, but rather revenge, or some other name that includes no order to
Law.

We must proceed upon other principles, that is, the forelaid and main basis of
our discourse, that the common good ought to be the rule of the Magistrates
Title, and the Subjects Obedience.

Out of which this follows, that when ever (considering all things) the
common good is clearly on the possessors side, then the dispossessed has no
claim. Neither ought we expect till we have assurance, that it will not be
better for the subject if the late owner (after great dangers,) gains his
former power: For, first, this it self is uncertain; secondly, the success of
endeavors to restore him must be hazardous; thirdly, many and great mischiefs,
during the time of the attempt, are altogether unavoidable; and all this to be
balanced against those uncertain hopes. Nor, again, must we expect that the
wills of all the Subjects concur, actually, to the acceptance of the new
Governor: For that is either impossible, or of so long expectation, as to
ruin all by dissensions and jealousies in the mean time: Nay, the vulgar sort
are so easily led by fancy, that they understand not the common good, nor what
they should wish.

But you may demand, How shall it be known when the common good holds it self
on the possessour's hand? I answer, we must first see who are the common, whose
welfare is to be preferred before private interests. And presently it appears
that, dividing the whole people into Governors and governed; the governed part
is the Public to whose good the Governors are to direct their pains: And
that these are they that spend their lives in seeking their own profits, either
by improving the Land, or in Arts and Handicrafts: Whence, it follows, when
their good stands on the possessours side, then clearly he begins to gain right
and power; and this is plain to be, when the Merchant, the Husbandman, and
Tradesman, with their appendices, are in an undisturbed practice of their
functions, and begin to be afraid of change upon the noise of an invasion.

This resolution could not be doubted, were it not that one might object, That
what is said seems true, abstracting from circumstances; but it ought to be
considered, that such men see nothing but the outward appearances of what
passes in humane negotiations, and so there may many circumstances lie hidden
from them, which would make them think or with otherwise if they knew them: As,
for example, home-discontents and foreign conspiracies; which if understood,
would make these honest men prefer a war, after which there is to follow a
peace far exceeding the present quiet, and such a one as deserves the
intervening disturbance and damages.

And indeed, I allow these men understand not such mysteries of State, nor
penetrate the value of the hazard: But, if they do not, why are they not also
exempted from engaging on those motives? and then the rest of the Commonwealth
will be but so many private men, who must follow the common. Again, if they
think themselves well, they manifestly consent to the present Government, and
therefore cut off the title of the dispossessed Governor. Besides, who can
answer they shall be better by the retu^n of the dispossessed party? surely, by
common presumption, the gainer is like to defend them better than he who lost
it.

But what if an open Enemy should come, could or ought the Subjects join
against him with their new Magistrate? If not, the whole public must perish:
If they may, then the case is the same against their old Magistrate; since his
right stood upon the common peace, and that is transferred from him to his
rival by the title of quiet possession.

The Authority of Lawyers insufficient in this Question.
NO Laws made by the power or agreement of men, can judge betwixt Subject and
Sovereign, in dispute of the common good and Government; but only the Tribunals
of God and Nature, or Divinity and the science of Politics: And therefore, the
maxims of Law have no force in these questions; Now, if Princes lose their
pretenses by the force of Nature, it is ridiculous for private men to build
hopes, upon rotten titles of ages long passed, upon weak maxims of Law, after
Nature, by her revolutions, has cast all Law and moral acts and agreements.

NOw as the malignity and poison of these anti-monarchical assertions render
this Author a very unfit Prescriber of political Principles and rules of
government and subjection to the rest of mankind; so circumstance of their
writing and Publication (they being published when Cromwell was in possession
of the Government, and the King dispossessed, and in Banishment) makes them
look so like a public disswasion of the People to endeavor the restoration
of his Majesty (who by his Principles ought to have renounced his title to the
Government,) that we leave it to the World to judge whether such a man, unless
he repent, and renounce these wicked assertions, be worthy of his Majesty's
protection, being restored to that Government to which, he affirms, that the
Subjects ought not to endeavor to restore their Prince, being once (though
never so unjustly) dispossessed.

Out of Bishop Bramhall's Book against Mr. Hobs, called, The Catching of the
Leviathan.
THE Obligation of a Subject to the Sovereign, lasts no Hobs his Lev. p. 114.
longer, than the power by which he is able to protect him, Bramhall, p. 517.

When in a war foreign or intestine the Enemies get a final victory, Lev.
so as (the forces of the Commonwealth keeping the field no longer,) there is
no protection of Subjects in their Loyalty, then is the Commonwealth
dissolved, and every man at liberty to protect himself by such courses as his
own discretion shall suggest to him, p. 517.

He that has no obligation to his former Sovereign, but that of an Le. p. 190.
ordinary Subject, has liberty to submit to a Conqueror, when the means of
his life is within the guards and garrisons of his enemy, for it is then that
he has no longer protection from him. And concludes, -- That their total
submission is as lawful as a Contribution, p. 518.

That they who live under the protection of a Conqueror, openly Le. p. 137.
are understood to submit to his Government: And that in the Act of receiving
protection openly, and not renouncing it openly, they do oblige themselves to
obey the Laws of their Protector, to which in receiving protection, they have
assented, p. 518.

If the Commonwealth come into the power of its enemies, so Hobs de Civ. C. 7.
Sect. 18.
that they cannot be resisted, he who had the sovereignty before, is understood
to have lost it, p. 517.

Security is the end for which men make themselves subjects to Ci. C. 13. Sect.
3.
others; which if he in joy not, his subjection cease, and he loses not
right to defend himself at his own discretion; neither is any man understood to
have bound himself to any thing, or to have relinquished his right over all
things, before his own security be provided for, p. 513.

It is manifest, that they do against Conscience, and wish the eternal Ci. C.
13. Sect. 5.
damnation of their Subjects, who do not cause such doctrine, and such worship
to be exhibited to them, as they themselves do believe to conduce to their
salvation, or tolerate the contrary to be taught and exhibited, p. 514.

No man is bound by his pacts, whatsoever they be, not to resist Ci. C. 2.
Sect. 18.
him, who brings upon him death or wounds, or any bodily damage, p. 514.

Seeing no man is bound to impossibilities, they who are to suffer Le. p. 112.
corporal damage, and are not constant enough to endure it, are not obliged to
suffer it. And more fully, -- In case a great many men together have rebelled,
or committed some other capital crime, for which every one of them expects
death, whether have not they the liberty to join together and assist and defend
one another? Certainly they have, for they do but defend their lives with the
guilty, as well as the innocent may do. There was indeed injustice in their
first breach of duty, their bearing Arms subsequent to it, though to maintain
what they have done, is no unjust Act, p. 514.

FINIS.

