An Account of the Taking of the New-Fort in Kinsale, By the Forces of the EARL
of MALBOROUGH,
LICENSED,

October 25th 1690. J. F.



ON the 10th of October our Cannon for Battery arrived in the Camp before
Kinsale, they having been retarded some time by six days continued Rains, which
very much incommoded the Besiegers, whereby they were only contented to remain
in their Trenches, without making any considerable Progress. On the 12th a
Battery was raised and planted, of 12 Demy-cannon, which played all the
succeeding Night, both upon the Counterscarp and Fort, and the next Morning the
Earl of Malborough commanded an Attaque to be made on two several Places of the
Counterscarp, and after an Hours Assault we entered the same, putting all we
found to the Sword, which were about 40; our Men forthwith made a Lodgment
thereon, notwithstanding the Enemy sallied out to impede us, but they were
driven back with great Loss. On the 13th and 14th we continued to enlarge the
Breach in the New Fort and widen our Trenches, disposing all things for a
General Assault, and those within made a Show as if they would abide the Storm,
the Governor Sir Edward Scot, late Deputy Governor of Portsmouth, returning
Answer to the Earl of Malborough's second Summons, That he was resolved to
abide the last Extremy: But on Wednesday the 15th, in the Afternoon, just as
our Men were beginning the Storm, in the midst of the shooting, a Drum beat a
Parlee; which Colonel Fitz-Patrick, who commanded in chief the Attaque,
observing, discontinued firing, and sent to know the Demands: Who answered,
That the Governor desired that a Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel should be sent
into the Fort, and he would send two of the like Quality into the Camp, by way
of Hostage, in order to treat of something relating to the Fort: which being
accordingly done, it was that Evening capitulated and agreed to, and signed by
the Earl of Malborough; Considering the Advance of the Season, and the very wet
Weather, That the Garrison, being three broken Regiments, should march out with
Bag and Baggage, and the usual Ensigns of Honors, to have several Days
Provision, and to be conducted half way to Limerick; and that the Morrow, being
Thursday, two Regiments of our Men should take possession of the Gates: And a
particular Article was made in favor of the Governor, That he should have the
Liberty of three Months to go out of the Kingdom. On Thursday, accordingly, our
Men took Possession, when the aforesaid Colonel Fitz-Patrick was sent Express,
by the Earl of Malborough, to give his Majesty an account; and he arrived here
the close of the last Week, and says, That on Friday the Irish were to march
out, being not above 1000 Men: And that Colonel Churchil his Lordship's Brother
is made Governor thereof.

LONDON, Printed for Y. S. MDCXC.


