A DISCOURSE Concerning a Deathbed Repentance.

By WILLIAM ASSHETON, D.D. Rector of Beckenham in Kent, and Chaplain to his
Grace the Duke of ORMOND.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXCVI.

TO THE KING's MOST Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please Your Majesty,
TO accept of this Treatise, part of which was preached in Your Royal Chapel
before the late Queen, Your Majesty's Dearest Consort of blessed Memory. That I
did not then Present it to the Hands of that Excellent Princess, was the
Imperfection of the Work, (I having designed some further enlargement upon that
Subject) otherwise I should most cheerfully have complied with some approving
Intimation then given, in order to a Command for the Publishing of it. The
whole being now finished, is most humbly submitted to Your Majesty's Censure, by

Your MAJESTY's Most humble and Obedient Subject and Servant, William Assheton.

THE PREFACE.
HAVING made my self a Debtor to the Public, for A Plain Method of Devotion
for Sick and Dying Persons: And one chief part of that Devotion being the
Exercise of a true Repentance, (for the Minister who visits the Sick Person, is
directed by the Church of England to examine, Whether he repent him truly of
his Sins?) lest Men should from hence be encouraged to defer their Repentance
to a Sick and Dying Bed, (as if they might safely enjoy their Sins in their
Health, because they are admonished to Repent when they come to Dye) I have
therefore very faithfully examined that matter: And have endeavored in the
following Treatise to convince them, That though Repentance, as all other
Graces, must be exercised and improved upon the approach of Death (for our
Lamps must be trimmed when the Bridegroom comes) yet A Deathbed Repentance is
neither comfortable nor safe.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Soul is Immortal, and shall be Eternally either Happy or Miserable. Page
1. This Life the only time to fit and prepare us for our Future Eternal State.
Page 2. The Vicious, Sensual, and Impenitent, shall be miserable. Ibid. But
such as are Obedient to the Laws of the Gospel shall be happy. Page 3. Hence it
is both our Interest and Duty, to take care of our Souls, and provide for
Eternity. Ibid. But this generally neglected, and why. Ibid. The Case of a
Deathbed Repentance strictly examined, and in what method. Page 5. What is
meant by a Deathbed Repentance. Page 6. What by true Repentance. Page 7. The
Vulgar Notion of Repentance. Ibid. Which yet, as is showed, is no Gospel
Repentance. Ibid. What Repentance is saving. Page 11. How far, and in what
manner a Sick and Dying Sinner can be able to Repent. Page 13. Wicked Men, when
they come to Dye, may remember their Sins. Page 16. They may also be very sorry
for their Sins. Ibid. They may earnestly beg Pardon for their Sins. Page 18.
They may make very serious Resolutions of Amendment. Page 19. They may make
Restitution. Page 20. Whether all this will amount to true Repentance. Page 21.
Of the Laborers in the Vineyard. Page 43. The Case of the Thief upon the
Cross. Page 49. The Close. Page 61.
A DISCOURSE Concerning a Deathbed Repentance.
IT IS the faint Dictate even of Natural Reason, but the more clear and full
Discovery of Revelation, That when we dye, when our Souls shall be separated
from our Bodies, when we leave this World, we shall not then perish like the
Brutes, and cease to be; but shall subsist and continue in another State and
Capacity, either of Happiness or Misery, to all Eternity. And we are further
instructed from Divine Revelation in the Holy Scriptures, That this present
Life, this short and uncertain time of continuance in this World, is the only
space of Probation and Trial, to fit and prepare us for our future Eternal
State. As the Tree falls, so it lies. There is no Work nor Repentance in the
Grave. But as Death shall seize us, in the same Capacity we shall appear before
the Throne of God, and shall then be disposed of in an irreversible unalterable
State, either of Happiness or Misery.

Those who make their own Will their Law, and who are guided and acted by their
own vicious sensual Inclinations, they shall be eternally miserable. Or
according to our blunt way of expressing it in our English Language, They shall
be Damned, that is, they shall be condemned to that state of Misery, which the
Justice of God has prepared to be the sad Lot and Portion of all impenitent
Sinners.

But on the other hand; Those who follow the Divine Conduct, and are obedient
to the Laws of the Gospel; such Persons, through the Mercy of God, and the
Merits of Jesus Christ, shall be saved and preserved from the Wrath to come.
And shall be placed in that happy State and Capacity, where they shall not only
be freed from Misery, but shall further be secured in the unalterable enjoyment
of an unexpressible Happiness and Satisfaction.

From these Considerations you are fully convinced, that it is both your
Interest and Duty to take care of your Souls, and provide for Eternity. But the
sad mistake is this, (and it is the ruin of thousands) you fancy it is time
enough hereafter to entertain such Thoughts. You have so much Diversion and
Employment in the World, that you have little or no time for the Duties of
Religion. But when you have settled your Affairs, and dispatched this or that:
When you have improved or cleared your Estates: When you have taken in this
Mortgage, finished that Purchase, etc. When the hurry of these things is over,
and that you can call your Thoughts your own, then you promise your selves to
be very Religious; that is, when you have done with this World, you will
provide for the next. When your Bodies begin to be crazy, and your strength to
decay; When you are laid upon a Sickbed, and have lost the relish of sensual
Pleasures, then you fancy you shall have both leisure and inclination to repent
of your Sins, and to beg Pardon for them. And whenever you do Repent, (though it
be but upon your Deathbed) God, who is very merciful, has promised to accept
you.

I appeal now to your own Consciences if this is not the very Language of your
hearts: But know, that your hearts are deceitful, and take heed lest they be
further hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.

That I may therefore awaken your Consideration, and convince you of your
danger in trusting to a broken Reed: That I may make you sensible how unsafe it
is to depend upon a Deathbed Repentance, I shall very distinctly examine that
matter. By showing,

1. What is meant by true Repentance? 2. I shall enquire, How far, and in what
manner a Sick and Dying Sinner can be able to Repent? 3. I shall desire such
Persons sadly to consider, What small hope there is, that such kind of
Repentance should find acceptance with God. 4. I shall examine those Two noted
Scripture-instances commonly mentioned in favor of a Death bed Repentance,
viz. The Laborers in the Vineyard, who came in at the eleventh hour. And, The
Thief upon the Cross.
But as Preparatory to my enlargement on these Particulars, whereby it will be
more distinct and instructive; I must first premise, what is meant by a
Deathbed Repentance.

Now a Deathbed Repentance denotes Two things.

1. A finishing that great Work of Repentance which we begun in our Healths,
and took some care to carry on amidst the Business and Diversions of this
World; But do now more solemnly complete at our Deaths, by reviewing the State
of our Souls, and perfecting our Accounts with God.

This kind of Deathbed Repentance is so far from being a mistake, that it is a
necessary Duty, and is the commendable practice of good and pious Men. But,

2. There is a Vulgar Notion of a Deathbed Repentance, viz.

When a Man then begins to Repent when he comes to dye. When a Man has spent
all his Life in the gratifying of his Lusts, and has followed his own vicious
Inclinations. When he has denied himself no carnal Satisfactions, but has
taken his fill of sensual Pleasures: And yet such a Man, when his Body is
disabled, and Death approaches, so that he has neither time nor inclination
to Sin any longer, will pretend to be sorry for his Sin, and Repent. This we
call a Deathbed Repentance.

Now how unsafe and uncomfortable such a Deathbed Repentance is, I shall
endeavor to convince you, by examining the formentioned Particulars.

I. What is meant by true Repentance.

The vulgar and common Notion of Repentance, is evidently this:

When a Man has committed a fault, and has done something amiss, and is then
sorry for it; is grieved and troubled that he has done it, and does heartily
wish it had not been done. Such a Man, we usually say, does Repent of such an
Action.

But this is not the full adequate Notion of a Gospel-Repentance; of such a
Repentance as shall find acceptance with God.

This is but the Repentance of Malefactors at the Gallows; nay, it is no other
than the Repentance of Cain and Judas.

It is observed, That the most profligate condemned Wretch when he comes to
dye, will be very sorry for what he has done. He will be much ashamed, and
will have great Indignation against himself, to think he should be such a fool
to part with his precious Life, and all the Comforts and Satisfactions of this
World, in such a vile ignominious manner, to be tied up like a Dog, perhaps for
the taking of a few Sheep. How will such a Fellow fawn upon, and flatter the
Judge, That if he will but spare him, O what an honest Man he will then be! And
yet do but procure his Pardon, and let him loose, and he is quickly at the old
Trade. Nay, it is great odds but you have him again by the next Assizes.

Now will any one pretend that in such a Case as this, there is true Repentance?

Which yet is more evident from those Scripture-Instances of Cain and Judas.

It seems very probable, from the circumstances of his Story, that Cain did
repent of the Murder of his Brother. My punishment, says he, is greater than
I can bear, Genesis 4.13. But because in the Judgment of some Learned Men, this is
rather an instance of Despair than Repenting-Sorrow; I shall not much insist
upon this of Cain. But as to the other instance of Judas, it is express and
undeniable.

You read his Story, Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when
he saw that he was comdemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty
pieces of silver to the chief Priests and Elders, saying, I have sinned, in
that I have betrayed the innocent Blood. And they said, What is that to us? see
thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself.

Here are as signal Instances that Judas did sincerely repent of what he had
done, as can possibly be given. For besides the express Testimony of the Holy
Ghost, which in plain terms tells us he did Repent, and that he himself
declared, He had sinned in betraying the innocent Blood: He further gives this
evidence, that he was in earnest, he not only restores the thirty pieces, but
in horror and consternation of Mind, he went and hanged himself.

Here is, I say, in this instance as much Grief, and Trouble, and Vexation for
the Commission of a Sin, and as noted evidence that he was heartily sorry for
it, as can possibly be supposed. And yet it is as plain, that this Repentance of
Judas was not an Evangelical Repentance, such a Repentance as was accepted by
Almighty God. Our Blessed Savior, who is Truth it self, having passed this
Decree upon him: Woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had
been good for that man, if he had not been born, Matthew. 26.24.

It appears from these premises, that there is more required to a saving
Gospel-Repentance than trouble of Mind. When a Man has committed a sault, he
may be sorry for it, he may grieve and mourn that he has done it; he may
heartily wish it had not been done; he may make Restitution of his ill-gotten
Goods. All this may be done; thus far he may proceed, and yet his Repentance is
but imperfect, and shall never find acceptance with a pure and holy God.

But here you will say;

If Men may proceed thus far, and yet their Repentance is not true and saving;
How shall we know that we have true Repentance; and wherein does the nature of
it consist?

To this I answer,

God only can instruct us what is true Repentance. That is, it is very agreeble
to the Majesty and Sovereignty of God to prescribe the Terms and Conditions of
Salvation, and to appoint his Creatures what they must do; how they must behave
themselves to be accepted by him.

Now there is no other way to be informed in this matter, but to consult the
Holy Scriptures. In those Sacred Writings, the Divine Wisdom has sufficiently
revealed his Will, and has plainly told us, What it is that he required of us;
and what we are to do, that we may inherit Eternal Life.

We are expressly admonished, That without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12.14. That the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the
spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. Be not
deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal.
6.7, 8. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works, Matthew.
16.27. And the Son of God being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And St. Paul does plainly
admonish us, That the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty
angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.7, 8.

From these places of Scripture (to omit many others) it evidently appears,
That actual Holiness, and actual Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel is the
indispensible Condition of Salvation. And consequently to be only Sorry for our
Sins; to be troubled that we have done amiss; unless this Sorrow do bring forth
fruits meet for Repentance; that is, unless it be attended with actual
Reformation and Amendment, it is not a true and Evangelical Repentance, such a
Repentance as God has promised to accept.

2. I am to examine, How far, and in what manner a Sick and Dying Sinner can be
able to Repent?

And this I shall best perform by a plain representation of matter of Fact.
Whilst I faithfully remind you, how, or in what manner you may happen to dye.

1. You may dye suddenly.

This has been many a Man's case, and you have no assurance to the contrary,
but it may be yours. If some hidden Distemper do not thus extinguish the Lamp
of Life, your own Sin and Folly may then puff it out. You may happen in some
private Quarrel, unexpectedly to dye at the point of a Sword, and so may fall a
Sacrifice to your Lust, to your Malice, or Revenge. But whatever may occasion
your Death; if it be sudden, it is then impossible for you to Repent upon your
Deathbeds. And if you have not taken care in your lifetime to perform that
great Work, then according to the Laws of the Gospel, you are utterly lost and
undone for ever. For except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

2. You may dye raving Mad, or stupidly Senseless.

There is a sufficient Mass of vicious corrupted Humors, or (as Physicians
phrase it) of Morbisick Matter in any of your Bodies, as may occasion these sad
Symptoms and dismal Effects. And if this be your case, where then is your
Deathbed Repentance?

It is necessary to Repentance (even in the vulgar Notion of it) that you
should not only remember your Sins, but should also be sorry for them. But now
supposing your Distemper is either a Frenzy or a Lethargy, or in any other
instance of such a nature, as shall wholly deprive you of your Memory and
Understanding, your Repentance is then impossible. But,

3. Supposing it is neither thus nor thus with you; but that God in his Mercy
gives you a slow and easy passage out of this World. Suppose your Distemper is
so gentle, that it neither distracts you with Pain, nor disorders your
Faculties; but that, as we phrase it, You have your Senses to the last. In such
a case as this (which is the most favorable that can be supposed) I will now
examine, how far any Man who has spent the time of his Health in Sin and
Vanity, can be able to Repent.

1. Wicked men, when they come to die, may remember their Sins, which they
seldom think on in the time of their Healths.

The generality of men are so wholly taken up with the Designs of This World,
that they have neither leisure nor inclination to think of the Next. In what a
hurry such men do spend the Day, is very obvious to observe; and at Night,
being laden with Wine and Business, they sleep over their Cares and their Sins
together.

But when some lingering Disease shall confine them to their Chambers, or nail
them to their Beds; when their Sleep is departed from them, and that they lie
rolling and tumbling, and wishing for the Day: Then they are at leisure to
consider their Ways, and to remember what they have done, and to recollect the
former Passages of their Lives.

2. Wicked men, when they come to die, may not only remember, but also may be
very sorry, and much troubled for their Sins; and may likewise make a penitent
Confession of them.

This evidently appears from the former Instance of Judas, who was not a little
troubled for betraying his Master; and as freely makes confession of his Fault:
I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent Blood.

And this is undeniable even from daily observation: Those who visit Sick-Beds,
and hear the dying Groans of departing Sinners, are best able to tell you how
they will lament their former Lives, and what wretched Sinners they have been.
And at such a time they will be very free and ingenuous in their Confession,
with a thus, and thus have I done; and withal they may mightily judge and
condemn themselves for it.

If ever you have been laid upon a Sickbed, with the Terrors and Apprehensions
of another World before you, then I appeal to your own experience for the truth
of what I have now said.

3. Wicked men, upon their Deathbeds, may not only make a sorrowful Confession
of their Sins, but also they may earnestly beg Pardon for them.

There is a Principle of Self-preservation in the most vicious carnal man,
which prompts him to be solicitous for deliverance from an imminent Danger. A
noted Instance of this you have in Seamen; such men (especially the common
Sailers) are not usually over-zealous in Religion, and yet in a dangerous
Storm, or in a leaky sinking Ship, those who seldom named God, unless in Oaths
and Execrations, will now fall to their Prayers.

And thus the most graceless, sensual, worldly Person, when he comes to die,
and has the prospect of another World immediately before him; when he sees the
Infernal Pit open to receive him, O with what earnestness will he deprecate the
Divine Vengeance! How passionately will he pray unto God to spare him, to be
gracious to him, to pardon and forgive him!

Nay, even those who have been so careless and unconcerned, that they could
never in their whole lifetime be persuaded to remember our Blessed Savior's
Passion in the way of his own Institution in the Holy Sacrament; yet these very
Persons on their Deathbed will pretend to remember it. They will then plead
his Merits and Satisfaction, and will beg God's Pardon for the sake of Jesus
Christ.

This likewise, as to matter of Fact, is undeniably evident.

4. Wicked Men, when they come to dye, may further make very serious
Resolutions of amendment of Life. And in such cases this is the noted Language
of a Deathbed.

O what a wicked Wretch have I been? I have done thus and thus. But if God will
now please to spare my Life, and restore me to my Health, I Will become a new
Man. I Will no more be guilty of such Intemperance. I Will be wanton and lascivious
no more. I Will take heed of lying and slandering. And I Will refrain from this
cursing and swearing. I Will be more careful to sanctify the Sabbath. I Will not
only frequent the Church, but for the future I Will no more be guilty of vain
Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's Day. And on the Weekday, though I must follow
my worldly Business, yet I Will do it in dependence upon God's Providence, I will
never more neglect to pray unto God; but do now resolve Morning and Evening to
bend my Knees to my Creator and Redeemer. Lastly, As an evidence that he is
sincere, He may make Restitution and Satisfaction in several instances.

He may declare that he bears no Malice, but does freely forgive all the World.
He may likewise restore his ill-gotten Goods; and may give satisfaction to
those he remembers to have wronged.

And not only so, but for the close of all, he may be large in his Charity in
Reversion; and by his last Will and Testament may bequeath a bountiful Legacy
to the Poor.

All this may be done, and it is the utmost that can be done upon a Deathbed.

3. Let us now impartially examine, Whether all this will amount to true
Repentance? Such a Repentance as shall find acceptance with a Pure and Holy God.

1. Wicked Men when they come to Dye may remember their Sins.

But such remembrance being no other than the exercise of a natural Faculty, is
neither Repentance, nor any part of that Saving-work. The vilest Wretches do
but too much remember their Sins, and please themselves in that Carnal
Satisfaction they had in the enjoyment of them.

But, you will say, this is not the Case. For such a dying Sinner does not
barely remember his Sins, but he remembers them with Shame and Sorrow, and is
much troubled for the committing of them. And this Trouble, and Sorrow, and
Compunction of Mind, we hope will be accepted as true Repentance.

To this I answer.

Such a dying Sinner is indeed very much troubled, and is under great anguish
and perplexity of Mind. But let us now strictly examine what is the occasion of
all this Consternation? Is he sorry that he has offended God, that he has
transgressed the Laws of so gracious a Majesty? This pretense is not probable,
when we reflect upon his former Conversation. He who made his own Will his Law,
and never denied himself in any Carnal Enjoyment; but though God himself in his
holy World has expressly delared, That such and such things ought not to be
done; yet because of some present Pleasure and Profit he is resolved to commit
them. He who was not only pleased with his Sin, but gloried in his Sin, and
boasted in his Sin; it is very unaccountable, that such a Man all on the sudden
should be thus sorry for his Sin. It Is strange that his Judgment and
Appehension of things should be thus changed in a moment.

For his Conviction, I Will suppose him to be restored to his former Health and
Vigor, and that the former Passages of his Life, in any instance, could be
repeated. Being under such pleasing Circumstances, can he then honestly and
conscientiously make this Expostulation of Joseph, How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God?

It Is true, the Man is now troubled; but for what? It Is not for his Sin, (which
he never had any Quarrel against) but in plain terms, it is for the punishment
of his Sin.

He is indeed thus far troubled for his Sin. He is very much out of Humor that
he can Sin no longer; that he has lost his relish and inclination to it. It
makes him heavy and lumpish, that all his pleasant Days are passed and gone;
and that nothing now remains but a sad Reckoning and Account. Rejoice, O young
man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and
walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou,
that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. It Is this
Judgment, this Reckoning and Account that makes him quake and tremble.

When a poor dying Wretch, who has neglected God and his Duty all his life
long, shall be now convinced by the decays of Nature, that his Soul must
immediately be torn from his Body: When he looks upward, and there beholds a
just Judge ready to pronounce a sad Sentence upon him: When he casts his Eye
downward, and there observes that place of Horror, that flaming Furnace just
ready to receive him: When he now sees and considers these things, which
formerly in the days of his Vanity he had no leisure to think on; and further
reflects, that all this Misery is now brought upon him by his own folly, and
that with a very little care and forecast it might have been prevented. Being
under such sad Circumstances as these, it is but a natural Love of a Man's self;
it is no other than an instance of Self-preservation to be troubled and
perplexed. In plain terms, This anguish of Mind for the Happiness that is lost,
and the Torments that shall be endured, is the very Worm of the Damned that
dies not. And if such Sorrow and Vexation as this is true Repentance, then
those miserable Creatures shall sadly repent to all Eternity. But,

2. The dying Person is not only sorry for his Sin, but also makes Confession
of it, and very humbly begs Pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ. And will not
this be accepted as true Repentance?

I answer.

We are indeed assured by St. John, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. But what kind of Confession shall be
accepted, the Holy Scriptures must inform us.

In these Sacred Writings we are often admonished, that it is not an Historical
Confession; it is not a bare-acknowledgment that we have done thus or thus; but
it is a Penitential Confession shall find acceptance. Whosoever confesses and
forsakes his sin shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. A sick dying Man may indeed
confess his Sins; but how far he can be able to forsake his Sin, that is, to
amend and reform, shall be considered in its proper place.

But you will say, He not only confesses, but he begs pardon for the sake of
Jesus Christ; and we have a gracious promise that at such a time we shall be
heard, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me, Psalm 50.15. And our Blessed Savior has assured us, Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you, John 16.23. Now here is a
poor languishing Creature in great distress and trouble, and will not God
accept him for the sake of Jesus Christ?

I answer;

All the Promises of God in Jesus Christ are Yea and Amen, that is, most sure
and certain. But then you must also know, these Promises are conditional, and
the performance of them on God^s part, does suppose certain Qualifications and
Conditions on our part. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. intimating, that unless we cleanse our
selves from all filthiness, and do thus perfect Holiness, we have no title to
these Promises.

Indeed Jesus Christ has promised, those that come unto him, he will in no
wise cast them out, but will kindly receive them, and treat them as Friends.
But upon what terms he will receive them, and own them as Friends; he himself
has told us in these words. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command
you, John 15.14. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9.

I have now showed you, that actual Holiness, or actual Obedience (which are
one and the same thing) is the Gospel-condition of Salvation. And if you can
make it appear, that a Man who in the time of his Health was so far from the
practice of Religion, that he contemned and despised it, nay, perhaps ridiculed
and burlesqu'd it: If, I say, such a Man when he is laid upon a Sickbed, and
is able to do nothing else, can obey the Laws of the Gospel, and walk in the
ways of God's Commandments, then indeed you say something; otherwise here is,
as yet, but very slender encouragement for a Deathbed Repentance But,

3. We suppose further, That the dying Person makes very serious and passionate
Resolutions of amendment of Life. And will not the Mercy of God accept these
Resolutions? In such a Case will not he take the Will for the Deed?

To this I answer;

That when Men are in a great fright, and are under the apprehensions of some
eminent Danger, it is then the most common thing in the World to make
Resolutions. What will not such Men promise, if they may but escape such and
such a Danger! The Vows of Mariners and Seamen in a violent Storm, are a noted
instance of such Resolutions.

Let us now strictly examine, Whether, or how far, God will accept such dying
Resolutions?

To state this Matter truly, you must observe, That Religion is represented in
the Gospel as our reasonable or rational Service, and consequently that the
exercise of it must proceed from Judgment and Deliberation, not from sadden
Heats and Passion. We are admonished by the wise man, Not to offer to God the
sacrifice of fools; but when we make a vow or promise to him, deliberately to
consider how far, or in what manner we can be able to perform it.

Now there are Two Things to be considered in a dying Sinner's Resolution,
Sincerity and Ability. Sincerity in his Intentions, and Ability in his
Executions.

And first, it is not likely that a dying Sinner's Intention should be sincere;
but that he may promise what he never intends to perform. Such a Wretch who
has so far corrupted his Morals, may by the just Judgment of God be depraved
in his understanding and may vainly imagine that God is such a one as himself.
And because he observes that frail Men have been often cheated by him, and have
really believed him, whilst he made Promises and Protestations of what he never
intended; he is so foolish as to fancy, that an Omniscient God may be likewise
thus imposed on. And therefore he will be as large and as passionate in his
Promises of Reformation, as the most notorious Malefactor ever was in hopes of
Pardon. Whereas should God restore him to his former Health and Vigor, he
would then be as loose and profane, as Lustful and Intemperate, as Envious and
Malicious, as Covetous and Worldly, as ever he was before. We should then
quickly have him at his old Cant: The charms of beauty and good Company are not
to be resisted. God forgive me, I am so used to this swearing, I rap out an
Oath before I think on it. And I am naturally so passionate, I see I cannot help
it. But be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap, Gal. 6.7.

But suppose the dying Sinner were sincere, and did really intend that
Reformation which is now so solemnly promised; let him sadly consider, how
unlikely it is he should be able to perform all this.

For his Conviction, I must remind him;

There are Two things necessary to all great Undertakings. Ability and
Opportunity.

1. As to Ability; How difficult, if not impossible, it is for a sick and dying
Sinner to reform his Nature, if ever it has been your own case, you your
selves will be easily convinced. When a man is oppressed with pain, disturbed
with Visits, distracted with the Clamours of his dissatisfied Relations: Amidst
all this noise and diversion, What can possibly be done? what Duties can be
performed? Do but seriously think upon it, and your own Apprehensions will
excuse my enlargement.

But supposing he had the greatest Capacity, pray, what time is now left him to
perfect so vast a Work? Evil Habits which have been long in contracting, are
not suddenly rooted out. When Lusts and Passions (by being often indulged) are
grown rampant, they are not easily mortified. A thorough Reformation is a work
of time, and must be done successively, and by degrees. This is fully intimated
whilst we are admonished to go on to perfection. And to grow in grace.

But what can that man do who is now a dying? When the Sentence of Death is
passed upon him, and his Physician has given him over? To talk then of
reforming his Life, when he now finds he can live no longer, is such an
intolerable piece of weakness, as in any other instance would scarce be heard
with patience.

Suppose a dying Father, who had ruined his Family by his Extravagant Courses,
should thus comfort his dejected, impoverished Children;

Be of good cheer, I am now resolved to be very frugal. I Will provide for you,
and get you a good Estate.

Pray, what could be replied in such a Case?

Alas, Sir, you're a dying. You cannot lift your head off the Pillow. You
cannot live till the morning. And how should you get us an Estate? To tell them
further, Ay, but I resolve it, and I hope you believe me:

Such Resolution would be but mean Satisfaction; and a very slender supply of
all their Wants.

The Application is easy, and pray make it effectually to your selves. In
short; Promises and Resolutions are not Performances. Nor were ever so accepted
by God or Man. But you will say;

4. He actually, thus far, performs his Promises and Resolutions, that he makes
Restitution, and that in several Instances. Will not this be accepted as true
Repentance?

To this I Answer,

That as Restitution is a most necessary Duty, to which all injurious Offenders
are strictly obliged; so it is the surest Expedient to satisfy the Conscience,
and to convince both our selves and others of the truth and sincerity of our
Repentance.

But upon a strict inquiry it will appear, how difficult it is for a dying
Person to make such Restitution.

For his Conviction I must remind him: That the word Restitution, in its
Latitude, denotes Two Things.

1. The being reconciled to the Person whom we have offended. 2. The giving him
Satisfaction and Reparation for the Damage has been done him.
To explain this further, we are to observe; That in Sins against the Second
Table, there is not only an Act of Disobedience toward God, but also of
affront and injury against our Brother. And he who truly repents, in both these
Instances will cancel and undo, and take away his Sin as far as possible.

Let us now examine, how far both these can be done by a dying Person.

1. The dying Sinner pretends to be reconciled to those whom he has offended.
He declares, He is very sorry for the envy and hatred, the rancour and malice
he has been guilty of; And assures his Neighbor he is now very real, and
desires that what is past, may be forgiven and forgotten mutually on both
sides. He is heartily troubled that he has ever done him any wrong, and
desires him to forgive him; and withal assures him, that he himself does now
forgive him and all the World, as he expects to be forgiven for Christ's sake.

All this is plausible and seemingly pious. But let me thus expostulate with
this dying Sinner.

You say, you are now sorry for the Wrongs and Injuries you have done to such
and such Persons. Let me ask you this short Question:

Are you now able to affront them any longer? Is it in your power to do them
further mischief? Is not your Malice now bridled, is not your Rancour limited
and restrained?

For your Conviction pray resolve me;

You say, you do now forgive. But were you thus ready to forgive in the days of
your Health and Vigor? Did not you then, on all occasions, express your
resentments to the utmost? Did not you then gratify your Spleen, and take the
pleasure of Revenge when it lay in your power? What reason is there now to
believe you, whilst you protest you do forgive him?

You say, you forgive him, because you do not hurt him. You do not hurt him,
because you cannot.

Again, You say, you forgive him. But what hypocrisy is this, to pretend to
forgive, when you have had your Revenge already, and that to the utmost, at
least as far, as your own safety, and respect to the Laws would permit you to
take it.

I Will explain this further to you, in this following Case.

An insulting Mohammedan confines his poor innocent Christian Slave in a noisome
Dungeon, where with bad Air, and worse usage, the poor Man's heart is broke.
And being told, that he is dying, he pretends to be merciful, and gives order
for his release. But what a cheat is this, to say he does release him, when he
can keep him no longer? God has released him. For in the Grave, the weary be
at rest. There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
oppressor, Job 3.17, 18.

By the light of this Example you will easily understand the value and
acceptance of a Death bed forgiveness.

And just at the same rate,

2. The dying Sinner makes Reparation and Satisfaction.

He is convinced that he has injured such a Man, having wronged him in his
Dealings to such a value; And is now not only sorry for the injury, but is also
ready to make him satisfaction. And is not this sufficient evidence of the
sincerity of his Repentance? Answer;

It is indeed very pleasing to God, that those who have been wronged by you,
should receive satisfaction for the Wrongs you have done them. And if this
Reparation is not made by you in Person, it must then be made by your Heirs in
Reversion. But withal you must be reminded; that though what is paid and
satisfied by your Heirs, may in the sense of the Law be called your payment;
yet I much question, whether in the sight of God it will be so accepted.

For to state the Case fairly.

You are now ready to part with your Estate, and to distribute it in proportion
to those you have wronged. But, pray, who thanks you for this, To bequeath your
Estate when you can keep it no longer? Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?
Luke 12.20. that is, they are then none of thine. So that Satisfaction in
Reversion is not thine, but thy Heirs. And he who thus makes Restitution, he
only pays his old Scores, by drawing a Bill upon his Executors.

I have now distinctly examined what it is that a dying Sinner can be able to
perform in order to Repentance. As also, what small hope there is, that such
kind of Repentance should be accepted by a pure and holy God.

A man may remember his Sins; He may be sorry for his Sins; He may confess his
Sins; He may beg Pardon for his Sins, with firm Resolutions of Amendment; nay,
He may make actual Restitution to those he has wronged, and yet may be
rejected.

But you will say,

This is very harsh and uncomfortable Doctrine; and we can scarce think that
you your self will be so severe and ill-natured, as to practice accordingly.
When you visit Sick-Beds, and hear a poor Dying Creature to lament his Sins
with Tears, and most earnestly beg Pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ: When
you observe how passionately he resolves, That if God will but spare him, he will
become a new man, and never more be guilty of such extravagance:

What do you say or do in such a Case? Nay, what must such a wicked man do, who
having lived a vicious Life, shall thus happen to be surprised by Death?

Dare you be so uncharitable as to pass the Decree upon him, and say, That he
is past hope: There Is no remedy, but he is certainly damned?

Answer;

I dare not presume to limit the Holy One, whose Mercies are Infinite. In such
a Case I will not censure, but admonish and instruct. I will exhort the dying
Sinner to remember his Sins; to bewail his Sins; to beg Pardon for his Sins; to
make firm Resolutions of Amendment; and where there is occasion, to make
Restitution. And having prayed earnestly for him, and commended him to God's
Mercy, Do I then say, Such a one shall be damned? No; I dare not. But do I say
he shall be saved? No; I cannot. What then do I resolve? What do I determine in
this matter? I will be silent, and determine nothing. For as I dare not flatter
him into a false and groundless Presumption, so neither would I sink him into
the horror of Despair. I say, I will determine nothing; I will judge nothing
before the time. All that I can do, in this dark, intricate Case, is to commend
him to the Extraordinary Mercy of God, to which we must leave some great Cases,
not knowing what to judge of them our selves. Possibly, God, who will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, may please to let this Dying Sinner be a
signal Example of his Unlimited Power and Prerogative, to save beyond all
ordinary Rules.

Whether it may be thus, or thus, I dare not determine. What God can do, ex
plenitudine Potestatis, or by his Prerogative, is not for us to dispute.
However, I must be so faithful to my Office, as to admonish this dying Sinner,
That the Gospel, by the Laws of which we must be judged, does expressly declare,
That actual Holiness, and actual Obedience, are the necessary Conditions of
Salvation. When therefore a man has been vicious and extravagant all his Life
long, if God does accept his Dying Resolutions, it is more than he has
Promised: And it is more than he has given us Authority to Preach and Declare.

But are we not told in the Gospel, That the Laborers were rewarded who came
into the Vineyard at the Eleventh Hour? And that the Thief upon the Cross was
received into Paradise? And are not these Two Examples sufficient for a
Deathbed Repentance?

I Answer:

It Is very deplorable, what slight, trifling Pretenses, what thin, fig-leaf
Excuses some men will make for the neglect of their Duty. As, in particular,
may appear by a strict Examination of these Two Instances.

I. Of the Laborers in the Vineyard.
THIS being a Parable, is to be interpreted as all other Parables ought to be.

It Is a Rule among the Schoolmen, Theologia Symbolica non est Argumentativa;
that is, Arguments are not to be drawn from the particular Circumstances of
Parables, but only from the chief Scope and Design of them.

Now when you have observed the Scope and Design of this Parable, (which you
read, Matthew. 20.) you will then easily be convinced, what slender encouragement
it gives for a Deathbed Repentance.

The Story is this:
A Master of a Family hires a Company of Workmen to dig in his Vineyard. Some
he hires early in the Morning, and bargains to give them a Penny a day for
their Labor. About the Third hour, (which answers to our Nine in the Morning)
as also at the Sixth hour, (which is our Twelve at Noon) and at the Ninth hour,
(which is our Three in the Afternoon) he hires more Laborers with this
condition, Whatsoever is right, I will give you, that is, I will not bind my
self to give you the Wages of a whole Day for working part of it; but according
as you behave your selves, I will reward you.

At the Eleventh hour (which is about our Five in the Evening) he takes in more
Workmen upon the same terms. And at Night he gives them their Wages, and pays
them all alike. And though some of them were discontented at this sort of
Distribution, and thought it unequal, that those who had workt but one single
hour, should be paid as largely as they, who had sweat for it all the Day; yet
they were quickly silenced by being told, Friend, I do thee no wrong, that is,
they had their Bargain. And what reason had they to envy and murmur, if either
to encourage Industry, or to express his own Bounty, he had given to these
last, as unto them who were first?

This is the Parable. The Interpretation of which, the meanest Capacity will
thus easily comprehend.

Almighty God, the great Householder, calls several Laborers, both Jews and
Gentiles, into his Vineyard, the Church. At several hours of the Day, that is,
in different Ages of the World, and at several times of men's Lives. Those who
came in at the Eleventh hour, that is, in the declining part of their Lives,
they had their reward of Glory, as well as those who came in at the first.

From which Parable some Persons have made this Inference.

That though a Man may have loiter'd all the Day, and wasted the time of his Life
in Sin and Vanity, yet if he comes in at the Eleventh hour, that is, if he
Repents, and is sorry for his Sin at his Death, God will then both accept and
reward him.

But this is a very gross and fatal mistake, and it is the greatest Charity to
make Men sensible of it.

Now in order to such Men's Conviction, I shall desire them to consider,

1. They who came in at the Eleventh hour, they came in and worked as soon as
they were called. Had they been called sooner, they would have worked sooner.
Had they been called at the Ninth hour, they would have worked from the Ninth
hour. Had they been called at the Sixth hour, they would have worked from the
Sixth hour. Had they been called early in the Morning, they would have worked
from that time. This being the very reason they gave for their Idleness, viz.
No man has hired us.

But what is this to the Case of a dying Sinner now under the Gospel? Who was
called upon, and invited to work, not only at the Eleventh hour, or at the
Ninth hour, or at the Sixth hour, but early in the Morning, even in the very
beginning of his Life; from his Childhood, in the dawning of the Day, he was
called to this State of Salvation. But he obstinately refused to work, and
resisted the many Calls and Invitations of God, and slighted the Warnings and
Admonitions of his Ministers. He wasted his Time, and squandered his Days in
Idleness and Luxury; and being now come to the period of his Life, he only begs
pardon for not working. I say, What pretense of comfort can he frame from this
Parable, that God will reward him only for Wishings and Wouldings at the last
Gasp? But,

2. Those Laborers who came into the Vineyard at the Eleventh hour, though
indeed they came in late, yet they worked one hour, and they continued
laboring to the close of the Day. But had they staid to the Twelfth hour, when
working was over, and should thus make their Confession to the Steward: Sir,
it is true, you hired us in the Morning, and we promised you to come and work.
But so it happens, we have been idling, and loitering, and diverting our selves
all the Day. However we are now sorry for it, and hope you will pass it by, and
give us our Wages amongst the rest.

Pray, what answer would he make to such Men as these?

This is the very Case of a Deathbed Repentance. For the dying Sinner does not
so much as come in at the Eleventh hour, but stays till the Twelfth; till Night
comes, when no man can work. He has been trifling and loitering, revelling
and caressing all the time of his Life; and now expects at his Death that God
should reward him, because the Laborers in the Vineyard, who came not in till
the Eleventh hour, did receive their Wages equal with the first. But, I say,
how great a cheat he puts upon himself in this comparison, will easily appear
from these premises to any considering Person.

It Is true, Those who came in at the Eleventh hour they had their Wages, for
they did work one hour. But what then? Therefore those shall be rewarded who
did not work at all. This is indeed the noted Logic of a dying Sinner. But the
Inference is too trifling to deserve a Confutation.

The Second Instance commonly urged in favor of a Deathbed Repentance, is

The Thief upon the Cross.
YOU read his Story, Luke 23. from Verse 39. Our Blessed Savior being
crucified between two Thieves, One of them railed on him, saying, If thou be
Christ, save thy self and us. As if he had said, If thou art what thou
pretendest to be, a Christ, a Savior, if thou art not a Cheat and Impostor,
save thy self and us. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not
thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same Condemnation? And we indeed justly,
that is, we were justly condemned, and we justly now suffer the Sentence of our
Condemnation. For we receive the due reward of our Deeds; but this Man has
done nothing amiss, that is, he is an Innocent Person whom the Jews and Romans
do thus barbarously Murder. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when
thou come into thy kingdom. As if he had said, Though these contemn and revile
thee as mean and despicable, yet I acknowledge thee to be a Great Lord, and
that thou have a Kingdom to dispose on. And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say
unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in paradise; that is, immediately after
thy Death thou shall go to a place of Happiness, and there abide with me, as a
Member of that my Kingdom which thou ow ask for.

This is the Story of the Thief upon the Cross.

From whose Example, Carnal, Licentious Persons do thus encourage themselves in
their extravagant Practices.

We are fully convinced of the necessity of Repentance. And we do as fully
resolve, some time or other, to Repent. But why should we be so forward to
disturb our Pleasures, and neglect our Business as to do it now, since we may
Repent hereafter at better leisure? And though we should be so far diverted, as
not to Repent till our Death, yet we have here an encouraging Example, we shall
then be accepted. This Thief had been very notorious and extravagant, an
Offender of the first Rate; and yet when he calls for Mercy, though it was with
his last Breath, his, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, was
comfortably answered with a This day thou shall be with me in paradise. And
therefore, though the greatest part of our Lives, like this Thief's, may have
been spent in Sin and Vanity, yet if we can but say, Lord have mercy upon us,
with our last Breath, we shall likewise be accepted. To this I

Answer:

IT IS a dangerous thing to presume on God's Mercy. And so provoking is such
Presumption, that if the bare saying of these words, Lord have mercy upon me,
would save thy Soul; it may so happen, through the just Judgment of God, thou
may not be able to do it.

Thou may dye suddenly, or thou may dye Stupid, or raving-mad.

But suppose thou have both Breath, and the use of thy Reason to say these
words, here is very slender encouragement from the Example of this Thief, that
a dying Sinner, who never repented till his Death, shall then find Mercy.

For to prove the Validity of a Deathbed Repentance, from the Example of this
Thief, Two things are supposed.

1. That this Thief was a very wicked Man. 2. That he continued in his Sin, and
did not repent till the time of his Death.
Now, if neither of these Two can be proved, then the Case of this Thief is not
parallel, nor a firm foundation for the Validity of a Deathbed Repentance.

1. It does not appear, That this Thief was a very wicked Man.

He is called indeed a Thief, and dies as a Malefactor. But now, a good Man,
and who is so in the general Course of his Life, may by surprise, and the
violence of a Temptation, be guilty of a very bad Action, of which he
afterward does sincerely Repent. The very Case of David and Peter. But
further, he is called indeed a Thief in our Translation; (...) in the Greek,
Latro in the Latin. But what these words do properly signify, we must further
examine.

It was the Character of Barabbas, that he was (...), a Robber. So we Translate
it, John 18.40. But what kind of Person he was, may be inferred from other
places of Scripture.

It is said of this Barabbas, That for a certain sedition made in the city, and
for murder, he was cast into prison, Luke 23.19. And St. Mark tells us, Chap.
15. Ver. ^. There was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them, who had
made insurrection with him, that is, at his Instigation and Procurement. He
was, it is probable, the Ringleader and Captain of the Rebels. The which
conjecture is further confirmed by the story of this Barabbas in St. Matthew.
27.16. They (that is, the Jews) had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas;
(...). Now the word (...), sigfies an Eminent Person, a Man of Note and Quality.

This Barabbas then was the Head of the Party. Who as Zealots for their Nation
and Religion, had made a rising against the Romans; in which attempt being
unsuccessful, they were punished as Malefactors. And yet this Barabbas, though
the Captain General of a Party, is called, (...), Latro, a Thief.

And in Confirmation of this, I must further observe to you, That the word
Latro, which is now a term of Ignominy and Reproach, and is usually translated,
a Thief, or a Robber; did anciently signify no more, as the best Authors inform
us, than a hired Soldier. And Latrocinari pro Militare, is noted Language in
Plautus.

So that this penitent Thief, as great a Malefactor as he is usually supposed,
was no worse (for ought we know to the contrary) than a Soldier, who happening
to be on the wrong side, was punished as a Malefactor.

But now supposing,

2. That this Thief had been a very wicked Man; (which is more than was ever
yet proved against him) yet, How do we know that he did not Repent, even long
before he died? And if so, if he had formerly repented, then his Case is
nothing to the purpose, nor can his Example, with any show of reason be urged
in favor of a Deathbed Repentance.

But supposing,

3. That this Thief was, 1. A very wicked Man, not a Soldier, as the word may
be rendered, but a Thief, and a Robber, in the strictest Sense. And supposing,
2. That he did not Repent till his Death. Yet I shall show, ex abundanti, that
his Example ought not to be urged in favor of a Deathbed Repentance. As will
more fully appear by examining the Circumstances of this Thief's Conversion.

1. It Is possible he never heard of Christ till his Crucifixion.

If he was a Gentile, and not a Jew, it is highly probable he never did. For
Christ, at first, was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And the Commission, Go, teach all Nations, was not enlarged till the day of his
Ascension. If this was his Case, How could he believe on him, of whom he had
not heard? So that on this Supposition, no other than a Death-Repentance was
possible to this Thief.

2. Supposing he had heard of Christ, and that he was informed by common Fame,
that there was a Man called Jesus, who had done great Miracles: And that
several had this opinion of him, That he was the Messiah, whom God had promised
to send into the World: Yet all this was but general and confused knowledge.

He had indeed heard of Christ, and the several Passages concerning him. But
such was the Course of Life this Thief is supposed to have led, that he had no
great curiosity to inquire over-strictly into such matters. But when it so
happened that he was apprehended for Robbery, and condemned to dye at the same
time with Christ; this in all probability made him curious to inquire after
him, and to learn all the Circumstances of his Apprehension, Trial, and
Behavior. From whence he observed so much as convinced him, that he was the
true Messiah. And so he believed on him, and had Salvation by him.

But what encouragement is this to thee, O presuming Christian! who was
baptized into Christ, and distinctly instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel,
even from thy Childhood?

Had this Thief, as thou art, been early admitted into the Church; had he then
been instructed in his Duty, and constantly admonished to continue in it: And
if after such Admission, such Instructions and Exhortations, had he still lived
upon the Pad, and spent his time in Roving and Robbing, in Luxury and
Injustice; and had rejected the Warnings and Admonitions of his Teachers. Had
this been his Case, we have then the justest reason to pronounce, That a short
Ejaculation at his Death would not have been accepted; and his Lord remember
me, would have been rejected with a Depart from me, I know thee not, thou
worker of Iniquity. But,

3. The Case of this Thief was miraculous and extraordinary. And that whether
we consider the Penitent, or the Grace of God in pardoning.

1. As to the Thief; probably he had lived in great Ignorance, and never had
the means of Grace till now. And therefore to profess his Faith in Christ, when
he saw him hanging upon the Cross, was very signal and extraordinary.

He confessed Christ when his own Disciples fled from him, and when Peter
himself denied him. Nay, so great was the Scandal of the Cross, that all Men
then forsook him, and lost their Faith in him, and had no further hope of Help
and Salvation from him.

Now to confess and own him at such a time as this, was so pleasing and
acceptable to our Savior, that he makes him a signal Instance of his Grace and
Favor.

2. It was very agreeable to the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, to do something
extraordinary on such a solemn Occasion as this. Thereby to signalize the
Efficacy of our Savior's Mediatorship, and that at such a time, when the
Dignity and Glory of his Person was most clouded and obscured.

From these Premises it appears, That this Instance of the Thief upon the
Cross, was miraculous and extraordinary. And we have a known Rule,
Extraordinaria non debent esse Exempla, Extraordinary Cases are no Rule for
practice.

The Israelites had Manna showred down from Heaven. Will you therefore leave
your Husbandry, and expect your Bread from the Clouds?

Will you adventure to leap into the Sea, because you read that Jonah was saved
from thence? Look upon this Thief as a Jonah in the Sea; A Miracle of Grace; a
Prodigy of Providence.

A King in his Progress passing by the Place of Execution, as an Instance of
his Royal Favor, pardons a Thief with the Rope about his Neck; Dare you
therefore be encouraged to play the Thief, in hopes of such a strange and
unusual Pardon?

And if you dare not thus venture your Life, your Temporal Concern; dare you
hazard your Soul, your Eternal Concern?

To conclude.Our Blessed Savior in pardoning this Thief, in such an
extraordinary manner, has showed us what he can do, that none may Despair. But
he has likewise declared in his Holy Word what he ordinarily will do, that
none may presume. He has plainly told us, That without holiness no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. And that every one shall receive the things done in
his Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor.
5.10.

The CLOSE.
I Have now faithfully represented the Uncertainty and Danger of a Deathbed
Repentance. And have plainly admonished you, That if you neglect to Repent now,
and defer this necessary Work to you know not when hereafter, you have just
Cause to fear you will never Repent. For, either you may be prevented by a
sudden stroke, and so your Repentance is impossible; or else disturbed with the
Pains and Tortures of a languishing Bed. Which indeed may distract you with
Remorse and Anguish, with Horror and Despair; but it is much to be feared
without true Repentance.

I do much hope (and do earnestly pray) that what I have now said on this
Subject, may make its due Impression upon you. But the more effectually to
persuade you, give me leave to enforce my Admonitions, with the noted words of
a truly Great and Good Man, now with God.

LET no Man deceive you with vain Words, or with false Notions of a slight and
sudden Repentance. Do not delude your selves with vain hopes, that this Work
may be done at any time, and in an instant; and that if you can but fashion
your last breath into Lord have mercy upon me, this will prevail with God, and
make Atonement for the long Course of a wicked and sinful Life.

What strange thoughts have Men of God and Heaven? As if Heaven were an
Hospital, founded on purpose to receive all sick and maimed Persons; that when
they can live no longer to the Lusts of the Flesh, and sinful Pleasures of this
World, can but put up a cold and formal Petition to be admitted there.

No, no, as sure as God is true, they shall never see the Kingdom of God, who
instead of seeking it in the first place, make it their last Refuge and
Retreat. And when they find themselves under the Sentence of Death and
Damnation, only to avoid present Execution, and since there is no other remedy,
do at last bethink themselves of getting to Heaven, and fall upon their Knees,
to Petition the Great Judge of the World, that they may be transported thither.

Can any Man in reason expect that such a Petition will be granted? I tell you
nay; but except you repent sooner, and at a fitter time, and after a better
fashion, you shall certainly perish. As much as God desires the Salvation of
Men, he will not prostitute Heaven, and set the Gates of it wide open to those,
who only fly to it in extremity, but never sought it in good earnest, nor
indeed do now care for it, or desire it for any other reason, but to excuse
them from going to Hell. They have no value for Heaven, because they are in no
wise fit for it. But yet they think Hell to be the worse place of the two.

I am afraid this is the true Interpretation of many a Man's Repentance, who
has deferred it till he comes to dye. I do not speak this to discourage
Repentance even at that, time. I deny not the possibility of the thing. But to
speak the best of it, it is a very dangerous Remedy. For, alas, how unfit are
most Men at such a time for so great and serious a Work as Repentance is, when
they are unfit for the smallest matter, and how hard is it for any Man then to
be assured of the truth and reality of his Repentance, when there is no
sufficient opportunity to make trial of the sincerity of it? I desire to have
as large apprehensions of the Mercy of God as any man. But withal, I am very
sure that he is the hardest to be imposed upon, of any one in the World. And no
Man that has any worthy apprehensions of the Deity, can imagine him to be so
easy, as to forgive Men upon the last Word and Intimation of their Minds; and
to have such a fondness for Offenders, as would reflect upon the Prudence of
any Magistrate and Governor upon Earth.

God grant that I may sincerely endeavor to live a Holy and Virtuous Life; and
may have the comfort of that when I come to die. And that I may never be so
unwise, as to venture all my hopes of a blessed Eternity upon a Deathbed
Repentance.

Vid. Archbishop Tillotson's Ser. on Eccles. 12.1. and Ser. on Heb. 3.13. FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Conference with an Anabaptist. Price 1 s.

A Theological Discourse of Last Wills. Price 1 s.

Several small Books against Debauchery, Profaneness, Blasphemy, Cursing and
Swearing, etc. Price Two pence each, and something cheaper to such as are so
Charitable to give away Numbers.

All by (the Author of this) Dr. Assheton.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End. And the Danger
and Mischief of delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow. In Octavo. Price 18 d.

The four Last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; practically
Considered and Applied. By W. Bates, D. D. In Twelves. Price 2 s.

The Advice of a Father: Or Counsel to a Child, directing him how to demean
himself in the most important Passages of this Life. By E. C. Gent. In Twelves.
Price 1 s.

All Printed for B. Aylmer in Cornhill.


