THE Assenters Sayings, PUBLISHED In their own Words. For the Information of
the PEOPLE: Being in Requital of Roger L'Estrange's DISSENTERS SAYINGS.

By an Indifferent Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Jones. 1681.

The Epistle to the Reader.
In this Collection you will find Sayings of two sorts, some Good, and some
Bad; the Good are all spoken in favor of Dissenters, by men of as much Piety
and Learning, as any have been in the Church of England since the Reformation.
Among the Bad ones, you will find some Enthusiastic and Blasphemous, some in
favor of Debauchery, etc.

In making this Collection, I have taken care to avoid that which L'Estrange is
so frequently guilty of in his pretended Dissenters Sayings, viz. taking a line
in one place, two or three words in another, and a word from another, and
drawing them head and shoulders into one Sentence; which thus jumbled together,
speak quite contrary to the Author's sense and meaning: So that to say the
truth, some of those Sayings are not the Dissenters, but L'Estrange's. Now here
you will find the whole Sentence laid down in the words of the Author, without
the least alteration. I shall conclude with my hearty Prayer to God, That
Assenter, and Dissenter, and all other Names of Division, and Causes of
Animosity may be taken away from among us for ever.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THE Design of the ensuing Collection, is, in some measure, to put a Check to
those Clamorous Outcries that are daily sent forth against the Dissenters,
especially in those two famed Pamphlets, called, The Dissenters Sayings, etc.
And to inform the World, That the Dissenters from the Church of England, are no
such manner of Persons, as R. L. Heraclitus Club, and the late famed William
Gould, cum multis aliis, would represent them to the Common People for; and
there is nothing more plain, than that many sober Assenters to the Church of
England, are Dissenters from them: For you shall find many of these Sayings
spoken in favor of the Dissenters, by Men of more Brains and Learning, and
therefore more capable of judging, than Roger L'Estrange, and though (being
Guide to the inferior Clergy, as the Worshipful JEST-Ass was pleased to style
himself in a Letter to a young Divine at CAMBRIDGE) he may with Authority
correct them, yet certainly he will not do so by those of the superior Clergy.
Men, of far more Holiness and Piety, whose Sayings are more to be regarded,
than the envious and malicious Railings of every prosligate Buffoon: Men of far
better Estates, and larger Revenues, whereby they are not so liable to be
imposed upon by a debauched Companion, or an imperious Strumpet; a pressing
Poverty, or an insatiable Revenge; a covetous Bookseller, or a turbulent
Clergyman; the one promising to pay well for his Copy, and the other to make
larger Contributions among those of his Tribe: For it is apparent to all
unprejudiced Persons, that the whole design and ultimate end of all his
Writings, is, to promote the Roman Interest, supply his Necessity, and satiate
his Revenge.

THE Assenters Sayings. PUBLISHED In their own WORDS TO Inform the PEOPLE.
I shall Introduce the Reader with a Choice Collection of the Sayings of a
Great Champion of the Assenters: wherein he endeavors to prove K. C. the
First, to be the Third Person in the Trinity. 2ly, That there is no Salvation
to be obtained out of the Church of England.

1. THE first Objection is, say they, What does your Scripture Proofs make for
King Charles? I answer, With those that hate Him and the Truth, the Proofs are
of little or no force: With such as love Him and the Truth, the Proofs will
prevail. There are darker Proofs than these brought to prove the verity of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Echo to the Voice from Heaven, Printed 1652. in the
Preface.

2. As the Jews will find Objections enough against the Gospel, so many will
find Objections against this King; but let them take heed what they say against
Him, for Jesus knew that the Scriptures heretofore was dark, and therefore he
said to them that spoke against his own Person then, It was forgiven them: but
says he, Whosoever speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, it shall never be
forgiven him, Matthew. 12.32. That is, against his appearance in this King, John
14.26. Jer. 9.28. which thing is so clear, that all the Mysteries of God are
opened by it: So that now an Angel swears that time shall be no more for
Ignorance to shelter under, Rev. 10.7. Ibid.

3. For this King is that Key of David, by which all Secrets was locked up,
Isa. 22.22. Rev. 3.7. and by which Key all now is opened, for this Day of Light
was appointed to be in a King, and therefore it is said in Heb. 4.7. he
limiteth a day, saying in David, To day, after so long time, giving to
understand, that the Day was not the Apostles Time, nor David's time, but our
time. Ibid.

4. Christ signifies Anointed in English, and I hope none will deny the King to
be the Lords Anointed; the Lord, our Lord, is the Lord Jesus, and the King is
the Lord's Anointed, or in Greek, his Christ; for all knows, that Christ is a
Greek word; and one of the most learned Bishops in England, upon the hearing of
my Book read before him, gave this sentence of Approbation upon it, That he
wished that all Men were of my mind; and for the Third Person, all the true
Ministers in the King's Dominions fifteen years ago gave him the place of the
Third Person, saying of him to God the Father in their Prayers, CHARLES, by thy
Grace and Providence, King of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the true Ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith, next under Thee and thy Son,
supreme Head and Governor. Ibid.

5. Here they place the King to be next to Jesus Christ, making no mention of
the Floly Ghost, except they meant Him to be the King. Ibid.

6. The Holy Ghost is the Chief Governor of the Saints on Earth, by the
Apostles Testimony, for when the Decree is sent to the People of God, Acts
15.28. it runs thus; It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon
you no other burdens than these: And for the Ministers words, by the orational
sense of them, we must understand them thus, That by the King, they mean the
Holy Ghost, and third Person; or else, we must understand thus, That they do
not acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be the third Person, for they spoke of God
the Father, and of God the Son, and King Charles to be next and immediate under
the Father and the Son. Ibid.

7. Here they put out the Holy Ghost from being the third Person, except they
mean him to be signified to us in the King's Person; which may very well be,
for Christ himself in the first place, where he speaks of God's sending the
Holy Ghost, says he, John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter: and by this Comforter, we must understand him according to
the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 18.16. that is, another Comforter like unto me, not only a
Spirit, but a perfect Man. Ibid.

8. We must understand the Holy Ghost to be a man, for they that are sent to us
in the Name of Christ, are Men, yet he that is thus dignified is but one man.
Ibid.

9. Christ says, speaking of the Holy Ghost, John 16.13. He shall not speak of
himself, but what he hears that shall he speak. Ibid.

10. From whence you may understand, That the Holy Ghost though called here a
Spirit, as elsewhere, is not a Spirit only, but a Man also; for he is a Hearer
and a Receiver of the things of Christ, and his Errand is not to speak of
himself, or to set forth himself, but to glorify Jesus Christ, which thing you
know, King Charles did above all that ever was. Ibid.

11. You say, The Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, and so the promise of
Christ, Joh. 14. was fulfilled, and there is no further manifestation of the
Holy Ghost to be expected amongst men: I say no; for the great manifestation of
the Holy Ghost was reserved until the time of the Restoration of Israel, and
thus you see, Acts 1. For Christ being amongst them, bids them wait for the
promise of the Holy Ghost and not depart out of Jerusalem, until it came upon
them; they thinking there should be a full manifestation of it in their days,
said, Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel; for then they
understood the fullness of the promise should be, but the Lord puts by their
question, says to them, they should receive a competent measure of power from
the Holy Ghost fit for their work, which was but the influence or beams of the
Holy Ghost, so called the Holy Ghost; as we say of the Sun when it shines upon
a House, there is the Sun, though indeed it is but the Sun beams; and the Sun
has its distinct body before our eyes, though no man is able to disern the
Limitation of its beams; and as Abraham, and the Kings and Prophets, saw Jesus
Christ, yet they saw not his Body, with their eyes, as the Apostles did; so the
Apostles saw the Holy Ghost, yet they saw not his Body with their Bodily eyes,
as we saw. Ibid.

12. S. Paul speaks of two, one he calls the first born, and that is Jesus,
Heb. 1.6. who first was Typed out in the Sacrifices, who comes and Sacrificed
himself; the second he calls He, saying, When He comes into the World, Heb.
10.5. That is the Holy Ghost, which is ready to be a body of Jesus Christ to do
his Will, Ibid.

13. In the first Dispensation under the Law, Christ Jesus was amongst them,
and spoke by their Prophets, whose Form of Speech is, Thus says the Lord, and
that it is the Lord Jesus that uttered himself by them, so in the second
Dispensation under the Gospel, you shall find the Holy Ghost comes in the
beginning in S. John the Baptist, and so forward to Christ and his Apostles,
increaseing in it, and that the Prophets under the Gospel use this Form of
Speech, Thus says the Holy Ghost. Ibid.

14. As the appearance of Jesus was to end the Prophecy and Prophets under the
Law, so the appearance of the Holy Ghost in Charles, is to consummate all
Prophecies and Prophets for ever, that now no more Prophets are to be expected:
for the Holy Ghost has sealed with his blood that true way by which all the
World is to worship God, and that shall Unite all in Love, both Jews and
Gentiles. Ibid.

15. The Jews say the same thing that there are two Messiahs, one they call
Messiah the Son of David, the other Messiah the Son of Joseph, which Messiah
the Son of Joseph, as they affirm, was to die in the last War of Gog and Magog,
and afterward to rise again, and show him to be Messiah the Son of David; and
that Messiah the Son of Joseph shall sit in the Throne of Messiah the Son of
David, and Rule for ever all that he has, and be his Viceroy, as Joseph was to
Pharaoh: which Assertion in this point is more consonant to the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, then any holds it forth amongst our Divines; yet I say
the Spirit of Infallibility is in our Church, by which they, guided according
to the great Providence of God, to give the King the great Honor due unto him;
though many of them did not consider what they said, and now will not own it in
the true sense: but of this I am sure, that the Bishops who first said it, were
men of understanding, and did nothing ignorantly, and some of them Prophesied
when the King came from Spain, that he should die to maintain the true
Catholic Faith. Ibid.

16. If Blasphemy be in me, then Christ Blasphemes, the Apostles Blasphemes,
the Church Blasphemes, the Jews Blasphemes, for we are of one Assertion. Ibid.

17. Christ is not proud, be not ye foolishly proud for him; for you shall have
but a small reward for it, for Christ does permit his Servant to be equal with
him, and I dare say, if he had met in his day with such a faithful King, as
King Charles, the Lord Christ would have put him before him; but the humility
of King Charles would have been such that he would have been glad to follow on
his knees the last of all his Disciples, being overjoyed to have that Honor
to see his Presence and Person upon Earth. Ibid.

18. Who is he that does prefer King Charles to the place that Jesus would give
unto the meanest of his Servants that is to be equal with him; for my part I do
not, and I know no Servant of his will take it upon him, and I know King
Charles must rather be compelled to it, for Christ will give it him by force,
and he must receive it, or anger his Lord, which I know he will not do. Ibid.

19. For so indeed I am sent before King Charles, to prepare a People to
receive him; as S. John of Old was sent to prepare the way of the Lord Jesus,
the case is the same. Ibid.

20. I suppose such an account is expected from me, as S. Paul gave the People,
that is, a Narration of my calling to this work, wherein you shall find God's
special purpose in me, preparing me from my Infancy, and also leading me by His
Special Hand, from time to time, and declaring his mind unto me, giving me to
understand wherefore I had my being, showing special signs upon me, while I was
yet an Infant, to the admiration of my Parents, and of all my friends and
acquaintance, that they were forced to Prophecy, and to say that God had
appointed me for some great Work. ibid.

21. Lifting up mine Eyes from my work, I beheld the Angel of the Lord all in
white stood upon the Shopboard, with a flaming Sword in his hand ready to
destroy me. Echo to the Voice from Heaven, page 20.

22. Comparing this trouble of mine by Kindred, to that of my Savior's, who
was in a like manner dealt with by his own Kindred, I taking it to be unto me a
similitude of my Saviors grave, I rested confidently, that I should be
delivered the third day, the first and second day came and I had nothing, when
I did ask for something, but threatening words; and by that the third was come,
I was very faint; and as I lay upon my Bed the third day in the morning,
expecting some sign of deliverance from God, there came in at the Window a
round Cloud, in Color like unto the Rain Bow, and it covered me, abiding upon
me about a quarter of an hour, and when it came upon me, I was so revived, as
if I had eaten all the Delicacies in the World; and after a quarter of an hour,
the Cloud departed out of the window in the same manner as it came in, until
it ascended out of my sight. Ibid. page 33.

23. He answered, You said, Woe be to them that are not of this House shortly,
meaning the Queens Chapel. I said, Friend, you err as the Jews did, for I did
not mean the Chapel, but this House of my Body, and of my Faith and Judgment.
Ibid. page 43.

24. I said, I believe we shall be better acquainted, for you are the King's
Secretary, and I am God's Secretary. To Secretary Windebank, ibid. page 45.

25. William Heyfer reading a Book, called the Anatomizing of the Common Prayer
Book, which I disputed against, but not being able longer to hear him read
such Blasphemies again the truth, I cried out, saying, Lord for thy truths
sake, show thy displeasure against this wicked Book, and as I spoke, a mighty
flash of fire struck against the window, put all in a fright, and the fellow
cast away his Book. Ibid. page 51.

26. I had the same Spirit to declare the Scripture as did Pen them. Ibid. page
54.

27. When Green the Recorder asked me what I was? suppose I had answered him;
saying, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other God but me; I am sure I
had not sinned in it. Ibid. page 67.

28. As I was desiring God to show me a figure of the Judgment to come, and the
Glory that is to follow, I fell into a Trance, that I seemed to be at
Maysellan-kadder-ruse, where I was brought up, and I was with my elder Brother
by the Riverside, it was a glorious Day, about Two in the Afternoon, but on a
sudden my Brother was gone I knew not how nor where, and as I lifted up mine
eyes again, the Sun by degrees became dark, so that the Stars appeared about
it; at which darkness the Sheep did cry and run to seek a shelter in holes of
the Rocks, as they use to do in those parts, when a darkness comes before a
storm; and all the light of Heaven was taken away. Then appeared by a mad-man's
house that lived there when I was a Boy, a great Bonfire, and people making
merry about it: but as I still waited for some light above, I espied a little
white Cloud breaking out in the North-east, after which the Sky appeared, and
upon the Sky appeared the King's Arms as it is upon blue in some Churches, and
it rid upon the Heavens very terrible toward Southwest; and as the light
appeared, abundance of waters sprung out of a dry Hill Northwards. Ibid. p.
107, 108.

29. The interpretation of it is thus, My Brother did signify Jesus Christ
appearing, and after absenting himself for a time from his people. Ibid.

30. I beheld and saw a peaceable modest young Woman standing on a Plain, and
another of a malicious Countenance, and looked enviously upon the modest Woman,
and she took up a small Pipe as it were of green Glass, but I was given to
understand it was the sting of a Serpent, and she did put it in her mouth and
blew it against the modest woman; and they came close together, and did blow
one against the other so furiously, that a Wheel of sire in color like the
Rainbow covered them both, that I thought she had consumed the modest woman:
but at last she that took up the sting was consumed to nothing, and the modest
woman remained peaceably, and did shine with beauty far more glorious than
before. The first woman signifies the Church of England, the other, the
Presbyterians that took up the Sting against the Church of England, but at last
the Church of England gets the Victory, and the other is consumed. Ibid. p. 113.

31. On Good Friday at Night about Ten a Clock, as I came from one Mr. John
Lee, who lived then in Printting-house Lane, and I lived in Cob's Yard, but as
I came by Black-Fryars Church along the Paved Alley, it being a light Night,
over against the Churchyard, there I met a man all in black, with a black long
Cloak, like a Presbyterian Minister, and we justled close, he fell before me,
as if a black Cloak had been spread upon the ground, and vanished away. This
was that Presbyterian evil Spirit, which knew I should discover his wickedness
and banish him out of the World, as I did in part in 1646.

32. I say, there is no true Church of God in all the world, but the Church of
England, and from henceforth there is no Salvation for Souls but in it: there
is no Elect visibly seen, save those of the Church of England, and all the
Elect must come to Unity with these in Form of Worship, Doctrine and
Discipline, before they can be justified and saved. England at this time
contains all the Elect of God, and those that will not come to this Church,
must be destroyed. Preface to the Echo to the Voice from Heaven.

33. The Reformation of Luther in Germany, of the Calvinists, Hugonites in
France, of John Knox in Scotland, are but rebellious Rules, like the Rods of
the Sorcerers in Egypt. Voice from Heaven, p. 54.

34. The Book of Common Prayer is promised, Isa. 35* 8, 9, 10. and is called
the way of Holiness, wherein a wayfaring man, though a Fool, shall not err
therein. Ibid. page 30.

So much for this Welsh Prophet and mighty Gigantick Champion of the Prelacy.

35. There sprang up a mighty Bramble on the Southside the Lake Lemane, that
spread and flourished with such a sudden growth, that by the industry of his
Agents abroad, and partly by its own indefatigable pains and pragmaticalness,
it quite overran the whole Reformation. Parker's Defense Policy. p. 663.

36. It is absolutely necessary to the Peace and Government of the World, that
the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth should be vested with a Power to
govern and conduct the Consciences of Subjects in matters of Religion. Dr.
Parker. p. 10.

37. Unless Princes have power to bind their Subjects to that Religion that
they apprehend most advantageous to public peace and tranquillity, and
restrain those religious mistakes that tends to its subversion, they are no
better than Statues and Images of Authority. page 13.

38. A Prince is endued with a Power to Conduct Religion, and that must be
subject to his Dominion as well as other things. Ibid. p. 27.

39. If Princes should forgo their Sovereignty over men's Consciences in
matters of Religion, they leave themselves less power than is absolutely
necessary. Ibid.

40. The Supreme Government of every Commonwealth, where ever it is lodged,
must of necessity be universal, absolute, and uncontrollable in all affairs
whatsoever, that concern the Interests of Mankind, and the ends of Government.
Ibid.

41. He in whom the Supreme Power resides, having Authority to assign to every
Subject his proper Function; and amongst others, those of the Priesthood, the
exercise whereof as he has power to transfer upon others, so he may, if he
please, reserve it to himself. Ibid. page 32.

Quaere, Whether this be not a learned exposition of Mat. 28.19. And whether
there were any Kings in that Commission?

42. The Government of Religion was vested in Princes by an antecedent Right to
Christ. Ibid. page 34.

43. Men may think of things according to their own persuasions, and assert the
freedom of their Judgments against all the powers of the Earth. This is the
Prerogative of the mind of Man within its own Dominions, its Kingdom is
intellectual; whilst Conscience acts within its proper sphere, the Civil Power
is so far from doing it violence, that it never can. Ibid. p. 89.

44. Mankind has the same natural right to liberty of Conscience in matters of
religious Worship, as in Affairs of Justice and Honesty; that is to say, a
liberty of judgment, but not of practice. Ibid. p. 92.

45. In Cases and Disputes of public Concernment, private men are not properly
sui juris, they have no power over their own actions; they are not to be
directed by their own judgments, or determined by their own wills, but by the
commands and determinations; of the public Conscience: and if there be any sin
in the Command, he that imposed it shall answer for it, and not I, whose duty
it is to obey. Ibid. p. 308.

Quaere, Whether according to this Position; a Man or his Horse be the happiest
Creature?

46. The Commands of Authority will warrant my Obedience, my Obedience will
hallow, or at least excuse my Actions, and so secure me from sin, if not from
error. Ibid.

47. In all doubtful and disputable cases, it is better to err with Authority,
than to be in the right against it. Ibidem.

Quaere, Whether this be not an excellent Exposition upon Acts 5.29. we ought
to obey God rather than man?

48. God has appointed Magistrates to be his Trustees and Officials, to act
and determine in moral Virtues and pious Devotions according to all Accidents
and Emergencies of Affairs: to assign new particulars of the Divine Law, to
declare new bounds of right and wrong, which the Law of God neither does nor
can Limit. Ibid. p. 80.

Quere, Whether this be not proved out of Deuteronomy. 17.17, 18, 19, 20. Neither
shall he multiply Wives to himself, that his Heart turn not away: Neither shall
he greatly multiply to himself Silver or Gold.

And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a Copy of this Law in a Book out of that which is before the Priest
the Levites.

And it shall be with him, and he shall Read therein all the Days of his Life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law,
and these Statutes to do them.

That his Heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside
there from, to the right Hand or the Left.

49. Moral Virtues being the most Material and useful part of all Religion, is
also the utmost end of all its Duties, Ibid. p. 69.

50. All Religion must of necessity be resolved into Enthusiasm or Morality,
the former is mere Imposture; and therefore all that is true must be Reduced to
the latter, Ibid. p. 76.

51. It Is absolutely necessary to the Peace and Happiness of Kingdoms, that
there be set up a more severe Government over men's Consciences, and Religious
Persuasions, then over their Vices and Immoralities. Preface to the
Ecclesiastical Policy. p. 53.

52. Princes may with less Hazard give Liberty to Men's Vices and Debaucheries,
then their Consciences. Ibid. p. 55.

53. If Princes will be Resolute they may make the most stubborn Conscience
bend to their Resolutions, Parker. p. 271.

54. Princes must be sure to bind on at first their Ecclesiastical Laws with
the straitest Knot, and after ward force them in by the severity of their
Execution. Ibid. p. 121.

55. It Is so easy for men to Deserve being punished for their Consciences, that
there is no Nation in the World, in which, were Government rightly understood,
and duly Managed, mistakes and abuses of Religion, would not supply the Galleys
with vastly greater Numbers then villainy. Ibid. 223.

66. There is not any sort of People so inclinable to Seditious Practices, as
the Trading part of a Nation Ibid. p. 49.

57. Of all Villains the well meaning, Zealot is the most Dangerous. Ibid. p.
154.

58. Princes cannot pluck a pin out of the Church, but immediately the State
shakes and totters, Ibid. p. 166.

59. No Rites nor Ceremonies can be esteemed unlawful in the worship of God,
unless they tend to Debauch men either in their Practices, or their Conceptions
of the Deity. Ibid. p. 82.

60. It Is no part of the Princes concernment to institute Rules of moral good
or evil, that is the care and the prerogative, of a Superior Lawgiver Ibid.
p. 241.

61. Christ was not only in an hot Fict of Zeal but in a seeming Fury and
Transport of passion. Preface. p. 17.

62. I do profess to all the World, that the Transforming of Indifferent
Opinions into necessary Articles of Faith, has been that Insana Laurus, or
cursed Bay Tree, the cause of all our brawling and contention. Bishop Bramhall.
p. 141.

63. When the Civil Magistrate takes upon him to Determine any particular Forms
of outward worship, it is of no worse consequence, then if he should go about
to Define the signification of all the words used in the worship of God.
Parker. p. 110.

64. Some have thought they could not be esteemed Loyal, if they appeared
Devout: And therefore to purchase the one Character, were willing not only to
throw off, but openly to reproach the other all they could, Mr. Burnets Sermon
before the Court of Aldermen. Jan. 30. 1680/1. p. 10.

65. It is not to be conceived, that amongst them who are so Zealous in the
opposing of a Plot against his Majesty's Person, our holy Religion, and the
peace and safety of the Nation; there can be any that dares mock God and man so
audaciously as to be designing any such thing themselves, the same time they
are accusing others of it. To suppose it otherwise, were to give Credit to the
false suggestion* and base contrivances of those who Design nothing more than
to take us off from watching over their Motions, by engaging us one against
another, and infusing such Jealousies, as may effectually divide us among our
selves: The only way that is now left without a Foreign power, first to break,
and then to Conquer those in separated parties, whose united strength they know
they cannot Resist. Ibid. p 18.

66. God be Thanked none of our Differences are such as we may Despair of
Reconciling them, or at least of bearing with one another Infirmities and
Mistakes, Ibid. p. 26.

67. Many that are for the Church should abate of their stiffness, in things
not Essential; and unite at home all that are capable of it by adjusting
matters among our selves and those cannot come into that Union be at least
Inoffensive to them that do. Ibid. p. 28.

68. The Kings great strength is his peoples love. Causes and Remedy of the
Distempers of the times. p. 285.

69. But these, like the grave, swallow all, the good, the bad, life, Liberty,
and Estate; Families, posterity, Root and Branch, in one Day, I mean such as
are Trepanners or Countenancers of them; sham-Evidence, false Witnesses, whose
Tongue can Swear and unswear, whose Tongue perhaps have Cut the Throats of many
a poor Innocent already, and still want more work, more work; men of no Honor,
no Honesty, no Religigion, (except of that Notorious and Bloody Religion, that
is worse then no Religion) you may have more Truth, more kindness more
Fidelity, fairer quarter from Infidels, then from such Bigotted-Catholicks,
that think it is Religion and pleasing to God to cut men's Throats. Horrid Sin
of Man-Catching, p. 9.

60. Which they dare not always do in the down right Godfrey-way of Murdering;
(that has and may) prove Dangerous, no the Devil is crafty, and his Agents and
Emissaries can improve in Wit as well as Malice; they do the Feat, lay their
Snares, catch men (not in the night and be Hanged) but at noon Day and by Law;
not with Cruel Hands, but a way worth two on it) with Venomous Tongues of a
Serpent. Ibid.

61. And that by false Oaths, false Tongues swearing pro and con; as if those
that will swear you Twenty Oaths in an hour, for God have Mercy, will scruple
at an Oath for Money, and to have all other Oaths and Sins pardoned, into the
Bargain Ibid. p. 10.

62. Wicked men by false Oaths can do the Business, do their own Business, get
Rewards for catching Innocent men, and not always (though sometimes) the
Gallows also for their pains, in setting Snares to catch men, these are the men
that can do any man's business how Innocent soever, Ibid.

63. Holy David compares these lurking Catch-poles, these Knights of the Post
(that wait in all Companies and spy in all Assemblies) unto a Lion Lurking in
his Den; or in secret places, lying in wait privily and under some Covert
(perhaps of the Righteous Law) to catch men, to catch their Prey. Where men
walk, where men Talk, by the way-side says David, they insinuate into all
Companies, all business, all Assemblies, where they can get Admittance, they
are never out of their way; they catch at the words of a Minister in the
Pulpit, of a Judge upon the Bench, laying Snares for him that Reproves in the
Gate, Trepanning their very Comrades, their Friends and Familiars, like
Jeremies Companions, Jer. 20.10. Saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and
we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our Revenge on him. But this
they do with all privacy imaginable, perhaps under an Oath of Secrecy, to pump
the deeper, under Color of Friendship, or under Color of some doubtful word
that will bear two Senses, and they shall always take it in the worst Sense and
in the wrong Sense, and inconsistent in Sense, and incoherant with all former
or subsequent Discourse, or make Additions, villainous Additions of their own,
these are the Dark-Lanthorn men, that like. Faux, walk with a Vizard on, the
vizard of Honesty, of Religion, Friendship, or perhaps of good Fellowship,
laying their Snares secretly and in the Dark, to catch Men. Ibid. p. 14.

64. These are the Blades of our times, and the men of Valor, that dare strut
like those Giants of old, that bid Heaven battle, and did Defiance to the God
of Heaven, and Blaspheme him to his Face, and if ever they Pray to him, it is
only in jeer, as when they pray to God to Damn them, Damn them. Ibid. p. 16.

65. Words are lost, and much more holy Scripture words are lost on these stout
Hectors, Atheists, false Witnesses, men-catchers, Catch-poles, and
Sham-Evidences. God bless us all from them, and grant we may never come into
their Clutch, or within the reach and probability of their Oaths, their Oaths,
the Snares wherewith they catch men, many honest men, useful men; nay,
therefore these men-catchers lay their Snares and their oathing-gins to catch
them; because they are honest and useful, and stand just in the way to hinder
their Villainous Plots and Design. Well go on, and swear and Dam your selves to
the Pit of Hell, and let men persuade you there is no such thing as Hell, at
worst but a kind of Purgatory, (a certain refining crucible only to take away
your Dross) and for a little money, or killing two or three Heretics, and that
warm her house too, may be avoided, Ibid. p. 19.

66. They Will say it is a difficult thing to prove a Rogue perjured, and an
Affidavit-man, and an Evidence shall find favor and Friends, it is hopeful,
and if we swear (say they) to catch and trap a man out of his life and Estate,
we are upon our Oaths, (so they are every hour of the day but when they sleep,
but no sooner awake, but the first is a prayer to God, damn me) none can
contradict us, the Jury is bound to believe us whether they will or no, and in
spite of their Heart and Conscience (they must go according to their Evidence,
yes, yes, the Juries well know their duty, well know you and your Evidence too)
none know to the contrary, an Oath is an Oath, they go on and say before Death
and the day of Judgment, we will Repent and get a Pardon from our
Ghostly-Father; nay, perhaps they have one before hand in their Pockets, Jub
Sigillo piscatoris, vel Sacerdotis. But your Ghostly-Father, nor their Father.
-- Pa -- Pa pater patrum, cannot deliver the false Swearers and Men-catchers
from the just Judgment and Discovery of the Father of Spirits, who protests he
will be both Judge and Jury and Witness too against the false Swearers,
Adulterers and Oppressors, Mil. 3.5. Ibid. p. 19.

67. There was a Plot, a horrid Plot and Conspiracy by the Chief Priest and
Scribes against our blessed Redeemer's Life, and willing enough they were to
kill him but they feared the people. Wherefore they Resolved he should suffer
by the Law of the Land, for Treason, in preverting the Nation, and forbiding to
give Tribute to Caesar, etc. But how shall they prove the Indictment? Why
that is the easiest thing in the World; it is but looking out (and they are
always at hand) some Knights of the Post, some false Affidavit-men,
catch-Poles, and false Evidence, and the Sham-plot is perfected, the Indictment
proved, and the business done. Therefore all heads to work, especially the
Chief-priests (they must be in at a dead lift) and Elders and all the Council
sought false witness against Jesus to put him to death, but found none: Yea
though many false witness came, yet they found none. That was hard, but at the
last came two false witness. And these did the business, for which they came,
for which they were hired, and they were Caesar's Evidence, and swore for
Caesar, and swore the matter home, and these catchers carried the cause against
the greatest Innocence. Mighty glad (no doubt) were the Chief-Priest, and
Elders and Council; and mightily caressed and much made of were these two sham
Evidences and false witness that swore home; especially after the former false
witness miscarried in the Attempt, as not having got their lesson sufficiently
by heart. They had needs be men of cunning and ability that can swear
thorow-stich and cleaverly, mixing some Truth and probable Circumstances
amongst many, and amongst the main Lie: There is art in daubing. Ibid. p. 23.

68. From a Lion, a Tiger, a Woolf or a Serpent, we may make some defense and
provision, but this kind of Snake is Anguis in herba, no foresight, no
caution, no prudence, no innocence can defend from the sting of this forked,
venomous, and murdering Tongue, except a man abandon all society with Mankind.
Ibid. p. 23.

69. Men may keep these Snakes (and but perhaps neither) out of their
Bedchamber, scarcely out of their Houses, however not out of public Houses,
Churches, Courts of Judicature, Exchanges, and public Assemblies, so that if
they can but bring good proof of the Circumstances, as that they were at such a
time in such a Church, Assembly, Exchange, public meeting in Court, City, or
Country; let them alone to swear what they heard there. These (I say) are the
great Plague, the non-such Pests of all Society, the common Nuisance: no former
Age (that I read of) can parallel ours for improvement of Vice and Mischief.
What Blockheads were the French-mens Ancestors in the Art of poisoning, in
comparison of the present skill and dexterity? What Blockheads were the Irish,
the Native Irish in all Arts and Mysteries imaginable in former Ages? But now
how ingenious (though some of them are but Bunglers still, and enough to
destroy a neat well-laid, and well-contriv'd Plot in the management, for want
of skill in a subtle Intrigue) but time and good Tutors may improve them, if
there be first a willing mind. Ibid.

70. The sin of setting Snares to catch men is so common (too too common God
knows) in these days; such shamming, trepanning, that scarce any honest man in
England of any Eminency, but has or may have cause to say with holy David; --
Every day they wrest my words Ibid. p. 26.

71. Some think our Divisions are so great, that they will not have a shorter
period than the Wars and Miseries of Greece; of the end whereof the Oracle of
Apollo (being consulted) replied, -- They shall surcease when they should
double the Altar at Delphos; was Cubique form (which is impossible!) Yet I have
other thoughts, more faith, and better hope that our Distractions will find a
happy Conclusion, and the depth of Plots and Sham-plots in good time be
fathomed, sounded to the bottom, and discovered; yet truly, I think (as is said
of the Altar at Delphos) a period and end of our Distractions is impossible,
till all Popish Altars, Popish hopes, and Popish claim (by the Pope and his
Emissaries) to these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Propagation of his Superstition amongst us, be extirpate and rooted out, nay
root and branch: for there always were Popish Plots in the Reigns of all our
Kings, ever since the Pope's Supremacy and Usurpation have been rejected, and
whilst there is a fair prospect and hopes of Redemption of this Golden Fleece
(though they be but Glimpses) there will be Popish Plots and Conspiracies,
except they Apostatize from the Principles of Popery. Ibid. p. 28.

72. Better a thousand times (if possible) to die a true Protestant, and a true
Englishman, by the Shamplots, false Witnesses, and Popish Machinations, than
willingly to enslave a man's self and Posterity, Soul, Body, Honor, Honesty,
Religion, and Estate, to Arbitrary and Popish sway; I put them together: for
like Hippocrates's Twins) they are born, and live, and die together. Ibid. p.
34.

73. It Is senceless to doubt the being of a Popish-Plot, that never ceased
(since Hen. 8.) in England: But now by Coleman's Letters it infallibly appears,
that they never had such blessed hopes of converting these Three Kingdoms since
the Bon-fires in Smithfield in Queen Mary's days, as now at this time, now that
--

And the more impudently they deny so clear a truth, the more cause we have to
abominate the Villainy of that Religion, that hardens men in Lies or
Equivocations even to death; and the more they deny it, after such apparent and
manifold conviction, the more suspicious and dangerous it is by the combined
endeavors to conceal it, and to turn the edge thereof upon the Protestants.
Ibid. p. 35.

74. Indeed no man can deny but it is politickly and craftily done, to endeavor
to put out the eyes of those men that are most quick-sighted to discern their
dark mysterious and hellish Intrigues: Or if they could but be Godfreydiz'd,
strangled, hanged or stabbed, the business would be done as effectually, and to
all intents and purposes. Especially, if the Sham-evidences would but be
improved and managed with some Lawyer's Hackneytongue, whose Conscience is so
often sold pro and con, right or wrong, for Plaintiff or Defendant (who bids
most, and who comes first) prostituted and set to sale, when Merchandise is
indifferently and equally madeof Truth and Falsehood) the Snare of catching men
would be the stronger, and the Feat more current. Ibid. p. 36.

75. A Christian is bound to choose the Communion of the purest Church, and not
to leave that for a corrupt one, though called never so Catholic.
Sillingfleet's Idolatry of the Church of Rome. p. 8.

76. Ecclesiastical Laws must be imposed so as to leave our liberty unharmed.
Bishop Tailor 's Cases of Conscience. p. 301.

77. Laws of burden are always against Charity. Ibid. p. 310.

78. Ceremonies oblige no longer than they minister to the end of Charity.
Ibid. p. 314.

79. Ecclesiastical Laws must ever promote the Service of God, and the good of
Souls, but must never put a Snare or Stumbling Block to Consciences. -- The
Authority which the Lord has given is for Edification, Ibid. p. 323.

80. Though significant Ceremonies can be for Edification to the Church in some
degree, and in some persons; yet its to be considered, whether the introducing
of such things does not destroy the Church, not only in her Christian Liberty,
but in the simplicity and purity, and spirituality of her Religion, by
insensible changing it into Ceremonial and External Service. Ibid. 325.

81. A Symbolical Right of Humane Invention, to signify what it does not
effect, and then introduced into the solemn Service of God; is so like the vain
Imaginations and representations forbidden in the second Commandment, that the
very suspicion is more against Edification, than their use can pretend to. Ibid.

82. Were we so happy but to take off things granted uncessary by all, and
suspected by many, and judged unlawful by some, and to make nothing the bounds
of our communion, but what Christ has done; viz. One Faith, one Baptism, etc.
allowing a liberty for Matters of Indifferency, and bearing with the weakness
of those who cannot bear things which others account lawful, we might indeed be
restored to a true Primitive Luster far sooner than by furbushing up some
antiquated Ceremonies, which can derive their Pedigree no higher than from some
ancient Custom and Tradition. God will one day convince men, that the Union of
the Church lies more in the Unity of Faith and Affection, than in Uniformity of
doubtful Rites and Ceremonies. Stillingfleet's Irenic. p. 121.

83. It would be strange the Church should require more than Christ himself
did, and make other Conditions of her Communion, than our Savior did of
Discipleship, etc. Preface to Irenic. p. 8, 9.

84. Without all Controversy, the main Inlet of all the Distractions,
Confusions, and Divisions of the Christian World, has been by adding other
Conditions of Church Communion than Christ has done. Ibid.

85. And therefore were there that Spirit of mutual Condescension which was
most certainly in Ecclesia prmo primitiva, in the first and truly Primitive
Church in the Apostles times, our breaches as to this thing too might soon be
closed up, and the Voice of Schism be heard amongst us no more. Irenic. p. 122.

86. What Charter has Christ given the Church to bind men up to, more than
himself has done, or to exclude those from her Society who may be admitted
into Heaven? Ibid p. 8.

87. It cannot but be looked upon as a Token o^ God's severe displeasure
against us, if any though unreasonable Proposals of Peace between us and the
Paepists, should meet with such entertainment among many; and yet any faint
offers of Union and Accommodation among our selves, be so coldly embraced and
entertained. Ibid. p. 123.

88. The least Peg scrued up too high in the Church, soon causes a great deal
of discord, and quickly puts men's Spirits out of tune. Ibid. p. 47.

89. Nothing should be imposed as necessary but what is clearly revealed in the
Word of God. Ibid. p. 62.

90. But as for the way, manner, and circumstances of Worship, we are to follow
the positive Laws of God. Ibid. p. 36.

91. Certainly the Primitive Church that did not charge men's faith with such a
load of Articles, as now in these latter Ages men are charged with, would much
less burden men with imposing doubtful Practices upon them as the ground of
Church Communion. Ibid. page 122.

92. Let men turn and wind themselves which way they will, by the very same
Arguments that any will prove Separation from the Church of Rome lawful,
because she required unlawful things, as the Conditions of her Communion, it
will be proved lawful not to conform to any suspected or unlawful practice
required by any Church Government upon the same terms, if the thing so
required, be after serious and sober enquiries, judged unwarrantable by a man's
own Conscience. And withal its to be considered, that our best Writers lay the
Imputation of Schism not on those who withdraw Communion, but on them for
requiring such Conditions of Communion (whereby they did rather eject men out
of their Communion, than others separate from them.) Ibid. p. 120, 121.

93. The Episcopal men will hardly find any evidence in Scripture, or the
practice of the Apostles, for Churches consisting of many fixed Congregations
for Worship, under the charge of one Person, etc. Ibid. page 114, 115.

94. From this monopolizing of Churches to Parties, has proceeded that strange
uncharitableness toward all who come not up to every circumstance of their way
and method. Preface to Irenic. p. 5.

95. Princes have no right to call or confirm Preachers, but to preserve such
as be sent of God, and give them liberty for their preaching, and security for
their persons; and if Princes refuse so to do, God's Laborers must go forward
with that which is commanded them from Heaven. Bishop Bilson of Subjection, p.
236.

96, When we shall come to the Question of Schism, I persuade my self, that I
shall plainly show, that the most vehement Accusers are the greatest Offenders;
and that they are indeed at this time the greatest Schismatics, who make the
way to Salvation narrower, the Yoke of Christ heavier, the difference of Faith
greater, the Conditions of Ecclesiastical Government harder and straiter, then
they were made at the beginning by Christ and his Apostles: they who talk of
Unity, but aim at Tyranny, and will have peace with none but with their Slaves
and Vassals. Chillingworth's Safe way. p. 180.

97. Because the use of Sacraments in a Christian Church ought to be the most
free from all exception, and they ought to be so administered as rather to
invite than discourage scrupulous persons from joining in them: I do think it
would be a part of Christian wisdom and condescension in the Governors of our
Church to remove those Bars from a full Communion. Unreasonableness of
Separation. p. 82.

98. Heresy and Schism as they are in common use, are two Theological
Scare-crows, which they who uphold a Party in Religion, use to fright away
such, as making an Inquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and oppose it, if
it appear either erroneous or suspicious. Hales's Tract of Schism. p. 191.

99. In regard of diverse Distempers men are subject to, Dissension and Disunion
are often necessary, when either false or uncertain Conclusions are obtruded
for Truth, and acts either unlawful or ministering just scruple, are required of
us to be performed; in these Cases, Consent is Conspiracy, and open Contention
is not Faction or Schism, but due Christian Animosity. Tract of Schism. p. 194.

100. Where cause of Schism is necessary, there it is not he that separates, but
he that occasions the separation is the Schismatic. p. 199.

101. In all public Meetings pretending Holiness, so there be nothing done,
but what true Devotion and Piety brook, why may I not be present in them and
use communion with them? p. 29.

102. Were Liturgies and Public Forms of Service so framed, as that they
admitted not of particular and private Fancies, but contained only such things
in which all Christians do agree, Schism and Opinion were utterly vanished, For
consider of all the Liturgies that are or ever have been, and remove from them
whatsoever is scandalous to any Party, and leave nothing but what all agree on,
and the event shall be, that the Public Service of God shall no ways suffer:
Whereas to load our Public Forms with private Fancies, upon which we differ,
is the most Sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the worlds end. Prayer,
Confession, Thanskgiving, Reading the Scripture, Administration of Sacraments,
in the plainest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy,
though nothing either of private Opinion, or of Church Pomp, of Garments, of
prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of
many Superfluities, which creep into the Churches, under the name of Order and
Decency, did interpose it self: For to charge Churches and Liturgies with
things unnecessary, was the first beginning of all Superstition, and when
Scruples of Conscience began to be made or pretended, then Schism began to
break in. Page 216, 217.

103. If the Spiritual Guides and Fathers of the Church would be a little
sparing of incumbring Churches with Superfluities, and not over rigid either in
reviving obsolete Customs, or imposing new, there were far less danger of
Schism or Superstition and all the Inconvenience were likely to ensue, would be
but this, they should in so doing, yield a little to the Imbecillities of
Inferiors; a thing which St. Paul would never have refused to do. p. 218.

104. Wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a piece of the Church
Liturgy, he that separates is not the Schismatic; for it is a like unlawful
to make Profession of known or suspected falsehoods, as to put in practice
unlawful or suspected Actions. Ibid.

105. They but abuse themselves and others, that would persuade us, that
Bishops by Christ's Institution have any Superiority over men further than of
Reverence; or that any Bishop is Superior to another. Page 224.

106. It has been the common disease of Christians from the beginning, not to
content themselves with that measure of Faith, which God and Scripture have
afforded us; but out of a vain desire to know more than is revealed, and have
attempted to discuss things of which we have no light from Reason nor
Revelation: Neither have they rested here, but upon pretense of Church
Authority, which is none, or Tradition, which for the most part is but figment;
they have peremptorily concluded, and confidently imposed upon others. p. 212,
213.

107. In Jesus Christ there is neither high nor low; and in giving Honor every
man should be ready to prefer another before himself: which sayings cut off all
Claim to Superiority by Title of Christianity; except men can think these
things were spoken only to poor and private men. p. 125.

108. This abuse of Christianity, to make it lacquey to Ambition is a vice for
which I have no extraordinary name of Ignominy, and an ordinary I will not give
it, least you should take so transcendent a vice to be but Trivial. Ibid.

109. All pious Assemblies in times of Persecution and Corruption, howsoever
Practiced, are indeed or rather alone the lawful Congregations; and public
Assemblies, though according to Law, are nothing else but Riots and
Conventicles, if stained with Corruption, and perstition. P 231.

110. The Church as it imports a visible Company in Earth, is nothing else but
the Company of Professors of Christianity, wheresoever Dispersed in the Earth.
To Define it by Monarchy, under one visible head, is of Novelty crept up, since
men began to change the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ to secular Pride and
Tyranny, and a thing never heard of, either in the Scriptures, or in the
writings of the Ancients. p. 137.

111. Schism is sometimes upon the account of matter of Fact, as when it is
through error taken for necessary, that an Easter must be kept; and upon worse
then Error if I may so speak, (for it was no less then a point of Judaism
forced upon the Church) p. 202.

112. It is Schism upon wilfulness that brings Danger with it, Schism upon
mistake, and Schism upon just occasion, has in it self little hurt, if any at
all. p. 84.

113. Why should it be any longer said, and that with so much color of Truth,
that Loyalty and Piety can not dwell together in the same Breast? Why should it
be any longer said to our shame, that swearing, and drinking, and deriding
Religion, and making a mock of Holiness, are the principal Badges of such as
call themselves Loyalists? Ellis's Sermon before the Marquess of Newcastle. p.
38.

114. A Citizens Skull is but a thing to try the Temper of a Soldiers Sword
upon. Lestrang's Apology. p. 48.

115. The very mention of a Parliament Inrages them, and there is reason for
it, there heads are forfeited, and if Law lives, they must perish: But all this
while, are not we in a good Condition, when the Transgressors of the Law, must
be the Judges of it. Apology. p. 51.

116. A Furious Bussle the Presbyterians make with silly people for fear of
Popery. Lestrange's Relapsed Apostate. p. 240.

117. I Defy any man to produce another Gentleman in the Kings Dominions under
my Circumstances, that has suffered so many illegal, Arbitrary and mean
Injustices from any abusers of the Kings Bounty, insomuch that after one and
thirty years faithful service to the Crown, the Bread has been taken out of my
Mouth, and in a large proportion shared among some of those very people that
pursued the late King to the Block; Lestrange's Englishmans Birth Right. p. 44.

118. Who knows not that Interest governs the world, and that for Reasons best
known to themselves, he that is a Protestant in his heart, may be induced
rather to appear a Papist; and the other, though in Heart a Papist, may find it
his Interest yet to seem a Protestant. Lestrang's further Discovery. p. 18,

119. We find the Court dangerously Thronged with Parasities, Knaves
Represented to the King for honest men, and honest men for Knaves. Lestrange's
Caveat for Cavalliers, p. 12.

120. If men will be Damned, they had better Damn Rich than Poor, and keep
their Lacquies and their Whores, and at last go to Hell in Triumph. Le Strang's
Apology. p. 23.

121. A Parisian Massacre, a Guisian League, a Powder Treason, a Covenant
Reformation, a Spanish Inquisition House, and an English High Court of Justice,
the fighting for Reformation and bidding Defiance to Heaven by whom Kings
Reign; these are Abominations so scandalous and Antichristian, as do nonplus
Hyperbolies, and silence Invention; and next to these there is scarce any thing
more. Criminal than the equally sinful and Ridiculous Bill against the
Succession of his Royal Highness. Goulds Sermon, p. 20.

122. I believe the Framers of that Bill had a further Design than the Dukes
Person, and am clearly of Opinion that there is both a Popish Plot, and a
Presbyterian one at this time against the Church or the King, or both in
Conjunction. Ibid.

123. He that maintains such a thing in a Parliamentary Session (speaking of
the Dukes Bill) is not so well qualified for Westminster as Bedlam: Ibid p. 25.

123. The Doctrine of taking away the right of Succession came from Rome, the
People had it from the Devil etc. Ibid.

124. I bless God I have the Spirit of an English man and uy knoes, due to God
and the King, shall never be yielded up to Usurpers, come what will, come
Hanging, Burning, or any other, or all the Torments that exercised the Patience
of the Primitive Christians. Ibid. p. 28.

Whether this Blade be not more foolhardy than valiant?

125. Infinite Obligations lies on us to the greatest thankfulness to our good
God, for rescuing these Nations from under the Roman Yoke; and for these
Miracles of Mercy which he has wrought for us, in blasting so many of their
deep-laid Designs, their late great Conspiracy, and late Sham-Plots, for the
reducing us to our old Captivity. Dr. Fowler 's Sermon, p. 25.

126. He has no participation of the God-like Nature and Life, which is of a
quarrelsom, contentious, uncharitable spirit. Ibid. p. 27.

127. There are too too many among our selves, that do little consult our
Churches Interest, nor consequently the Interest of the Protestant Religion,
but greatly disserve both, by their intemperate Heats, and branding all with
the names of Fanatics and Presbyterians, who are not come up to their Pitch,
and in all things just of their Complexion; although they be as obedient to
both their Civil and Ecclesiastical Superiors as themselves. Ibid. p. 28.

128. We ought by Love and Sweetness to encourage Men all we can, and not by
Sowreness and Censoriousness tempt those to depart from us, who would gladly
hold communion with us. Ibid.

129. Where we find an inclination toward returning in any that have departed
from us, we should be glad to meet them half way, in order to the bringing them
over to us. Ibid.

130. I do believe if all the Church of England were of this mind, it would
greatly lessen the number of Dissenters. Ibid.

131. There are too too many Debauchees in the Nation, who would be thought
great Champions for the King and the Church, but do infinite prejudice to both,
by mad and frantic expressions of their Zeal; and mighty honor to Fanaticism,
by charging all with it, that run not with them to the same excess of Riot.
Ibid. p. 29.

132. One would think that these, whatsoever they pretend, do really design
nothing more, than to make both the King and the Church as friendless as they
are able; Heaven help them both, should they ever be so unfortunate (which God
forbid) as to stand in need of this sort of People. Ibid.

133. Indeed if Huffing and Healthing, Cursing and Damning, and giving vile
Names would do the business, then let them alone to protect the King and the
Church; but former experience has assured us, that those are the best Weapons
that most of them can boast of their being good at. A Neighboring King, and
the Church of Rome, may wish God's Blessing on the hearts of these Gentlemen;
but our own King (whom God preserve) and the Church of England, have little
reason to con them thanks, for any service they are like to do them. Ib.

Whether Heraclitus, the Observator, and Thompson, are then like to do the
Church of England so much service as they pretend to? And to show that they act
contrary to the King's mind, I shall conclude with two passages of His
Majesty's Proclamation against Vicious and Debauched People.

We think it high time to show Our dislike of those against whom We have been
ever enough offended, though We could not in this manner declare it, who, under
pretense of Affection to Us, and Our Service, assume to themselves the liberty
of Reviling, Threatening, Reproaching others; and, as much as in them lies,
endeavor to stifle and divert their good Inclinations to Our Service; and so to
prevent that Reconciliation and Union of Hearts and Affections, which can
only, with God's Blessing, make Us rejoice in each other, and keep Our Enemies
from rejoicing.

There are likewise another sort of Men, of whom We have heard much, and are
sufficiently ashamed, who spend their time in Taverns, Tippling Houses, and
Debauchos, giving no other evidence of their Affection to Us, but in drinking
Our Health, and inveighing against all others, who are not of their own
dissolute Temper; and who, in truth, have more discreited Our Cause, by the
License of their Manners and Lives, than they could over advance it by their
Affection or Courage.

FINIS.
There is lately Published an ingenious Piece, Entitled, The Horrid Sin of
MAN-CATCHING. The Second Part: Or, further Discoveries and Arguments to prove,
That there is no Protestant Plot: And that the Design of casting a Plot upon
them by the Suborned Man-catchers, was antecedent to the first discovery of the
Popish Plot. Together with some further Discoveries concerning Mr. Booth.
Humbly Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Shastesbury. Printed for
H. Jones, and are to be sold by most Booksellers. Price Sixpence.


