An Account of the Surrender of the Old CHARTER OF Northampton, September the
26. and the manner of Their Receiving Their New Charter, etc.
Together with an Eloquent Speech made by Robert Clerk Esquire; (Deputy Recorder of
Northampton) upon that Occasion.
YEsterday, the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs and Burgesses, walked in their
Formalities to the Limits of the Town; and met the Right Honorable the Earl of
Peterbourgh, Lord Lieutenant of the County, and High Recorder of the Town:
accompanied with a great confluence of Nobility and Gentry on Horseback; and
attended by a body of the County Horse. My Lord alighting, presented a new
Charter from the King, with an Excellent Discourse upon the Gracious favor of
His Majesty to the Town. The Mayor in the name of the new Corporation, humbly
receivied it on his Knees, with due Reverence, Joy, and gratitude of mind.

When this was done, my Lord mounted again on Horseback; the Mayor, Aldermen,
Bailiffs, and Burgesses, leading the way to the Town Hall, the Charter being
carried before them by the Town Clerk bare-headed: the Trumpets sounding, Bells
Ringing, and Wind-Musick playing aloud. When they came to the Hall, the Charter
was read, which being done, Robert Clerk Esquire; our Deputy Recorder, made the
enclosed Speech, a true Copy whereof is here incerted, After this, they were
all entertained at a splendid Dinner by the Corporation, and with great
rejoicing, they did Solemnly and Soberly conclude that happy day.

Mr. Mayor, and You the Gentlemen of the Corporation.

BY the Bounty of His Majesty, and His Royal Progenitors Kings of England, you
have had great Privileges and Freedoms bestowed upon you.

They have likewise put so much confidence in you, as to trust you with a great
share of the Government of this Town.

But so it fell out, that certain evil men have lately crept into Authority
among you, and by their Stubborn and Seditious Practices, have abused this
Trust, and forfeited those Liberties: You did Judge right, when you apprehended
these ill consequences sprang originally from some defect in your Charter.

And you did resolve wisely, when you entered into thoughts of surrendering it,
together with such Liberties and Rights, as were annexed to your Corporation;
and to lay them at His Majesty's Feet, with an humble request, that He would
grant you back what he thought most suitable for you.

And you did it seasonably in point of time, before too much notice had been
taken above, of some extravagancies that had happened here below; which might
otherwise have produced inconvenient effects.

The King most Graciously accepted them; not with any thoughts (you do see) of
abridging your Liberties, retaining your Revenues, or cutting off any Branch of
your former Authority in the Government of this Town.

For they are all re-granted to you to a Tittle, together with some other
accommodations in your Government, which you did request.

If you could have thought on any more advantages, and would have desired them,
I have reason to believe you might have had them; but indeed the King has been
so kind to you, that you cannot quickly find out what he has not already
granted you.

His Majesty has reserved only to himself, (which is indeed a most Gracious
Favor to you all) that whereas you have heretofore been Subject to His
Correction if you did ill: now He has made it His care (by way of prevention)
that you may not hereafter do amiss.

And now may you (under the Providence of Almighty God) date your Felicities
from this time, if you please.

For it rests only, that you of the Loyal Party be constant and united; and the
rather, because the Seditious have been broken in their measures of the late
Plot, and have since then, made it their business to gain a great point in
sowing Divisions among the well affected in several parts of the Nation.

Is there any among you have been tainted with ill Principles that you revolve
often in your minds? now there is an eye upon you, which will have a respect to
Justice, as well as Mercy.

And that you do show your selves humbly grateful to the King who has
graciously received your Address, passed by what former failings has been among
you, and given you these good things, and to conclude that you bear Faith and
true Allegiance to His Majesty; and to His Heirs and Lawful Successors by
Birthright, according to the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of the Crown and
Kingdom: For they certainly will prove the best support of the Established
Government, in Church and State.

FINIS.

