Some Reflections UPON A LATE PAMPHLET, IN A LETTER to J. H.
SIR,
IT is out of a particular respect to you that I write these few hasty Lines, I
being a Frequenter of your Shop, where I always was sure to meet with things
Ingenious and Loyal (I mean in the way of your Trade) without any appearance of
those lewd and seditious Pamphlets, which in these Licentious Times swarm from
the Deplorable Liberty of the Press. A Liberty which can be of no good
Consequence in the most settled and peaceable Times, but as the miserable
Posture of Affairs is now, it is certainly that to which we chiefly owe the
spreading Contagion of our Divisions, both in Church and State: The very best
of Men I fear write with some Itch of Emulation and Contention; and as for
others, their daily Libels are stuffed with most malicious Insinuations and
treasonable Suggestions against the best Government in the World. We have
Answers and Rejoynders multiplied upon each other daily, without any one fixed
Point of Truth, as things are now passionately managed, and this peevish
progress of mutual Dispute and Contradiction, is likely to Reign Ad infinitum.
You know a few Tuggs at the Press shall immediately produce that which shall
with ease speak to the whole Nation at once; so that the mischievous
Conceptions of a single Person, shall by the help of this Dispatch, infect Ten
thousand in few Hours. I hope the Wisdom of the approaching Parliament will
redress this loud Calamity, and at once stop the Occasions of our old, as well
as prevent the Propagations of new Strifes and Animosities. Our Heart-burnings,
God knows, are now risen to such a height, as nothing but the prudent and
successful Care of the Great Council of this Nation, can stop from breaking out
into a general Conflagration: But enough of Preamble.

The Intent of these Lines is to make a few Reflections upon a Pamphlet which
met with me Yesterday: I am sorry to hear your Shop should Credit such a
Scurrilous, if not Profane Paper; However I am pleased to hear that you by the
immediate stifling it have stopped the Mouths of those hot Zealots, who make
Mountains of Molehills, and greedily snatch at any Occas^ons to expose the
Failings of their Opposers, as they have done by this rash Author, whose
Supereminent Zeal for Loyalty was perhaps the only Occasion of his Indiscretion
in venturing upon such Irreligious Allusion they themselves not thinking their
Familiarity and Sawciness with God Almight^ has been more directly and
notoriously Profane, and thereby given occasion to t^ and many the like
Pamphlets.

Well then, it is my opinion upon the perusal of that Paper, that the Author t^
more strongly to express the vile Hypocrisy of our Dissenters, was resolved to
e^pose them in their natural Colors; and I imagine he thought of no better way
the under this Title to make their Principles and Practices diametrically
opposite to t^ very Fundamentals of Christian Religion; for in that Pamphlet he
has dislodged t^ several Petitions of the Holy Prayer, and Articles of the
Creed, etc. and in their roo^ has planted his own sharp Reflections. This (I
suppose) he did, as thinking the Digni^ of their new place and seat would make
them appear with the greater luster, and more advantageous state and pomp of
Satyr Besides (I suppose) he thought that as t^ Novelty of this odd Allusion
would make his Descriptions more remarkable, by bea^ing relation to those
familiar parts of our Religion; so it would fix the designed Co^tumely and
Scandal against Dissenters so much the deeper in the mind of the Reade^ the
Matter of Fact being undeniable, though unhappily represented under a sacre^
Title. Sir, my general Charity obliges me to think well of all men, and that
the Sentiments of the Author were not designedly Atheistical or Profane, though
an ind^screet Zele has laid him under the Censure of both. The Picture of the
Persons he d^signed to draw, comes very near the Life; but his Prudence might
have chosen a more suitable Frame to set it in, than that of the Sacred Word.
For though it is true, the Scandalum acceptum is not always Scandalum datum; yet
it is ill playing with such edge^ Tools,, especially in a Juncture when very
ill Consequences may happen by the wea^ness of some, and malice of others. I am
not ignorant that things of this nature have been done with less noise and
outcry, than was yesterday made about this; yet it w^ ill timed now, when as
our tottering Affairs are so unsteddy, that the Sentiments ^ the People, are
made the Test of Truth. For my own part, I blush at the Authors imprudent
choice of his Title, but cannot conceive the substance of the thing absolutel^
Profane; for it is evident the Authors design was not at all to vilify the
Essentials ^ our Religion, but only by this Ludicrous Allusion to render the
Persons there pointe^ at more familiarly and plainly detestable. To conclude, I
believe you (like me) though that Pamphlet incapable of giving such distaste,
or that from so slight occasion so great a noise should arise, which made it at
first find a place on your Counter; but since i^ has been an occasion of so
much Discourse, I commend your discretion in denying it ^ room in your Shop; it
being wisdom in all persons who desire the Peace of the Nation^ not to engage
themselves in any thing which may increase or continue our Animosities*

Sir, I am, Your Servant, T. A.

Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh at the Black Bull in Cornhill. 1681.


