A DEFENSE OF THE Country Parsons ADMONITION, Against the EXCEPTIONS OF THE
Plain-man's Answer.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by R. Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1687.

Imprimatur.

Guil. Needham
April 4. 1687.
A DEFENSE OF THE Country Parson's ADMONITION.
THere is a Paper called The Plain Man's Answer, etc. Which has made some
Reflections upon The Country Parson's Admonition. But how justly and with what
success (being directed to make short work on it) I do thus briefly examine.

The exceptions against that little Tract, are 1. General. 2. Special.

1. His general exception is against the Person who gives you this Advice. Who,
as he pretends, is not duly qualified to write Admonitions, because he is not
Infallible. For thus he expostulates with me.

Sir, You do not pretend to such Infallibility; and therefore if I must rely
upon the Ministerial Function, I ought in case it can be found, to seek out
such a one as is unerring. (Plain Man's Answer, p. 3.) And again. But what!
must I stand to the Direction of the Ministerial Function? Can it secure me
that the Reverend Divines of the Church of England have hit upon the right
sense of Scripture? But I see they pretend not to such an Infallibility. And
therefore Sir, I must needs tell you, that as when I make choice of a Physician
or Lawyer, I love to choose the best. So, if I must make choice of a Director, I
must and will make choice of him, that can give me security that he neither can
nor will lead me astray; for I do not love to rely upon any thing that can
deceive me. [p. 5.]

The sum of which charge, when resolved into plain English, is this.

These Divines of the Church of England (are so modest) they dare not pretend
to be Infallible (for they know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12.) and therefore they
are not fit to be trusted with the care of Souls. Do not hearken to them, nor
regard their Admonitions. But the Priests of the Church of Rome (if we could
but make you believe it) they are Infallible, i. e. they neither can nor will
deceive you.

But are these Missioners in earnest whilst they insinuate such Things? Do they
really believe themselves when they talk at this rate? To put them to the Test;

Ask this very Missioner; whether He, or any other private Priest in the Church
of Rome, is Infallible? And let him not think to satisfy your doubts by
declaring; That he does not find any other, but those called Roman Catholics,
that offer to challenge it. (page 2.) What Is this to the purpose? We need not be
told that they challenge to be infallible; We do not suspect their confidence,
but expect their proof.

But now if this Missioner shall acknowledge, that neither he nor any other
private Priest is infallible (and I know he dares not pretend the contrary) you
are then to be admonished, from his own Principles, that such fallible and
erring Guides are not fit to be trusted.

You have lately been reminded, not to pin your faith upon another sleeve,
unless you could be sure that such a one on whom you rely, could not, nor would
not deceive you. (p. 3.) And therefore (my good Parishioners) since some body
must direct you, pray do you consider; whether it is not more prudent to trust
your own Parson, then a fallible pretending Priest?

If this Missioner shall then further propose; that though he is not infallible
himself, yet he can bring you to an Infallible Church, and that is as good. To
this you may Answer; That though your Parson is not infallible, yet he can
bring you to infallible Scriptures, and that is better.

And it is pertinent to observe; that the Romanists themselves, as well as we,
do acknowledge these Holy Scriptures to be infallible; But we Protestants do
declare; That the Church of Rome is not infallible. And therefore, since in all
doubtful Cases the safest part is to be chosen (and that is safest, say the
Priests, wherein both sides are agreed) do you stick to the Scriptures, and let
them take their Church.

I shall not now enter upon the Merits of the Cause; by examining the nature of
this pretended Infallibility. Neither, at present, shall I take notice of those
Reasons, which are here produced by this Missioner to support it. These, God
willing, shall be considered in their proper place, viz. in my Reflections upon
the Missioners Answer to the Plain-man's Reply. Which I hope, in due time, to
publish.

So much for his General Exception.

His Exceptions in Special, are against those Directions, which by way of
expedient, I desired you to observe.

1. He is not well pleased that I send you to your Prayers. To Pray unto God to
give you his Grace; to hold fast the Profession of your Faith without wavering,
Heb. 10. 23.

But this is to correct St. Paul, and not the Country-Parson. Who thinks it
very proper (since we are to pray in Faith) to turn an Apostolic Precept into
a Prayer. And being admonished by the Apostle to hold fast our Profession: in
an humble dependence upon the divine Grace, we pray unto God to enable us to do
it.

However at last he gives you leave to say your Prayers. But then he tells you,
it must be in this Form. If I be not in the right, etc. And If I be in the
right, etc.

But will this Missioner allow his new Converts, to pray with these If's and
And's? If he grants them such liberty, let me then desire them daily to repeat
this Prayer.

If the Church of Rome, of which I have now professed my self a Member, is not
a sound Catholic Church; but in any instance is erroneous Superstitions and
Idolatrous; Lord pardon my Errors, and lead me into the way of Truth. And if
the Reformation of the Church of England, is just and warantable, and agreeable
to thy Holy Word; Lord open mine Eyes; that I may acknowledge my mistake and
return into her Communion. Amen.

If here it shall be further urged; That this conditional way of praying is
indeed very fit for Protestants, who are not infallibly secure that their Faith
is true, being various and uncertain; [p. 3.]

But these kind of Prayer are never to be used by Roman Catholics, who are
certain that their Faith is true; and that they are in the right, as being
Members of an Infallible Church: Tell him;

This is only to talk big, and to be Judge in his own Cause. For, 1. A man may
be certain, and sure that he is in the right, without being Infallible.

2. There is greater uncertainty; more Divisions and diversity of Opinions (and
that in matters of Faith) in the Chruch of Rome, then there are in the Church
of England.

If he startles at the Charge, and thinks himself affronted; desire him (for
his satisfaction) to return an Answer, to the Learned Dr. Stilling fleet upon
that Subject. The

2. Direction (with which likewise he is pleased to find fault) was this;

When you read the HolyScriptures, and do find some place which is too
difficult for you, do not then pretend to interpret it your selves. But beg the
Direction of your Spiritual Guide; and desire him to show you how it is to be
understood.

It seems thisGentleman is resolved to show his skill; other-wise this
Expedient (for a Reason that he knows) might have passed without his Censure.

It Is very surprising; that a Romish Priest, who expects such blind obedience
to his Dictates, should yet be thus offended at this honest Advice.

Byt the Reason is evident. For whilst the good Protestants of England are so
kind to Us, and so careful of themselves, as to own their Clergy (as Blessed be
God they do, notwithstanding all the Arts of Rome to withdraw them from us) I
say, whist they stick to their Clergy, through Gods Blessing, they are
certainly safe.

As to the slavery of such submission (which this Author suggests) with respect
to the Church of England, it is an invidious Reflection.

We do indeed desire you to take our Advice. Not for that we have Dominion over
your Faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by Faith ye stand, 2 Cor. 1. 24.

Now the Scripture is the only Rule of our Faith; and as such (to use his own
expression) we will stand and fall by it. (Plain-man's Answer. p. 4.) And
therefore (as he well reminds you) you must search diligently and soberly into
it your selves. (lb. p. 4.) Imitate those noble Bereans, who received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so. Acts 17. 11.

But to what purpose (thinks this Author) do you read the Scriptures, which
neither you, nor your Clergy, can pretend to interpret?

And why not? Cannot the Divines of the Church of England interpret Scripture
as well as the Priests of the Church of Rome? No says he, because they are not
infallible, (and thus he upbraids us at least ten times in this very Answer.)

But what strange impertinence is this? That those men should be thus concerned
for the want of infallibility in others, who have so little of it themselves.

For is there any thing more fallible and contradicting, then those vast Volums
of Popish Commentators, that even make our shelves to crack? And yet all these,
fallible as they are, owned and published, with the usual Approbations, and
permissu Superiorum.

Now had I leisure to expostulate, I would desire this Missioner (who writes to
me in your name) to resolve me. That since it would be very profitable for all
Christians, that the Scriptures should be infallibly interpreted; why does the
Church of Rome employ particular Doctors to Interpret them fallibly? Why are
such different and contradictory Expositions published by her Authority? Why
does she not rather Petition his Holiness, or whoever else is best able to do
it, to explain them Infallibly? Why does she hide her Candle under a Bushel,
and keep her Talent, of interpreting Scripture infallibly, wrapped up in a
Napkin? How such unfaithfulness can be answered to her Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, I leave him sadly to consider. To him that knows to do good and does
it not, to him it is sin. James 4. 17.

3. I did direct you; As far as possible to avoid all Disputes about Religion.
And thus far he allows you to follow my Advice. For he hates contentions, heats
and animosities. And indeed so do I, as being fully convinced, that it is much
more profitable, both for me and my Parish, to spend my time in Devotion and
practical Discourses, then in these unpleasing Disputes.

And I have great reason to affirm; That the rest of my Brethren of the Church
of England, are likewise of the same mind.

But since the importunity of others, in seducing our People, has forced us to
it, we dare not now be silent: and think our selves obliged as good Shepherds,
not only to feed our Flocks; but also to keep them from wandering into bypath,
and to defend them from those that would lead them astray.

To his Exceptions against my Fourth Expedient I do thus Reply.

That it will be time enough to enquire after the Privileges of the Roman
Church, when you are first convinced; That it is your Duty to leave the
Communion of the Church of England.

Now whoever would persuade you to such a Separation (I told you if he will
proceed rationally and to the purpose) he must first convince you;

That the Church of England is no sound Member of the Church Catholic: But
that her Doctrine is either Defective or False.

If he pretends that it is Defective; he must then show, that there are some
Truths necessarily to be believed, as Articles of Faith, which the Church of
England does not receive as such. And also that there are some necessary
Duties, or Parts of Worship, which the Church of England either wholly omits,
or else does not require under any such necessity.

But if he affirms, Secondly, That the Doctrine of the Church of England is
False, he must then prove; That the Church of England does require some
unlawful Condition of her Communion; and that either in Faith or Worship.
Plainly thus.

He must make it appear That her Faith is Erroneous, and contrary to the
written word of God; The Faith once delivered to the Saints. Or else that her
Worship is unlawful, Superstitious or Idolatrous.

All this indeed he thought very reasonable. And because he has no leisure for
long enquiries, (p. 7.) I will not be so rude as to press him beyond his
Measures.

However I must be so obliging as to assure him; That when he has found his
Arguments, I shall be ready to attend him.

And now (my good Parishioners) having dispatched this Answer, let me thus
briefly enforce my former

Admonition.
IT IS a serious thing to change your Religion. Eternity depends upon it. And
therefore it is an unpardonable Error, to be guilty of rashness in so weighty a
concern.

Be not persuaded out of your Senses with confidence and noise. Nor do you
presently conclude, that some men are in the Right; because they say it is
impossible they should be in the Wrong.

If they think to frighten you into their way by telling you; that you are
other-wise Damned: Regard such threatenings no more then you would the Ravings
of a Quaker. For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
Commends. 2 Cor. 10. 18.

Be not discouraged; nor suspect the truth of your Faith, because at first
hearing you cannot Answer a Sophistical Objection. Thinking men, who expect
solid Arguments, may possibly be surpised, on the sudden, with such slender
Stuff. For even a Child may puzzle a Statesman, at Riddle my Riddle.

But these kind of Tricks, when a little examined, how trifling do they appear?
and signify nothing but the Confidence of those who urge them.

Remember this, and show your selves men.

FINIS.

