True Copy Of Part of that PAPER, WHICH Mr. Ashton left in a Friend's Hands:
Together with the LETTER in which he sent it enclosed.
[The Paper begins with the Speech already published, immediately after which
he adds.]
THus much is contained in the Paper that I design to leave with the Sheriff.

But being suddenly to give up my Accounts to the Searcher of all Hearts, I
think it a duty incumbent upon me to impart some things farther, which neither
the Interest nor Iniquity of these Times will, I conclude, willingly bear the
publication of, and therefore not fit to be inserted in the Sheriffs Paper.

Some time after the Prince of Orange's Arrival here, when it was expected,
that, pursuant to his own Declaration, and the King's Letter to the Convention,
an exact Search and Enquiry would have been made into the Birth of the Prince
of Wales, there was a Scheme drawn up of that whole Matter, and of the Proofs
that were then (and are still) ready to be produced, to prove his Royal
Highness's Legitimacy; but no public Examination being ever had, and the
Violence of the Times, as well as Interest of the present Government, not
permitting any private Person to move in it, those Papers have ever since lain
by: But it being now thought advisable by some, to have them printed and
published, and (as at first they were designed) addressed, at their next
Meeting, to the Lords and Commons, entreating them to enquire into that weighty
Affair, and to call forth, examine, and protect (for who else dares to appear)
the many Witnesses to the several Particulars therein offered to be legally
proved, etc.

I was ordered to carry those Papers to the King my Master, for his view, that
his Leave and Aprpobation might go along with the Desires of his good Subjects
here; and they being taken with me, with some other Papers of Accounts, etc. in
a small Trunck, amongst my Linen, and other private things of my own, and not
in the Packet, (my Ld. Preston being altogether a stranger to the whole
proceeding,) by this means fell into the hands of our present Governors; who,
though they wisely waved the producing them as Evidence at my Trial, yet have I
just Reason to believe my greatest Crimes were contained in them; and I do
therefore conclude and hope, that I only am designed to be sacrificed, who
only knew of them: Nor am I surprised at it, since nothing, I think, can be
more prejudicial to some Persons present Interest, than the exposing of those
Papers to the Public, which will set that pretended Mystery of Darkness in so
clear a Light, that all Mankind must be convinced of his Highness's being born
of the Queen, and of their Wickedness, who have maliciously and designedly
asserted that innocent Prince to be an Impostor. The Love and Compassion that I
have for my native Country, as well as Charity, obliges me humbly to implore
Almighty God to be merciful to it, and not to charge this great Sin to the
public Account, and that (...) further provoke his Justice by our wilfully
continuing in Errou^ (...)ache, I beseech him to put it into the Hearts of the
Lords, etc. at their next Meeting, to examine into that whole Matter, and (if
before that time this be published) to enquire after, call for, and, if
possible, retrieve those Papers that were taken with me; whereby the Obstinate
will most certainly be convinced, the Ignorant informed, the Doubtful
confirmed, the Eyes of all opened, and a sacred most important Truth made
apparent to the whole World.

What I have next to impart is not less material, etc.

[But I do not think it a proper time to publish what follows next; and
therefore, according to the Will and Desire of my dead Friend, expressed in his
following Letter, it is reserved to a fitter Opportunity; and shall now only
insert what he wrote to me relating to Mr. Ellyot.]

But I must not end this Paper till I have done one Act more of Justice, as
well as Charity, in behalf of my Fellow-Sufferer, Mr. Elliot, who was, as I do
most sincerely believe, altogether ignorant, not only of the contents of the
Papers, but even of the Papers themselves, and no way concerned but as a
Passenger; and yet if Providence had not prevented our being all tried
together, as was intended, that innocent Gentleman had most certainly shared in
our Fates; for the Proofs, even at my Trial, lay stronger against him than my
self; for Captain Billop did then upon Oath, (unnecessarily, I think,) declare
him to be much more concerned and importunate than I was, to have the Packet
thrown over Board; and yet singly from my being concerned, and speaking to him
on that Subject, a presumptive Evidence (sufficient, as it proved, with that
Jury to find me guilty upon,) was drawn, that I knew what was contained
therein. But I do most heartily forgive them, and pray to God, that this poor
Gentleman, by gaining of Time, may escape better, and that his innocent Blood
may not be shed: And I hope these words of a dying Man (though no legal Proof)
may have some weight with an impartial, conscientious Jury, (if such a Jury he
can get,) whenever he is brought to his Trial.

John Ashton.

[This Paper, etc. came enclosed to me from Mr. Ashton, before his Execution,
in the following Letter.]
Sir,
KNowing your Friendship and Fidelity to your, and your only, as unto safe and
secure (though distant) Hands, I recommend the enclosed Papers, what chiefly
relates to my self, being the first part, I design to leave with the Sheriff;
nor shall I be anxious about his Disposal of it: But the following Paragraphs,
that concern the Prince of Wales, and -- I beg you to preserve as Jewels, and
publish them, either part, or all, (chiefly that about the Prince,) whenever
time or occasion seems to permit or require. And as to the fitness of either,
you may be pleased to consult A. B.'s Advice; I doubt not but sooner or later
they will all be useful: And that you may the more value them, I do most
solemnly protest, I have been as careful in what I have asserted for Truth, as
if I were now at God's dreadful Tribunal, where I expect suddenly to appear,
and by his Mercy hope to hear that ravishing Sound, Come, ye blessed, etc.

What relates to Mr. Elliot, though I design to declare as much to some, who at
his Trial may give it in Evidence, yet I thought it just to leave a Record of
his Innocence under my Hand.

I have nothing to add, but to request your Prayers, That God, of his infinite
Mercy, would support and strengthen me in my last Moments, and take to himself,

Sir, Yours, Newgate, January 27. 1690.-91. John Ashton.


