TOLERATION Disapproved and Condemned BY THE Authority and convincing Reasons
OF I. That Wise and Learned King James and his Privy Council. Anno Reg. 2do.
II. The Honorable Commons Assembled in this present Parliament in their Votes,
etc. Feb. 25. 1662. III. The Presbyterian Ministers in the City of London met
at Sion-Colledge, December. 18. 1645. IV. Twenty eminent Divines (most (if not
all) of them Members of the late Assembly) in their Sermons before the two
Houses of Parliament on Solemn Occasions.
Faithfully Collected By a very Moderate Hand, and humbly Presented to the
Serious Consideration of all Dissenting PARTIES.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Oxlad Sen. and are to be Sold by John Williams in
Cross-Keys Court in Little-Brittain, 1670.

The Names of those eminent Divines, whose Testimonies are recited, are as
follows, viz.
Dr. Cornelius Burgess Mr. John Ward Mr. William Good Mr. Tho. Thorowgood Mr.
Humph. Hardwick Mr. Arthur Salwey Mr. William Reyner Mr. Thomas Case Mr. John
Lightfoot Mr. Thomas Watson Mr. George Hughes Mr. Edmund Calamy Mr. Richard
Baxter Mr. Thomas Horton Mr. Lazarus Seaman Mr. Matthew Newcomen Mr. Richard
Vines Mr. Simeon Ash Mr. James Cranford Mr. Thomas Edwards.
TOLERATION Disapproved and Condemned, etc. Humbly Presented to the serious
Consideration of all Dissenting Parties.
My Brethren,
THE Lord Jesus (who knows all our Hearts, and before whose great Tribunal both
you and I must one day appear) is my witness, that the chief design of my
present Undertaking is the Peace and Welfare of the Church, the continuance of
the Gospel, and the eternal Salvation of precious and immortal Souls; I do
therefore much hope (though we are all naturally impatient of opposition) that
you will favorably receive, and seriously consider these plain (yet
well-meaning) lines; which have no other patronage, then the charity of the
Author, and the candor and piety of those persons to whom they are directed.

The solemnity of this Preface as it may raise your expectations, so it may
possibly invite your curiosity to inquire, who or what manner of person I am,
that have taken the confidence of so important an Address.

And though the knowledge of my name would signify little, (I being not so
considerable as that it should add any weight to my performance) yet that I may
in some sort gratify such obliging Readers (as I hope to find you) I shall
farther acquaint you, that though I am not a person very ambitious to be known)
yet upon occasion, I shall either publicly own and vindica^^ or (if duly
convinced) as publicly recant my present Opinion: and (in short) to secure you
and Apologize for my self (since concealed Names are ever suspicious) I do
solemnly protest; that I am no scoffer at Religion, nor Railer at true Piety;
that I love an honest Religious good man (that endeavors to save his Soul, and
come to Heaven) under what profession soever I find him; that I will pity and
(according to my poor ability) rectify, but never make sport with his errors,
and mistakes; and herein I do readily subscribe to the Learned Ld.
Advertisements touching the Church of England, in his Refuse. p. 165.
Verulam, that to turn Religion into a Comedy or Satyr, to search, and rip up
Wounds with a laughing countenance; to intermix Scripture, and scurrility
sometimes in one sentence, is a thing very far from the devout reverence of a
Christian and scant beseeming the honest regard of a sober man, two principal
causes (says this honorable person) have I ever known of Atheism; curious
Controversies, and profane scoffing. And no less do I admire (what I hope you
will grant I have endeavored to transcribe) that incomparable saying of the
judicious The Preface to his Eccl. Pol. Sect. 2.
Hooker, There will come a time, when three words uttered with Charity and
Meekness, shall receive a far more blessed Reward, than three thousand Volumns
written with disdainful sharpness of Wit. But, if an irregular heat (which I
will yet endeavor to suppress) should some little display it self (it being
very difficult to contend coldly, and without Affection, about things which we
hold dear and precious) (and certainly the Peace of the Church is eminently
such) if Passion, and Interest should obtrude themselves under the notion of
Zeal (which God knows, is no less the common than fatal mistake in the
management of our Controversies) I do then humbly beg of you, that you would
seriously consider the following Word of the forecited good man, that, the
manner of men's writings must not alienate our hearts from the Truth, if it
appear they have the Truth.

Having now (as far as it is judged convenient) given you an account of the
Author, 'twil in all likelihood be next demanded (since this Subject has been
of late so fully, and as some think unanswerably discust) what convincing
Reasons I have to trouble, either my Brethren to read, or my self to write, so
common, and (whilst proposals are on foot) so unwelcome a Discourse.

Really (my Brethren) did I not fear, that such frequent protestations might
seem too affected; or that Conscience and Reality, might be mistaken for Humor
and Design; I would once more call the searcher of all Hearts to witness; that
I am so far from a persecuting spirit (the usual Brand we bestow upon our
Adversaries) that some Months since I had so favorable an opinion of
Indulgence, Connivence, or Toleration, that I little thought I should now
appear an obstructer of so much desired, and (as I then apprended) so blessed a
work.

I am confident you are very forward to know the Reason of so sudden, and
unexpected a change; it is therefore (omitting all farther prefacing) in short
thus:

Being desirous to inform my self in the Nature and extent of Toleration, which
I observed (in such variety of Methods, by such different Parties) so zealously
promoted, (and that under no less titles than Liberty of Conscience, the great
interest of all Kingdoms, and States, and particularly of England) in order to
a more full satisfaction (not omitting my hearty Prayers to the Father of
Lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, and who has promised to
give Wisdom, Counsel, and direction to him that asks) I procured, and
perused some of the most considerable Tracts and Pamphlets (pro and con) that
have handled this Subject; and I must ingeniously confess (though I was not
perfectly convinced, yet) I did at first very much favor (whom I do yet no
less pity) the dissenting Party; and really it seemed so plausible (since
every man must answer for his own works) that every man should have the Liberty
of his own opinion; and the name of Conscience is so sacred; that I durst not
but make a pause, before I had passed a judgment upon such honest pretenses.
And (to make you my Confessors) I was not little affected with some resentments
of a late ingenious Writer, his words are these:

Propos. for the safety of King and Kingd^m. Page 10.
There are a company of people about us in the Country of Different peswasions,
who meet sometimes many hundreds together, that our Justices have been in
perplexity what to do: The most of them (for ought I perceive) are certainly
inoffensive persons* and they have really no more against them, than Pliny
against the Christians of old, when he sent to Trajan about them; that is, only
that they meet, and Preach, and Pray together, and if that excellent Prince was
ashamed after this report he gave him of them in his Epistle, to have those
good men sought out any more unto punishment, I cannot but favor their
inclinations, which are averse from the like inquisitions. I profess to God it
is such an ungentleman-like thing (me thinks) to trouble ones Neighbors, that
I should be glad to rid modest men of that work. It were better all these Acts
suffered at once a due and Christian regulation, than we should be still put
upon this untoward dragging innocent Folk's thus to Prison, for doing nothing
in earnest, but endeavoring to save their Souls; in the name of God take you
your Psalter, and let them say their Prayers as they will.

This, together with some other Reflections drawn from the great Love of Christ
to Us (which therefore by way of gratitude we are to acknowledge by suitable
Acts of Love, pity, and Indulgence to our poor Brethren) did very much move
me: the words of my Author are these.

There is a person I hope you would do a kindness for page 72*
with all your heart, and you have Reason, it is for your dear Lord that bought
you, and there is nothing in the world you can do I am persuaded, that he will
take so kindly from you at this time, as to be pitiful to his Servants, who
are distressed about your Acts in point of Conscience, and who the more
despised they are and the like unto their Lord, the fitter Subjects they are
for your Compassion: And a little after -- If you had no need of Mercy from
God, it were tolerable then for you to be extreme toward others.

I hope this can did confession of my weakness (if yet it be a weakness to
acknowledge my Errors) shall not so far prejudice my Reader, as to hinder his
acceptance of my following Reasons, if it appear that they are really such ( i.
e.) rational and convincing, to give you therefore my Thoughts, in order to my
first reflection, was this:

That though this Toleration whilst considered in the Notion, and as it were
in the Idea, do carry with it a great deal of outward glory and luster, filling
the Hearts of Men with Expectations of much Happiness to ensue (and no wonder
if it be therefore entertained with general Applause, especially of the Vulgar
sort:) yet when we come ad practicandum, to consider how this notion may best
be made practical, and put in Execution, we shall then meet with such
impediments, and inconveniences as shall render the performances (to say no
worse) very far short of promise, and expectation. And for my own part
(submitting still to better Judgments) I do find it so Unintelligible and
Vnpracticable, that however it is pretended (and that very highly) by others,
yet in my apprehension (and indeed the process of the World shows no less)
it is only a Thing for weaker Parties to talk on.

For (to remind you only of what others have more fully discussed) if a
Toleration must be admitted, then either Universal and Unlimited (such as may
comprehend even the Papists themselves) or else Particular, ( i. e.) limited to
^ome peculiar Persons or Parties.

As to the first, it is so perfectly wild and extravagant that (in the judgment
of all sober Protestants) Protestants) it rather deserves an explosive scorn
then a serious confutation.

For the second, viz. a particular and limited, unless (which seems the
likeliest way to bring the work to some Issue) the Dissenting parties (who are
many, and of different persuasions) would clearly and distinctly acquaint the
World (in some public Writing Unanimously owned) who they are that shall be
indulged, and upon what conditions, we are yet never the nearer.

They give us indeed (by way of Resolution) some general expressions: but these
then are of so doubtful, (I had almost said impossible) interpretation; that I
appeal to any rational man (all prejudice and interest laid aside) whether
such uncertainties can be laid as a sufficient Foundation, on which to raise so
considerable a structure as the peace of the Church, and prosperity of the
Nation.

For whilst they tell us of Reformed Religion to Disc. of Relig. Title page
be settled in its due Latitude, and yet never acquaint us what we are to
understand by this due Latitude, what is the full extent, and meaning of the
Word: whilst they propose, that the Parties Disc. of Rel. Par. 1 page 18
comprehended in their establishment shall be of importance in the public
Interest, and of Principles congrous to such stated Order in the Church, as the
stability of the Commonwealth requires: and yet never inform us what these
important Interests, and congrous Principles are; what other is it, but to
trifle us with Ambiguities and amusements? to trouble both themselves and
others, in thus fiercely contending for a Toleration in no body know's What,
and to be granted to no body know's Whom.

I have given you a reflection, which if duly improved by some happier Pen,
might possibly, appear of more difficult resolution, than your present
Sentiments (occasioned by the meanness of its delivery) may invite you to
apprehend.

However, I am sure (as to me) it has been of sufficient moment, to revise my
former Thoughts; and to show less kindness to your present Toleration, toward
which I have been (very lately) more warmly affected.

But (to come closer to my intendment) that which did more fully (and if I
mistake not, unanswerably) convince me, was the perusal of several Sermons
preached by some of our late eminent Divines) before the two Houses of
Parliament) on solemn occasions, for I must not omit to tell you; that having
heard those Discourses much commended (as being delivered by such famous
Preachers; before such as were reputed so wise and judicious Auditors as the
Lords and Commons, and therefore without doubt did contain somewhat
extraordinary) I procured a good number of them (about an hundred) and as my
other occasions would permit, not without much expectation set my self to the
reading of them.

And indeed (that I may be faithful to the memory of those persons) I must
acknowledge both to you and the world, I received no bad return of my Labors,
for I found (which is chiefly to my present purpose to observe) This point of
Toleration so excellently, and fully discussed, though obiter only and as it
were by the by, that no Tract ex instituto (and there are some very ingenious)
could ever aford me the like satisfaction.

Now that this may not be gratis and precario dictum, I shall very Faithfully
lay down their own Reasons in their own Words, and then leave it to you and all
men to consider, Whether it be not (morally at least) impossible that so many
excellently learned, and eminent Divines should so frequently, (and that with
such vehemence of Zeal) oppose the very Name of Toleration (and which is yet
more observable, that those very Sermons in which these invectives are
contained, should not only receive the Thanks of the Two Houses, but by their
especial order, be likewise made Public) were there not some secret Danger in
the Thing, which either the Interest, or Security of the present Age, will not
now suffer us to Apprehend.

I speak as unto Wise men, Judge ye what I say.
Dr. Cornelius Burgess Mr. John Ward Mr. William Good Mr. Tho. Thorowgood Mr.
Humph. Hardwick Mr. Arthur Salwey Mr. William Reyner Mr. Thomas Case Mr. John
Lightfoot Mr. Thomas Watson Mr. George Hughes Mr. Edmund Calamy Mr. Richard
Baxter Mr. Thomas Horton Mr. Lazarus Seaman Mr. Matthew Newcomen Mr. Richard
Vines Mr. Simeon Ash Mr. James Cranford Mr. Thomas Edwards.
The Testimonies of the forementioned Divines against Toleration.
Dr. Corn. Burgess Sermon. before the house of Commons Novem. 5. 1641. p. 60.
London, printed for C. Meredith at the Crane in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1641.
GIve me leave, I beseech you, to speak freely to you; I will do it humbly too.
At your first sitting down, you expressed many brave and noble Resolutions, of
giving Gods business the precedence of all other your Affairs: and your
beginnings promised much. Howbeit, I know not how it comes to pass, but so it
is, that Gods work lies yet undone. Matters of Religion lie a bleeding; all
Government and Discipline of the Church is laid in her Grave, and all
putredinous Vermin of bold Schismatics and Frantic Sectaries glory in her
Acts, making her fall their own rising to mount our Pulpits, to offer strange
fire, to expel the gravest, ablest, and most eminent Ministers in the
Kingdom; (if not out of their Pulpits yet) out of the Hearts of their People,
as a company of weak men, Formalists, Time-servers, no Ministers of Christ, but
Limbs of Antichrist; having no calling except from the Devil; and to forsake
our Assemblies as Babylonish and Antichristian; so as in short time they will
not leave us the face of a Church. And yet No Course is taken to suppress their
fury and to reduce them to Order, which (as things now stand) will never be,
till you put your hands to the Cure. I beseech you therefore, in the P. 63.
Name of that great God, whom you serve, and who has hitherto blessed you, and
for the Peace and Prosperity of this Church and Kingdom, to resume and pursue
your first thoughts of setting up God and his ordinances, as becomes you in a
regular way -- that our Church and the Government thereof may be no longer laid
waste, and exposed to Confusion, under the plausible P. 64.
pretense of Not forcing men's Consciences. To put all men into a course of
Order and Uniformity, in Gods way, is not to force the Conscience; but to set
up God in his due place, and to bring all his people into the paths of
righteousness and life. Sermon. before the Commons at a public Fast March 30.
1642 p. 35.
Be there none of you that foresee the fatal mischiefs of leaving all men to
their liberties in the things of God, and yet want hearts to use your Skill and
Interest, to make have to setle matters of Religion, lest you come too late
with a Remedy when the Disease is grown incurable, and the Kingdom grown to
that pass (as the grave Historian noted of old Rome) that it can neither bear
the malady, nor endeavor the Cure? Do you not see or hear daily of the
Disorders, Sects, Rents, and Schisms P. 46.
that every where bud forth already, and threaten all Order, Unity, and
Governments? give the water but a passage without speedy making up the Banks,
and you Know how some whole Seas will break in upon us, and render all
irrecoverable and incurable. If one difficulty occurs to day, it will be
doubled, yea multiplied to morrow. There is no Hydra so fertile of heads, as
Error and Schism grown to some strength and maturity, it will ask you but a
short time of Co^nivances afterward: there will be no curbing nor shaming of
it. Nothing is so confident as ignorance, impudent as falsehood, and catching as
Errors. Sermon. before the Commons at a public Fast April 30 1645. p. 5. and 52.
Take heed of those spirits of Error, who with fair (speciouse, pargetted,
gloing words seek to make merchandise of you, beguiling unstable Souls. Beware
of those compliances with, and Indulgences to all sorts of Sects and Schisms
now pleaded for, both by word and writing, as it were a part of Christ's Legacy,
and his Peoples liberty to be of what Religion they will; to be tolerated in
any opinions never so erroneous and pernicious (until further light:) that it
is the Magistrates duty to protect them in that liberty; and that the contrary
thereunto is to persecute Christ. Has God inserted this as one main branch of
his Grand Covenant with his People under the Gospel, I will give them one heart
and one way that they may fear me for ever; * that is, that they may all call
upon the name of Jer. 32. 39.
the Lord to serve him with one consent? Zeph. 3. 9. Did Christ ascend up on
high and give gifts unto men, and gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come, (...) into the unity of the Faith; and, is it Persecution, and
Antichristianisme to engage all to Unity and Uniformity? Does Paul bid the
Philippians to beware of the Concision? Phil. 3. 2. Does he beseech the Romans
to mark those which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which they had learned, and to And yet the Author of Libert. of Consc. (p. 32.)
tells us that this Text is little (...) the purpose.
avoid them; and that upon this ground, that they who are such, serve not the
Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, however by good words and fair speeches they
deceive the Hearts of the simple? Romans 16. 17. Does he writing to the
Galatians, wish, I would they were even cut off that trouble you, Gal. 5. 12.
And it is such an heinous offense now, for the Faithful Servants of Christ, to
advise you to the same course? O Heavens! be astonished at this; and blush for
the Ignorance of some, and Impudence of others, that dare so boldly press for
such a Toleration which none but ^ain destructive thoughts of carnal men can
look upon without indignation and horror. Beware how you hearken to these
Empiricks and Sirens, who seek to Charm the World into a deep Sleep, by
presenting their Confidence of a necessity of complying with all sorts of
Sectaries, yea of trusting the Sword in their hands, and to defer the settling
of matters of Religion during the War, for fear of losing the Godly Party (as
too many proudly style themselves, by way of difference from all that are not
of their opinions and ways) what is this but to teach God a new Form of
Politics, to proclaim, that it is not always safe to hold out the Truth of the
Gospel, and to command all men to embrace it, but much safer to halt between
two opinions? Belike Josiah went beyond his bounds, when after himself had
sworn a solemn Covenant to the Lord, he made all Judah and Benjamin to stand to
it, and made all that were present in Israel to serve the Lord their God. 2 Chronicles. 34. 32, 33. and Asia much more, when he drew all the people into a
Covenant, That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put
to Death, Whether small or great, Man or Woman, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. The Author of
Lib. of Cons. p. 28. assures us the contrary, when he tells us that what was
done by the Kings of Israel and Judah, cannot be reasonably made a rule to
Magistrates now under the Gospel.
But the amble and transcendant Commendations which the Lord gives unto these
pious Kings, especially in reference to their sincerity, and zeal in reforming
and settling of Religion in one Uniform way, may sufficiently warrant and
encourage all Religious Magistrates; to take care that all under their
Government, should all serve the Lord with one shoulder; this being not a
Tyranny over men, but the Privilege, of the Gospel. Beware yet, at last, of
that thought, that it is not yet time to build the Lords house, Judah paid dear
for this, as I have heretofore showed you at large, on Psalm. 76. 10. and in my
former Sermon on this Text; and therefore, shall spare my self and you the
pains of enlarging at the present. Setle this in your hearts; Gods Truth, the
true Worship and Discipline of Christ, set up and established in one Uniform
way., never prejudiced any Nation or State (where it had free passage) in the
least degree, but has ever been their safety, happiness, and honor. It is
Error (how much soever cried up) not truth, (how much soever cried down and
blasphemed) that makes and foments Rents and Factions. Honorable and Beloved;
yet another word of Exhortation Mr. John Ward of Ipswich in his Sermon. before
the Commons March 26. 1645. p. 49. London printed for C. Meredith. 1645.
to judge for God, and as God judges. 1. For God. There are matters of God, as
well as matters of the King or Kingdom; the care whereof must be upon you as
well as upon us; his Church, his Kingdom, his City, his House, his People, his
Spouse, his Children, his Body ye as nursing Fathers, must tender the good and
welfare of them, that they may find Harbor, and Protection, enjoy their just
Privileges, and Liberties, wherewith Christ had made them free: not such
Licentiousness as is abused for a Cloak of Naughtiness. Ye must see to Order
and Unity amongst them, that there be no Rents and Schism^; surely our Savior
that Ascended into Heaven, and gave gift to men, some Apostles, etc. that we
might all meet in the Unity of the Faith; and has diverse times, and after
sundry manners, given that very thing in Charge to his Ministers, would not
have the Magistrate left at large from providing, and endeavoring, that
speaking or following the truth in love, we may grow up, making increase by
edifying our selves and one another in Love. Ye must do that, which we are to
pray that ye do, viz. Take a Course that Christians may live in a Peaceable and
quiet life in Godliness and Honesty, not in strife and contention. There is --
his name, it may not be blasphemed, dishonored. This day, it must be
sanctified. This Gospel. Ye have Authority, and it is your duty to provide that
it be duly preached: That it be truly taught: not blended, adulterated, made
another Gospel. P. 50.
This worship; it must not be corrupted by Idolatry, superstitions,
Innovations, lest God be worshipped in vain while they teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of men. This Ministry; it ought to be purged, planted, lights set
up in every Bowl of the Candlestick, encouraged, maintained, and abetted in the
work of the Lord. These Sacraments; it is your honor as your duty to se that
they be kept pure in the celebration and ministration of them. There is a
booker case for it. Numb. 9. 7. There were certain men, etc. but if this be not
full, the Presidents. 2 Chronicles. chapter 15. chapter 30. and chapter 35. will rule the Case
for the Civil Magistrate, and make out this: That where the Doctrine and
Discip^^^e of the Church does not, or cannot prevail, the Magistrate must
interpose his Coercive Power for restraint and remedy. -- In a word: God has
many things amongst us that must be protected and maintained; and the matters
of God have many adversaries which must be watched, and suppresse^; for ye bear
not the sword in vain* ye are Gods Ministers attending continually upon this
very thing. Magistrates and Ministers have (as ye see) one common style of
Office; that ye in the place, and we in our Function and Order, should mind and
promote the things of God; ye by the Sword, and we by the Word; you are Keepers
of both Tables, the first and great Commandment, P. 15.
as well as the second that is like unto it; both come sometimes as occasion
is, under your cognizance. And ye know what a brand sticks to this day upon
Gallio (though an Heathen Magistrate) that he cared not for the matters of the
Law and Worship, (according to the Law) when question was brought; no, though
there were Insurrections and Tumults upon that occasion: and for Gamaliels
counsel, Refrain from these men and let them alone: for if this Counsel or this
Work, be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God If this be
true, the Auth. of the Prop. for King and Kingdom showed more zeal than
knowledge, when having mentioned the Counsel of Gamaliel, he thus adds. I wish
to the Lord, the great Ministers of our state would be content to be no wiser
men then Gamaliel. p. 36. p. 26.
. Though it be found within the Bible, yet it is not of like Authority with one
of Solomon's Proverbs or Maxims of Policy: It has no otherwise the approbation
of God for good, then the Design of Pharaoh, or the crafty Counsel of
Achitophel, which are also recorded in the Scripture: it will not consist with
other rules of the Word, and it has been condemned as unsound, and unsafe by
many godly wise men; we have more sure words of Scripture, out of which we draw
the Doctrine of the Magistrates power and duty in the matters of God and
Religion, then the loose speech of such a Neutralist and time-serving
Politician as Gamaliel was. Go on therefore, I beseech you as you began; take
us the little Foxes as well as the ravening Wolves; These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit. They Boast indeed (much) of the
spirit, but they manifestly do the works of the Flesh. They plead for liberty,
but it is licentiousness. Liberty of Conscience they term it, but it is Liberty
of Practice, that every man may do what is good and right in his own eyes: they
pretend to nothing but Piety and Godliness, and seem as if they would be
content if they might but have a bare subsistence in the profession of it. So
did the Jesuits to learning, when they first appeared upon the Stage, but when
they had once insinuated themselves into the good Opinion of Princes and
States, how well they answered the Expectations; and requited the kindness of
those who nursed them up, all the Christian World sees and feels to their cost
at this day. They ask but Connivance and Toleration, but if they once meet in a
Confluence, and find themselves strong enough to run in a stream; let but a
Damm be Pitched down to restrain or oppose their Madness, or men follow not on,
to indulge and gratify their humor, it would soon appear, whether or no they
rage and swell and get over, or bear down before them all that should stand in
their way. They did seem a while to cry up the Order of Parliaments and of the
Civil Magistrate, and have their persons in admiration, but merely for
advantage, that so they may get above all Ecclesiastical Authority; and when
they are once up to their height, what they will do with the Ladder, they hope
to climb and ascend by, is not hard to conjecture; they reckon themselves the
Wheat in the Field, and when once they are ripe, they will easily be content to
have all that threshed of, by which they received their growth. Ye have heard
of the Fable of the Snake and the Countryman that brought it unto the fire, I
shall not need to apply it, already they begin to remove the old Landmarks and
straiten their Bounds, they deny their claim up to an high Water-mark, and make
their Banks, and enclose for themselves to the very Channel side: But whether
it be holden fit or seasonable that these Libertines ^e decried; for my part, I
cannot yet discover by any activeness to suppress them: only seeing the evil
and foreseeing the mischief, I have given the warning, that at least I may
deliver mine own Soul. I pray God the Remedy be not deferred till it be too
late, and ye be driven to play an after-game to an extreme hazard and
disadvantage. I doubt not but your Souls abhor that bloody Tenet Mr. Will. Good,
Sermon. before the Commons, March 26. 1645. p. 36. London printed for C.
Meredith. 1645.
to the Souls of men, That it is the duty of the Magistrate to Tolerate all
Religions. You have carried out the Dust behind the door, and this Opinion will
bring all the mire in the streets into the house of God again. Cambyses had a
lust to marry his Sister, and his Counselors told him, there was no Law
whereby to do it: But withal they told him, there was a Law that the Kings of
Persia might do what he list, and by this he might marry his Sister. What it is
that shall be unlawful, if this be lawful, for every man to make a Law and
Religion for himself? Put some stop by your Authority to the growth of Errors,
that are destructive, to the power of Godliness, and let not this suspend your
Sanction, because some that broach them pretend to Godliness; an enemy, the
more like he is to a Friend, the more dangerous. The third Use of Confutation;
it is of the Remonstrants, Sure this Gentleman is mistaken, I always thought
Remonstrants and Arminians had been the same.
Arminians and Socinians, who endeavor from Mr. Tho. Thorowgoods Sermon. before
the Commons at a solemn fast Dec. 25. 1644. p. 10. his Text, Phil 4. v. 5. Let
your moderation be known unto all men. Land. Pr. for Chr. Meredith 1645.
my Text, to get countenance for that Babylonish ^^ror, the allowance of all
opinions, as if because the Apostle says, Let your moderation be known unto
all men; therefore all Men's Conceits must be born with in Religion, and every
one suffered in what he supposes to be Truth: it is a cunning and couse^ing
Devise, that st(...)es in with corrupt nature; but because it offers violence
to my Text, I cannot be true to it, or you, if somewhat be not added by way of
Vindication; and it shall be in these Six Particulars. First, is it probable
that our Apostle, who elsewhere, almost every where, is so zealous for Unity
against Schisms, should in any sort Tolerate them, and so voluntarily open a
wide Door for division? In this very Epistle he writes for Peace even
passionately but with might Power, Phil. 2. 1, 2. If there be any Consolation
in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any
bowels and merc^es, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same
Love, being of one accord, and of one mind. And in the next Chap. 3. 16. -- Let
us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing: Expressions different
from all licentious Tolerations: The same Apostle abounds in serious
Dehortations from Schisms and Dissentions, Romans 13. 12, 16, 17. and as carnal.
1 Cor. 3. 3. and in other places: And he does very often exhort with earnest
words and arguments, not only that we be like-minded, Romans 15. 6. Phil. 2. 2.
and of one mind, 2 Cor. 13. 12. but of the same mind, 1 Cor. 10. 10. joined,
yea joynted together in the same mind, and in the same judgment: And is here
the least approbation of that multiplying Doctrine? neither will that excuse so
long as they all breath Christ, tend to the advancement of Christ; it matters
not: but let St. Paul answer this Objection also, is Christ divided? 1 Cor. 1.
13. Consider it well, and season your consideration with that of our Master
Christ himself, Mar. 9. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another: If we were preserved by hum(...)ty from the corruptions of
self-opinion, it would be no ^^rd matter to embrace unity Secondly, such
allowance would prove destructive to Holiness both Personal and Domestical;
Omnis Religio and nulla Religio, would soon be the same: Suppose the Husband of
one opinion, the Wife of another, the Children, it may be, of one or two other,
and the Servants of as many more; what shall the Master of the house do here?
how perform the Family duties? diversity of Opinions, like so many Hatchets
interrupting their Prayers, 1 Pet. 3. 7. chopping all Devotion and Piety in
pieces: as the Duke of Wittenberge was wont to say, New Garment^ introduce new
Manners, new Manners bring in new Men, and new Men thrust out the old; so
Opinions suffered will devour the old; and the Toleration of every Religion
will destroy all Religion: and in conclusion leave no Religion at all. Thirdly,
this Liberty is inconsistent with civil tranquillity; the bleeding condition of
our own Nation at present, is a living, almost a dying witness of this: and if
that one Religion of Popery, so tolerated as it was, has brought in upon us so
many destructions; what will that multiplication do, but hasten desolation
without recovery; for every part would endeavor to support it self, to the
prejudice of the rest; et dum de Religione certatum est Regio, dum de caelo
terra amissa, as it was said long since. Fourthly, the late Bishops of Ireland
may put this Liberty to silence and shame; for when not long since a Toleration
of Popery in that Kingdom was proposed, they said; To give the Papists a
Toleration is a grievous sin, and will make us accessory to all their
Abomination, and the perdition also of seduced Souls. Fifthly, this may be
current Doctrine ^^ongst the Turks, and Defense of Prop. p. 20. highly commends
this judgment of the wise Emperor Solomon and is sorry that his Adversary is
of another humor.
the grand Seignior told his M^s^i; that is, his chief Priest, As a Garden is
beautified with varity of flowers, so his Empire would be adorned with
diversities of Religion: let such Toleration find allowance in the Turk's
Paradise; it shall never, I trust, be planted in the Paradise of God. Sixthly,
We have undertaken all in the National Covenant, the establishment of
Uniformity; and how can that stand with this Omniformity indeed Nulliformity, I
understand not: it was a prodigious thing in the days of Jeremiah the Prophet,
Jer. 2. 28. According to the Number of thy Cities, are thy Gods, O Judah: Here
would soon appear another kind of multiplying and increase; but though this
Fancy be never so plausible, Divine providence has shut it out of our Camp by
our Covenant, a M. Hump. Hardwick, Sermon. before the Commons June 26. 1644. p.
43. London, printed for C. Meredith. 1645.
thing pleasing to God and profitable to the Kingdoms, by which there is, and
through Gods blessing may be the most famous Blow given to the Whore of
Babylon, and her Bastard Imps that ever yet was: Now to have this stick amongst
us, or laid aside, whilst Malignants and Sectaries live in our Bosom,
blessing, and in secret applauding themselves, that they have neither taken
this, nor any of your former protestations. This is our case and I appeal to
wiser Judgments, whether this may not be the way to Lessen the Honor and
Authority of the High Court of Parliament. Consider I beseech you ( Worthy Mr.
Arth. Salwey before the Commons, Octo. 25. 1643 p. 19. Land. Pr. for C.
Meredith 1644.
Christians) that the Vows of God are upon you, you have abjured Neutrality in
your late solemn Covenant, far be it from any of you to glory in a lukewarm
indifferency, as if it were a piece of singular Policy: you have with your
Tongues renounced this Neutrality as detestable. Follow the Lord in promoting a
National Reformation, you have an admirable Pattern; the zealous Prophet
Elijah: I wish from my Soul that a double portion of his Spirit, may be given
unto you, that you may act in his Power and Spirit* (...) Elijah opposed
Idolatry and Oppression, so do ye: down with Baals Altars, down with Baals
Archbishops, Bishops, Dedus, Chapters, etc.
Priests; do not (I beseech you) consent unto a Toleration of Baals Worship in
this Kingdom upon any Politic consideration whatsoever -- Give me leave to be
your Humble Remembrancer, the mouths of your Adversaries are opened against
you; the hearts of your true Friends are grieved, that so Honest Royalists.
many Delinquents are in Prison, and yet but very few of them brought to their
trial. Ye cannot preach, nor pray them Errors and Heresies.
down directly, Mr. Willi. Reyner before the Commons, Aug. 28. 1644. p. 12.
and immediately -- well, that which the Word cannot do, the Sword shall; that
which the Water cannot wash out, the Fire will burn out; unto this particular
the Apostle apply's this very Haggai 26, 7. Lo^d. printed for Sam. Enderby 1644.
Text in part, namely concerning the shaking of the Heavens, etc. an Earthquake
(as we have heard) was appointed to shake down the Ceremonial Ordinances; Now
if this were necessary for the abolition of that Divine Worship, which had
sometimes been by Gods own holy Institution, how much more shall that which
has been of Humane Invention (yea the very fumes and fogs of the bottomless
Pit) to Gods infinite displeasure and dishonor, be (...)bled down with
Violence, and Vengeance to Hell, form whence it came. There is a word of
Exhortation behind, and I beseech Mr. Tho. Cases Sermon before the Commons, May
26. 1647. p. 33. London print. for Luke Fawn at the Parrot in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.
you suffer it. First, to you Honorable and noble Patriots, who are called to
be Reformers and Healers of a poor broken Kingdom. Does not indeed the
punishing and suppressing of spiritual Whordoms against God, Idolatry, Heresy,
Blasphemy, and the rest: does it not belong unto you, as well as the punishing
bodily Whordoms, Theft, Murder, etc.? does it indeed belong to you only to look
to the Civil peace, and to let Religion, and Truth, and the Worship of God
stand or fall to their own Master? fight God, fight Devil, fight Christ, fight
Antichrist; catch that catch can; you have nothing to do but to stand by and
look on* say so then; speak out, publish it in your Declarations to the World,
and let the People of England know, that it is the right and liberty, to which
the Subjects of England are born, that every man hold what he please, and
publish, and preach what he holds: that it is the Birth right (as some would
have it) of the freeborn people of England, Every man to worship God according
to his own Conscience; and to be of what Religion his own Conscience shall
dictate: do so, and see (Fathers and Brethren) how long your Civil peace will
secure you when Religion is destroyed; how long it will be ere your Civil peace
be turned into Civil War! for no doubt if this once be granted them, but they
may in good time come to know also (there be them that are instructing them,
even in these principles too) that it is their birthright to be freed from the
Power of Parliaments, and from the power of Kings; And to take up Arms against
both, when they shall not vote and act according to their humors. Liberty of
Conscience (falsely so called) may in good time, improve it self into liberty of
Estates, and liberty of Houses, and liberty of Wives, and in a word liberty of
perdition of Souls and Bodies. Right Honorable and worthy Gentlemen: I cannot
stand to dispute* This only would I know of you; Are Idolaters, and Heretics,
and Blasphemers, and Seducers, are they evil doers? if so, then look to your
charge. Romans 13. 3. 4. Rulers must be a Terror to evil Doers, unless ye mean to
bear the Sword in vain* And if you will, God will not, and if God take the
Sword into his own hand once, (as he seems to be a doing of it) he will smite
to purpose; he will execute Vengeance thoroughly: both upon the evil doers, and
upon you that have not been a Terror to them. Oh therefore up and being doing,
that ye may deliver the Kingdom out of the hand of the Lord; for it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. O let not your patience
(I hope it is no more all this while) be interpreted a Connivence, and your
Connivence be taken for a Toleration, it may be the Kingdoms ruin, but it will
be your sin. Sermon. before the Com. Feb. 19. 1645. p. 25.
Fathers and Brethren, how will ye call this keeping of Covenant with God? Had
we a Parliament of Apostate Julians, of whom it is reported, that at what time
he opened the Temples of the Heathenish Gods, he set open the Christian
Churches; called home all the Christians whom he had banished, both Orthodox
and Heretic, and gave them (as we call it) Liberty of Conscience; but as
Austin more truly phraseth it, Aug. Ep. 166. vid Ammian. Marcel. lib. ^2. p.
208. 209 Edit. Hen Valesii. Defense of the Prop. Calls this of Julian a brave
and Politic thing. p. 98.
Libertatem perditionis, Liberty to destroy themselves; for that was his Policy
and end, namely by libert^ of all Religion, to Eo modo putans Christianum nomen
posse perire de terris, etc.
destroy the True, and the Professo^^ therefore too, Or had we a Parliament of
careless Gallio^s, we should not wonder: but for a Parliament of Christians,
Protestants, Professors, the Choicest, the most active that could be called out
of a Christian Sat, the like not under Heaven; that these things should
^owdone, and you ^old your peace, and be able to keep your places* ^and not to
put on Righteousness as a Breast Plate, and the Garments of Vengeance for your
Clothing, as it is said of God; this makes the Churches abroad to wonder what
Englands Parliament is a doing; and all at home that love the Lord Jesus Christ
more than their own Interest and Notions, to be filled with unspeakable
trembling and astonishment, to wit, what God means to do with this poor
bleeding Church, and State. If you mean that England shall be turned into a
Wilderness, Sermon. before the Commons, Aug 22. 1645 p. 29.
and be over run with Atheism, and Heresy, and Prophainness, and Blasphemy,
you may hold your hands, and you need not do it long. The Errors and
Innovations under which we so Sermon before the Commons, Feb. 19. 1645. p. 25.
much groaned of latter years, were but tolerabiles ineptiae, tolerable
trifles, Childrens play, compared with these damnable Doctrines, Doctrines of
Devils, as the Apostle calls them: Polygamy, Arbitrary Divorce, Mortality of
the Soul; No Ministry, no Churches, no Ordinances, no Scripture; yea, the very
Divinity of Christ and the Holy Ghost questioned by some, denied by others; And
the very Foundation of all these laid in such a Schism of boundless Liberty of
Conscience, viz. Believe what you will, and Preach what you believe, and such
lawless separation of Churches: and all these not not only whispered in
Corners, but Preached on the Housetop, yea, published in Print before your faces
with so much virulency and impudence, that I verily believe no Age since the
Apostles time could ever parallel. Sermon before the Commons, Man. 26. 1649. p.
25.
There be a Generation of men in the Land that stand up for all kind of false
Worship; that every man may Worship God after his own Conscience; or if they
will not own it in words at length, they will have it in figures: And if they
may not, are ready, not only to cry, but to act Persecution Mr. John L^gh^f^ot
Sermon. before the Commons, Aug. 26. 1645. ^ p. 30. London, printed for Andr.
Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's Church yard. 1645.
and that to purpose: for while they cry Persecution gladiooris, they are ready
to act Persecution ore gladii, I pray God it may never be Englished. There is a
great talk of, and pleading for Liberty of Conscience, for men do in matters of
Religion, as Israel did in the book of Judges, whatsoever seems good in their
own eyes; and how that proved there, there are sad stories that relate: I shall
not go about to determine the question, whether the Conscience may be bound or
not, though for mine own satisfaction, I am resolved it may, and hold it a
truer point in Divinity that Errans conscientia liganda, than ligat, but
certainly the Devil in the Conscience may be, nay he must be bound, or else you
act not according to (a) Mr. Thomas Watson before the Commons, Dec. 27. 1649.
p. 17. London printed for Ra. Smith at the B^b^e in Cornhil. 1649.
that vigor that Christ has put into your hands; nor according to that
exactness that Christ requires at your hands: it is true indeed which is so
much talked of, that Christ alone must reign in the Conscience, but it is as
true also, that he does so by the Power that he has put into the hands of the
Magistrate, as well as by his Word and Spirit. If Conscience be a sufficient
plea, the Papist will come in for a Child's part. Conscience must have a Rule,
it binds only virtute praecepti, by virtue of a Precept. If Conscience against
the Word. Deponenda est talis Conscientia. M Hughes Sermon before the Commons,
May 26. 1647. p. 34 London print for John Rothwell at the Sun and fountain in
S. Paul's Churchyard.
Get conscience better informed. I must say that the Toleration of all things
must be a destructive principle to the State or Church wherever it be
allowed. Experience has showed us no less in Kingdoms and Churches Called by
Gods name. These are only suggested which need a larger Treatise to state
fully. Ye Servants of Christ, take heed of yielding to the pretenses of
Conscience, the Devil and not Christ has his Throne there; And no stronger
hold for him than Conscience, if he once take it Christ will not suffer him to
shelter there; therefore ye may not, so much as in you lies. Do not other
States, as some of the United Provinces Doubt.
tolerate all these Heresies, and protect them, and yet they prosper? who more?
I desire not to deal with other Sol.
States, unless I might do them good, I am now only called to our own, yet
others being made exemplary, a word in soberness and truth may not offend. I
suggest only these thoughts. 1. Can any man say, that prosperity is a sign
peculiar unto Truth? then let Rome come in and speak more than any for outward
prosperity. 2. Are not spiritual wickednesses as odious to God as carnal; and
are not these Heresies such, which God condemns as works of the flesh
inconsistent with the Kingdom of Christ? 3. Has God made an end yet of
visiting Nations for the sins of them? When God has done judging, were a
better time to urge this Example than now. I pray God the evil day may not
over-take those States; the good Lord cause the Cup of trembling to pass by
them and purge their iniquities peacably. But I am pressed in Spirit to say,
God has not spared such State-Polities, which have sought their own rise by
the ruin of God and his Truth. Witness Jeroboam the Son of Nebat who made
Israel to sin. And he bids sin that does not hinder it when he can -- Gods
Truth, my beloved, and not man example must be the Rule -- if Heresies yet must
be, let us mourn for what we cannot help; it is a miserable necessity when not
allowed; it will be rejoicing in iniquity, either for State or Church wilfully
to tolerate. Though God has given us glorious Victories over our Mr. Ed.
Calamy, Sermon. before the Lord May^r, Jan. 14. 1645. p. 5.
enemies, yet the Churches of Christ lie desolate; Church-Reformation is
obstructed, Church Discipline un^^^^ed, Church-Divisions increased. The famous
City of London is become an Amsterdam, Separation from our Churches is
countenanced, Toleration is cried up, Authority asleep. -- It would seem a
wonder if I should reckon how many separated Congregations, or rather
Segregations, Sermon. before the Lords, Dec. 25. 1644. p. 13.
there are in the City: What Churches against Churches, etc. The Lord Knows
that I mention these things with a sad heart. Divisions whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Political in Kingdoms, Cities, and Families, are infallible
causes of Ruin to Kingdoms, Cities and Vt supra. p. 4.
Families. Hereby the hearts of People are mightily distracted, many are
hindered from Conversion, and even the Godly p. 14.
themselves have lost much of the power of Godliness in their lives. I say the
hearts of People mightily disturbed, while one Minister preaches one thing as
a Truth of the Gospel, and another Minister preaches the quite contrary with
as much Confidence as the former. If Divisions be so destructi^^ to Kingdoms,
Cities and Families? this reproves those that are the Authors and Fomenters of
these Divisions that ^re now amongst us. These are the in^endiaries of England.
If he that sets one house on fire deserves hanging, much more they that set a
whole Kingdom on fire. If he that murders one man must be put to death, much
more he that murders three Kingdoms: Mark them, (says the Apostle) Romans 16. 17
That cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them, as the greatest Enemies of England. These are like the
S^l^mander that cannot live but in the fire of contention. (...) are of a
Jesuitical spirit. And no doubt the heads and hands of the Jesuits are in all
our Divisions. Take heed of the Land destroying opinion of those that plead for
an illimited Toleration of all Religions, even of Turkisme, Judaisme, etc. The
Lord keep us from being poisoned with such an Errour^ * This Text rises up
against Mat. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to
Desolation.
it. For it will divide a Kingdom against it self. It will render it into a
Thousand pieces. It is a Doctrine directly contrary to your late Oath and
Covenant. A Doctrine that overthrows al Church Government, brings in
Confusion, and opens a wide door unto all Irreligion and Atheism: For at the
same door that all false Religions come in, the true Religion will quickly get
out; and if it be as good for a man to live where nothing is lawful, as where
all things are lawful, surely it is every way as uncomfortable to live where
there are all Religions, as where there is no Religion at all. It is your Duty
(Right Honorable) whom God has betrusted with great power, to suppress these
Divisions and Differences in Religion by your Civil Authority, as far as your
are able, lest you be accessory unto them. For God has made you Custodes
utriusque Tabulae, Keepers not of the second Table only (as some fondly
imagine) but of the first Table also; and not only Keepers, but vindices
utriusque Tabulae, Punishers also of those that transgress against either of
them; for you are the Ministers of God for good, and Revengers to execute Wrath
upon him that does Evil, Romans 13. 4. and God has deputed you for the
punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1 Pet. 2.
19. There be some that would blot out half your Commission, and restrain this
good and evil, to civil good, and to evils only against men; But this is
against that general Rule, Non est distinguendum, ubi Lex non distinguit. Where
the Law does not distinguish, there must not we distinguish. Tell me I bes^^ch
you, shall it be lawful for Magistrates to punish those that destroy men's
bodies, but not those that destroy men's Souls? Shall they be blamed for
suffering men to draw people away from obedience to the Laws of the Land, and
to themselves, and not also for suffering men to draw away people from the
Truth of the Gospel, and from the ways of God, such as Hymenaeus and Philetus,
who overthrew the Faith of some, and their Words eat as a Canker? Shall
Christian-Magistrates take up the Maxim of Tiberius, Deorum injurias Diis
curae esse? Let God himself take care to vindicate himself from injuries
committed against God? as for me, I will (just like Gallio) take care of none
of these things. Can Christian Ears endure such Language? Does not God
prophecy, Isaiah 49. 23. That in the New Testament, Kings shall be our Nursing
Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers? And how can a Christian Magistrate
discharge that duty a right if he has not power from God, to punish those that
would poison the Souls of his weak Children with Heresies and Soul destroying
Opinions. Will you allow the Magistrate to Tyrannize over men's Object.
Consciences? By no means. But I believe it is the duty of Magistrates to keep
men from infecting their Subjects Answ.
with Soul-destroying Errors. If thou have an Heretical Opinion, have it ^o
thy self, and the Magistrate will not; nay, cannot meddle with thy Private
Conscience. But if thou labourest to infect others with thy Grace-destroying
Opinions, I doubt not but the Magistrate is bound to keep thee from spreading
thy Infection, to the undoing of the Souls of his Subjects; if he may lawfully
shut up a man that has the Plague upon his body that he may not infect others,
why not the man t^^ has the Plague of Heresy upon his Soul, that so he may
not destroy the Souls of Thousands? Shall a Master in a Family have power to
put away a Servant that is tainted with a gross opinion, and yet not be called
a Tyrant over that Servants Conscience? and shall not the chief Magistrate of a
Kingdom have power to put out of his Kingdom (at least to shut up from doing
hurt) one that is his Subject and polluted with blasphemous Heretical
Idolatrical Opinions? Is not the Kingdom the Magistrates House and Family?
This is a certain Rule, That all the sins of the Kingdom Sermon before the Com.
Oct. 22. 1644. p. 26.
which are committed by your connivence or allowance, are the Parliament sins,
and they call for a Parliament Repentance. And therefore I beseech you search
and try your hearts, and consider how far you are accessory to the sins of the
Kingdom, that so you may be wrought up, not only to a personal, but a
Parliament Humiliation. And if it does appear, that you have, taken more care
in settling your own Liberties, than in settling of Religion; if you have taken
more care to build your own Houses than Gods House, this is is a crying Sin;
and this makes you accessory to a Thousand sins that are committed in the
Kingdom. Again, if you do not labor according to your duty, and according to
your power, to suppress the Errors and Heresies, that are spread in the
Kingdom; all these Errors are your Errors, and these Heresies are your
Heresies, and they are your Sins, and God calls for a Parlimentary Repentance
from you for them this day; You are the Anabaptists, and you are the
Antinomians; and it is you that hold, That all Religions are to be tolerated,
etc. And these are your Errors if they spread by your Connivence. For, the
sins of the Sons of old Ely are imputed to old Ely himself. And when the People
Mr. Rich. Baxters Holy Commonwealth. Addition to Pref. Prop. 6. Land. Pr. for
Tho. Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in S. Paul's Church yard. 1659.
of Israel had prophained the Sabbath, Nehemiah contended with the Nobles of
Judah for suffering them, and tells them, that it was they that did profane
it; because they suffered the People to profane it, Neh. 13. 17. It was none
of the Old Cause that the People should have Liberty, and the Magistrate should
have no Power in all matters of Gods Worship, Faith and Conscience. And as it
is not the Old Cause, so it is not a Good Cause. For first, it contradicts
the express Revelation of the will of God, in the holy Scriptures. Moses had to
do in matters of Religion as a Magistrate; and so the ruling Elders of Israel
that assisted him; And so h^d the Kings of Israel and Jud(...) as is well
known, insomuch that in Asa^s days, they Covenanted to put him to Death that
would not seek the Lord God of Israel. 2. It tends to the ruin of the
Commonwealth: and therefore it is no good Cause. How God was provoked by
Aarons Calfe, and by his Sons, that offered strange fire which the Lord
commanded not, (...). 10. and what was the effect? and what benefit the Calves
at Dan and Bethel brought to Israel and Jeroboam's house, and the High places,
and others Errors about worship; brought to the Princes and People of Judah? we
need not particularly recite. Law and Providence are quite changed, if
Toleration of false Worship, and other abuses of Religion, tend not to the
ruin of the Commonwealth. If Magistrates must give Liberty for all to
propagate a false Religion, then so must Parents and Masters also: (for their
Coercive power is rather less than the Magistrates than more; and they are no
more Lords of Faith or Conscience;) But if all Parents and Masters should give
such a Liberty, it would be a crime so horrid in the nature and effects, as I
am loath to name with its proper Titles. A pari: it tends to the Destruction
of an Army, to give liberty to all men to do their worst, to draw them to
Mutinies and Rebellion; it tends to the ruin of Families that all have liberty
to do their worst, to tempt the Sons to Thest and Drunkenness, and the Wife and
Daughter to Whordome: it tends to the Destruction of the Commonwealth, if
there be liberty for all to persuade the People to Sedition and Rebellion: And
therefore it must tend to the Destruction of the Church, and man's souls, and
consequently of the Commonwealth in the chief respects* if all have leave to do
their worst to preach up fidelity, Mahometanism, Popery, or any false Doctrine
or Worship, against the great and necessary Truths. I leave it therefore to the
judgment of all men that are not fast asleep in their security, and utterly
unacquainted with the advantages of the Papists, whether this design of
engaging the Magistrate by a fundamental constitution, not to meddle with
matters of faith and Worship, but leave them all to Christ alone, be not the
present setting up of Popery in England and the delivering all the fruit of our
labors, Prayers and Victories into the Papists hands. Obj. But Liberty for
Popery and Prelacy is still excepted. Answ. by whom? -- But if there had been
an exception against Popery put in, it would have been to little purpose, as
long as a general Rule is laid down that condemned that exception. For if it be
the standing Rule, that matters of Religion and Faith, and all matters of
Worship are out of the Magistrates power: to say then, that Popery shall be
excepted from Liberty, is to say the Magistrate shall intrude into the proper
Office of Christ to restrain the Papists. Mr. Tho: Horton Ser: before the House
of Peers. Dec. 30. 1646. Loud. printed by F. Neile for Sam: Gellibrand at the
Brazen Serpent in Paul's Ch: yard. 1646. p. 35.
Well, seeing these things are so; That sin will find out us: let this be the
use we make of it, to be careful to find out it; and to begin with that first,
This is that which lies upon us all; But especially (to speak a word in Season)
upon those which have the Government of Kingdoms and Commonwealths committed
unto them, These had need to find out sin more especially, for the safety and
welfare of that State; which P. 36.
they have the ordering and managing of. First, their own Personal Sins.
Secondly they are to find out also the sins of the P. 37, and 38.
Kingdom. I have already administered some help in this performance, by the
hint of those Sins before mentioned; all which I humbly desire may be taken
into serious Consideration, and especially (which grows so much upon us and
which threatens so much evil to us) the Sin of Libertinisme and Toleration,
which is the ringleader of all the rest, and involves all others with it. O
that this should ever be once mentioned amongst us here in England, who have
enjoyed so much of the Gospel of Truth as we have done; derived to us from our
Godly forefathers, sealed to us by the blood of the Martyrs, prosecuted with
so many blessings, and victories, and gracious successes both of former and
latter times to the admiration both of Enemies and Friends; is this the fruit
and issue of all that God has done for us? and do all overtures of Reformation
come to this? Surely God cannot but take it very ill from us, that we should
but incline and lean hereunto; As he said to David of his building of the
Temple; Thou did well that it was in thine heart, and accordingly was well
pleased with him. So will he say to us, of our contrary carriage; That it is
ill that it is in our heart; if so be, it be come so far, as I hope it is not.
What? when we have so much appeared against Popery^ and Superstition, shall we
now begin to think of Indifferency and Toleration? Certainly it is but a sorry
exchange of a bad Religion for none. Although indeed it will be no exchange,
but rather a further Confirmation: Toleration of all other Errors does but
strengthen Popery, amongst the rest; which will at least think so well of it
self, as to come in for a Child's part. There is a Generation who look for much
at your Mr. Lazar. Seaman Ser: before the Comm: Sep. 25. 1644. Land. printed by
E. G. for J. Rothwell at the, Sun in Paul's Ch: yard. 1^^4. p. ^^
hand, and yet ask nothing, I mean by way of humble Petition. When they find
you, or themselves in such a posture, as that they cannot be denied, it may be
you may hear of them. Besides the many loose, profane, and scandalous
Ministers, there are a new sort risen amongst us, who have thrust themselves
into the Lords Vineyard. It Is no less than Persecution (so they commonly give
out) to desire that their suspicious Opinions may be examined according to the
word of God, and they commanded to forbear the publishing and spreading of them
for the present. There be many dangerous Books abroad, dangerous at least, I Will
say no more. Liberty of Conscience. The bloody Tenent. The compassionate
Samaritan. John Baptist.
Consider also Solomon's.
his failings and beware of them. 1. p. 44.
he had many Wives, even seven hundred Wives, Princesses, and three hundred
Concubines: 1 Kings 11. 3.
let not us have as many Religions. There Is some Analogy between the one and
the other. 2. There was in his days first a Connivance at Idolatry, then open
Toleration, and withal Apostasy, these Wives turned away his heart after other
Gods; v. 4. he built an high place for Chemosh the Abomination of Moab, and for
Molech the Abomination of the Children of Amm^n, and likewise did he for all
his strange wives, v. 7, 8* Observe the Gradation, first Connivence, then open
Toleration, here withal Apostasy. No Reformation of Religion now: now nothing
w^^ Mr. Matth^^ Newcomen Ser* before the Parliament Sept. 12. 1644. Land
printed for Ch: Meredith, 1644. P(...)
satisfy some, but a Toleration of all Religion, and all Opinions; Church.
Government, Discipline is to some a fiction, to others Tyranny, and
Persecution, An Brethren, this is a Provocation and will be a Provocation, for
this God may turn us into the Wilderness again. We are grown beyond
Arminianisme, Brownisme, Anabaptis* we are come (I mean many among us) to
downright Libertinism. There are two Opinions, which if encouraged (and they
are encouraged if connived at) will open a door to Turcisme, P. 36.
Judaisme, Atheism, Polytheisme, any monster of Opinion. The one is, That
every man is to be left to the Liberty of his own Religion, an opinion
contended for by the bloody Tenets, John Baptist, Liberty of Conscience, An
opinion most pernicious and dest^uctive, as to the souls of men, so to the
Common* weal of the Kingdom. Libertas illa quidlibet credendi (says Gerard)
nihil aliud quam Libertas errandi, etc. That L^berty of believing what men will
(or of holding what faith they please) is no other than a liberty of erring,
and of erring in a matter that concerns the eternal Salvation of the Soul,
wherein to err, cannot but be most dangerous and destructive -- Diversity of
Religion dis-joynts and distracts the minds of men, and is the Seminary of
perpetual hatreds, jealousies, seditions, wars, if any thing in the world be;
and in a little time, either a Schism in the State begets a Schism in the
Church, or a Schism in the Church begets a Schism in the State. That is,
either Religion in the Church is prejudiced by Civil Contentions, or Church
controversies and disputes about Opinions break out into Civil Wars. Men will
at last take up Swords and Spears, instead of Pens: and defend by Arms what
they cannot do by arguments. Once for all, it is the Preservation and
Reformation of Religion* which you have Covenanted to endeavor, and not a
Liberty of Opinion; that will consist with neither. It is the Extirpation of
Heresy and Schism that you have Covenanted: which if to be connived at, why
does the Apostle reprove the Corinthians for their Schism, so much? and why
does our Lord Jesus commend the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, for trying
those which said they were Apostles, and were not? And why is the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira reproved for suffering that woman Jezabel, who called her
self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce: if once we come to this, that any man
be suffered to teach what he pleases, to seduce whom he list, to be of what
faith, or Religion seems good in his own eyes, farewell Covenant, farewell
Reformed Religion, farewell the Peace and Glory of England, if that day once
come. But you (Right Honorable) I hope better things of you though I thus
speak. I hope while you live and sit in Parliament, this shall never be. It is
not usual, nay* it is not possible that they which love God secretly, should
desire Sermon.: at Paul's Feb. 8. 1646. Land. printed for Ch: Meredith 1646 p. 14.
to cherish differing Religions; for it is most certain he that admits contrary
Religions, believes neither of them. But then the question will be, Seeing
there will be difference of judgment and Opinion, while we are upon earth,
then how, or how far is this difference of judgment P. 14.
to be permitted? how or wherein may Christians differ from one another in
judgment, and yet ought to be tolerated and born with? This is my Brethren a
very grave and difficult Question; Ans.
and to me, considering how many places there are wherein the holy Ghost calls
upon us to endeavor to be of one mind, of the same mind, and of the same
judgment; it is easier to tell you, wherein we may not differ in judgment, and
wherein differences in judgment may not be tolerated, than to tell you wherein
they may. First therefore, I say, that as an absolute unity in judgment, that
we should all be of the same mind in all things, is scarce to be attained in
this life, though it be to be endeavored; so an Universal and absolute Liberty
of judgment, for every man to differ when he pleases, and in what he
pleases, to be of what Opinion and faith he will, is not to be endeavored if
it might be attained, nor is it to be tolerated or permitted. I know no
warrant, no pretense of warrant for it, in all the Book of God: Scripture no
where says, Let every man be of what opinion, and of what faith he pleases,
let every man be left to his own judgment. Particularly, Liberty of Opinion or
judgment is not to be granted, or indulged, in such things as are injurious to
God, and destructive to the souls of men; nor wherein the Difference of
judgment and opinion will necessarily and unavoidably, ex natura rei, produce
a rent and Schism in the Church of Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you
Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no Divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Romans 10. 17. I
beseech you Brethren mark them that cause Divisions and Offenses among you,
contrary to the Doctrine that you have received. And -- what? Tolerate them?
no, avoid them. Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut off that trouble you.
Nothing can be clearer than these Scriptures are, against the Toleration of all
Doctrines, and particularly of those that trouble, rend, divide the Church. But
(to speak a little to the Positive) if there be a Latitude, and a Liberty of
judgment left, it is first in such things as are not clearly and positively
laid down in Scripture, and therefore are not of the Fundamentals, and
essentials of Faith and Worship; for there is for these, clear and undoubted
Light in Scripture. Secondly, it is in things that are of private and single
practice, and no^ of open converse, or Church fellowship and Communion. And yet
even in these thing; this Liberty is not to be assumed, at least, not to be
practiced without much tenderness and circumspection* First, care must be had
of keeping those Opinions wherein we differ from others, private to our selves,
not troubling or perplexing the Consciences of others with them. This is the
injunction: Romans 14. 22. Have thou Faith? have it to thy self before God. The
Faith there spoken of, is a particular persuasion, touching the free use of all
creatures, and the Liberty of all days. And this Faith, this persuasion was
according to the truth (as is clear by the Apostles Argumentation in that
chapter) yet says the Apostle, Have thou Faith? have it to thy self before
God: do not say* I am fully persuaded of my liberty, and therefore ^^ought to
profess it, and hold it out in my pr^cti^^ whatever become of others; it is the
truth of God, and I must hold it forth: No says the Apostle, have it to thy
self. And if a man who has a private opinion in re media, must keep it to
himself, though it be a truth, much more must they whose opinions are false and
erroneous. Certainly there is scarce any difference of judgment so small, and
in it self inconsiderable, but the divulging and propagating of it, may prove
very dangerous and pernicious, and in the event intolerable. Suppose a man
should be of this Opinion, that it is unlawful to eat things strangled, or
blood: if such a man keep his Opinion to himself, and make it a rule only to
his own practice: let him enjoy it till he can be otherwise informed, and
persuaded in his Conscience. But if he will now go publish this Opinion, and
entangle the Consciences of others; and seek to draw disciples after him, and
make a party, and cause division and dissension amongst the People of God. This
is not to be tolerated: Private persons of a differing judgment, if they live
quietly, frequent the public Assemblies of Worship, and are nor discerned to
disturb the peace either of State or Church, by any secret underminings, are to
be tolerated, in hope of their conversion, and for public peace sake. But if
these men shall begin to spread their errors in public, to inveigle and draw
others to them, to beguile the simple, and so to trouble the public peace,
they are to be restrained. Had all that profess the Gospel in England, made
Conscience to be of the same mind, and the same judgment with their Brethren,
and the rest of the Churches of Christ, as far as possibly; and where they
cannot, where there is a necessity of differing, had they made Conscience to
keep their differences from appearing in Public, to have their private
opinions and faith to themselves, and not entangle the weak with their
doubtful Disputations; forbearing to judge or despise those that are not of
their opinion, loving them still as Brethren, not censuring them as profane,
Antichristian, fighters against God, men that will wilfully shut their eyes
against the Light; had these things (I say) been attented to, on all hands, our
breaches had never been so great as now they are, non should the lovers of
truth and Peace have had so much cause to lament them, But where is the fault
you will say? True it is there P. 40.
are divisions, sad divisions, danger threating divisions aamong us, but where
is the fault? I know there are many that lay all the fault upon those whom they
call ^^esbyterians, and say it is their rigor, and their pride and ambition,
their Spirit of Domination that is the cause of all these divisions; Thus say
the Antinomians; and thus the Separatists, and thus the Anabaptists, and thus
the others say. Now the Lord judge between us and them, and let his people that
hear judge this day. Who are they that divide in judgment from all the
Reformed Churches of Christ in the world, that have Opinions and judgments
differing from the Opinions and judgments of all the Reformed Churches? we or
the Anabaptists? we or the Separatists? we or the --? Possibly they will all
say, they are of the same Opinion with the Reformed Churches in fundamentalls
as well as we: and their differences, are but in minutioribus. Now supposing
this to be true (as it may be in some of them why then d^ they tra^^gresse the
Apostles (...) why do they not if that it be in matters of lesse^ ^^^ment
wherein they differ from us, why do not they keep their opinions private, and
have their faith unto themselves before God? why do they upon so small
differences (^f the differences be so small) withdraw from Communion with us
and the rest of the Churches, and gather themselves into distinct and separate
Churches, -- their holding one head and one faith, does not excuse them from
being guilty of breach of Unity and down ^ight Schism, so long as the^ hold
not one body, one baptism (...) Beza ann t. in 1 Cor. 1. 10.
(...) etc. Schism or division (faith he) is this w^e^ men are so addicted to
some men, or to some outward rites, that though they do agree in the chief
points of Religion; yet they are (...) their minds, and engage themselves into
parties and factions: Now who are they, that though they profess to agree with
us in Doctrine have yet made a secession, withdrawn themselves gathered
Churches, engaged Parties? Consider and give sentence. Who are they that have
most broken the band of Love? There is great fear will at the Presbeterians
will do if once they get power into their hands; but in the mean time what do
others? who are they that brand their Brethren with the Title of, Proud
Time-servers, Prelaticall, Tyrannical, Antichristian? And what is this less
than Persecution. Who are they that have been farthest from condescending to
their Brethren for peace and union sake? were it fit, I could say something of
this, yea much, I could tell you much has been yielded and much more would be
yielded, yea almost any thing, but that one thing that would lay a foundation
of perpetual Division and disunion on families. Church, Kingdom? Who are they
that profess an utter impossibility of reconciliation or union, and plead for
nothing but Toleration, Toleration, and some for Toleration in the ^omost
Latitude, to Papists* (...) Turks, the very artifide whereby the Arminians ^^
Holland sought to gain a party, and strength unto themselves? Resolve these
Questions, and they will resolve you who are most guilty of these Divisions. By
a Declaration set forth above Thirty years ago, M. Richard. Vines Ser. before
the Com: March 10. 1646. Land. print. for Abel Roper. 1647 p. 1.
King James (of famous memory was pleased to let the World know, not only how
ill he resented, and how much he detested the Vorstian, and Arminian Doctrines,
then newly born and in their swadling-cloaths; but also how sollicitously he
interposed with the States General of the United Provinces against their
admittance of V^rstius into the place of Divinity Professor of Leiden, or into
their Country* And that he might decline the envy of being in aliena Republica
curiosus, he beats himself upon that common rule paries cunt proximus ardet,
when a neighbors house is on fire, it concerns all in the Neighborhood to
look about them, this vigilance condemns our (I know not what to call it, I
wish no worse might be said than) insensibleness and security. For what were
those sparks at that time smoking in a remote corner, in comparison of that
fire which now flames forth at a very corner of our house, blown up by that
(...), or liberty of all Religions, which may be justly called, the Golden Calf
of these times, whereunto many are not unwilling to contribute their strength
and Policy, and whose Birthday, they would not fear to call festum Je(...), a^
acceptable day unto the (...) not the (...)o^s which are ^ue amongst ^^, either
by infecting persons of place and Quality, grown into that boldness? or by
carrying away, Bar^abas also crept into that credit? or by spreading far and
wide, risen to that strength? that they do fa^^, if not seem able to put into
(...)ger of ^ow^ing, our common faith, public Worship, authorized Ministry,
long and much expected, and promised Reformation. This to the common Enemy, is
the Cape of good hope; the sound part are afraid, lest the Truth should come to
beg for poor quarter, and be led Captive, following the Chario^ of triumph(...)
Liberty* some think that Episcopacy^ in his Pont^ficalibus, may by this means
be retrived, and recalled from exile, to which it was sentenced by the
Covenant, many that are as distant in their Opinions as the two Pol^^, yet
moving upon one axeltree, or tied together by the (...)s of common Interest,
doubt not but by laying their stocks together, they shall be able to bid fair
for a Toleration. And that we might no^ be lest alone to wonder at our selves,
our sympathyzing Brethren abroad do wonder also That we should be made the
common Sewreto receive the Garbage of other Churches; and that their stinking
snuffs should be allowed Candlesticks here in England. In this sad posture of
things, all men's eyes have been upon the Parliament, and every one says, Is
there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? why then is not the
health of the Daughter of my People recovered? Mr. Si^eon Ash Sermon: before the
Lords Feb. 26. 1644. Land. printed for E^^. Brewster, 1645. p. 32.
Endeavor vigorously to compound our Differences in Ecclesiastical
concernments. Alas, alas, my heart aches, because of our breaches. Let mine eyes
run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease, for the Virgin
Daughter of my People is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow,
Jer. 14. 17. What Factions, and Fractions, what Schisms and separations, what
Rents and Divisions are in this poor, distracted distressed Church of England?
how should either Kingdom or Church divided stand? God forbid, but tender
respect should be had to tender Consciences. But (Right Honorable) I beseech
you take heed, lest under that pretext, you think of Tolerating all Religions
amongst us. Such Liberty (I am afraid) would usher in Libertinisme, P. 62.
and hasten our desolation. It is commonly replied in Pulpits, in Presses, That
Mr. James Cranford Sermon. before the L. Mayor Feb. 1. 1645. Land. printed for
Char: Green. 1646. p. 11.
a Toleration of all consciences, even Antichristian, would be a sovereign
remedy to cure all dissentions, and an effectual means to compose the Wars of
Christendom: all the blood that has for so many years been shed, is charged
upon the restraint of this licentiousness ignorantly or maliciously termed
Persecution. I answer, it is besides my purpose to discuss this question of
Toleration, only for the present I enquire First; Would these men that so
hotly desend it grant that Toleration (if they had power in their hands) to
others which they desire for themselves? I doubt it. The Arrians did sometimes
seem as earnest enemies to Persecution as these men; yet when they had
Authority on their side, they raised Persecution against the Orthodox, more
terrible than the heathen Emperors against the Christians which the Churches
of the East most Binii Tom. 1. conc. p. 686.
grievously* complained of. Athanasius at large describes, and having spoken
much of their inhumane and more than b(...) (...) ^ruelty against all S(...)s,
all Ages* both living and dead conclude^* Epist. ad Solicar.
that he had said los^ than their in humanity was* because it exceeded all
expression. The Donatists did ordinarily plead for Toleration and seemed the
most in^eterate enemies to all d(...) ^^nce for Conscience s^^e* yet when under
^he Apo^^a^e J(...) they had g^t^en power, who can declare (says Austin) Con:
lit Petil: l. 2. c. 82.
what h^vock they made of the Orthodox? All Africa was filled with blood and
desolation; men were rent matrons Optat. cont. Parm. l. 2. 3.
dragged, infants slaughtered, women with child miscarried, none were secure in
their houses, the ways were not safe for travelers; the letters of them that
boasted to be the Captains of the Saints were terrible to all. Are our men led
by another Spirit? Sure I am, that one of them, that with most earnestness, or
impudence pleads for Toleration, was lately of another mind in the case of
Familists and A(...)ians in Ne^-England. Secondly, would such Toleration
conduce to the establishing P. 13.
of peace in the Common wealth? has it ever done it? Possible it is, that the
equality of Powers may persuade each Party for a season to suppress their
inward rancour; can Toleration take it away, so that it shall not break out
upon sensible advantages by the increase of strength? let the experience of
former Ages, and present times teach this. Error may Tolerate Error, savis
inter se conven(...)sis; but can darkness agree with light? or Wolves with
Sheep? Tertullian observes concerning Heretics of old* De praescrip. cont.
Haret. c. 41.
they agreed well enough one with another; for though they differed in private
opinions, yet they joined in one opposing of truth. You persecute (says Austin
of the Donatists) where you are able; where you persecute not, you are not able
to do it, restrained by the fear of Laws, or envy, or the multitude making
resistance. I have been long upon this point; but I will conclude it, with that
solemn Embassy, which the Orthodox Fathers, Assembled in Council at Sirmium,
sent to the Emperor Constantius: I have insisted the longer, that Athan. de
Syn. Arim and seleve.
it might appear to all, that the Toleration of Error is not a way to Peace,
as some men pretend, but to disorder and confusion: And yet I am not an enemy
to Peace, but a friend to Truth, and Holiness, without which, no Man shall see
God. Ministers ought now to be intent to the errors of the Aserious and
passionate Admonition to the Clergy; in the words of M. Tho: Edwards in his
Gangraen: part: 1. p. 84 Land. printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill
1646.
times, both in Doctrine and Practice, and observe what is the proper work of
the day, and Preach accordingly; taking heed o^ being guilty of sinful
silence, whilst Christ and his Truth suffers. We have too many wounds with
which we have been wounded, in the house of our friends: many Ministers have
and do undo us; some by their total silence; others by speaking too
favorably, of the Sects, and too much daubing; it is high time now to speak
out, when the Truth of God, the Faith once delivered to the Saints, more
precious than our lives, is almost lost, three Kingdoms almost ruined, and all
the reformed Churches in their Truth and Peace, hazarded, they that can now be
silent, well contented, and let the Wolves come freely and not bark, they
deserve to be accounted dumb dogs: Let therefore, all Godly Orthodox Ministers,
who would not have all run to ruin, stir up themselves and lift up their
voices like Trumpets stand no longer looking on, as idle spectators, or halting
between two; for he that is not now with God in his cause is against him, and
he that gathers no^ (...)eth -- And that Ministers in our times may be a
means to prevent and suppress the Errors, Heresies and Schisms, they must not
only often preach against them, but they should set themselves against all the
ways by which Errors are come in* and are farther coming in upon us, and
oppose them by preaching and writing; as Laymens Preaching, the Gathering of
Churches, and above all a Toleration, for that would be an open door, at which
all kind of Heresies would come in, and no man could keep them out: and
therefore if Ministers will witness for Truth and against Errors, they must set
themselves in a special manner against a Toleration, as the principal inlet to
all Heresy and Error; And if a Toleration be granted* all preaching will not
keep them out: for as it has been answered, the Patrons of Images (who plead
let them stand, but Preach against the Worshipping of them) that if they stand,
Preaching will not take away all the danger; it is not sufficient to keep the
People from all Idolatry; so say I in this case. If a Toleration be granted,
the Devil will be too hard for us, though we Preach never so much against them.
A Toleration will undo all. First bring in Sceptisme in Doctrine, and looseness
of Life, and afterward all Atheism. The Patrons of Error, because they cannot
at first plead for such and such Doctrines in terminis, and yet hold them, and
would have them propagated, therefore they plead for a Toleration, which once
being granted, they will come in then of course. O let the Ministers therefore
oppose Toleration, (as being that by which the Devil would at once lay a
foundation for his Kingdom to all Generations) witness against it in all
places, possess the Magistrate of the evil of it, yea, and the People too,
showing them how if a Toleration were granted, they should never have peace in
their Families more, or ever after have command of Wives Children, Servants:
but they and their Posterities after them are like to live in discontent, and
unquietness of mind all their days. -- I might show how the Pastors of the
Reformed Churches (namely those who were stars of the First Magnitude) p. 87.
were against the Toleration of Anabaptists, Libertines and other Sectaries in
their time, and what they did and writ against it; Calvin, Zuinglius, Peter
Martyr, Philip Melancthon, Zanchius, Beza, Knox, Bullinger, Musculus, p. 88.
-- As also now in England in Queen Elizabeth's days, learned Bishops and Godly
Ministers were against the suffering of many Religions in this Kingdom: as
Bishop Jewel Bishop Babington Bishop Bilson, Mr. Cartwright and Mr. Perkins,
who in his learned works on Revel: 2. 20. speaks thus. Every man is not to be
left to his own Conscience; to teach and hold what Doctrine he will, But all
such men or women as teach erroneous Doctrine by the Government of the Church
are to be restrained -- Did I say the Arch Bishops, Bishops, Deanes Doctors, p.
89.
Court-Chaplains, and Bishops-Chaplains, (for there were some of all these
sorts opposed) hazard the favor of Kings, Nobles, Great Courtiers the loss of
all their Preferments, Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Deaneries, great liveings
to wi^hstand a Toleration: And shall the Ministers of our times suffer a
Toleration of all Sects to come in upon us, in a time when the greatest
Reformation is pretended that ever was in this Kingdom, and a Parliament
sitting, and be either wholly silent or oppose fain^ly; be afraid of
displeasing some great man, or hazarding little estate and liberty? was the
Luke warm Angel whom God has cast out of his Church, for not being zealous
enough, yet so zealous as to haz^rd all against a Toleration of Popery? And
shall the Presbyterians O^thodox Godly Ministers be so cold as to let
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Antinomianisme, Libertinisme, Independency, come in
upon us, and keep in a whole skin? Certainly the Bishops and their Chaplains
shall rise up in judgment against the Ministry of this Generation, who appeared
against the mind of the King, Council, and so powerful a faction as was for
Popery, and the Toleration of it in those days, if they be silent or meally
mouthed, besides the shame and dishonor of it here, before the Churches
abroad, and good men at home, who will lay all the blame upon the Ministers,
and say, We may thank them for this, for dealing no more freely, nor faithfully
with the Kingdom, crying out an unworthy Assembly, an unworthy Ministry in City
and Country, to sit still, and suffer all these Errors and poisonous
Principles, in Books, Sermons, to come in upon us, and to pass unquestioned. O
for some Gabriel Powells, Downams, Abbots, etc. O for a Burges^, a Calamy, a
Cas^, a Baxter, an Edwards etc. to write Preach, etc.
to write, preach, remonstrate, protest against the Errors and ways of these
times. It Is want of courage and speaking out has undone us; and it is only
boldness and freedom in speaking, to declare particularly such books come
forth, such Sermons preached, such practices played, such persons preferred and
suffered, such partia^^ty used, etc. in reference to the Sectaries, that must
recover us; there is no way to put a stop to things, and save all from ruin,
but present courage and Heroic resolution, and lets speak out, and suffer no
longer a company of giddy cunning self-seeking Sectaries to betray the truth of
God, and to abuse and undo two Kingdoms -- Lets therefore fill all Presses,
cause all Pulpits to ring, and so possess Parliament, City, and the whole
Kingdom against the Sects, and of the evil of Schism and Toleration, that we
may no more hear of a Toleration, nor of Separated Churches being hateful names
in the Church of God. AMEN, AMEN. THus far, these Famous Divines, whose very
words I have transcribed, and that faithfully; never adding so much as one
syllable of my own, unless in the Margin, where I have sometimes taken a little
Liberty.

I do much hope (upon a serious perusal) you will confess these Testimonies
both pertinent and convincing; and therefore I might here take occasion to
consult my own ease, and your patience, but because (as I have found by sad
experience) prejudices are strong, and evil habits (which have been long in
contracting) are not suddenly removed, (as an effectual means (through Gods
blessing) of your farther conviction) I shall entreat your perusal of these
following Authorities.

A LETTER OF THE Presbyterian Ministers in the City OF LONDON Presented the
First of Jan. 1645. to the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES, Sitting at Westminster
by Authority of Parliament, AGAINST Toleration.

To our Reverend, Learned, and Religious Brethren, the Prolocutor, and the rest
of the Divines Assembled, and now sitting at Westminster, by Authority of
Parliament: These present.
Reverend and beloved Brethren,
WE are exceedingly apprehensive of the desirableness of our Churches Peace,
and of the pleasantness of Brethrens Unity, knowing that when Peace is set upon
its proper Basis, viz. Righteousness and truth, it is one of the best
Possessions, both delectable and profitable: like Aarons ointment, and the dew
of Hermon. It is true by reason of different lights, and differing sights among
Brethren there may be dissenting in Opinions; yet, What is the keeping
conventicles or private meetings but separating from our Churchcommunion.
why should there be any separating from Church Communion? The Churches Coat
may be of diverse colors, yet, why should there be any rent in it? Have we not
a Touchstone of Truth, the good word of God; and when all things are examined
by that word, then that which is best may be held fast; but first they must be
known, and then examined afterward. If our dissenting Brethren after so many
importunate entreaties would have been persuaded (either in zeal to the truth,
or in sincere love to the Churches peace, and unity among Brethren* or in
respect to their own reputation by fair and ingenious dealing, or Yet the
Ministers of this persuasion made as little conscience of their Subscriptions,
Promises, ^ea, Oaths of Canonical Obedience to their respective Diocesans.
in conscience to their promise made with the Ministers of London now five
years since, or any such like reason^ble consideration* at last to have given
us a full narrative of their Opinions* and Grounds of their Separation* we are
persuaded they would not have stood at such a distance from us as now they do:
But they chose rather to walk by their own private ligts than to unbosome
themselves to us their most affectionate Brethren; and to set themselves in an
untroden way of their own, rather than to wait what our Covenanted Reformation,
according to the word of God and Show us the example of one reformed Church
which allows her Ministers liberty not to use her established Rits and C^re-
examples of the best reformed Churches would bring forth: But the offense does
not ^n^ here* it is much that our Brethren should separate from the Church, but
that they would endeavor this is plainly our Brethrens design and endeavor
at this time.
^^ ^et a warrant to Authorize their Separation from it, and to have Liberty
(by drawing members out of it) to weaken and diminish it, till (so far as lies
in them) they have brought it to nothing; this we think to be plainly
unlawful; yet this we understand is their present design and endeavor.
Wherefore (Reverend Brethren) having had such large experience of your zeal
of Gods glory, your care of his afflicted Church, your earnest endeavors to
promote the complete Reformation of it, and of their ready concurrence with us
in the improvement of any means that might be found conducible to this end; we
are bold to hint unto you these our ensuing Reasons against the Toleration of
Independency in this Church.

1* The Desires and endeavors of Independents for a Toleration, are at this
time extremely unseasonable and preproperous: for,

I. The Reformation of Religion is not yet perfected and settled amongst us,
according to our Covenant. And why may not the Reformation be raised up at
last, to such purity, and perfection, that truly tender Consciences may receive
abundant satisfaction, for ought that yet appears*

2. It is not yet known, what the Government of the Independents is, neither
would they ever yet, vouchsafe to let the World know, what they hold in that
point, though some of their Party, have been too forward to challenge the
London Petitioners as led with blind Obedience, and pinning their souls upon
the Priests sleeve, for desiring an establishment of the Government of Christ,
before there was any Model of it extant.

3. We can hardly be persuaded, that the Independents themselves (after all the
stirs they have made amongst us) The Presbyterians (although often pressed
thereunto) will not declare wherewith they would be all concluded, how far they
mean to go, and where to stay in ^ their desires of Toleration, and
condescension.
are as yet fully resolved about their own way, wherewith they would be
concluded, seeing they publish not their model (though they are nimble enough
in publishing other things) and they profess Reserves, and new Lights, for
which they will (no doubt) expect the like Toleration, and so in infinitum, it
were more seasonable to move for Toleration, when once they are positively
determined how far they mean to go, and where they mean to stay.

II. Their desires and endeavors, are unseasonable, and unequal in diverse
regards.

1. Partly because no such Toleration, has hitherto been established, (so far
as we know) in any Christian State by the Civil Magistrate.

2. It Is notorious Presbytery would not in the late times tolerate Episcopacy.
Partly, because some of them have solemnly professed, that they cannot suffer
Presbytery; and answerable hereunto is their practice in those places where
Independency prevails.

3. And partly because To grant indulgence unto a few, would offend many more
of all Parties. ^^ hy may not Independents, and all other Sectaries, desire the
same favor, in case they provide Readers or Churches.
to grant to them, and not to other Sectaries, who are free born as well as
they, and have done as good service as they to the Public (as they use to
plead) will be counted injustice and great Partiality; but to grant it unto
all, will scarce be cleared from great impiety.

III. Independency is a Schism.

1. Ye already do, and (in case your Toleration be granted) will draw our
members from our Congregations; which ye acknowledge true Churches.
Independents do depart from our Churches, and so acknowledged by themselves.

2. They draw and seduce our Members from our Congregations.

3. Ye do in effect set up separate Churches.
They erect separate Congregations, under a separate and undiscovered
Government.

Ye receive not the Sacraments (except some few) in our Churches, but at
private meetings,
They refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments.

5. Their Ministers refuse to Preach among us as Officers.

6. Their Members, if at any time they join with us in hearing the Word and
Prayer, yet they do it not as with the Ministerial Word and Prayer, nor as acts
of Church Communion.

No Schism is to be Tolerated, as ye grant. But Presbytery is a Shisme Now, as
much as Independency was by you declared to be Then. Therefore, (according to
your own grounds) it is not to be Tolerated.
Now we judge that no Schism is to be Tolerated in the Church Schisms.
(...) 1. Cor. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 12. 25. Divisions.
(...) Romans 6. 17. with 1 Cor. 3. 3. Gal. 5. 20.

IV. The same would follow if Presbytery were Tolerated.
Many mischiefs will inevitably follow upon this Toleration, and that both to
Church and Commonwealth.

First to the Church, as

1. Causeless and unjust revolts from our Ministry and Congregations.

2. Our Peoples minds will be troubled, and in danger to be subverted, as Acts
15. 24.

3. Bitter heart-burning among Brethren, will be fomented, and perpetuated to
Posterity.

4. The Godly, painful, Orthodox Ministry, will be discouraged and despised.

5. The life and power of Godliness will be eaten out by frivolous disputes,
and vain janglings.

6. The whole course of Religion in private Families, will be interrupted and
undermined.

7. Reciprocal Duties between persons of nearest and dearest Relations will be
extremely violated.

8. The whole work of Reformation, especially in Discipline and Government will
be retarded, disturbed, and in danger of being utterly frustrate and void,
whilst every person shall have liberty, upon every trivial discontent at
Presbyterial Government and Churches, to revolt from us, and list themselves in
separated Congregations.

9. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will be encouraged to
endeavor the like Toleration.

10. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will safeguard and shelter
themselves under the wings of Independency, and some of the Independents in
their Books, have openly avowed, that they plead for Liberty of Conscience as
well for others, as for themselves.

11. And the whole Church of England, in short time will be swallowed up with
destruction and confusion. And God is not the Author of confusion but of peace.
1. Cor. 14. 33.

Secondly to the Commonwealth for.

1. All these mischiefs in the Church will have their proportionable influence
upon the Commonwealth.

2. The Kingdom will be woefully weakened by scandals and Divisions; so that the
enemies of it, both domestical and foreign, will be encouraged to plot and
practice against it.

3. It is much to be doubted, lest the power of the Magistrate, should not only
be weakened, but even utterly overthrown, considering the principles and
practices of Independents together with their compliance with other Sectaries,
sufficiently And are not Presbyterian Principles known to be so too.
known to be Anti-Magistratical.

And as inconsistent with other Oaths imposed by Lawful Authority, which that
was not
V: Such a Toleration is utterly repugnant and inconsistent with that solemn
League and Covenant, for Reformation and defense of Religion, which not only
both houses of Parliament, but also persons of all sorts in both Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, have subscribed, and with hands lifted up to the most
high God have sworn: Which Oaths have been taken by most of the chief
stricklers for Toleration, and with a true intention (it was hoped) to perform
the same.
which Covenant likewise, both you, and we, and those that most earnestly
pursue the establishment of Toleration, have made (or should have made) in the
presence of almighty God, the searcher of all hearts with a true intention to
perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed. for

1. This is opposite to the Reformation of Religion, according to the word of
God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, Article 1.

2. The Toleration of Presbytery is no less destructive to the conjunction and
uniformity of all the three Kingdoms than Independency.
It is destructive to the three Kingdoms nearest conjunction and uniformity in
Religion and Government, which might lead us and our Posterity after us as
Brethren to live in faith and Love Art. 1.

3. Seeing Presbytery is as much a Schism from Episcopacy, as Episcopacy or
Independency was from Presbytery, why do they now, instead of extirpation,
desire the Toleration of it, contrary to your Covenant.
It is plainly contrary to that extirpation of Schism and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, which we have
sworn sincerely, really, and constantly to endeavor without respect of
persons.

4. Toleration of Schism renders Magistrates and Ministers accessory to the
Errors, Sins, and Destruction of seduced and deluded People.
Hereby we shall be involved in the guilt of other men's sins, and thereby
endangered to receive of their Plagues Art. 2.

5. It seems utterly impossible (if such Toleration should be granted) that the
Lord should be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms, Art. 2.

6. This will palpably hinder the Reformation of Religion, inevitably divide
one Kingdom from another, and unhappily make factions and parties among the
People contrary to this League and Covenant; of which evil offices, whosoever
shall be found guilty, are reputed in the Words of the Covenant The Toleration
of deformity, even in little Matters, sometimes causes factions and parties
amongst the People. Let us have a care we be not Incendiaries, or evil
Instruments for Sacrilegious spirits to work by, ill affected as well to
Presbytery as Episcopacy.
Incendiaries, Malignants, Malignants and evil Instruments, to be discovered,
that they may be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment.
Art. 4. and 5.

These are some of the many Considerations, which make deep impressions upon
our spirits, against that great Diana of Independents, and all the Sectaries so
much cried up by them in these distracted times, viz. A Toleration, a
Toleration. And however, none should have more rejoiced than our selves in the
establishment of a Brotherly, Peaceable, and Christian accommodation: yet this
being utterly rejected by them, we cannot dissemble how upon the forementioned
grounds, we detest and abhor the much endeavored Toleration. Our Bowels, our
Bowels are stirred within us, and we could even drown our selves in Tears, when
we call to mind, how long, and sharp a travel this Kingdom has been in for
many years together, to bring forth that blessed fruit of a pure and perfect
Reformation; and now at last after all our pangs, and dolours and expectations,
this real and through Reformation, is in danger of being strangled in the Birth
by a lawless Toleration, that strives to be brought forth before it.

Wherefore (Reverend and Beloved brethren) we could not satisfy our selves,
till we had made some discovery of our Thoughts unto you about this matter, not
that we can harbor the least jealousy of your zeal, fidelity, or industry in
the opposing, and extirpating of such a root of gall and bitterness, as
Toleration is and will be, both in present and future Ages; but that we may
what lies in us, endeavor mutually to strengthen one another resolutions,
against the present growing evils, and that our Consciences, may not smite us
another day for sinful silence, or sluggish deficiency in any point of Duty,
tending to the glory of Christ, Honor of the Truth, Peace of the Church,
Perfection of Reformation, Performance of our Covenant, and Benefit of present
and succeeding Generations.

From Sion-Colledge Land. December. 18. 1645. Subscribed by Us your affectionate
Brethren, and fellow laborers in the work of the Ministry, to whom Truth and
Peace is very precious.

The Judgment of King JAMES and, His Privy Council against Toleration,
Transcribed verbatim out of Judge Crook's Reports, Term. Mich. Anno 2. Jacobi,
parag. 13. Part. 2. p. 37.
MEmorandum, that by command from the King, All the Justices of England, with
diverse of the Nobility viz. The Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor, the Earl of
Dorset Lord Treasurer, Vicount Cranbourne Principal Secretary, the Earl of
Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earls of Northumberland, Worcester, Devon and
Northampton, the Lords Zouch, Burghley and Knowles, the Chancellor of the
Duchy, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, Popham Chief
Justice, Bruce Master of the Rolls, Anderson, Gaudy Walmesly, Fenner,
Kingsmill, Warberton, Savil, Daniel, Yelverton and Snigg, were assembled in the
Star Chamber, where the Lord Chancellor, after a long Speech made by him
concerning Justices of Peace, and his Exhortation to the Justices of Assize;
and in discourse concerning Papists and Puritans, Declaring how they both were
disturbers of the (...), (...) that the King (...)ing ^^ (...), and to have the
(...) against (...) (...)ded of the Justices their Resolution in three things.

First, Whether the Deprivation of Puritan Ministers by the High Commissioners,
for refusing to Conform themselves to the Ceremonies appointed by the last
Canons was Lawful? Whereto all the Justices answered.

That they had conferred thereof before, and held it to be lawful, Because the
King has the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power, which he has Delegated to the
Commissioners, whereby they had the power of Deprivation, by the Canon Law of
the Realm, and the Statute of 1. Eliz. which appoint^ Commissioners to be made
by the Queen, does not confer any new power, but explain and declare the
ancient power. And therefore they ^eld ^^ clear, That the King without
Parliament might make Orders and Constitutions for the Government of the
Clergy, and might deprive them, if they obeyed not. And so the Commissioners
might deprive them. But they could not make any constitutions without the King,
and the divulging of such Ordinances by Proclamation is a most gracious
Admonition; And for as much as they have refused to obey, they are lawfully
deprived by the Commissioners ex Offici^ without Libel Et ore tenus convocati.

Secondly, Whether a Prohibition be grantable against the Commissioners upon
the Statute of 2 H. ^ if they do not deliver the Copy of the Libel to the
Party, whereto they all Answered, That that Statute is intended where the
Ecclesiastical Judge proceeds, Ex officio and ore tenus.

Thirdly, Whether it were an offense punishable, and what punishment they
deserved who framed Petitions, and collected a multitude of hands thereto, to
prefer the King in a public cause as the Puritans had done; with an Intimation
to the King, That if he denied their Suit many Thousands of the Subjects would
be discontented? Whereto all the Justices answered, that it was an Offense
finable at Discretion; and very near to Treason and Felony in the Punishment;
for they tended to the raising of Sedition, Rebellion and Discontent among the
People: To which Resolution all the Lords agreed and then many of the Lords
declared:

That some of the Puritans had raised a false Rumor of the King, how he
intended to grant a Toleration to Papists: which Offense the Justices conceived
to be heinously finable by the Rules of the Common Law, either in the Kings
Bench, or by the King and his Council: or now since the Statute of 3 H. 7. in
the Star Chamber. And the Lords severally declared how the King was
discontented with the said false Rumor; and had made but the day before a
Protestation unto them, That He never intended it, and that he would spend the
last drop of Blood in his body before he would do it; and prayed that before
any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion than what he truly
professed and maintained, that God would take them out of the World.

VOTES, etc. Of the Honorable House of Commons, Feb. 5. etc. 1662. Upon
Reading His Majesty's Gracious Declaration and Speech; etc.
Die Mercurii 25. Feb. 15. Car. R.
Resolved etc. Nemine contradicente,

That the humble Thanks of this House, be returned to his Majesty, for his
Resolution to maintain the Act of Uniformity.

Resolved etc.

That it be presented to the Kings Majesty, as the Humble Advice of the House,
That no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of Uniformity.

Most Gracious Sovereign!

THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons house of Parliament did
with great joy receive your Majesty's most Gracious Speech a^ the opening this
Session of Parliament: And ^eing th^^^by in^^ted to consider of th^^^
Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December last; they have with all Sobriety,
Duty and Affection examind the Grounds thereof, and do by me present unto your
Majesty their most hearty Thanks for the same, and humble Advice thereupon;
both which I do beseech your Majes^y, that you will vouchsafe me to deliver in
their own words.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty.

We your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgosses of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, having with all
fidelity and obedience considered of the several matters comprised in your
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration of the 26. of December* last, and your most
gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session.

Do in the first place for our selves and in the names of all the Commons of
England, render to your Sacred Majesty the Tribute of our most hearty Thanks
for that infinite grace and goodness, wherewith your Majesty has been pleased
to publish your Royal Intentions of adhering to your Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, by a constant and Religious Observance of it. And our hearts are
further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgivings when we consider your
Majesty's most Princely and Heroic Professions of relying upon the Affections
of your people, and abhorring all sort of Military and Arbitrary Rule. But
above all we can never enough remember, to the honor of your Majesty's Piety,
and our unspeakable Comfort, those solemn and most endearing Invitations of us
your Majesty's Subjects to prepare Laws to be presented to your Majesty against
the Growth and Increase of Popery; and withal to provide more Laws against
Licentiousness and Impiety; at the same time declaring your own Resolutions for
maintaining the Act of Uniformity.

And it becomes us always to acknowledge and admire your Majesty's Wisdom in
this your Declaration, whereby your Majesty is pleased to resolve not only by
Sumptuary Laws, but by your own Royal Example of Frugality, to restrain that
Excess in Men's Expenses which is grown so General and so Exorbitant; and to
direct our Endeavors to find out fit and proper Laws for Advancement of Trade
and Commerce.

After all this we most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, That it is with
extreme unwillingness and reluctance of heart that we are brought to differ
from any thing which your Majesty has thought fit to propose; And though we do
no way doubt but that the unreasonable Distempers of men's spirits, and the many
Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on during the late intervals of
Parliament, did reasonably incli^e your Majesty to endeavor by your
Declaration, to give some allay to those ill humors; till the Parliament
assembled; and the hopes of indulgence, if the Parliament should consent to it,
especially seeing the prete^^ers to this indulgence did seem to make some
titles to it by virtue of your Majesty's Declaration from Breda. Nevertheless
we your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are now returned to
serve in Parliament, from those several parts and places of your Kingdom for
which we are chosen, Do humbly offer to your Majesty's great Wisdom, That it is
in no sort advisable, that there be any indulgence to such persons, who presume
to dissent from the Act of Uniformity and the Religion established.

For these Reasons,

We have considered the nature of your Majesty's Declaration from Breda, and
are humbly of Opinion, That your Majesty ought not to be pressed with it any
further.

Because it is not a promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of
your Majesty's Intentions to do what in you lay, and what a Parliament should
advise your Majesty to do; and no such Advice was ever given or thought fit to
be offered; nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with but by Act of
Parliament.

They who do pretend a right to that supposed promise, put the Right into the
hands of their Representatives whom they chose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have passed, and your Majesty consented to the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume to say that a right to the benefit of this
Declaration does still remain after this Act passed.

It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a ^^sability
in your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament to make a Law contrary to any part
of your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise your Majesty to
it.

We have also considered the nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those consequences which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the Censures of it of no Moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at
one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the Reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the
execution of it.

It will expose your Majesty to the restless importu^ity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single Person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will
weaken the true Protestant Profession so far that it will at least be difficult
for it to defend it self against them: And which is yet further Considerable
those Numbers which by being troublesome to the Government, find they can arrive
to an Indulgence, will as their Numbers increase, be yet more troublesome* that
so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, which your Majesty has
declared against, and in time some prevalent Sect will at last contend for an
establishment, which for ought can be foreseen, may end in Popery.

It is a thing altogether without precedent, and will take away all means of
convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the method and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly it is humbly concieved that the Indulgence proposed will be so far from
tending to the peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion great
disturbance. And on the contrary; That the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce a settled Peace and obedience throughout your Kingdom: Because
the variety of Professions in Religion, when openly divulged, does directly
distinguish men into parties, and withal gives them opportunity to count their
numbers; which considering the animosities that out of a Religious Pride will
be kept on foot by the several factions, does tend directly and inevitably to
open disturbance.

Nor can your Majesty have any Security that the Doctrine or Worship of the
several Faction, which are all governed by a several Rule, shall be consistent
with the Peace of your Kingdom.

And if any persons shall presume to disturb the peace of the Kingdom; We do in
all humility declare, That we will for ever and in all occasions be ready with
our utmost endeavor and Assistance, to adhere to and serve Your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.

My Brethren!
I Have now given you my Authorities, viz.

1. The private Testimonies of twenty eminent Divines.

2. The public Testimony of the Presbyterian Ministers in the City of London
(Sydonically) met at Sion College.

3. The Authority of that Wise and Learned King James and his Privy Council.

4. The Votes and Reasons of the Honorable Commons Assembled in this present
Parliament.

All which I have designedly ranked in this method, that observing the order of
nature, and beginning ab imperfectiori, I might gradually ascend to that which
is more perfect; for such I think the Reasons of the House will be found; (to
him that dare attempt them) ( i. e.) impregnable and unanswerable.

I know not how it fares with other men, (I am no judge of their honesty or
Knowledge) but I am sure, as to me the premises have appeared so considerable, I
should think the world might suspect either my Intellectuals of Morals were I
no^ thu^ apprehensive of so convincing a Light.

My Brethren, (that I may deal freely with you) I am perfectly amazed, and (I
had almost said) scandalized, that men so eminent for learning, so noted for
piety, and (if we may believe themselves it being one of their grand Topics
for Indulgence) so considerable for Policy, I say that these men should so
warmly concern themselves for this Thing called Toleration, which (as I hope
the premises have evinced) is not only destructive both to Church and State,
but also (which prudent men would a little consider) so directly contrary to
their former Principles and Practices.

I am very unwilling to make any unpleasing Reflections, but it is the Language
of the world (and I am not yet instructed to confute it) that it is not a
Toleration (however pretended, as the most advantageous method that can at
present be employed) but a Reformation, that is, (as sad experience has
explained it) a total Extirpation of whatever is contrary to their humors and
designs) that each different Party endeavors to establish.

Now that this may not be rejected as a slandering design, only to make you
odious to Authority, (as is commonly objected) there are several Reasons (at
least strong conjectures) that seem highly to enforce the forementioned charge.

I am willing to conclude; and shall therefore give you my notions in gross,
leaving the Analysis to your acuter Judgments.

There are you know such things in the world as a jus divinum of some one Form
of Government, and a Solemn League and Covenant; both which as being directly
contrary to your pretended Toleration, (had I but the leisure or ability to
improve them) might easily be resolved into a Volumn of Arguments.

But leaving this performance (if occasion shall require) to the management of
some abler Pen, permit me very calmly to beg your Resolution to this following
Proposal.

Were you in the same Condition, ( i. e.) di^ you enjoy the same encouraging
Circumstance^ that your Adversaries, the true Sons of the Church of England
(through Gods great mercy and the Indulgence of a gracious Prince) are at
present favored with; then lay your hands upon your breast, and re(...), as in
the Presence of the great God that shall ^udg the world; Whether would you then
indulge either person or Parties that should diss(...) from your) established
Discipline, be it Presbyter^an or Independent, or any other whatsoever ( e. g.)
Whether would you then permit that Minister to preach publicly, that should
read the Service of our Church, wear a Surplise, use the Cross in Baptism,
Kneel at the Sacrament, etc. and not only so, but the utmost of whose endeavors
should be employed in persuading others to the like practices, telling them
that the contrary (by) you observed) was irreverent and indecent, and therefore
of all good Christians to be loathed and abhorred, I say, tell me plainly;) Is
it fit to grant a Toleration and Indulgence to such a person or no? if not,
then (even your selves being judges) neither is it fit to Tolerate you, since
your Principles and Practices are as distant from his ((...) the true Son's of
the Church of England) as his from yours, as destructive to his, as his to
yours and it is unreasonable (says the defender of the London Ministers Let. to
the Assem.) that Independents should desire that toleration from Presbyters
(...) they would not give Anti-Toler. p. 16.
to Presbyters; so say I, it is unreasonable that Independents, Presbyters, or
any other Sect should desire that Toleration from Episcopacy, which they would
not grant to Episcopacy. For with what face can I desire a courtesy from him,
to whom I do openly profess, I would deny the same Courtesy?

But now if you take the other member of the Contradiction, and say, you would
tolerate the forementioned person, supposing him otherwise of a quiet and
peaceable temper; let me then desire you further to resolve me, Are you
persuaded that the Church of England requires any thing sinful as their
condition of her Communion or not? if you say she does not (I am no little
troubled to mention it, but there is no evasion) I must plainly tell you, you are
no better then downright Schismatics; for Schism in the proper notion of it,
is nothing else but a causless Separation from that part of the visible Church
of which we were members: now there is no sufficient cause for such separation
but Sin, Unless there be something which is sinful required as the Condition of
our Communion, it appears to me to be Schism to withdraw our selves. Def. of
Propos. p. 91.
it being the judgment of our best Writers upon that Controversy, that nothing
else could warrant our Separation from Rome but this, that she required as
conditions of her communion, somewhat in fide erroneous, or in facto impious.

But if you are persuaded (and some of you have (...) at) (...) she does
require something which is sinful as the condition of her Communion, then the
case is clear; the mask f^lls of; and I have finished my task; for, for, since
all sin is confessedly the object, not only of our hatred and (...)sation, but
also of total extirpation (it being every ones duty not only to avoid sin
himself, but (by all lawful ways and method^) to hinder its commission ^^
others) I shall humbly leave it to his most Sacred Majesty, and the wisdom of
the Parliament to consider;

Whether it be either Religion or Policy, to tolerate those Persons, or
Parties, which are persuaded in their Consciences, that it is a necessary
incumbent Duty, not only to hate and detest, but also (by all those ways and
methods which they themselves shall think lawful) to weaken, alter and
extirpate the settled Government of the Church? the which Alteration, what
influence it may have upon the State, and how Destructive it may prove to His
Majesty's Crown and Kingdoms, (I hope it is no breach of the Act of Oblivion to
tell you) the experience of late years has suggested a very fatal conjecture.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
The Preface.
The Author no scoffer at Religion page. 2. The Occasion of this work. 5. The
Author dissatisfied about Toleration 7. Toleration is unpracticable 8. The
Petitioners for Tol. scarce intelligible in their Proposals 9. The Testimonies
of twenty eminent Divines against Toleration 11. Particularly,
Mr. Ash. 50. Dr. Corn. Burgess. 15. Mr. Baxter. 37. Mr. Calamy. 33. Mr. Case
28. Mr. Cranford 51. Mr. Edwards 53. Mr. Good 23. Mr. Hardwicke 26. Mr. Horton
39. Mr. Hughes. 32. Mr. Lightfoot. 31. Mr. Newcomen. 42. Mr. Reyner 28. Mr.
Salwey. 27. Mr. Seaman. 41. Mr. Thorowgood 24. Mr. Vines 49. Mr. Ward 19. Mr.
Watson 31.
A Letter of the Presbyterian Ministers in the City of London to the Assembly,
against Toleration 61.
ERRATA
PAge ^2. line 20* after these words Liberty of (...) ^he^ like (...) p. 46. l.
(...) d^le th^se word^, this is (...) Tolerated, and place them in the
foregoing line. There (...) smaller Errata's, which the Reader (as he
pleases) (...) pardon.


