The Danger of Hypocrisy. A SERMON Preached at GVILD-HALL CHAPEL, August 3d.
1673. By William Asheton, B. D. Domestic Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of
Ormond.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. 1673.

TO The Right Honorable Sr. ROBERT HANSON, LORD MAYOR Of the City of LONDON,
AND THE Honorable Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
I AM so far from being guilty of any trifling Apologies (the usual
Embellishments of these Dedicatory Epistles) that, quite contrary to common
expectation, I have thought fit, in my own defense, to give this Assurance;
That the following Discourse is, if not Pertinent, at least Seasonable; and
(had not their prejudices prevented) might have been as profitable to others,
as to my great encouragement I find, it is acceptable to your Honor, who by
your Command to publish it, have made it yours.

Had some men, who have no mean thoughts of themselves, been my Judges herein,
they would sooner have sent it to the Fire than to the Press. For to deal
ingeniously, as will appear upon its perusal, it is not calculated for their
Meridian.

I have neither blazoned the privileges of the Saints, nor enlarged any other
of their darling Doctrines. Nor indeed (that I may freely declare my Opinion)
have I any great kindness for them; unless it be for this one, wherein, I
confess, I am their perfect Convert. It Is their Doctrine of Perseverance. That
is, such Saints as the World has hitherto found them (and I have not now
judged it suitable to give you their Character) such they resolve still to
continue. And thus far, upon good Grounds, I am very apt to believe them.

For when men are once grown to this height of Confidence (this is a real
Truth, but it will not please them) to boast of it as their Glory, to head and
hold up a Party; when they shall study ways how to evade, where they are called
to obey, and are resolved to err, because they have erred, and to hold the
Conclusion in despite of all Premises; when they are angry with all those that
shall endeavor, though by the mildest Methods, to reform them; the utmost that
can be said is this; Great is Diana of the Ephesians; It Is their Interest to
have it so; the cry runs on, and who can help it?

Were it pertinent to detain your Lordship with such Expostulations, I would
then express my trouble, that any one should so far mistake my Discourse (and
there were some that did so, for they had not the Patience to hear it) as to
interpret any thing by me then delivered, either as a discouragement of
Preaching, or an encouragement of its Opposers.

As I am sure such a Gloss was beyond my Intention (and certainly I should best
know my own meaning) so I dare be confident, if my Accusers will but allow my
words such a favorable Interpretation, as the composures of men do usually
challenge: That is, Let them but consider my Discourse as a Totum complexum;
give every Sentence its due connection and dependence with the preceding and
subsequent matter, and they will then confess; That had their hearts been as
innocent as my Sermon, there had been no cause to have troubled, either Them or
my Self with this present Vindication.

The God of Heaven grant them humble Hearts, and governable Spirits, is the
constant Prayer of

Your Honor's most humble Servant, WILLIAM ASHETON.

A SERMON Preached at GVILD-HALL CHAPEL, August 3d. 1673.
MATTHEW VII. XXI. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven.
THERE are two extremes in the Church of God have been ever fatal to Religion,
and destructive to the power of Godliness: they are Hypocrisy and Profaneness.

Profaneness is indeed more visible and notorious, but Hypocrisy is more
dangerous. Our Blessed Savior (who certainly best knew how to judge in the
Case) has thus determined it to our hands. For, in 21. of S. Matthew. at 31.
verse, speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees, the Rulers of the People; those
great Professors of their Age: Verily, says he, I say unto you, the Publicans
and Harlots go into the Kingdom of Heaven before you. The Reason of which
Sentence seems to be this: Because Conviction, that necessary either
preparatory to, or part of Conversion, is more easily wrought in these latter
than the former. For, tell a man that is notoriously profane, of his idle,
graceless, debauched courses; and the Law of God is so express against him; the
world takes such notice of these things; his own awakened Conscience (maugre
all his Charms to quiet and appease it) does so smite and buffet him, that if
he has any shame and ingenuity left in him, he is forced to subscribe the
Charge and confess the Indictment.

But now the Hypocrite, such is the nature of his sin, is not so easily
converted, because not so easily convinced. For when the Preacher has employed
the best Rhetoric he can; first, to aggravate his sin and guilt, and then to
direct him by what ways and means he may avoid the snare; either this Discourse
is beating of the Air; a mere empty Harangue, which as to any particular
Application belongs to no man: or else, if the guiltiest wretch in a whole
Congregation, should but fancy, that our Reproofs were directed against him in
special; could I open his breast, and display his tumultuous Thoughts unto the
world, I could then, but not till then, discover his entertainment of such
Doctrine.

The truth is, and it is a sad Truth, men can endure plain dealing in any thing
rather than in matters of Salvation, where it is certainly most needful. But we
who are the Ambassadors of our dear Lord and Master, must not be partial or
unfaithful in our Duty, for the pleasure or displeasure of any mortal Creature.
If men's confident hopes shall encourage them to cry Peace, Peace, when the
Scripture tells us there is no Peace, but sudden Destruction: must we then sow
Pillows under men's Elbows? and betray the Truth by a cowardly silence? No; but
we must then blow the Trumpet and warn them of the approaching Danger; and if
they will not regard us, if they will not repent; their Blood be upon their own
heads, we have given them warning, we have delivered our own Souls.

There are several men amongst us, but with what warrant I know not, that
bestow upon themselves, by way of difference, the Titles of Professors, the
Godly party, the Praying people, and the like: as if none but they were fit to
be owned either as Professors, as Saints, or as Godly men. Of what ill
Consequence, as to the Church of God, the appropriating of these distinctive
Titles (that sound so like the Pharisees, I am holier than thou, and warp so
much toward a separation) may prove; it is no part of my business at present to
enquire. Only I must desire them, (and I do it in compassion to their poor
immortal Souls) to take good care that their hearts be right in the sight of
God in this matter. The Devil, so he may but deceive them, will easily
transform himself into an Angel of Light. That they are a Praying people, that
they are frequenters of Sermons, we are so far from disliking, that we tell
them it is but their Duty, and commend them for it. But we must withal remind
them; That there is something else to be done besides Preaching and Praying;
even the great things of the Law; the Duties not only of the First, but also of
the Second Table; which if they must neither be preached up by us, nor
practiced by them, lest thereby we should too much exalt a Moral state; I must
tell them, and I do it with some dread upon my Spirits, we may come to roar in
Hell for not being Moral men. Not every one, etc.

For the Explication of the words I must show,

First, What it is to say Lord, Lord. Secondly, What, to do the Will of his
Father that is in Heaven.
To say Lord, Lord, it is to make an outward Profession, by performing external
acts of Worship, that we are Christians; that we believe in Jesus Christ; that
we acknowledge him for our Lord, and look for Salvation by him.

That this may appear more plain and intelligible, I must remind you, that
there is a twofold Worship; or, to speak more properly, the name of Worship is
considered two several ways.

1. There is Internal Worship, which denotes the exercise of those inward
Graces whereby the Soul does show its dependence upon and Relation unto God, as
Faith, Hope, Love, Patience, etc.

2. There is External Worship, which comprehends such outward actions, whereby
the inward Piety and Devotion of the Soul, in the exercise of the forementioned
Graces, is expressed and cherished; as Prayer, hearing of Sermons, Receiving
the Sacraments, and such outward Duties, which are the Marks and Characters of
a visible Church, and whereby she is distinguished from all civil Societies. So
that the full meaning of this first Clause is this, Not every one that says,
etc. Not every one that is a Member of the visible Church. Not every one that
is a Professor of Religion. Not every one that can Preach or Pray or hear
Sermons, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: No; there is something more to
be done: and what that is, the latter part of my Text informs you. But he that
does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

By the Doing of his Fathers Will, is meant the Doing of those Duties of
Obedience, which his Father has commanded in his Law, particularly the
Decalogue. Which our Blessed Savior is so far from destroying, that he tells
us expressly, he came to fulfill it. Not by the Addition of any new Precept; the
Socinian conceit. Nor by taking off its Obligation as to the Person of a
Believer, the Antinomian fancy. But First, By fulfilling it in his own Person,
thus it behooves us to fulfill all Righteousness.

2. By a particular explication and wiping off the false Glosses of the
Pharisees and other Jewish Doctors.

3. By adding new and more spiritual Motives of Obedience to its former
Obligations.

The words thus explained do afford us this Observation, which I intend the
subject of my present Discourse.

Observe.
An outward Profession of Religion, without Obedience and amendment of Life, is
not sufficient to bring us to Heaven. I shall give you these two Reasons for it.

First, An outward Profession may be found R 1.
in Hypocrites and Cast-aways, such men as shall never come to Heaven.

Secondly, An outward Profession of Religion R. 2.
without Obedience and amendment of life, is displeasing and abominable in the
sight of God, and therefore, I argue a fortiori, it is not sufficient to bring
us to Heaven.

The former Reason, when put into Logic, runs thus.

That which may be found in Hypocrites and Cast-aways, such men as shall never
come to Heaven, is not sufficient to bring us to Heaven: But an outward
Profession of Religion without Obedience and amendment of life, may be found in
Hypocrites and Cast-aways; such men as shall never come to Heaven.

Therefore it is not sufficient to bring us to Heaven.

The Major Proposition stands upon this foundation.

That which gives us a Right and Title to Heaven, must be something proper to
the called and chosen of God, something peculiar to his peculiar People. Hence
it is, that in Scripture we read of the faith of Gods Elect; and amongst our
Divines that we hear so often of these Distinctions; Common and special Grace;
Gratia gratis data, and gratia gratum faciens; The Graces of Illumination, and
Sanctification. The which latter being wrought by the blessed and powerful
operation of the Holy Spirit of God, after a most effectual but unconceivable
manner, regenerating and renewing, seasoning and sanctifying the hearts of his
Chosen; though Hypocrisy may make such a semblance, as that we, who are
obliged to the judgment of Charity, may have probable inducements to persuade
us, that they are in such a man who has nothing but their counterfeits, yet
the inward power and reality of them can never be found in any Hypocrite or
Castaway. For, such Persons being not united to Christ the Head of his Church,
cannot possibly have the truth of those spiritual Graces which do necessarily
require such an union, as the root and fountain from whence they must flow.

The right understanding of this is of great use in Divinity, particularly for
a true apprehension of our spiritual Estate and Condition; and therefore,
before we proceed any farther, I shall endeavor to make it as plain as I can.

Now since Spiritual Beings, which are of a more abstracted nature, are best
known by reflecting upon things corporeal, we cannot find a more easy way to
understand this Spiritual union, than by comparing it with the Union of the
Body natural; with which indeed it has no small resemblance.

Every good Christian has a twofold Life, Natural and Spiritual. And as his
natural Life is twofold. 1. Substantialis; the Soul it self. 2. Accidentalis;
the real Effects and Operations of it: and in this sense it is, that when we
see a man stretched out in a swouning fainting fit, without sense or motion, we
usually say, The man is dead; though his immediate recovery does convince us,
that his Soul was still united to his Body: So likewise his Spiritual life is
1. Substantialis, and so the Spirit of Christ, or Christ himself (who is our
Life, Col. 3. 4.) working in us by his Spirit, is our vita Substantialis, our
essential Life; the first Principle of all our Graces and Operations. 2.
Accidentalis, and so Faith and all other Spiritual Graces are called our Life.

As therefore in Naturals, unless the Soul be united to it, the Body neither
stirs nor moves; neither sees, nor hears, nor walks, nor performs any other
Operation either of sense or motion: so it is in Spirituals: unless the Soul be
united to God and Christ, it neither lives the life of Grace here, nor shall
live the life of Glory hereafter. By this time, I hope, you see the Reason why
Hypocrites and Cast-aways shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: because,
though they have a name to live, though they have many counterfeit Graces,
proceeding from the Principles of moraliz'd restrained nature; yet they are
dead: for want of this union they are no living members of Christ's Body, and
therefore shall never reign with Christ as their Head.

And now as to the Assumption, viz. That an outward Profession may be found in
Hypocrites and Cast-aways, in such men as shall never come to Heaven; I cannot
give you a more full either proof or illustration than the stories of the
Scribes and Pharisees, particularly the Pharisees.

That they were a company of errand Hypocrites we have little cause to doubt,
because our Blessed Savior, who knew their very Thoughts, calls them so even
to their faces, and confutes them under that notion for a whole Chapter
together, as you find it Matthew. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites is the burden of it.

That they were likewise Reprobates and Cast-aways, we have great cause to
think, not only from their obstinate refusal of the Messiah, Have any of the
Pharisees believed on him? But also John 7. 48.
because Christ himself assures us; Except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes Matthew. 5. 20.
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Such were
these Pharisees, such Hypocrites, such Cast-aways. And yet if you consult their
Character, you will find, they were as zealous Professors of Religion, as any
can be named, either in the Jewish or Christian State. It was no small part of
their holiness, and whereby they begat an Opinion of Saintship, that they were
a praying People; and often repaired to God's house, as if they had been
intimate friends of his, and had frequent Communion with him. They would extend
their Prayers to a very great length, which is an Argument they were well
pleased in the Duty.

I might tell you of their fasting twice a-week; their strict Observance of the
Sabbath, with other instances, which I have not time to enlarge; only I must
not omit to remind you, how precise they were in their Separations from other
men: Out of a superstitious fear, it is likely, lest they should pollute
themselves by a mixed Communion.

And yet these seeming Saints, as the Scripture tells us, were unnatural to
their Parents; devoured Widows houses, absolved men from their Oaths, were full
of Extortion, ravening and wickedness, and derided the Sermons our Blessed
Savior made, because not sorted to their Covetous humor. He did not flatter
them with stories of their Privileges; no, they could do that well enough
themselves; God, I thank thee that I am not as other men; but he tells them
plainly and roundly of their damned Hypocrisy, and of the sad Consequences of
it; from which all their mock-Devotion would not be able to secure them. Ye
Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? And
this brings me naturally to the second Reason.

That an outward Profession of Religion R. 2.
(which these Pharisees had) without Obedience and amendment of Life (which
they wanted) is displeasing and abominable in the sight of God, and therefore
is not sufficient to bring us to Heaven.

That Sacrifices and other Ceremonial Observances under the Law, were of Divine
Institution is clear and express; they being usually delivered with this
Sanction; That Soul that does not thus or thus observe them, shall be cut off
from Israel. And yet if you consult the writings of the Prophets, you will
there observe, that when these Sacrifices stood in competition with any moral
Duty, they were so far from being accepted by Almighty God, that I find them
rejected with the greatest Detestation.

The Prophet Isaiah is very full and pertinent to our purpose: read his first
Chapter from the Eleventh to the Twenty first Verse. I cannot stay to repeat
the whole; you may do that at your leisure.

To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? Bring no more vain
oblations; your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates: when ye
spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when you make many
Prayers I will not hear. And why all this abhorrence? Your hands are full of
Blood. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your Doings: cease to do
evil, learn to do well: seek judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow. To these you may add that noted place, Hosea
6. 6. (which is likewise cited by our Savior, Matthew. 9. 13.) I desired Mercy
and not Sacrifice. The reason of all which is this: Because Sacrifices and such
like performances were therefore instituted, that they might keep men from Sin,
and the better encourage them to perform moral Duties.

Now that which Sacrifices were under the Law, that are Preaching, and Praying,
and receiving the Sacraments under the Gospel: even Ordinances of Divine
Institution, which are not to be observed for any intrinsic worth and value in
themselves, but only in ordine ad aliud, for the better promotion of those two
grand Fundamental Duties; Piety toward God, and Charity toward our Neighbor.

Wherefore is it that we Pray unto God? is it not to bewail, and beg pardon for
our former neglect of these Duties; to implore Divine Grace and assistance,
that we may perform them better for the future? in which endeavors if we are
sincere, he will then assist us by his Holy Spirit, and grant our Petitions.
Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, says S. John. But why? not because our
Prayers are many, or long, or loud, delivered with seeming vehemence and
affectation of Spirit; but, Because we keep his Commandments, and do those
things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3. 22.

So likewise for Preaching; Wherefore is it that you come to hear Sermons? is
it only to entertain your selves with a continued well-compos'd Discourse
concerning Divine matters? which perhaps you leave even at the Door of Gods
house; and yet can have the confidence to boast of your seize, and tell
strange stories of your Conversion, and of your former days of Ignorance, from
which you are now happily translated; because you have tasted the Heavenly
gift, and are followers of the word.

I would not willingly be here mistaken. This is a captious Age, and we cannot
be too cautious. I do not come to decry Preaching, or declaim against Sermons:
it is the abuse of them I endeavor to remove. Preaching is necessary, and will
be of continued use in the Church of God; it being a blessed Instrument, when
enforced by the Spirit, to open the eyes of the blind, to turn us from darkness
to light, from the power of Satan unto God. So that as long as there is
Ignorance in men's Understandings, or perverseness in their Wills; that
Apostolical Commission, which was intended for the continuance as well as first
planting of the Gospel, will be still in force, Go and teach all Nations.

When you have well considered this, I hope you will more favorably receive
those Reflections that follow.

I say it is not the regulated use of Preaching I inveigh against; it is this
superstitious doting upon Sermons I would willingly rectify. There is more of
Popery in this practice, would their prejudice but allow me the Reflection;
than the admired Proselytes of this fancy can easily apprehend. It Is no better,
whoever considers it, than a perfect transcript of their Opus operatum. For,
really these deluded People do talk at such a rate, were it pertinent to recite
their Discourses, as if there were some secret Charm and hidden virtue, in this
constant hearing and repeating of Sermons, whereby their Souls are secured and
made impregnable, against the Policy of Hell, and the Powers of Darkness.

I cannot now stay to expostulate the Case with them; yet I must crave leave to
express my wonder, that these People, who are thus inspired with such a zeal
for Sermons, can yet be so cool and careless, so perfectly unconcerned for the
Sacrament of the Lords Body.

Certainly it is as much our Duty, there being as clear a Command for it as
there is for Preaching; and the Condition of our Souls does as much, nay more,
require it (supposing a sound knowledge in Fundamentals) than it does the
hearing of Sermons. What is it therefore that makes this difference? True Grace
in the Heart it cannot be; that, you know, is regular in its motions, and has
an equal respect to all Gods Commands; to one Duty as well as to another.

It must be acknowledged the infinite Patience and goodness of God, that after
all our multiplied provocations, he is yet ready to embrace us in the Arms of
Love, stretching out his hand all the day long; entreating us to accept of
Peace and Pardon, which he is still ready to seal and confirm unto us in the
Sacrament of his Blood.

And is this our requital of so glorious a Majesty, thus scornfully to reject
such gracious Invitations? Do we thus consult our own happiness, by neglecting
the means of it? Art thou sensible, O sinner, what it is thou do, when thou
turn'st thy back upon the Sacred Elements? If thou have not lately considered
it, I Will remind thee what it is.

When we present our selves before the Lords Table, we do humbly make
confession of our former breaches of his Covenant; we do earnestly beg pardon
for the sake of Jesus Christ; the which pardon, with much joy and comfort, we
expect to be now sealed unto us by receiving the Sacred Elements: we do
faithfully promise to live better lives for the future; and are now receiving
strength, Grace, and the assistance of his holy Spirit to make good our
engagements.

So that in short: When the Table of the Lord is ready furnished, and these
Spiritual Dainties provided for you, and yet you refuse to Communicate; you do
in effect thus reply to your Maker.

I am a Rebel and a Traitor, and notwithstanding any Act of Pardon I will stand
it out still. I am filthy, and I will be filthy still. I am intemperate, and I
will be so still. I am lustful and incontinent, and I will be so still. I am a
covetous, lying, deceitful Person, and I will be so still. I have abused God's
holy Name, by cursing and swearing. I have profaned his Sabbaths and his
Sacraments, rejected the means of Grace, and I will do so still. I am proud,
censorious, envious, malicious, hypocritical, schismatical, and I will be so
still. I will cast thy Counsel behind my Back. I will hate to be reformed.

Certainly these are sad Resolutions, and such as will not easily be answered
in another world, however men may think to avoid them in this. I know indeed
there are several Objections wherein men may hope to secure themselves. The
careless ignorant Person will tell you he is unprepared; that he is fallen out
with his Neighbor, and is not in Charity. There are others who scruple
kneeling; are afraid of Pollution by a mixed Communion. Pitiful Fig Leaves
these! easily blown away, did they not rather deserve (especially in this
Place) a silent Pity, than a serious Confutation.

Now to conclude the whole with some practical Inferences.

Is an outward Profession of Religion not sufficient to bring us to Heaven?
there is then,

1. Conviction, to all graceless profane Persons, Conviction.
who are so far from the power of Godliness, that they have not so much as the
form of it. If the Hypocrite with all his Prayers and his Sermons, and his
zealous pretenses for Reformation shall be thrown into Hell, where shall the
open sinner and ungodly appear? If many of those that Prophecy in Christ's
name, and in his Name have cast out Devils, and in his Name have done many
wonderful works, shall yet be sent packing with that doleful Protestation;
Depart from me; I know you not ye workers of iniquity: What may we then think
of those, that are so far from Prophesying in Christ's name, that it is their
business by Oaths and execrations daily to blaspheme it? Who are so far from
casting the Devil out of others, that they give him a kindly welcome in their
own hearts; cherish and embrace all his wicked suggestions; and, as if they had
sworn Allegiance to this Prince of Darkness, by their sinful allurements do
solicit his cause and make Proselytes for his Kingdom.

Secondly, here is Direction for the trial of our 2. Direction.
Spiritual Estate and Condition, even not to flatter our selves too much, or be
too jolly upon it, though we find in our selves some show of Godliness, some
zeal in the performance of outward Duties.

There Is no one part of practical Divinity of more comfortable use; nor indeed
any, especially of late years, more sadly abused, than the Doctrine of Signs,
Marks and Characters of a state of Grace.

The great Benefit of this Doctrine (whatever is insinuated to the contrary) is
easily established by considering, That our Souls are more precious than either
Bodies or Estates. As therefore, according to the Principles of right Reason,
it is the practice of mankind, by the best methods we can, to secure these
outward concernments; so doubtless it is as highly rational to get as good
evidence, as the nature of the subject will permit, that our Souls, which are
capable of the highest happiness or extremest misery, are in a secure Estate.

This Truth, though necessary in the Doctrine, is many times difficult and
perplexing in the practice. For though I do little doubt, but by the mercy of
God assurance of Salvation is attainable in this life, and that without
extraordinary Revelation, at leastwise in such measure and degree as may
sustain the Soul of an honest Christian with comfort, and secure him from
despair; yet I do not think it either so absolutely necessary, or so free from
fears and doubtings, as some perhaps have imagined.

For, even supposing it to be true, which yet some are pleased to dispute, that
he who is ingrafted into Christ by a lively Faith, and so is made a living
branch of the true Vine, shall bring forth fruit, and his fruit shall remain;
shall be acted by his Grace here, and reign with him in Glory hereafter: yet
since this Union betwixt Christ and the Soul, however indissoluble, is yet
mystical and invisible; and can no otherwise be proved than a posteriori, from
those Graces of his Spirit that flow from it: and since these Graces, even
supposing them to be true and sincere (and there are many counterfeits) are yet
but imperfect in this life; and consequently the truth and sincerity of them is
not always so manifest, but that a man may be sometimes deceived in his
judgment concerning the same: It hence unavoidably follows, what betwixt the
one and the other, (the imperfection of the thing, and the difficulty of
judging) that the Assurance which is wholly grounded thereupon, and can
therefore have no more strength than they can give it, must needs be subject to
fears, jealousies and doubtings.

It is not therefore to be wondered, that a Doctrine thus difficult and obscure
should, through the Devils subtilty, and the deceitfulness of our own hearts,
be depraved and abused. The which abuse is twofold, in Thesi, and in Hypothesi.
In Thesi, by collecting false Signs and Characters of a state of Grace. In
Hypothesi, by a false application of those that are true. The former is usually
the fault of our Preachers, the latter of the People.

The complaint would certainly be just (if the Digression were not too large)
should I here occasionally discover, what unsound Casuists, Physicians of no
value, some of our late Reforming Divines have showed themselves to be: Much of
whose Temporizing Divinity, as may easily appear to him that shall take the
pains to examine it, was evidently calculated for the Meridian of their own
Party. One eminent instance whereof, is the subject now before us: In
opposition to which, and to prevent mistakes, I will give you this Conclusion:
That cannot be an infallible Mark of true Grace, which may be found in an
unregenerate and graceless Person: It being, you know, inconsistent with a
Propriety to be attributed to any but its own subject. Hence I infer (which is
full and close to our purpose) that to be a constant hearer of Sermons, or to
be able by the help of good natural parts to pray extempore, are no such
infallible Signs as some Persons have fancied, since according to their own
Writers, if they dare believe themselves, they are both of them consistent with
an unregenerate state.

Do thou therefore hear the Word of God with joy? Do thou pray frequently,
and that with fervor and earnestness? Do thou avoid grosser Sins with care?
Do thou oppose against common Corruption with zeal? These are indeed thy
Duty, and thou art to be commended for them; these are comfortable Signs, but
yet no certain and infallible evidences of Grace. For what is there in all
this, that an Hypocrite either has not or might not do: as the instances of
Saul, Ahab, Jehu, Herod, with several others do evidently prove?

But here it may be demanded (and it is a very profitable enquiry) That since
the Hypocrite may go thus far in the performance of Religious Duties, how shall
I be able to discern, whether my Duties be sincere or hypocritical; such as do
proceed from a Principle of true Grace, which God will accept; or else from a
Principle of mere nature, which shall certainly be rejected?

I dare not now engage to give you a clear and satisfactory Resolution to this
difficult Question: a distinct methodical explication of so high a Point, is
very unsuitable for the Close of a Sermon. But since it falls so naturally in
my way, that I cannot fairly avoid it: I shall endeavor to prescribe some
short, yet, I hope, sound Direction what to do in this matter.

When we discourse about holy Duties, there is one thing can never be found in
the Hypocrite; and therefore by the Rule of contraries it is a good mark of
sincerity.

It Is the Universality of our Duties and Graces, when we have an equal respect
to all Gods Commandments.

Art thou therefore solicitous about thy eternal Estate (as every good
Christian ought to be?) Art thou desirous to be instructed, whether thy Duties
are performed in sincerity, yea or no? then consider the Universality of them.

It Is a Rule amongst Physicians, Universalia salutaria, partialia ex morbo; If
Heat and Cold be moderate and constant, equally diffused over all the Body,
it is a good Sign of health: but if a man be hot in one part, and cold in
another; if the palms of his Hands burn, and the soles of his Feet be cold,
it is a shrewd sign that all is not right, but that some Disease is either bred
or in breeding.

And thus it is in Spirituals.

Art thou brisk and forward in some Duties, but as cool and careless in others?
Do thou keep a noise and clamor about Preaching and Praying, and in the
interim can allow thy self to live in a constant neglect of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper? Art thou earnest, nay, even boisterous in Prayer, whilst in
public, and with the society of others; and yet can be as dead, as cool and
as formal when in private, none being present but God and thine own Soul; none
to admire thy zeal, none to take notice of thy eminent improvements? Art thou a
mighty stickler for Preaching, a great promoter and encourager of Sermons? Do
thou even breath after a soul-searching, a sin-reproving Ministry? Art thou
wondrous forward to hear other men told of their faults; and yet art angry and
impatient to be reminded of thine own? Art thou enraged when the right string
is touched, when thy sweet beloved Sin is smartly reproved? Can thou then say
or think, that the Preacher might have chose a fitter Text, or have handled it
more prudently, or the like? One instance more. Does thy blood even rise when
thou hear another man swear an Oath; and yet can thou be contented at the
same time to lie, equivocate and cheat; to impose upon thy poor innocent
Brother, who has more Charity for thee than to think, that a man who makes
such a glorious Profession as thou do, can so conscientiously cozen him?

If it be thus, and thus, and thus with thee, look to thy self, thou art an
arrant Hypocrite, and, without a serious Repentance, art in a wretched
Condition. To Conclude.

If thou repentest of one Sin, and yet persistest in another: If thou obeyest
one Commandment, and yet breakest another: If thou art zealous in one point,
and cool in another: If thou hate one vice, but love another; flatter not
thy self too much; thou have reason to suspect all is not well within.

But on the contrary, if thy Repentance, thy Obedience, thy performance of
Duties, thy Zeal, thy hatred of Sin, and other Graces be universal; equally
bent upon all Good; equally set against all Evil: it is a good Sign of the
truth of Grace, and that thou art no Hypocrite but a Child of God.

FINIS.

