A Theological Discourse OF LAST WILLS AND Testaments. By WILLIAM ASSHETON, D.
D. Rector of Beckenham in Kent, and Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of ORMOND.

Set thine house in order, for thou shall Die and not Live. Isaiah 31. 1. But
men should often be put in remembrance to take Order for the settling of their
Temporal Estates, whilst they are in health.

The Minister should not omit earnestly to move such sick Persons as are of
Ability, to be liberal to the Poor.

V. Rubr. in the Order for the Visit. of the Sick. LONDON: Printed for Brab.
Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXCVI.

To the Illustrious His Grace, JAMES Duke of ORMOND, Chancellor of the
Universities of OXFORD and DUBLIN, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
HAving formerly Published, A Plain Method of Daily Devotions and Devotions for
the Lord's Day, for the use of a Countrey-Parish; as a further instance of my
Duty, in instructing Those committed to my charge, I thought it might be
useful, in the same familiar manner, to give some Direction and Assistance to
Sick and Dying Persons. And though some able Pens have lately engaged in that
Subject (and consequently less need of any Composure of mine) yet the
Providence of God having Placed me amongst a Plain working People, who do not
much converse with Books, some short Manual of my own, when put into their
bands, would be accepted and perused, and through God's Blessing might make
impression upon them. Accordingly I have designed (humbly imploring the Divine
Assistance) to publish A Plain Method of Devotion for Sick and Dying Persons;
that when the extremity of Age, the Weakness and Decays of Nature, or the
Violence of a Disease do admonish them of their approaching Dissolution, they
may then be instructed what to do; how to behave themselves both to God and
Man; in what manner, and with what Circumstances, they may think of leaving
this World, before they enter into the next. Now according to the Order of the
Church of England (whose Directions I desire always to follow) the Minister,
who Visits Sick and Dying Persons, does admonish them (if they have not dove it
before) to Settle their Temporal Estates, and make their Wills. Accordingly I
found it necessary, as an Introduction to my intended Devotions, to Premise
some plain and brief Directions in that matter. This I conjectured, would have
been dispatched in a few Pages. But my Thoughts being enlarged beyond my first
expectation, I now observe I was much mistaken.

Having given this faithful Account of the Occasion of this following Treatise,
I most humbly crave leave to publish it to the World under Your Grace's
Patronage; as a small but sincere acknowledgment of those continued favors I
have received from Your Grace.

The God of Heaven multiply His Blessings upon Your Grace, Your Pious Duchess,
and Your Illustrious Family; Increase and continue Your Prosperity here, and
Crown You with His Glory hereafter. So Prays

Your Grace's Chaplain, in all Dutiful Observance, WILLIAM ASSHETON.

A DISCOURSE OF LAST WILLS AND Testaments.
THE Settling and Disposing of a Man's Estate by his Last Will and Testament,
is not only the most solemn, but also the concluding Act of his whole Life: And
as such, should be managed with the greatest Deliberation and Prudence. And yet
so inconsiderate are the generality of Men, that if they do not wholly neglect
to make their Wills, (which too often happens) they then clap it up in have,
and do it in a hurry, amidst the pains and distractions of a Sick Bed; whereby
such a Will is not only imperfect and defective in it self, but very disturbing
to the Dying Testator.

To avoid these Mistakes, and to direct the Testator how to make his Will as a
Prudent Man and a Christian, is the Charitable design of this little Treatise.

And though it must be granted, That to Discourse of Wills and Testaments is
chiefly the Lawyers Province; yet, I hope, it will be thought no unsuitable
Theme for a Divine, whilst I proceed to instruct you in this Matter. For though
your Lawyer can best direct you to draw your Will Legally and in Form; yet a
Divine may be allowed to instruct you how to make it Charitably, and I may add
Prudently, and consequently to your Comfort.

Now the Advice I would give concerning Last Wills and Testaments, is as
follows.

I. Make your Will in your Health. II. Make a Christian Will. III. Make a
Prudent Will. IV. Make a Just Will. V. Make a Charitable Will.
I. Make your Will in the time of your Health.
And do not defer so weighty a Work, which requires both leisure and
composedness of Mind, to your Deathbed; or at least to that which you think is
your Deathbed. It Is a very common practice for men thus to defer their Wills;
but he who duly considers the mischievous consequences of such neglect, will
more easily be persuaded to rectify and amend it. Now amongst others, these
following Accidents may possibly happen.

1. He who neglects to make his Will in his Health, and defers it to his
Sickbed, may possibly never make it at all.

Do but consider the uncertainty of your Lives; how suddenly, unexpectedly, and
without the least warning, many Men are snatched away, and hurried out of this
World; and you will then easily be convinced of this Truth.

One Man, for instance, is unexpectedly assaulted by Padders or Ruffians, and
so suddenly Dies by Sword or Pistol. Another falling into bad Company, in the
heat of Wine and Passion is provoked into a Quarrel, and so killed upon the
Place. A Third, by a fall from his Horse or down a Precipice, has his Brains
beat out. A Fourth, by some accident does perish by Water, and is taken up
drowned.

But besides these Casualties, which take men off in an instant, there are some
Distempers as sudden and fatal. Several in perfect Health have been seized with
an Apoplexy, and died in a minute. Others, by a Lethargy have been so stupid as
not to answer a question, or to take the least notice of what is said or done.
Some have been seized with such Malignant Fevers, that from the very first they
became delirous and disordered in their Reason.

These are no feigned Cases, but such as, God knows, have too often happened.

Now we may fairly suppose that all these Instances were Men of Estates and
Prudence; and that they firmly resolved to give such and such Portions to their
Children; such and such Legacies to their Relations, not forgetting a
considerable Charity to the Poor. And these they resolved to have Legally
disposed by their Last Wills. But Death, as you have heard, unexpectedly comes
and prevents them, and all is in confusion, and nothing done.

Now that which has happened to other Men, God may permit to happen to you.

A Prudent Man therefore, though he will hope for the best, and will Pray, From
sudden death Good Lord deliver me; yet with a just fear and caution will
provide for the worst: For suppose you should Die suddenly or unexpectedly;
What then? Let me then repeat it to you, as very good and Christian Advice:

Make your Will in the time of your Health; for otherwise it may so happen you
may never make it all.

2. Suppose a man has both time and inclination to make his Will upon his
Sickbed, yet it is then most commonly Imperfect and Defective.

Indeed there are some Chronical Diseases so gentle and easy; that could men be
persuaded to make their Wills, when they are first seized with such lingering
Distempers, they might then settle and dispose their Estates with the same
prudence as in their healths. But this is rarely to be supposed; for the same
reasons which prevailed with them to neglect it in their health, will have
still influence upon them. As,

1. Does the hope of long Life encourage them to defer it?

As to this; the presuming expectations of Decaying Persons are very notorious.
How will they hope even against hope, and flatter themselves, and are vainly
flattered by others, with such groundless fancies as these? It Is true; I find
my self a little indisposed, but good Air and careful Nursing will quickly
restore me. And as weak as you now think me, I may live to see many a stronger
man to go before me. Or,

2. Is it a desire of improving their Estates (that they may have something
considerable to bequeath) which occasions them to neglect it?

This likewise makes Impression, even on weak decaying People.

It Is true, says the Consumptive Person, I am admonished to make my Will, and
I resolve to do it; only I think it prudent to put my Affairs in a little
better Posture, before I settle what I have. When I have made this Purchase;
taken in that Mortgage; concluded such a Bargain; secured and gotten in these
and those Debts; then you shall see I Will defer it no longer. Or,

3. Is it a fond love for this World, and an unwillingness to leave it, which
makes men thus backward in so weighty a Concern? This also does influence these
Consumptive People. For they are as loath to depart from their Houses and Lands,
as Lot was out of Sodom; who lingered and hung back when commanded to be gone.

Thus you see, let death give never so much notice, and the Disease be never so
lingering, yet the concerns of these decaying persons are as much neglected, and
their Affairs are left in as great confusion, as if they had been taken off by
the sudden stroke of the acutest distemper.

For when the Disease, by insensible Degrees, is come to its height, and the
malignity of it has conquered Nature; then his Physician at last gives him
over, and whispers his condoling Friends to remind him of his End, to settle
his Affairs, and to commend his Soul to God.

But such is the foolish Pity of his Friends and Relations, they are commonly
afraid to propose it to him, lest it should damp his Spirits, and disorder his
Thoughts, and so hinder his yet hoped for Recovery. But when at the last he
finds himself sunk, and his Spirits to fail, and observes his condoling Friends
to stand round about him with Tears in their Eyes; being how convinced that he
has not, perhaps, many hours to live, he is at last persuaded to send for the
Scrivener, to take directions for the drawing of his Will. But what sort of
Will he is like to make, former experience in such cases as these, does too
sadly testify.

For when his Imagination is disturbed, his Thoughts distracted, his Memory
either lost, or diverted by his Pains, what can such a man do under these
Circumstances, that is either fixed or prudent? A Will indeed he makes, but to
speak properly, it is the Will of others, of those who are about him, more truly
than his own. What their importunity shall suggest to him, tho perhaps never
thought on before, he readily admits in hopes of a little respite, and that he
may turn to the other side. From this distraction it happens, That some, for
whom he has a kindness, are wholly forgotten. Others are more liberally
remembered; not because they are dearer to him, but because he loves not to be
uneasy, by displeasing those who attend him, and who press him to it.

In this hurry many times an unskilful Person has the drawing of the Will,
(because no better could be got) whereby several mistakes, to the ruin of whole
Families, have unfortunately happened. Or, if managed by a knowing Person, yet
there being not time or convenience to have a competent number of Witnesses,
the intended Will becomes void, because not attested according to Law.

At this rate Things are usually managed in these Deathbed Disposals; which
are not only, as I have showed you, imperfect in themselves, but also

3. Are very Disturbing to the Dying Testator.

Persons and Things are then properly said to be Disturbing, when they
unseasonably offer themselves at such a juncture of Time, when some other
Transaction of greater Consequent and Moment is to be attended.

Now when a Man is Dying, he has done with this World, and leaves the Cares
and Business of it to those who survive. His Thoughts should then be fixed upon
that happy Place, to which he is now going to remove. His only Treasure is in
Heaven, (for his earthly Treasure must be left behind him) and where his
Treasure is, there should his Heart, his Thoughts and Desires, be also.

It Is very improper therefore, nay impertinent and unseasonable, for a dying
expiring Person to be disturbed and diverted from his main Concerns, by these
worldly distracting Thoughts and Cares.

When a man is convinced he has not many days, perhaps not many hours, to
review the Actions of his whole Life; and in the bitterness of his Soul is
begging Pardon for his imperfect Repentance, is humbling himself before his
Judge; and is passionately acknowledging his own Demerits, and pleading God's
Mercy: And is raising his hope, that (through the Goodness of God, and the
Merits of his dear Redeemer) in a little time all Tears shall be wiped away;
when he shall be removed to that happy place, where neither Sin nor Sorrow,
neither Satan nor Temptation shall be able to reach him.

Having thus attained some foretaste of Glory, and a glimpse and view of that
Blessed State; and by the eye of Faith, and perhaps also of his Body, having
seen the Guardian Angels even ready to conduct him: Having, I say, thus
composed and raised his Soul, what a mean as well as disturbing Dispensation is
it, to be pulled down from this delightful Prospect, and to be diverted with
the rufflings of Parchments, and Noverint Vniversi's? to be told of Bills, and
Bonds, and Reckonings; to be calculating and disposing his Temporal Estate,
when he is going to take Possession of his Spiritual?

The perplexing Agony of the departing Soul under such disturbance is scarce to
be expressed. And therefore to avoid this distraction, make your Will in your
health, when you have vigor of thought, and composedness of mind.

II. Make a Christian Will.
Which I explain thus. Let your Will be so composed, so framed and worded in
the commendatory Part, as to declare your self a Christian.

The Preface or Introduction to that Form and Instrument of Writing, which we
call a Last Will or Testament, you know is this, In the name of God, Amen. And
having thus solemnly called upon God, the Testator then proceeds to dispose of
his Concerns, in these Three Instances. His Soul, his Body, and his Estate.

The first thing which the Testator disposes is his Soul. For so run the
words. First and principally I commend my Soul into the hands of God, my
Creator. But here too many of our Last Wills and Testaments do stop, and
abruptly break off. And then go on in a hurry, to the Body and Estate. But how
great an indecorum this is, nay even scandal to the Christian Religion, will
plainly appear when duly considered.

I commend my Soul into the hands of God my Creator, says the dying Person.
But thus a Jew, a Turk, or a Heathen may commend his Soul. For all these do
acknowledge God their Creator. And therefore that something further must be
added, I thus easily convince you.

When a man makes his Will, he is either really dying, or he dies by
anticipation; i. e. he puts himself into a posture of dying. And then uses
these words; I commend my Soul into the hands of God.

But why does he thus commend his Soul? Is it not in hopes that God will accept
it? But what now is the ground of this hope? Why does he expect that God should
receive his Soul? That he should not leave it to the malice and fury of Hellish
Fiends, who immediately upon its separation from the Body, stand ready to seize
and devour it; but that he sends his Holy Angels to shelter and protect it, to
guide and conduct it to a Place of Bliss?

Doubtless no other reason can be assigned of this his hope, but only the
Merits of his Blessed Savior; for there is none other name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved, but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore for a dying Christian to commend his Soul to God, without the
least mention of a Savior, it is a contradiction to the Christian Religion:
It Is not only a careless Omission, but the highest Presumption.

When therefore you make your Will, Commend your Soul to God in such a manner
as may declare your Christianity; give then a reason of the hope that is in
you; especially if your Religion is suspected (either as having none at all, or
as being Heretical and Corrupt) then Vindicate your self, by making a short,
but pathetical Profession of your Faith and Hope, in the beginning of your Will.

And that you may the better apprehend what I design, you may Commend your Soul
in this, or the like form.

First and Principally, I Commend my Soul into the Hands of Almighty God, as of
a Faithful Creator. Which I humbly beseech him mercifully to accept: Looking
upon it, not as it is in it self (infinitely polluted with Sin) but as it is
Redeemed and purged with the Precious Blood of his Only Beloved Son, and my
most sweet Savior Jesus Christ; in confidence of whose Merits and Mediation
alone it is, that I cast my self upon the Mercy of God for the Pardon of my
Sins, and the Hopes of Eternal Life. This is what I design when I admonish you
to make a Christian Will.

III. Make a Prudent Will.
The which Prudence ought to express it self in Two things.

1. In the form of Words and Phrases, in which the Will is Drawn and Composed.

2. In the Subject Matter of the Will; in the Distribution of an Estate,
whether Real or Personal.

As to the First. Were it pertinent to repeat the odd fanciful and affected
Expressions of some Wills and Testaments, you would then be convinced how very
proper it is to give some caution about this matter. Now to avoid the mistakes
of such foppish affected People, let the Expressions of your Will be grave and
sober; and do not expose your self to the just Censures of Posterity, by any
undecent or extravagant Passage. Remember your Will stands upon Record for
Public perusal; and therefore to be idle and extravagant in this last Act of
your Life, is to be hissed off the Stage, and to proclaim your folly to all
succeeding Ages.

But I hope there are not many Impertinents in so Solemn an Instance. And so I
pass on to the Second; which is of more general concernment, viz. The Prudence
of a Testator in the Distribution of his Estate.

And here the utmost I can pretend, is only to suggest some general Directions.
The Capacities of men are so different, and their Circumstances so various,
that much must be left to Prudence. However, though particular Persons must
determine as their case shall require, yet it may be useful to Direct as
follows.

In the Distribution of an Estate, do not only consider the Necessity of your
Relatives (for then the Poorest ought to have the greatest share) but
proportion your Legacies, as Christian Prudence will direct you, according to
other measures.

Observe the different Dispositions and Behavior of your Children, your
Friends, and Dependants.

Some are brisk and active in the management of Business; who, as we phrase it,
will look to themselves and secure their own. Others are of a quiet, sedate,
and easy Temper, or it may be of weak and slender Intellectuals; who either do
not love trouble, or do not understand it. Some are thrifty and frugal, who
will not only keep, but improve what you give them. Others are wild and
extravagant, who scorn to be confined, and think it below their Character to
live by rule and measure.

Some have been sober and regular, dutiful and obedient, in their Behavior
toward you. Others have been rude and disobliging, insolent and affronting, in
their Carriage toward you.

Now when you design to make your Will, and distribute your Legacies, it is a
just instance of Christian Prudence, duly to examine the several Capacities and
Circumstances of your Dependants, and distribute accordingly.

If your Children and Relations are notoriously Vicious and debauched (which is
the Affliction of many good Parents) do not abdicate or cast them off (for that
would harden and confirm them in their Wickedness) but make Provision for them
in Trust; in such manner and with such Circumstances, as may relieve their
Necessities, but not their Lusts.

Those who love their ease and quiet, or perhaps are of easy Tempers, should
not be encumbred with any thing that is litigious; or which being perplexing,
requires sagacious diligence to manage or secure. Those who have been dutiful
and obliging, should have a mark of kindness set upon them; yet so, as not to
Disinherit your Firstborn, or to deprive him of his Birthright.

These things, I say, ought to be considered deliberately, and in the fear of
God. And do not fancy, that because your Estate is your own, that therefore you
have liberty to Bequeath it as you please; for though it is thus far your own,
that there is no just Human Claim against you; yet it is still the Property of
Almighty God, the Chief Sovereign of the World; before whom you must shortly
give an Account of your Stewardship, and how you have Distributed and
Bequeathed your Estate.

IV. Make a Just Will.
Before I can exhort the Testator to be Charitable (of which in its proper
Place) I must first admonish him to be Just. And when I advise him to be Just,
I do not so much denote the Justice and Equity of his Distribution (for of this
I have Discoursed under the former Topic) as the Justice of his Title to those
Possessions he is now going to Bequeath. My plain meaning is this; Before a man
pretends, by making his Will, to Bequeath his Estate, let him first be fully
satisfied that he has a Just Title to it, and that what he Disposes is his
own.

We have a blunt Proverb concerning some Men, Who Rob Peter to Pay Paul: Who
Will pinch with one hand, to open and enlarge the other; who are rapacious and
Unjust in some instances, that they may be kind and Charitable in others. And
this, I doubt, is too frequent a Practice. But let such men know (though they
do not love to be told it) there is a Duty called Restitution; whereby all
injurious Persons are not only obliged to make a reconciling Acknowledgment,
but also Reparation and Satisfaction for the wrongs they have done.

To enforce this, though briefly, I shall a little explain the nature of
Restitution, with the reason of it.

As our Duty is Twofold, Our Duty toward God, and our Duty toward our
Neighbor; so also Sins and Transgressions, which are a breach and violation of
that Duty, are likewise Twofold, viz. Sins against God, and Sins against our
Neighbor.

Both these kinds of Sins shall certainly be pardoned upon our true Repentance;
because God, who is Faithful and Just, has expressly Promised Pardon upon that
Condition. But now it is pertinent to remind you, that more is required to
perfect our Repentance of Sins against our Neighbor, than of Sins against God
only.

Sins against God only, are sufficiently attoned by Reformation and Amendment.
When we return to our Duty, and own the Divine Authority by a sincere
Obedience, the Justice of God is then satisfied, and he will again receive us
into his Grace and Favor, through the powerful Intercession of our Dear
Redeemer.

But now as to those Sins which do not barely Offend God, but are also
Offensive and Injurious to our Neighbor, the Case is different, and there is
more required to the Pardon of such Sins.

For Sins against our Neighbor, do not only include an Offense against God
(who has Commanded us to Love our Brother) but also an affront and injury
against men. And therefore, though upon our true Repentance God will forgive
his share of the Sin, and will remit it so far as it is an act of Disobedience
against himself; yet he will not forgive the Affront and Injury against Men,
till we have first sought a Reconciliation with those we have Affronted, and
have made Restitution to those we have wronged, by giving Satisfaction for the
Damage that has been done them.

Of this Reconciliation (the necessity of it, and the manner how it is to be
made) I shall Discourse in its proper Place. That which I am now pertinently to
enforce, is Restitution: Which according to the true sense and meaning of the
word does denote, A Restoring or giving back to any Person, what was wrongfully
taken, and is still detained from him. The which Restitution, so far as we are
able, is a necessary Duty in the Judgment of all sorts of Casuists; Protestant
and Papist, Lutheran and Calvinist, do all of them subscribe to that well-known
saying of St. Augustine, Non remittetur Peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum.
Epist 54. ad Maced. The Sin shall not be Pardoned, except that which has been
Unjustly gotten be Restored. And the reason hereof is given by the same Father
in the foregoing words. Si res aliena propter quam peccatum est, cum reddi
possit non redditur, non agitur paenitentiae sed fingitur. If a man restore not
ill-gotten Goods, being able, his Repentance is but counterfeit, and not
sincere.

From both which Sentences put together, St. Augustine's Argument is this;
Without Repentance Sin shall not be Pardoned. But whoever does not make
Restitution when it is in his Power, does not truly Repent (his Repentance is
but Counterfeit); Therefore without Restitution no hopes of Pardon.

Suppose then that you have Injured another Man in his Estate, either by Theft,
or Fraud, or Oppression; it will not be sufficient to Absolve you, and to
procure your Pardon, that for the future you forbear Defrauding, Forcing, or
Stealing from him any more; but if it be in your Power you must make
Restitution of all that you have wrongfully deprived him of; And the Reason is
this.

It Is a known act of Justice, Suum cuique tribuere. To give every Man his own.
Now its certain, that your wrongful Seizure or detaining of what is another
Man's, does not alienate his Right to it: So that he has still the same Right
to it, whilst you keep it from him, as he had at first when it was taken from
him. And consequently, till you Restore it back to him again, you still
continue to wrong him of it: And your detaining it, is a continued repetition
of that Fraud; or Theft, or Oppression, by which it was at first wrongfully
Seized. And so long as you continue the Fraud, the Theft, or the Oppression,
it is most Vain and Hypocritical to pretend to Repent you of it. For certainly
Repentance can never be true nor sincere, whilst you continue in that Sin of
which you seem to repent. And without true Repentance, no hopes of Pardon.

When therefore you design to Bequeath your Estate; if upon a strict search or
inquiry you observe that any part of your Estate has been unjustly gotten, be
so just then to your Self and Family, as to make a faithful Restitution of it.
If not to the Injured Person himself (who perhaps is Deceased) then to his
Heirs or Relations. But if to these (by reason of Absence, great Distance, or
some other Cause) it cannot conveniently be made, then give it to the Poor: Who
in such a Case are God's Receivers.

And if herein I shall seem too severe a Casuist (since this Restitution, if
honestly made, might be to the impoverishing of many Persons and Families) I
shall then desire them to consider:

1. That it is much better, if the case should so require, to part with all
their Estates here on Earth, than to be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven. As all
injurious, rapacious Persons are threatened to be.

2. If the Concern is for their Relations they leave behind them (since we
suppose, they were not convinced of the necessity of this Restitution, till
they lay upon their Deathbed) let them then consider, that this Restitution is
the most effectual Method to secure that which is left, by continuing God's
Blessing upon it.

For there is a strange unaccountable Canker, through the just Judgment of God,
commonly attending all Goods, Estates, or parts of Estates dishonestly gotten.
It Is better therefore (even for their sakes) to leave a man's Relations
honestly Poor, than dishonestly Rich. Whatever therefore you Bequeath to your
Children and to your Friends, be it more or be it less, be sure it be honestly
gotten. This is what I intend, when I admonish you to make a Just Will.

V. Make a Charitable Will.
It Is the Direction of the Church of England, in the Order for the Visitation
of the Sick, That the Minister should not omit earnestly to move such Sick
Persons as are of Ability, to be liberal to the Poor.

Whence observe,

1. That it is the Duty of the Clergy to move Sick and Dying Persons to
Remember the Poor.

2. If such Sick and Bequeathing Persons are of Ability, they are then to move
them to be liberal in their Gifts and Legacies to the Poor.

3. They are not only to move them, but earnestly and with importunity to move
them.

If therefore the Covetous Misers of this world, who value their Bags more than
their Souls, shall be offended at this freedom, (as if this part of our Office
were a Pragmatical Encroachment; as if herein we did transgress the limits of
our Calling, and were as Busy-bodies in other men's matters) I shall for the
Conviction of such Persons, and the just Vindication of my Profession, suggest
the Reasons of such Charitable Distributions: And from thence shall show them
why we of the Clergy do think our selves obliged, with such repeated plainness,
to remind them of this Duty.

The Clergy by their Office and Calling are the Ambassadors of Christ. Or if
that may seem a Title of too much State, they are the Stewards of his Household,
who are to distribute to the Family their several Portions.

Now St. Paul, who was not only a faithful Pastor of the Flock, but also a
Governor of the Pastors themselves, has left this Apostolical Injunction to
his Son Timothy, and in him to all other Pastors and Ministers of God's Word:

Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy: That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.

It appears from this Injunction of St. Paul, that Rich men, as well as others,
are to be admonished of their Duty. Charge them that are rich in this world.
And if their Loftiness shall think scorn to be thus Tutored by the Clergy they
are then advised, that they be not high minded; not to be proud and insolent;
not to slight and despise their meaner Brethren. And the more effectually to
abate their Confidence, they are further to be admonished, that their Riches
are uncertain; and therefore it is the highest folly to trust in uncertain
riches.

Solomon's Observation, That riches make themselves wings, and flee away as an
eagle toward heaven Prove. 23. 5. (i. e. they are gone with a swift and
imperceptible motion) is fully confirmed by daily experience. Fire, Robbery,
Suretyship, the Falseness of a Friend, a Sinking Ship, a Treasonable Word, the
Tragical Excesses of Wine and Passion, with many other such like Accidents,
have sunk and ruined the Greatest in a Moment.

Now these possible Events, which may happen to the Richest and level them with
the Poorest, do seasonably admonish the Rich men of this world not to be
highminded, nor to trust in uncertain Riches. And therefore since Riches are
such uncertain Possessions, and may and will so unexpectedly leave them, it is
Charity to direct these Rich men where to put their Trust; even in the living
God: Who is not only a sure and certain Comfort (for he is a living God, and a
living Comfort) but all other Comforts do slow from him: Who gives us richly
all things to enjoy.

And why is it that he gives us richly all things to enjoy? Why have these
rich men so large a share of this world? It Is for this reason, viz. That they
may do good, be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate. And for their encouragement the Apostle assures them, that by thus
doing good, etc. they lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against
the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

From these Grounds and Reasons (which shall be more distinctly enforced in
their proper place) St. Paul does direct the Clergy not only to admonish, but
even to charge and command Rich men (to charge them Authoritatively and upon
their Peril, for so the word (...) denotes) to be Charitable to the Poor.

And what St. Paul commanded Timothy, and in him the rest of the Clergy, he
first practiced himself. He admonishes his Romans, to distribute to the
necessities of the saints, Romans 12. 13. He exhorts his Galatians, to do good to
all men, Gal. 6. 10. He reminds his Hebrews, To do good and to communicate,
forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13. 16. And in
his Epistle to the Ephesians he has thus Cautioned and Commanded Poor
Laboring men; Let him that stole steal no more; but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. Poor people must not pretend to excuse their
stealing, because they are in want. But they must work for their living in some
honest Calling: And that not only to maintain themselves, but also (though they
sweat to provide for their own Families) they must even out of their daily
Labor contribute to relieve their poor, helpless, disabled Neighbors.

Thus St. Paul did teach and admonish. And the rest of the Apostles, as
occasion was offered, did deliver the same Doctrine with their beloved Brother
Paul.

St. James has given us this System of Religion; Pure and undefiled religion
before God and the father is this; To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, (i. e. to comfort and relieve all distressed and helpless persons)
and to keep himself unspotted from the world, James 1. 27. And because there
were great Pretenses to Faith in his days as well as ours, the same Apostle
instructs us how to judge whether our Faith be sincere or no; What does it
profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have not works? can
faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,
and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled;
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body,
what does it profit? Even so faith if it has not works, is dead, being alone,
Jam. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17. As if he had said, Unless according to your capacity
you are ready to do good, and relieve those that are in want, all your
pretenses to Religion are vain and hypocritical.

And this most important Truth (which the Rich men of this World are so
unwilling to believe) is further confirmed by St. John. The design of whose
Epistles is to exhort us to the love of God and our Brother. The latter of
which, as he largely shows us, is the surest Mark and Evidence of the former.
If a man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar: For he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? 1 John 4. 20. No man has seen God at any time. God is a Spirit and
invisible, and we do not converse with God as we do with one another. How then
can we pretend to this love of God, or assure our selves that we have this
Divine Grace? Now St. John takes care to satisfy us in this matter, v. 21. He
who loves God, let him love his Brother also. i. e. He who pretends to love
God, let him prove his love to God by the love of his Brother. But how shall we
evidence this love of God by our love to our Brother? Of this the Apostle gives
us a plain and convincing Proof, cap. 3. v. 17. Whosoever has this Worlds good,
and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his Bowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him? i. e. He who relieveth not his poor
Brother, when it is in his power, he neither loves God nor his Brother. And he
that loves not his Brother abides in death, v. 14.

And because this may be censured as a very harsh and uncharitable Sentence,
the Apostle thus confirms it in the following verse, v. 15. Whosoever hates
his brother, is a Murderer; and ye know that no Murderer has eternal life
abiding in him.

With such powerful Motives as these, the Apostles of our Lord did recommend
this most necessary Duty of Charity.

And as this was the Doctrine of the Apostles, so also of our Blessed Lord
himself.

Give Alms of such things as you have; and behold, all things are clean unto
you, Luke 11. 41. Sell that ye have, and give Alms: provide your selves bags
which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief
approaches, neither moth corrupts, Luke 12. 33. And I say unto you, Make to
your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they
may receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. Love ye your Enemies,
and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again: and your reward shall be
great, and ye shall be the Children of the Highest: for he is kind to the
unthankful, and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is
merciful, Luke 6. 35, 36.

But in no part of the Gospel is this Duty of Charity so effectually
recommended as in Matthew. 25. v. 31. etc. The words contain the Process of the
Great and Final Judgment; punctually described by our Savior, and our Judge.
They are of infinite concernment to us all. And therefore I shall transcribe
them at large. And the rather, because, in its proper Place; I shall make some
Remarks and Observations upon them.

When the Son of man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the throne of his Glory. And before him shall be
gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats: And he shall set the Sheep on his
right hand, but the Goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger and ye took me in: Naked,
and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came
unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a
stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee
sick, or in Prison, and came unto thee. And the King shall answer and say unto
them, Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say also
unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me
not. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in Prison, and did
not Minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto
you, In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to
me. And these shall go into everlasting Punishment: But the Righteous into life
eternal. From these words of our B. Savior it is pertinent to observe; That
though (as appears from other Places of Scripture) we must be judged for what
we have done in the Body, i. e. for all the good or evil that we have done in
this World; yet our Savior in describing the Process of the Last Judgment,
makes no mention of any thing but Acts of Charity. From whence you may be
admonished, how necessary it is to do all the good you can whilst you live; and
to improve all those Talents with which you are entrusted (particularly your
wealth) to the highest advantage.

And as a further Confirmation of this necessary Duty, I must not omit to
observe; That Charity to the Poor, is not only commanded in the Gospel, but
also in the Law and the Prophets.

If thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shall
relieve him: yea though he be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with
thee, Lev. 25. 35. If there be among you a poor man of one of thy Brethren,
within any of thy Gates, in thy land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou
shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor Brother. Thou shall
surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto
him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all thou put thine hand unto. For the Poor shall never cease
out of the Land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall open thine hand
wide unto thy Brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land, Deuteronomy. 15. 7,
-- 10, 11. Blessed is he that considers the Poor: the Lord will deliver him
in time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he
shall be blessed upon the earth; and thou will not deliver him unto the will of
his enemies. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness, Psalm. 41. 1, 2, 3. A good man shows
favor, and lends; he will guide his affairs with discretion. He has
dispersed, he has given to the poor: his righteousness endures for ever; his
horn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm. 112. 5, -- 9. He that despises his
neighbor, sins; but he that has mercy on the poor, happy is he. He that
oppresses the poor, reproacheth his maker; but he that honors him, has
mercy on the poor, Prove. 14. 21, -- 31. He that gives unto the poor shall not
lack; but he that hides his eyes shall have many a curse, Prove. 28. 27. He
that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord; and that which he has given
will he pay him again, Prove. 19. 17. And when God himself did declare what
those Acts are, which render Penitential Devotitions most agreeable to him, and
most effectual, he thus expresses his mind: Is not this the fast which I have
chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thine
house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own flesh? Isa. 58. 6, 7.

And when Daniel would prescribe to King Nebuchadnezzar the best way of
Amendment, and the surest means of averting God's Judgments impendent on him,
he thus speaks: Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee;
break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor, Dan. 4. 27.

From these Premises it appears, That this great Duty of Almsgiving and Charity
to the Poor, is most expressly commanded, not only by our B. Savior and his
Apostles, but also by Moses and the Prophets.

And though such undeniable Authority, when duly considered, is sufficient to
convince even the most obstinate Worldling; yet the more effectually to
persuade him, I shall briefly suggest some of those Reasons and Motives which
are contained in the forementioned Scriptures.

1. Charity to the poor makes us like unto God. For hereby we imitate and
resemble the Divine Nature. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father which
is in heaven is perfect, Matthew. 5. 48. That is, as our B. Savior explains
himself, Be ye therefore merciful, as your father also is merciful, Luke 6. 36.
This is that Perfection in which we are commanded to imitate our Heavenly
Father; Who is merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness,
Exodus 34. 6. Who delights in mercy, Mic. 7. 18. Who will wait that he may be
gracious, Isa. 30. 18. Who is the father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort, 1 Cor. 1. 3. Who is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil, Luke 6.
35. He is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm.
145. 9.

To do good therefore, and to show mercy; To be kind to those that are
afflicted; To comfort those that are in distress; To relieve those that are in
Want; is not only Noble and Generous, but it is Divine and God-like. Thus to
act, is to be followers of God as dear children; and to walk in love as Christ
also has loved us, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.

2. Charity to the Poor is an Act of Justice.

It Is the noted Pretense of the most Covetous Misers, whilst living; and their
usual Character bestowed upon them by their surviving Friends, when dead; That
they were very just and honest, and punctual in all their dealings. And they
will challenge any one to say, They ever wronged him in a Farthing.

This is their Triumph and their Crown: This they fancy must secure their
Reputations in this world, and their Souls in the next.

But it is the greatest Charity to undeceive their flattering Hopes, and to
deal plainly and impartially with them in this matter.

1. They say, They are strictly Just, and were never False in their Dealings.
At present we'll suppose it. What then? Is nothing more required, than to be
Just, and to do no Wrong? Is there not Right as well as Wrong? Is there not
such a Duty as Mercy, as well as Justice? Are there not Poor to be relieved, as
well as Creditors to be paid? Ye have the poor always with you, says our B.
Savior, Mark 14. 7. But for what reason think you are such Objects of Pity,
such helpless Wretches, so frequent amongst us? Can you fancy, that they are
only placed as a Foil to your Greatness? That you may despicere, look down upon
these Underlings with a scornful eye? Is it only to insult over them, and
despise them, to contemn and oppress them? No, certainly. But the poor you have
always with you, that whenever you will you may do them good. That you may
Comfort and Refresh them; that you may Relieve and Protect them; and in any
other Instance, as their case shall require, may exercise and enlarge your
Charity toward them. Which if you shall neglect to do, then hearken to your
Sentence, (and it is not your pretense of being Just, and your Fair, Square
Dealing, as you call it, that can reverse that dismal Doom) Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was
an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I
was a stranger and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and
in prison, and ye visited me not. And therefore though the Laws of the Land, or
some other Secular Design, may so far restrain you, that you do them no Wrong,
(and so far may give you the Reputation of being Just and Honest) yet if
(according to your Ability and their Occasions) you do them no good, you shall
be condemned for your Uncharitableness, as well as for the greatest Injustice.
But

2. These Covetous Rich Men, who will not be persuaded to be Charitable to the
Poor, they are far from being Just. As I thus easily convince them.

To be Just, is to give every man his own. If therefore upon enquiry it does
appear, That a Prudent, Well-regulated Charity is the Poor Man's Own, his
Property, his Due; then those who deny it are apparently Unjust.

To prove this, I must remind them of this known Truth.

Almighty God, the Sovereign Lord and Proprietary in Chief of the whole World,
has given the Earth to the Children of Men; not Absolutely, and without
reserve, to dispose of it as they please; but Conditionally, and as it were in
Trust, for such and such Uses, according to God's Direction and Appointment.

And therefore all those vast Heaps of Wealth in which the Misers of this world
do so pride themselves, and say, All this is Mine; they are only committed to
them as Stewards, to be employed and disposed of for their Great Master's Use.

Now as to Wealth and Riches, God has thus enjoined and commanded; That after
we have satisfied our own Necessities, and supplied our reasonable Occasions
(i. e. have lived according to our Quality, and enjoyed our Portion) we are
then to employ the remainder of our Estates for the Relief of our Poor
Brethren. If we have two coats (i. e. one more than we need) we should impart
to him that has none. If we have meat (i. e. in abundance, and to spare) we
should do likewise, and give to him that wants it, Luke 3. 11. And to neglect
such Distribution is to be unfaithful Stewards, by misapplying our Masters
Goods, and by detaining from our Poor Neighbor what God has commanded us to
give him. Withhold not good from them to wham it is due, when it is in the
power of thy hand to do it, Prove. 3. 27. From which Precept of Solomon I thus
infer; That those Rich Men who refuse to relieve their Poor Brother when it is
in their power, they deny him his Due, and consequently are Unjust.

3. Charity to the Poor is the most proper and principal expression of our
Gratitude to God.

There is no Character so afflicting, as Ungrateful Wretch. Ingratum si
dixeris, omnia dixisti. Call a man Ungrateful, and you cannot call him worse.
If ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love those
that love them. And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have
ye? for sinners also do even the same, Luke 6. 32, 33. Even Sinners, the worst
and vilest of men, will love those who do them good, and will acknowledge their
Benefactors.

Now Almighty God is confessedly the most obliging, and the greatest
Benefactor: Who daily loadeth us with hii benefits, Psalm. 68. 19. And crowns
us with loving kindness and tender mercies, Psalm. 103. 4. All that we are, all
that we have, all that we can hope for, is alone from his Bounty: It is he that
has made us, and not we our selves, Psalm. 100. 3. It Is he that preserves us:
For in him we live, and move, as well as have our being, Acts 17. 28. All the
Comforts and Conveniences of our Lives, the Health of our Bodies, the Soundness
of our Reason, the Competency of our Estates (for it is God that gives power
to get wealth) the Society of our Friends, nay, the very Earth which feeds and
supports us, the Air we breathe, the Sun and Stars which by their benign
Influence do cheer and revive us, they are all his Creatures, and are made for
our use.

But if the Blessings of this life do so sensibly affect us, how should we be
transported with the Expectations of the next? What unexpressible Kindness is
it, that Rebels and Traitors should not only have their Pardon, but be taken
into Grace and Favor, be admitted to the Dignity of being the Children of God,
and Heirs of Salvation?

But could we look beyond the Vail, and take one single Glance at those Glories
which are there prepared for those that love God; O! what Raptures would it
raise in us; how would it enlarge our Souls toward our dear Redeemer? What
shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward us? Psalm. 116. 12.
Nay, what shall we not render him? Shall we refuse him any thing, who has
given us all things, He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8. 32.

Indeed our Goodness extends not to God, Psalm. 16. 2. And a man cannot be
profitable to his maker, Job 22. 2. All that we can pretend to do in this kind,
is indirectly, in the Persons of his Poor Relations. Ye have the Poor with you
always, and whenever you will ye may do them good, Mark 14. 7. These are his
Deputy-Receivers: And what we do or not do to these, he acknowledges as done
or not done to himself. Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. And, Inasmuch as ye did it not to
one of the least of these, ye did it not to me, Matthew. 25. 40, 45.

So that to despise and contemn the Poor, is an Affront to their Maker. And to
take no notice of them, but to reject their Petitions for God and Christ's
sake, is a Despite and Indignity to him who sent them. And to refuse by their
hands to return some small Pittance of your Superfluities to Him, who is your
Best Friend, and most Bountiful Benefactor, is the vilest Ingratitude.

4. Charity to the Poor is an Act of Prudence; and of great advantage to our
selves: Because God who is faithful has promised, That it shall most
plentifully be rewarded, 1. In this Life. 2. The Life to come.

With respect to this Life, there are Three signal Advantages of a well
regulated Charity. It is the best Expedient, 1. To Secure and Preserve an
Estate. 2. To Improve and Increase an Estate. 3. To Bless and Sanctify an
Estate.

1. A Charitable Distribution of your Wealth, is the surest Expedient to
Preserve your Estate.

This the Covetous Misers; whose noted Motto is, To Have and to Hold, (and
consequently to part with nothing) will hardly believe. But our B. Savior, who
has assured them (if they durst but take his word) that it is more blessed to
give than to receive, would easily convince them, That Charity is the best
Tenure; and will continue a Name, and perpetuate a Family more firmly than all
their Fines, and Vouchers, and Entails, (those Clenching Nails of the Law) can
pretend to.

For alas! How slight a Title is a Legal Right? How slender Security is the
firmest Conveyance against Destructive Casualties?

Will you charm a Thief with Paper and Parchment? Or will it stop the devouring
Flames, to tell them that you have an unquestionable Deed of Sale; and that
this House which they are now ready to consume, is settled upon You and your
Heirs for ever? Will an astonishing Earthquake, when God gives it a Commission
to swallow up, be fixed and firm at the Pleadings of your Learned Council? Will
the Winds grow calm, and the Sea hush and be still; or a Roving Pyrate cease
his Pursuit, because the Ship and its Cargo are the Property of its Owners? Do
not these and such like Instances effectually convince you, That God's
Providence is your best Insurance? Can any Power, less than his, preserve you
from that Violence and Treachery, those Calamities and Dangers with which your
Wealth is surrounded?

Think seriously upon it, and you will then confess, It is your Interest as
well as Duty, by Acts of Charity to secure the Divine Protection, which alone
is able to preserve your Estates. Blessed is he that considers the poor; the
Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him, and keep
him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the Earth; and thou will not deliver
him unto the will of his Enemies, Psalm. 41. 1, 2.

2. A Charitable Distribution is the best Expedient to Increase an Estate.

This doubtless will seem a Paradox to the Covetous Worldling: Whose Infidelity
will not suffer him to comprehend, how an Addition can be made to an Estate by
substracting from it For according to outward Sense and Apprehension, he who
shall separate the Tenth, the Twentieth, or the Thirtieth, or any other
Proportionable part of his Estate, and give it to the Poor; he must needs have
so much less to Dispose of in any other Instance. So much less for his Family;
so much less for his Pleasures; so much les for his Friend; so much less for
any other Occasion. How then can Charity to the Poor increase an Estate?

Indeed to Sensual men, whose hope is in this Life, this may seem impossible;
but it will appear very possible to him who Believes. Solomon has assured us,
There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholdeth
more than is meet, but it tends to Poverty. The liberal soul shall be made
fat: and he that waters shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11. 24, 25. Upon
which words, a Learned and Pious Prelate of our Church has this Paraphrase.
You shall find here and there a man who Communicates readily and liberally to
the necessities of others; and yet his Estate is so far from being impaired
thereby, that it increases. When others, who are so saving that they will part
with nothing, no not upon the most just occasions, do not thrive at all, but by
one means or other become Beggars. Let not him therefore that bestows benefits,
imagine thereby he shall be impoverished; for it is the certain way to enrich
himself: And the larger his Charity is, and the more diffused for the
refreshment of others, the greater abundance shall be poured on him, and the
abler still shall he grow to do more Good. For he that gives unto the Poor,
shall not lack, Prove. 28. 27. i. e. He that relieves those that are in Want,
shall be so far from wanting himself, that he shall thereby procure God's
blessing to increase his Estate. And the reason of this increase is given,
Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity upon the Poor, lends unto the Lord: and that
which he has given, will he pay him again. i. e. He will repay him with
Interest and Advantage.

And therefore, as the Apostle admonishes, Let us not be weary in well doing:
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6. 9. i. e. Be not
discouraged, though you do not presently find the effects of your Charity, by
an increase of your Estate, for in God's due time your Liberality shall be
rewarded. But then you must not faint; you must not be weary in well doing; you
must not suspect the truth of God's Promises; but must patiently wait his time
for the fulfilling of them.

3. Charity will Bless and Sanctify an Estate. i. e. A charitable Distribution
of a Proportionable Part of our Estates, will qualify us to enjoy the rest with
Satisfaction and Comfort.

Give Alms, and behold all things are clean unto you, Luke 11. 41. Alms are the
First Fruits of our Estates, and as such are the Lord's Property. Which being
duly offered to the Lord, will Sanctify all the rest of our Estates, and give a
relish to all our Enjoyments. But if we withhold this Portion from the Poor (to
whom the Lord has commanded it to be given) it will pollute and profane all
our Estate; and it will render the fruition of it sour and unsavory to us.
The Blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Prove.
10. 22. There are many ways and methods to be made Rich; but when an Estate is
procured, by the Blessing of God upon our lawful endeavors; and is moderately
used, and Charitably Distributed; such an Estate is enjoyed without anxious
Thoughts, and perplexing Cares. Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall
open thine hand wide unto thy Brother, to thy Poor and to thy Needy, in thy
land. -- Because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15. 10-11,

He shall Bless thee, not only by giving thee good success in all thy lawful
and prudent Undertakings; but he shall Bless thee, in a comfortable enjoyment
of all thy Portion.

I have now briefly suggested, How, or in what manner Charity shall be rewarded
in this Life. It will 1. Preserve. 2. Increase. 3. Sanctify an Estate. But

II. The highest and most pressing Motive to Charity, is the comfortable
Assurance, that it shall be rewarded in the Life to come.

This is the hope and expectation of all good Christians. And if this will not
make the Vile Person to be liberal, and the Churl to be bountiful (in the
Prophet's language, Isaiah 32. 5.) If this will not open both the Hand and
Heart of the most Gripple Wretch, I am then discouraged from any further
enlargement. But I much hope, what I am now to say will not be rejected: But
may, through God's Blessing, be effectual and convincing.

And First, I must desire you to consider, O ye Great and Wealthy Men, that you
are frail and mortal as well as others. That after a very short time your
thread will be spun out. And then (as an Excellent Person does admonish you)
You shall be rifled, and quite stripped of all; you shall be laid out stark
naked, as when you came into the World; you shall not carry with you one grain
of your glistering Metals, or one rag of your gaudy Stuff. Your stately Houses,
your fine Gardens, and your spacious Walks, must all be exchanged for a close
Hole under ground; you must for ever bid farewell to your Pomps and
Magnificences; to your Feasts and Jollities; to your Sports and Pastimes. Not
one of all your numerous and splendid Retinue, no Companion of your Pleasures,
no Admirer of your Fortune, no Flatterer of your Vices can wait upon you: But
desolate and unattended you must go down into the Chambers of Darkness. V.
Barrow's Bounty to the Poor, p. 160.

Being thus convinced that you must certainly Die; the next Thought is to
consider (and it is a weighty Thought) Whither are you going, when you leave
this World? Into what unknown Regions is your next remove? And then, since
Persons of your Figure do love to be well treated, it is methodical to enquire,
What kind of Entertainment are you then to expect? What Preparations have you
made for your Reception there? In your Progress or Journey, you give notice of
your approach to such or such a place; and send your Harbingers before, to make
Provision for you, that so you may be received with Decency, and according to
your Quality.

Let us now examine, Whether you are as wise for the Life to come, as you are
for this.

We are all Strangers in this World, and have here no continuing City: But as
Pilgrims and Sojourners are Traveling to a better Country. Now those who
Travel into Foreign Parts, do either send some Effects before them, or else do
carry along with them Bills of Credit, which they take up in the Coin or
Commodities of those Countries, as they have occasion. Indeed in this World,
Money answers all things. But there is something else which answers all
things in the next. viz. Alms and Charitable Distributions. These are our
Exchange for the other World, and the Bills and Effects we are to send before
us. These (in the Traders Language) are such Bills, as will certainly be
accepted. Or (in Scripture Phrase) shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of
the Just. By thus giving Alms, you provide your selves Bags which wax not old;
a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no Thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts, Luke 12. 33. By this faithful usage of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, you make your selves friends, that when ye fail (when you Die,
and leave your Earthly Wealth) will receive you (will cause you to be received)
into everlasting Habitations.

For when the Dead shall be raised (to express my self in the moving Rhetoric
of a Learned Prelate) and all the inumerable Myriads that ever were born, shall
stand before the dreadful Tribunal; then shall those that have been relieved by
the merciful man, appear as so many Intercessors for him. As if they should
say; Lord, this is the Man that refreshed our Bowels when we were pinched with
Hunger; that came in seasonably to support us when we were ready to perish;
that delivered us from the hand of our cruel Oppressor; that had pity on our
Children, and gave them good Education when they were left poor, distressed,
fatherless Infants. V. Bishop Chichester 's Profitable Charity, p. 20. O! what
reviving Raptures will it then raise, to hear their Savior and their Judge to
make this Reply; In as much as ye did it to the least of these my Brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Come therefore ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world.

This is the Blessed Reward of a well Regulated Charity. And God grant that by
doing Good; by being rich in good Works; by being ready to distribute, and
willing to Communicate to the necessities of Others; you may lay up in store
for your selves a good foundation against the time to come, and may lay hold on
Eternal Life.

I much hope, that you are now fully convinced of the necessity of this Duty.
The Precepts of Charity are so plain, and so often repeated in the H.
Scriptures; so pressingly enforced by such just and reasonable Considerations,
that the most tenacious Wretch must needs be convinced in his Judgment, that it
is both his Interest and his Duty, To be Charitable and do Good.

But notwithstanding all this, or whatever else can be said on this Subject; if
either the Suggestions of Satan (who envies the happiness of Mankind), or the
clamours of disatisfied Relations (who like Vultures wait for their Prey) I
say, if either of these can divert the Covetous Miser from doing Good, they
will not fail to furnish him with such Pleas and Excuses as these.

PLEA I.
This pressing of Charity is a Popish Trick. How many brave Estates have been
ruined, by the wheedling Arts of these Canting Priests? What stately Lordships
have been bequeathed to the Superstitious uses of Obits and Masses for the
Dead? And being rid of this Trumpery, must the Clergy of the Reformation be
still practicing upon us? Shall not our Friends Dispose of their Estates and
make their Wills as they please, but these Men in Black must pretend to Direct,
and bring in their Items for the Poor, and the Church?

ANSWER.
To the great Honor of the Reformation we can boldly declare, that Charity is
no Popish Trick; for if a just Account of such Endowments were published to the
World (as it is hoped in due time it may) it would undeniably appear, That as to
the best parts of Public Charity (viz. founding Schools and Hospitals, etc.)
more has been done by Protestants since the Days of Edw. 6. than by Papists
from the Conquest to the Reformation.

But why must Charity be branded as Popish? Indeed formerly, Popish was a
frightful Word, and of large extent in these Nations. The Reformed Service of
our Church has been condemned as Popish. Bishops and their Lands have been
Voted Popish (for whilst Naboth has a Vineyard, he shall not be innocent) and
whatever else has displeased, has been nicknamed Popish.

But the Cheat is long since detected, and the Generality of our People are now
better instructed; for they plainly understand, That what Papists formerly did
out of a mistaken Zeal, and Superstitious Principles, Protestants may now
perform in a due and regular manner; and so the Objection is vanished, and the
Protestant Clergy may still do their Duty in pressing Charity, without the
harsh and unjust Censure of being Popishly affected.

PLEA II.
The Laws of the Land have taken care of the Poor: and if duly executed would
competently provide for them. To what purpose therefore do you Exhort us to be
Charitable to the Poor, when we are forced, upon Complaint, to relieve them
whether we will or no?

ANSWER.
1. If these Laws are not Executed (as many times they are not) the Poor will
still want relief: and may starve with the Law on their side.

2. There are many Cases of Charity, for which the Laws have not provided. Men
of generous Spirits will even sink in their misery, and endure the utmost
extremity, before they will make known their Wants to their insulting
Neighbors, or be relieved by a Parish. These are proper Objects for the
Charity of Wealthy Men, who besides the Payment of their Parish Rates, should
be constantly doing Good in such instances as these. For true Christian Charity
is of a large extent, beyond the Obligation of humane Laws; and therefore, when
at the great and dreadful Day, it shall be demanded of those Rich and Wealthy
Men, Whether they have fed the hungry, and clothed the naked? etc. it will be
a very imperfect and uncomfortable Answer only to Reply, That they paid their
Rates to the Poor.

PLEA III.
My Estate, as yet, is but small; when I am as rich as other Men, I may then
think of Distributing, and being Charitable to the Poor.

ANSWER.
How small is your Estate? Perhaps you are not worth Fifty Thousand Pounds; you
do not ride in your Coach and Six, nor eat in Plate. If this be your notion of
a small Estate, your Estate perhaps is not only small at present, but ever
shall be.

But not to Rally your Ambition, nor expose your impertinent Notion of being
Rich; if your Estate is but small, your Charity may be small likewise: For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. The Widow's Mite, because
cheerfully offered, was better accepted than the Rich Men's Abundance.

PLEA IV.
My Estate indeed is Competent; but I have Wife and Children and a Family to
provide for; I have Debts and Encumbrances upon my Estate; and till these
Expectations are answered, I have little left for Charity.

ANSWER.
1. True Christian Charity does not exclude Acts of Justice (such as these now
mentioned) but suppose them: It Is therefore your Duty to provide for your Wife
and Children, 1 Timothy 5. 8. But how must these be provided for? Not according to
your Projecting Ambition, or their extravagant Expectations, but according to
more sober and prudent Measures; provide so for them as to encourage their
Industry, that they may live decently according to your present Rank and
Quality, and may be enabled to maintain your Character, when they fill your
Place, and enjoy your Estate; beyond this do not concern your Self for them.
They that will be Rich (i. e. they who resolve, and make it their chief design,
to be Rich) they fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Be so
wise therefore,

2. To provide for your Self as well as your Family; and do not hazard an
Immortal Soul; nor make your self, not only a Drudge in this World, but
eternally miserable in the next; to raise them to a Grandeur, which shall only
instruct them to despise your Meanness, and (by making Provision for the flesh)
the more artificially to ruin themselves.

What is suggested concerning Debts and Encumbrances is a very uncertain
pretense; since many men who are in Debt may be out of it when they please.
Great Purchasers and great Dealers, who grasp at all, are seldom out of Debt;
and if such men must be excused from Charity till they have paid their Debts,
the Poor and the Public will be little better for them. But it is the Duty of
the Clergy,

3. To admonish such Men, That they are obliged to be just to God, as well as
their Creditors. They who talk so much of paying their Debts (as if that might
excuse them from giving to the Poor) let them first take care to pay their
Debts to God, in Charitable Distributions; which I thus prove to be their Duty.
When God gave them their Estates (either by Descent from others, or their own
Industry) he reserved to himself a Chief-Rent (a proportionable Part of their
Incomes) which he commands them to give, as occasion shall require, to the
Public, and to the Poor; and will they not be just to God, their great
Landlord, as well as to their lesser Creditors? Will they not pay God his own?
let them know therefore, if they refuse their Chief Rent of Charity, they have
forfeited their Estates, and God may take the Seizure When and How he pleases.

PLEA V.
I am inclined to give to the Poor, but there are so many Objects of Charity,
that I know not where to begin, nor when to end; should I give to every one who
asks, I might soon squander away my whole Estate, and perhaps have little
thanks for so doing; for these begging People are so rude and censorious, that
though I may have given, in former instances, even beyond my Ability, yet if I
do not give likewise to them, I shall be clamoured and railed at, as if I had
given nothing at all.

ANSWER.
Your Charity (as all other Passages of your Life) must be regular, and
governed by Prudence. Otherwise, in this as well as other Christian Duties, you
may offer the Sacrifice of Fools. A Good man shows favor, and lends; he
will guide his Affairs with Discretion, Psalm. 112. 5. You must not therefore
pretend to give at large, to every one that asks; no nor to every one that
wants. For there is no law of God or Man that does oblige you to impoverish
your Self and Family by relieving of Others.

And therefore, that you may neither be wanting to the Poor, nor to your Self,
give me leave to propose this following Method.

Having taken a true Estimate of the Value and Circumstances of your Incomes,
then settle a a Charity-Fund: By Separating and Dedicating some proportionable
Part of your Estate to Charitable Uses. This Method is plainly suggested, if
not commanded by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now concerning the Collection for
the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye.
Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as
God has prospered him. What Proportion you are to separate (or, in the
Apostle's Language, lay by you in store) whether a Tenth, a Twentieth, a
Thirtieth, or a Fortieth, etc. I must not pretend to Determine: For St. Paul
has left you to your liberty, with this general Caution, To do as God shall
prosper you.

Those who have large Estates, and no Children to provide for; that are not
clogged with Debts, nor such like Encumbrances, they are obliged to Dedicate the
more; but of those who have many Children to provide for, and are pressed with
Debts and other Encumbrances, God will doubtless accept the less. Let every man
according as he purposes in his heart (and according as his Circumstances will
permit) so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loves a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7.

By this Expedient of a Fund, or Poor-Man's Box (which is heartily commended to
you) your Charity will be ready and cheerful, as well as Regular and Prudent.

And because Examples are more intelligible than Precepts, and do usually make
the firmer impression: I shall therefore repeat this following Passage, of Mr.
William Whately, sometime Vicar of Banbury (a famous Preacher) who, upon
occasion, thus Addressed himself to his friend: You know, Sir, some years since
I was often beholding to you for the Lone of 10 l. at a time; The truth is, I
could not bring the Year about, though my Receipts were not despicable, and I
was not at all conscious to my Self of any vain Expenses, or of Improvidence:
At length I began to examine my Family what relief was given to the Poor; and
although I was assured that was not done nigardly, yet I could not be so
satisfied, but resolved instantly to lay aside every Tenth shilling of all my
Receipts for Charitable Uses. And (to let you see how well I have thrived this
way in a short time) now, if you have occasion to use an 100 l. or more, I have
it ready for you. V. Append. to Mr. Mede's Life, p. 37.

The same (as to the Dedication of a Tenth Part) is reported of the Lord
Harrington, Dr. H. Hammond, Mr. Joseph Mede, Mr. John Parker, with several
others.

PLEA VI.
Pray do not suspect my Charity, but have a little Patience with me: Give me
leave to enjoy my Estate whilst I live, and those who best deserve it shall
have it when I die. Amongst other Items in my Will, there is so much left to
the Poor; and this I hope may excuse me from any further Importunities.

ANSWER.
Though it seems you are resolved to part with nothing whilst you live, but to
keep the Staff in your own hand, as you phrase it; yet you fairly promise to do
some good at your Death. And thus far, it is well, for better late than never;
but let me be so faithful to my Office to remind you, That the Charity you
intend at your Death, must not excuse you from being Charitable in your
Lifetime; for, to give you a true State of the Case, it is with Charity as with
Repentance.

You must repent at your Death: For, Repentance, as well as other Graces, must
be exercised upon your Deathbed. But it is much hoped you do not then begin to
Repent: For, a Deathbed Repentance is neither comfortable nor safe. Repentance
then is the work of your whole Life: For Daily Sins must have Daily Repentance.
However, though there will be occasion for Repentance all your life long, yet
when you come to Die, you then revise and finish your Repentance, i. e. you
then exercise these Penitential Acts with all the vigor that you can, and most
earnestly beg pardon for your imperfect Repentance.

And thus it is with Charity.

You ought indeed to be Charitable at your Death (whereby you may supply your
former Defects, and may still be doing Good when you are removed into another
World) but this Deathbed or Testamentary Charity does not exclude, but suppose
the Charity of your preceding Life. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do
good unto all men, Gal. 6. 10. Now this Expression, As we have opportunity,
denotes Two Things:

1. Life and Time to do Good.

2. Wealth and Power to do Good: And both these may be wanting if you neglect
the present season.

1. You may resolve to be very Charitable at your Death, by Bequeathing such
and such Legacies to the Poor; but either Death prevents you (and your Will is
never made) or else you are diverted by the unseasonable clamours of others,
who will be very importunate to discourage your Charity. But

2. Suppose you are fixed and firm in your Resolution of doing Good at your
Death, it may then possibly not be in your Power; for Riches make themselves
Wings. And the Wealth of an Age may be gone in a Moment. For (to omit Modern
Instances) he who this Day has the Wealth of Job, may to Morrow need his
Patience: And therefore, Withhold not Good from them to whom it is due, when it
is in the power of thy hand to do it, Prove. 3. 27.

PLEA VII.
I have both Ability and Inclination to be Charitable: But am troubled to
observe, How Gifts and Legacies are abused, and how often the Intentions of
Pious Donors are Perverted.

ANSWER.
That this may not discourage your Charity, please to Consider, That there is
nothing fixed and certain in this World; and if you dare not be Charitable,
because your Gift may be abused, for the same reason you must neither Purchase
nor Bargain, because you may be cheated.

Use therefore the best Caution, and take the best Advice you can; and when you
have so done, leave the Success to God And then, though the Wickedness of
others should pervert your Charity, yet God, who is faithful, will Reward your
good intention.

And the better to avoid Abuses; Finish your Charity in your Life, and depend
not too much upon Executors and Trustees. But lest you should not Personally
settle your Charity in your Life, make choice of such Executors as are of
Ability as well as Integrity: and (in Modern Language) who are Responsible as
well as Honest.

And if your Charity is not so large as to raise a Foundation of your Own,
there are then several eminent Foundations, in this Kingdom, upon which you may
safely Superstruct, and securely place your Charity, without the least hazard
of its being perverted, viz. The Colleges and Halls in our Two famous
Universities, Oxford and Cambridge. The Five noted Hospitals in London and
Southwark, viz Christ's -Hospital, St. Bartholomew's -Hospital, St. Thomas's
-Hospital, Bridewel-Hospital, Bethlem-Hospital.

Besides these, there is another late Foundation, which (because as yet not so
generally known) I shall more largely describe; and with a most Affectionate
Concern thus Commend to your Charity.

ALL those Honorable and Worthy Persons, who are inclined to Dedicate and
Bequeath some part of their Estates to Charitable Uses; They are most humbly
Petitioned, To Remember Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen.

And the better to promote so Pious a Work, it was thought fit here to Publish,

An Abstract of the CHARTER Granted by his late Majesty, King Charles the II.
(of ever Blessed Memory) for Erecting a CORPORATION for Relief of Poor Widows
and Children of CLERGYMEN. Dated July 1st. 1678.

HIS said late MAJESTY having taken notice, That diverse Charitable Persons had
appeared very forward in contributing to the relief of such of the Widows and
Children of Loyal and Orthodox Clergymen as were poor, and of the good effect
the same has had; and taking into his Princely Consideration the great
Sufferings of many of the Clergy in England for their Loyalty: Was graciously
pleased by his Charter, under the Great Seal of England, to Ordain, Constitute,
and Grant, That the Persons therein named, and their Successors, (to be elected
as is therein expressed) Be one Body Politic and Corporate, by the name of, The
Governors of the Charity for Relief of poor Widows and Children of Clergymen:
And that by the same name they should have perpetual Succession, and be capable
to purchase, have, or take Manors, Lands, and Hereditaments, etc. not
exceeding the yearly value of Two thousand Pounds; and all manner of Goods and
Chattels, and to dispose thereof: And by that Name to Plead, and to be
Impleaded in All Actions, etc. And to act all other Matters and Things as fully
as any other Body Politic in this Realm can do: And that the said Governors
should have one Common-Seal.

And his said late Majesty did further Grant to the said Governors, That There
should be a President, a Vice President, three Treasurers, and forty two
Assistants, Members of the said Corporation, and that they, or any five of
them, (whereof the President, Vice President, or one of the Treasurers to be
one) should be called The Court of Assistants of the said Corporation, who
should have the management of all the Affairs of the said Coporation, and
should make Laws and Ordinances for the good Government thereof, as well in
Matters concerning the Corporation, as in electing of Officers, and Management
of their Revenues; and impose Penalties on Offenders against the said Laws, and
recover the same to the use of the said Corporation.

And therein it is appointed that the persons thereby Constituted to be the
first President, Vice President, Treasurers, and first Assistants, should
continue in their respective places until the second Thursday in November,
1679. And from thenceforth, until there should be a new Choice made of persons
to succeed them.

And that on every second Thursday in November for ever (or oftener if there be
occasion) there should be a General Assembly of the said Governors, and the
Major part of the Members then present might choose a President, Vice President,
three Treasurers, and Forty two Assistants, who should continue for the Year
following: And that in case of the death of any of the said Officers within the
Year, others might be chosen at a General Assembly into their places.

And that such General Assembly might Elect such other person or persons to be
Members and Governors of the said Corporation, as they, or the greater part of
them shall think fit.

Provided, That the President, Vice President, and Treasurers abovenamed,
should before they enter upon their Places, take their Oaths before the Lord
Chancellor, faithfully to execute their Respective Trusts: And that all other
the Members of the said Corporation before they act as Assistants, and all
succeeding Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Treasures, Assistants, and all other
their inferior Officers should take the like Oath before the Persons by the
said Charter empowered to administer the same.

And that the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord High-Chancellor of England,
Lord Archbishop of York, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord
High-Treasurer, Lord Bishop of London, Lord Almoner, and the Lord Mayor of
London, for the time being, should be the Visitors of the said Corporation, and
settle all differences about the Government thereof, and touching the
disposition of their Revenues.

HAving thus published this great favor of his late Majesty, here are next set
down the Forms of Subscriptions; and also how any Legacy in Money, or Houses
and Land, may be given by WILL to the said Corporation.

I (...) of (...) do promise to pay to the Governors of the Charity for Relief
of poor Widows, and Children of Clergymen, the Sum of (...) Sterling, on or
before the (...)

Witness my Hand

I (...) of (...) do promise to pay to the Governors of the Charity, for Relief
of poor Widows, and Children of Clergymen, the Sum of (...) Sterling, at the
two usual Feast days of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and St.
Michael the Archangel, by equal Portions during (...) The first payment to be
made at the next of the Feast Days above mentioned, that shall happen after the
Date hereof.

Witness my Hand

This may be inserted among LEGACIES in a WILL.
ITem, I give and bequeath unto the Governors of the Charity, for Relief of
poor Widows, and Children of Clergymen, the Sum of (...) Pounds, to be paid to
one of the Treasurers.

For devising HOUSES or LANDS.
ITem, I give and devise unto the Governors of the Charity, for Relief of poor
Widows, and Children of Clergymen, and their Successors for ever, all that my
Message (...) and Lands Situate and being in (...)

IT is thought fit and requisite to give notice; That the Governors of this
Charity (by the assistance of many worthy persons, who have bountifully
contributed thereunto, and whose names are Registered as Benefactors:) Have not
only made some Purchases as a Yearly Bond, but also distributed considerable
Sums amongst poor Widows, and Children of Clergymen. And also several poor
Children are Yearly placed forth Apprentices, by the Direction and
Encouragement of the Stewards. It is therefore much hoped, That considerable
Subscriptions will still be made, Gifts and Legacies bequeathed in all parts of
this Kingdom: Such a certain Method and Security being Established for the due
Administration of this Charity, so that nothing can be diverted to any other
use.

All Persons who shall please to promote this Charity, or have any thing to
communicate concerning the same; may direct Letters, as occasion shall require,
to Mr. Thomas Tyllot, the Register of the Corporation, at Doctors Commons,
LONDON.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Design of this Treatise. Page 2 That Divines may Discourse of Last Wills
and Testaments, and how? Page 3 Directions concerning Last Wills and
Testaments. Ib. I. Make your Will in your Health. Ib. For, 1. If you defer it
to your Sickbed, you may possibly never make it at all. Page 4
Or, 2. It is then most commonly imperfect and Defective. Page 7 3. Disturbing
to the Dying Testator. Page 12

II. Make a Christian Will. Page 15 III. Make a Prudent Will Page 19 Express
this Prudence, 1. In the form of Words and Phrases, in which the Will is Drawn
and Composed. Ib. 2. In the Subject Matter of the Will; the Distribution of an
Estate, whether Real or Personal. 20

IV. Make a Just Will. Page 24 The nature of Restitution Page 26 The Reason of
it. Page 30
V. Make a Charitable Will. Page 33
It is the Duty of the Clergy earnestly to move Sick and Dying Persons to be
liberal to the Poor. Ib. Charity commanded by St. Paul. Page 35 By St. James.
Page 40 By St. John. Page 41 By our B. Savior. Page 43 And in the Law and the
Prophets. Page 47
Motives to Charity. 1. Charity to the Poor makes us like unto God. Page 51 2.
It is an Act of Justice. Page 53 3. It Is the most proper expression of our
Gratitude to God. 4. It Is an Act of Prudence, and of great Advantage to our
Selves. I. With Respect to this Life. 1. To Preserve. 2. Increase. 3. Sanctify
an Estate. Page 62 etc.
II. Charity shall be rewarded in the Life to come.

Pleas and Pretenses, to excuse the neglect of Charitable Distributions. Plea
I. Pressing of Charity is Popish. Answ. Page 78
Plea II. The Laws have provided for the Poor. Answ. Page 80
Plea III. My Estate is but small. Answ. Page 82
Plea IV. I have Wife and Children to provide for, Debts to be paid. Answ. Page
83
Plea V. There are so many Objects of Charity, I may give away all my Estate.
Answ. Page 87
Plea VI. I will remember the Poor when I Die. Answ. Page 91
Plea VII. Charity is often abused, Gifts and Legacies are Perverted. Answ.
Page 95

Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen most humbly recommended. Page 97 An
Abstract of the Charter for Relief of Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen.
Ib.
Catalogue of some Books printed for B. Aylmer.
A Conference with an Anabaptist. Being a Defense of Infant Baptism. In 8 vo.
price 12 d. A Theological Discourse of Last Wills and Testaments. In 8 vo.
price 12 d. A Short Exposition (of the Preliminary Questions and Answers) of
the Church-Catechism. Being an Introduction to a Defense of Infant Baptism.
Price 2 d. Directions in order to the Suppressing of Debauchery and
Profaneness. 2 d. A Discourse against Blasphemy. Being A Conference with M. S.
Concerning 1. The Rudeness of Atheistical Discourse. 2. The Certainty and
Eternity of Hell Torments. 3. The Truth and Authority of the Holy Scriptures. 2
d. A Discourse against 1. Drunkenness. 2. Swearing and Cursing. 2 d.
These are the price of each of these small books single; but for the
encouragement of those that are so charitably inclined to give away some
quantities of them, they may have them at ten shillings a hundred. At Brab.
Aylmer 's, in Cornhill.

These above all Writ by the Reverend William Assheton. D. D.

Certain Propositions by which the Doctrine of the H. Trinity is so explained,
according to the Ancient Fathers, as to speak it not Contradictory to Natural
Reason: Together with a Defense of them, in Answer to the Objections of a
Socinian Writer, in his newly printed Considerations on the Explications of the
Doctrine of the Trinity. Occasioned by these Propositions among other
Discourses, in a Letter to that Author.

A Second Defense of the Propositions; By which the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity is so Explained, according to the Ancient Fathers, as to speak it not
Contradictory to Natural Reason. In Answer to a Socinian Manuscript, In a
Letter to a Friend. Together with a Third Defense of those Propositions, in
Answer to the Newly published Reflections, contained in a Pamphlet, Entitled,
A Letter to the Reverend Clergy of Both Universities.

Both by Edward Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

Lately Printed, the Holy Bible, Containing the Old Testament and the New: With
Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony of the
Gospels: As also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins, and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter and good
Paper; the like never before in one Volume.

The Four Last Things: viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, practically
Considered and Applied in several Discourses. By William Bates, D. D.


