THE BEST TREASURE, Or, THE WAY to be Truly Rich.

BEING A Discourse on EPHESIANS. 3. 8.

Wherein is opened and commended to Saints and Sinners the Personal and
Purchased Riches of Christ, as the best Treasure, to be pursued, and ensur'd by
all that would be happy here and hereafter.

By Bartholomew Ashwood, Late Minister of the Gospel; Author of The Heavenly
Trade.

Riches and Honor are with me, yea, durable Riches and Righteousness. Prove. 8.
18. For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was Rich,
yet for your sakes he became Poor; that ye through his Poverty might be Rich. 2
Cor. 8. 9. In Christo igitur sitae sunt omnes nostrae Divitiae.
In Christo sita spes nostrae gloriae. Daven.
LONDON, Printed for William Marshal, at the Bible in Newgate-Street, at the
corner of Ivy Lane. 1681.

TO THE READER.
THE Wisdom and Grace of God in Christ Jesus, are frequently in the Scripture
expressed by the name of Riches and Treasures. These it is the duty of
Believers in all Ages, diligently to search after, to enquire into and possess
for themselves. And it may be, more Diligence or with more Success, as unto the
doctrinal Revelation of them, has not been used in this Enquiry in any Age,
than in that wherein we live. But still they continue Unsearchable, though not
absolutely as unto their Truth, Reality and Substance, or such a possession of
them as may enrich us unto a Meetness for the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light; but as unto their unmeasurable Dimensions, their Breadth, and Length,
and Depth, and Height in Degrees of Fullness. Wherefore, after the utmost and
most diligent search made into these things by the best and wisest of the Sons
of men, there is still and ever will be, new work for the Church whilst it is
in this world, to enquire farther after and into these Treasures. Nothing but
the sight of Christ himself in Glory, can give us a full comprehension of them.
Whilst we are here below, no man can exercise his spiritual Wisdom and Faith,
about a more noble, a more useful, and beneficial object. They do best for
themselves who are most conversant herein, and will be sound to be the most
spiritual and thriving Christians. And therefore those who are not only wise
for themselves herein, but do moreover communicate unto others the knowledge
that they have obtained of these unsearchable Treasures, and their insight into
them, that they also may be made Partakers of them, do deserve well in an
eminent manner of all that do believe. Among these, the reverend Author of the
ensuing Discourse (if I mistake not) does deserve our Praise and our Thanks to
God for him and his Labors. For as he has given Evidence, that he was himself
in a good measure, admitted into the enjoyment of these unsearchable Riches; so
he has with great skill and spiritual wisdom, unfolded and laid them open unto
the view of others. And this he has done so briefly, plainly, and practically,
that the most learned will find nothing in his Discourse to be despised, and
the generality of Believers, whose Edification he designed, will meet with that
which will be to their Use and Advantage. The times also wherein we live, do
render this and discourses of the like Nature exceeding seasonable. For the
Uncertainty of the continuance of all other Riches, should stir us up to look
with diligence after an indefeasible Interest in the certain and unsearchable
Riches of Christ. For as these alone are sufficient for us in every Condition,
so we know not but that e're long, they alone will be left unto us; blessed are
all they who are possessed of them. Besides, the Opposition that has been made
of late by some unto these and the like Mysteries of the Gospel, does give a
value unto a sober Testimony given unto them. Of this Nature is the ensuing
Discourse, which that it may be useful to the Reader, unto all the ends
whereunto it was designed by it is worthy Author, shall be the Prayer of his
Servant in the work of the Gospel.

John Owen.

THE BEST TREASURE;
From EPHESIANS 3. 8. Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints is this
grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ.
CHAP. I.
The Occasion of this Discourse, with an Introduction to the Words, and
Explication of them, and the main truth contained in them.

RICHES are desired by most, but true Treasures obtained by few, (through the
mistaken Notion thereof.) It Is sad to see how sollicitous many are after
Vanities: and (like the Jews in Egypt) are scattered abroad, through all the
Land, to gather Stubble, whilst tried Gold lies neglected; and the Pearl of
Price little valued. O the Projects and vast expense of Time and strength to
reach things that are not; when the infinite Concerns of Eternity, and welfare
of an immortal Soul, cannot get a room in one serious thought; or a few minutes
of shortening time to attend them. It Is lamentable to behold, not only the
blind World, but those that profess themselves Wise, (like the Spider) working
out their Bowels to weave Cobwebs, and (with the Dog in the Fable) letting go
the Substance to catch at Shadows; and running themselves out of breath to sit
down in sorrow. The affecting sense of this Folly has made me scatter some
Balls of true Gold to prevent (if possible) the dangerous haste of such
deceived Souls, and to allure them to better and more unsearchable Treasures,
that are to be found in, and fetched from the Lord Jesus. This is the Design of
the ensuing Discourse on this portion of Scripture, which I shall briefly open,
and then draw forth the main Conclusion I intend to prosecute.

The Apostle lays down these words as an Argument by which he endeavors to
strengthen the Faith of those believing Ephesians in, and to quicken their
Affections to the Gospel of Christ, taken from the blessed Advantages it brings
to all that do receive it. It makes a Discovery and overture of unsearchable
Riches to them: let them be never so poor, destitute of the affluences and good
things of this World; yet, by believing through this Gospel, they shall come to
attain to inestimable Treasures; even the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

In the Words you have four parts.

First, A Discovery of the admirable Love of God to fallen man, particularly to
the blind, perishing Gentiles, in not only giving Christ to save them, but in
opening Christ to them, even his secret and boundless Treasures: The
unsearchable Riches of Christ.

Secondly, Here Is the way by which these are opened and brought to light, which
is, by the Gospel, in the Administration thereof by his Messengers: That I
should preach [(...)] strictly taken, it is to preach the Gospel, or good news,
but generally it takes in the whole work of the Ministry.

Thirdly, Here Is the great expense of Grace the Lord Jesus is at to bring forth
his unsearchable Riches, it is by the laying out of Grace to those that publish
it (To me who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace given;)
Grace, great Grace, to the least of Saints, ((...)) lesser, least, or more
little than the least; an unusual Degradation of a man's self, and the
Character of an empty and unworthy Instrument in his own eye, and so a Subject
that needed much Grace, to be meetned for such high Service: and yet such a one
did Christ use in this great Work, laying out large Grace to prepare him for it.

Fourthly, Another considerable part of the words, are the Persons for whom
this Grace is given, and to whom these unsearchable Treasures are discovered,
and they were Subjects most unworthy of it, (to the Gentiles) the chiefest of
Sinners, blind idolatrous Souls, ((...)) the Heathen, Persons extremely wicked,
1 Cor. 15. 32. called Beasts, wild Beasts, Strangers to God, beyond the Line of
Communication, Ephesians. 2. 12. Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers
from the Covenants of Promise, yea, Enemies to God in their minds; to those did
the Lord lay out these unsearchable Treasures.

To clear up my way to the main truth I intend to prosecute hence, and to leave
no difficulty in the words, it is necessary I speak to three things, by way of
Explication.

First, In what sense Paul calls himself less than the least of all Saints,
seeing he was a Person so dignified by Grace to be a chosen Vessel to God, an
Apostle of Christ, filled with the Graces of the Spirit, and eminent Endowments
for the Ministry, beyond many, taken into such high Communion with Christ, let
into the third Heavens to see things unutterable; How then can Paul truly call
himself less than the least of all Saints? Does not Paul speak dissemblingly,
as the Pope does, when he calls himself Servus Servorum, the Servant of
Servants, and yet makes himself Lord over the Faith and Consciences of others?

I answer, Paul does not hyperbolically debase himself here, but really, and in
the deep sense of his former Vileness, before Conversion, when he persecuted
the Church, and blasphemed Christ; in the consideration of which, he thought
none like him: never such a Wretch as he did God advance to so high Dignity to
be an Apostle of Christ: nor does he think that any particular Saint was so
guilty in that kind and degree of wickedness as he was: one that kicked against
the pricks, persecuted Christ in his Members, haling Him to Prison, seeking to
draw out his very heart blood, and to root out the profession of him: Now for
such a one as he to obtain this Grace, to be put in trust with the Gospel, and
to have such Treasures of Grace imparted to him, he thinks that Christ never
did the like Favor to any so vi^e a Creature as he was: so base will a Child
of God be in his own eyes, when once the Lord sets his Sins in order before
him. Paul, in another place, calls himself the chiefest of Sinners, greater
than the greatest of Sinners, but never less than the least of Sinners. Indeed
compared with the Pharisees, his Sin seemed less than their Persecution and
Blasphemy, in the degree and nature of it; his was ignorantly, theirs was
maliciously perpetrated, (and so the Sin against the Holy Ghost) and in that
respect his Sin was less than theirs, but compared with any that were saved, he
thought himself really less than any of them in regard of his sinful Life
before Conversion.

Secondly, What is this Grace which Paul so admires, and by which his Condition
is so changed, and he enabled to preach those Unsearchable Riches of Christ?

Answ. First, By Grace here is understood that infinite Favor and free Grace
of God to him through Christ, by which he was called out of the state of Sin
and Death into the Knowledge and Kingdom of God; that ever the Lord should
pitch on such a vile Wretch as he, and choose him to be a Vessel of Mercy,
revealing his Son, with his Unsearchable Riches, to so poor and unworthy a
Creature, pardoning his great Transgressions, and pouring out his infinite
Treasures on him.

Secondly, By Grace in this place, some understand his Apostleship which he
obtained at the hand of Christ, and the Ministry he received to preach to the
Gentiles these Unsearchable Riches of Christ: so is it rendered Romans 1. 5. By
whom we have received Grace and Apostleship.

Thirdly, Hereby is meant also those excellent Gifts he had received for this
end; those choice anointings of the Spirit, and Revelation of the Mystery, to
so poor and scandalous a Creature as Paul had been, and one that was so
ignorant of Christ and Salvation; that God should make him such an able
Minister of the New Testament, and give him any door of utterance, and
Endowments fit for so glorious a Service. This is that Grace by which these
Treasures were opened to the Gentiles.

The third thing to be opened here is, What are those Unsearchable Riches of
Christ which Paul preached to the Gentiles, and which are held out in the
Gospel unto Saints and Sinners?

Answ. First, Those Riches which are in Christ, as Mediator, with which he is
enriched in himself; those unspeakable Excellencies of his Person, which,
though they reside and inhere in himself, yet they contribute abundantly to the
Riches of Believers, Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, (subjective) as his Treasures, found in him. All Treasures, created
and uncreated, are not simply placed in him, but hid so, that they can be known
by none but those to whom they are revealed.

Secondly, Here are intended those Riches that came by Christ, the Riches of
his Purchase, the vast Estate which he has bought for all Believers, for all
that come unto him by Faith, the Estate which he gives, makes over, and
prepares for such, and this is called Unsearchable Riches: (...) (...), Riches
that cannot be found, or traced out. A Metaphor taken from quick scented
Hounds, that are yet at a loss, and can go no farther: so the most illuminated
Creature cannot follow home these Riches of Christ, they are so mysterious that
they cannot be discovered; they leave no Footsteps for any to go after them:
the best are at a stand and can go no farther, when they come to wade into this
Deep, so deep and hidden are these Riches of Christ.

Object. If the Riches of Christ be so unsearchable and past finding out, How
then could Paul discover and preach them out to the Gentiles? If they are not
to be traced out, then Ministers cannot open them, nor Hearers understand them.

Answ. First, They are undiscoverable by any Humane Eye; the most refined Light
of Nature cannot discern them; they are Treasures that no natural Abilities can
reach: the most profound Learning, and deepest Studies of the wisest men on
Earth, can make nothing of them; they are no way known but by Revelation and
unveilings of the Spirit; and in this sense are called Unsearchable.

Secondly, As to the fullness of their Worth and Excellency, they cannot be
understood by any in this Life; no mortal man, no unglorified Soul can know
them as they are: to cast up the total value of these Treasures, is beyond the
Arithmetic of Saints themselves; nay, Men and Angels cannot understand the
things that God has prepared, that Christ has purchased for them that love
him: Here (says the Apostle) we know in part, and we prophecy in part, 1 Cor.
13. 9. We, both you and I, the most elevated Light, by this side Glory, know
nothing of these lock't-up Mysteries as we ought: and on this account also they
are Unsearchable.

The Words being opened, and the Cabinet unlock't, I come to the main Subject,
and Treasure laid up in them; which you may take in this general Doctrine and
Proposition.

Doct. There are exceeding great, glorious, and unsearchable Riches in Christ,
opened and tendered to Sinners in the Gospel.

In this Doctrine lie three grand Assertions to be proved.

Assertion 1. That there are exceeding great, glorious, and unsearchable Riches
in Christ.

Assert. 2. These vast and hidden Treasures of Christ are opened in and by the
Gospel.

Assert. 3. It Is the Will of God that all these great and glorious Treasures,
which are in, and come by Jesus Christ, should be opened and offered to
Sinners, yea, the chiefest of Sinners.

I shall speak to each Assertion, but more largely to the first: That there are
exceeding great, glorious and unsearchable Riches in Christ.

And here I shall first prove by Scripture, That there are great, glorious and
unsearchable Riches in Christ.

Secondly, Show you (according to the Grace given me) what are those
Unsearchable Riches of Christ.

First, That there are such Riches in, and come by Jesus Christ, the whole
Gospel attests, which is a Revelation of the Excellency of Christ, and those
glorious things which come by him. I shall give you three or four Scriptures to
prove it; Col. 1. 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you the hope of
glory. In the former verse the Apostle calls the Gospel a Mystery hid from
former Ages; the Excellency of which he opens in this verse, and sets out in
these two Epithetes, 1. Rich. 2. Glorious.


First, It Is a rich Mystery, in that it opens the glorious Riches of Christ,
which are better than the Gold of Ophir and all precious Substance; the Riches
of his Wisdom, Grace, Righteousness and Redemption, which he calls tried Gold,
and counsels poor Sinners to come to him for it, Rev. 3. 17.

Secondly, It Is a glorious Mystery; called the Riches of his Glory, Romans 9. 23.
That he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy. Ephesians.
1. 18. The Riches of his Glory, etc. The Gospel is a glorious Mystery, because
it brings to light great and glorious things, even the Treasures of unknown
Glory: and what these Treasures of Glory are, he tells you in the close of the
verse, they are Christ in you the hope of Glory: Christ Jesus applied by Faith,
and received into the Soul by the Spirit, is this glorious Treasure, in that he
gives them (in his Union with them) an evident Right to Glory. See Prove. 8. 18,
19. Riches and Honor are ascribed to him: Riches and Honor are with me, yea,
durable Riches and Righteousness: My Fruit is better than Gold, yea, than fine
Gold, and my Revenue than choice Silver. This is spoken of Christ, the true
Wisdom of God, (1 Cor. 1. 24. Christ the Wisdom of God, and Power of God) who
is the Subject of this Chapter. And it is said of him, that Riches, durable
Riches, are with him, better Treasures than Gold, than choice Silver; Durable
Treasures, which Time cannot waste or alter; Riches that last to all Eternity,
which Rust and Moth cannot consume. And Righteousness (i. e.) Treasure justly
gotten, Riches of Wisdom and Grace given him by the Father, and Riches of
Righteousness bought by his Blood. All this Treasure is in him, and offered by
him unto Sinners. In Christ must needs be Unsearchable Riches, for in him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. that is, the Divine Nature
united to the Humane Nature: perfect God, as well as perfect Man; the infinite
Treasures of the Divine Nature are his. He is the Heir of all things, and
therefore must needs be rich. Heaven and Earth are his, Jews and Gentiles, all
Persons and Things put under him; in which Glory and Majesty, set over all the
Works of Gods hands, he mounts his Throne (having confirmed his Title by his
Blood) and gives Gifts to men, and makes a tender of Grace and Glory, of
Thrones and Crowns, to all that come unto him, promising to his Servants, that
they also shall inherit all things, Rev. 21. 7. and therefore he himself must
needs be rich. In him are Treasures of Mercy and Goodness, of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Riches, exceeding Riches of Grace, Ephesians. 2. 7. (...), Riches of
Strength, Honor, Glory and Blessing. So that the Scriptures give in full
testimony to this Truth, That there are exceeding great, glorious, and
unsearchable Riches in Christ. And now I shall endeavor to show,

Secondly, What are those exceeding great and unsearchable Riches of Christ.
But alas! this Well is deep, and wherewith shall we draw? these Treasures are
out of sight, who can find them out? they are boundless, bottomless,
numberless, endless; where shall we begin? where can we make an end? who can
search them out to Perfection? The best of men are but Learners, the Angels are
Enquirers, the wisest men but Fools in these Searches; we can know but in part,
nor prophecy but in part; when the utmost is spoken, you have not heard of one
half of his Glory. But according to the Revelation of Christ, I shall open some
of these Treasures of Christ to you, under these two Heads, His Riches:
Personal Purchased

with some Applications and Improvements of them as we go through these Deeps.

CHAP. II.
The Personal Riches of Christ opened, in his Divine Nature; manifested in his
Attributes; with the wonderful Advantages thereof to Believers.

PArt of these glorious Treasures of Christ lies in his Personal Riches, that
vast Worth and unknown Excellency that reside in himself, which become the
Believers Treasure also, by their Relation to, their Union with, Contemplation
of it, with the communicated Fruits and Effects thereof, Col. 1. 27. which is
Christ in you the hope of glory. (i. e.) which Treasure is Christ in you, or
Christ united to you by Faith, and dwelling in you by his Spirit. Christ his
Personal, as well as purchased Treasures are yours, through your Union with,
your Relation to, your Enjoyment of him, and his glorious Communications to you.

Now these Personal Treasures of Christ are demonstrable, in his Natures, in
his Offices, in his sweet and gracious Dispositions.

In his Natures severally considered, and united in his Hypostatical and
Personal Union. The Person of Christ consists of two Natures, God, the true
Emanuel or (God with us) God manifested in the Flesh. Man, the true Emanuel or
(God with us) God manifested in the Flesh.


So Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
Glory, the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace and Truth:
That is, the Word, which was God in the Second Person; The brightness of his
Glory, and express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3. took our Nature to himself
in one Person, and became Mediator, perfect God, and perfect Man

First, Perfect God, equal with the Father in Essence, Joh. 10. 30. I and my
Father are one; that is, one God, not one Person; it is not (...), one Person,
but (...), one thing or Being. I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and
therefore my Sheep are safe, they are in my hand, and in my Father's hand,
(here are two distinct Subsistences) and we are the same: I and my Father are
one God; as God, I am equal with him, the same in Substance, equal in Power and
Glory, Romans 9. 5. Of whom concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all,
God blessed for ever: over all men, and over all things; or in all, (as Vatab.)
This Scripture is generally used by all Interpreters to prove the Divine Nature
of Christ. He is God over all, and blessed for ever, in himself, and of
himself: and the Author of all those Blessings his Creatures enjoy. By him are
all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Visible and
Invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
all things were created by him and for him, Coloss. 1. 16. And therefore he is
perfect God, this being his peculiar Operation to create the World: By him all
things consist; he upholds all things by the word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3.
Supporting and ruling them, which is another property of the Divine Nature, the
ruling and bearing up of all things in the World, which none but everlasting
Arms can do. So he has Power to forgive Sins, which only God can do: to raise
the Dead, to judge the World, Mark 2. 5, 7. Joh. 11. 43, 44. Acts 17. 31. To
know the Secrets of all Hearts, Luke 5. 22. To be the Object of Religious
Worship, Heb. 1. 16. All which abundantly prove the Lord Jesus to be perfect
God: and so of infinite Perfection and Blessedness, to enrich all that come
unto him; which will evidently appear, if we do but a little consider those
Perfections of the Divine Nature, as opened in the Scriptures, all which are in
Jesus Christ.

First, His Simplicity, being a most pure Essence without the least Composition
or Diversity of Parts or Accidents. There is no mixture of Qualities or
Excellencies in God, but every Attribute is his entire Essence, and therefore
he is a most pure and simple Being, as the Names he gives himself import,
especially these two, Ehejeh, Exodus 3. 14. I am has sent me unto you. The Word
is in the future Tense, I will be, has sent me; but in the Hebrew, the future
Tense expresses often both the Present and preterperfect; and so this Word
holds forth God's most simple, absolute, and immutable Being and self
Existence. So Jehovah, a Name which God seems to take most Delight in, and
which does as it were sum up all his glorious Excellencies in one word,
importing his most pure, glorious, and incomprehensible Essence, which he has
in and from himself, before all time, and unto all Eternity, subsisting in, and
of himself, and giving Being to all his Creatures, and therefore must needs be
the most perfect and simple Being. The Unity of his Essence proves his
Simplicity, he is one God (though three Persons) Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel, the
Lord our God is one God; he is the first Being, and one undivided Essence, and
therefore most pure and simple. He is altogether a most perfect Being, in and
of himself, who wants nothing that is excellent, nor can have any thing in
himself that is evil, and therefore is a most simple, pure Nature.

And if Jesus Christ, as God, be such a simple and excellent Being, then he is
a most perfect Treasure to his People; there is nothing wanting in him to make
them happy, nor can there be any thing in him or come from him to make them
miserable; then he is true and faithful to Believers; there can be no
Contrarieties in him, or Contradictions proceed from him; his Love is sincere,
his Purposes are true, there is a reality in his Expressions; for he is one,
and of one mind to his redeemed ones. O Believers! think on the Purity of
Christ's Nature, the Perfection of his Blessedness, the Integrity of his
Affections, and the Infiniteness of all his Perfections, to make his beloved
ones happy. There Is no Moth, or Rust, no Worm or Death, can ware out his pure
Affections to his People. There is no mixture in his Nature: Composition is the
Corruption, or Imperfection of created Beings, but in Christ's Divine Nature
there is Unity and Simplicity, there is nothing can alter his Thoughts and
Resolutions to his sincere ones: he is most true, and most full in all his
Perfections and this his Simplicity: assures Believers of eternal and infinite
Blessedness in their Union with, and Relation unto him, for he is in himself
the most absolute and perfect Being, the first and most simple Being: he is
most perfect in and of himself, for he has all his Perfections in and of
himself (as God) and all that is sufficient for his infinite Blessedness, in
and from himself, and has all that in him, which is sufficient for the Good of
his Creatures, and highest Happiness of his People. Again, he is most perfect,
because he wants nothing from another to make him blessed. He needs no
Creatures to contribute any thing to him, nor does he lose any thing by
Creatures falling from him: or can have any Addition to his Glory or
Blessedness, by the access of men, or Angels to him. So also, he does what
pleases himself, nothing can resist his Will, or frustrate his Purposes, and
therefore is most perfect in himself.

And if the Lord Jesus be so perfect in himself, then he is the Author of
Perfection to his People, for he has made over himself, his whole Person,
God-Man, to Believers, to be their Shield and exceeding great Reward. Then
Believer, thy case is happy, thy Treasure is full and perfect, thy Choice is a
blessed Choice, and thy Lot a perfect Lot, fallen in a good Ground. Then the
Person of thy Beloved is altogether lovely, his Accomplishments being
altogether perfect, not a Spot or Blemish in him. Then all his Gifts to his
Spouse are perfect, his Righteousness is a perfect Righteousness that makes
Believers in God's Account as perfect as Christ himself, were not the robe of
his Righteousness every way as large as thy Guilt and Nakedness, were it not
long enough and broad enough to cover all thy Deformities, and hide all thy
Imperfections from the pure and judging Eye of the Father, it were not perfect.
But all his Procurements by his Blood are perfect. His Holiness is a perfect
Holiness, and he will make his Peoples Graces perfect too, e're he has done.
He is the Rock, his Work is perfect, i. e. He does perfectly fulfill his
Promises, his Works are true to his Word, and he will perfect that which
concerns his People. Psalm. 138. 8. i. e. He will accomplish that which he has
begun in me.

Let the doubting Believer know, that the Perfection of Christ is Security for
Perfection in his Graces also, in due time; he that has begun a a good work in
thy Soul, will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ; he will, e're he has
done, bring thy weak Graces to Perfection, that when he shall appear to
Judgment, thy Holiness shall be presented to the Father without Spot or wrinkle.

Secondly, As the Godhead of Christ, is a most pure and simple Being, so is he
an infinite Essence, both internally, without all Limitation or Dimension of
his Being; and externally, without all Comprehension of Places or Capacities;
every Attribute of his is infinite, His Understanding is infinite. Psalm. 147.
5. His Wisdom, Power, Love, Mercy, Faithfulness, and all his Perfections, are
one entire, infinite Being, that cannot be known or comprised, no Bounds or
Measures can be set to his divine Excellencies, The Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain him, 1 Kings 8. 27. or compass his Greatness; how much less can a
narrow Heart receive his Fullness, his Love: and all his Attributes are beyond
Knowledge. Isa. 40. 25. To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal,
says the holy one. This Infiniteness of Christ's divine Nature, is a mystery
too deep for humane Capacity to fathom, not curiously to be searched out, but
humbly to be adored, and no way discoverable, but by his own Light, and
according to the model of a created understanding. Some dark Reflections of
this visible Glory, are discoverable in the Glass of sacred Scripture, which
declare the Greatness of God, both as to his incomprehensibleness and Eternity;
he is every where, and yet circumsc^ibed no where, he fills all places in the
World, or without the World, but confined no where; no where included, no where
excluded: containing all things, contained by none, his essential Presence is
in all places, not by any Extension or Division of parts, which are not in God,
but (as the Soul in the Body, so is God in the Universe) the whole in the
whole, and the whole in every part; He is essentially present in all Places;
not by imparting his Essence to any created Being, but by giving and preserving
the Being of those things which fill up those Places: so his Power is every
where, in that all things are subject to his Power; his Wisdom fills Heaven and
Earth, in that all Things and Places are manifest in his sight. And this yields,

1. Comfort to Believers. 2. Terror to Sinners. 3. Caution to all.
First, Wonderful Comfort to Believers, in the Assurance of Christ's
Omnipresence with them, to counsel and comfort them. The Believer can say, what
none else can, Where I am, there is my Treasure with me: In all Estates and
Places is the Lord Jesus with his People (while they keep with him.) In the
Water, he wades with them; in the Flames, he stands between them, to keep off
Destruction from them; when under Wants, Temptations, Dangers, he is by them at
their right hand to relieve them: he knows their Soul in Adversity, for he is
near them: He is by, when Corruptions insurrect in them, when Satan with his
fiery Darts assaults them, or Enemies oppress them; he sees when their Fears
rise and their Tears fall: He stands behind Ephraim's back when he is mourning,
and puts his Tears into his Bottle, and lays his Complaints upon his Heart. No
sooner is Mary mourning for her departed Lord, but he is by her side to comfort
her. When his Daniels are thrown into the Lions Den, he goes with them to shut
the mouths of devouring Lions, or to give Life in the midst of Death: When the
Knife is at the Throats of his Isaacks, his Power is by to hold back the
murtherous hand from destroying; We will break their bands, and cast their
cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. say the Saints Enemies: Hold there, says Christ, I
am with them to defend them. No cruel Edicts can exile them from his Presence:
He was in Patmos with John, and turned it into a Pavilion; with Jeremiah in the
Dungeon, and gave him Goal delivery. Earthly men may be abroad, and their
Treasures at home; but faithful Believers carry their Treasure with them, or
their Portion, their Inheritance follows them.

Secondly, The Immensity and Omnipresence of Christ speaks Terror to the
Wicked, in that he is near them to behold and requite their Transgressions; He
knows their Works and their Thoughts, all their secret Designs are naked in his
sight; There Is no covering from his Eye, The Darkness and Light are both alike
to him, Psalm. 139. 12. He sees their Rage and Fury against him; their hidden
works of Darkness: All their Plots and Purposes against his Interest are open
to his Eye: their inward Thoughts, filthy Lusts, close Practices, are before
him; he is behind thy back, Sinner, to hear thy blasphemous Oaths, thy
reproachful Slanders of his ways and People: thy malicious resolves, thy
bloody Decrees against his poor and faithful ones: He is before thee to obviate
thy Designs, to frustrate thy Attempts, and requite thy Spite and Mischiefs. O
you who are yet in your blood and gore of Sin, in your confederacy with Death
and Hell, in your fixed Wrath against the Lord and his Anointed, be persuaded
to believe the greatness of your Danger before you feel it; think how visible
all your works of darkness are, when God, who is all Eye, is in every place;
and how desperate your sinful Adventures are, on the drawn Sword of Divine
Justice at your Breasts; how unsafe your securest state is, who are compassed
within the Circle of Omnipresence, and have Vengeance continually at your
heels, yea, are taken in the Arms of devouring Judgment.

Thirdly, The belief of Christ's being every where, gives a Caution to all to
carry themselves in all Places and Undertakings, as such who are ever in his
sight: His Eyes run to and fro, to behold the Evil and the Good: He stands by
thy Bed side, to inspect thy waking Thoughts, to observe thy unchaste Motions,
thy Earthy, vain Cogitations; no sooner is a forbidden wish in thy Heart, but
his Eye is there also: thy towering Pride, thy pale Envy, thy flaming Anger,
thy frothy Pleasure, thy lustful Desires, thy revengeful Projects thy Earthy
Thoughts, are legible Characters to his discerning look. And should not the
sense of this advise thy rational Soul to more watchfulness over thy
treacherous Heart: And surely, were Christ's All-seeing Eye more observed,
Persons Thoughts would be more weighed, and their Insides more regarded. O,
Reader, whoever thou art, Lodge this Truth in thy Heart, and carry this Belief
up and down with thee, wherever thou go; The Eye of God is on thee: He that
must shortly be thy Judge, is now thy Recorder; and puts a Remark on all thy
Thoughts, Words and Ways, for which he will bring thee into Judgment. Set a
watch on all the rising motions of thy Heart; stop thy hasty words at the door,
and examine what they are, whence they come, whither they go, before thou let
them pass; and measure thy designed Actions by the Standard of the Sanctuary,
e're thou let them go under thy hand; seeing he that is thy Judge comes with
his measuring Line to take an Account of them, and to render according to their
nature and merit.

Thirdly, Again, As Christ's Infiniteness exceeds all confines of Place, so he
passes beyond all terminations of Time; being from Everlasting to Everlasting,
without Beginning, without End: Psalm. 90. 2. His Duration admits of no
distinction of Time, and therefore must needs be Eternal. Time is the measure
of Finite Beings, which are capable of Priority and Succession, but the Divine
Essence has no Beginning, and so can have no End: He is the Author of all
other Beings, and therefore cannot have a Beginning; there being nothing before
him to give him a Being: God has his Essence in and of himself, and so must
needs be Eternal. Neither is he only Eternal, (says Aquinas) but he is his own
Eternity, because he is his own Essence, subsisting in and of himself; which
Essence, or Eternity of his, is the very reason of Eternity, and of all things
contained therein: for the Divine Essence, subsisting of himself, must needs be
before all things that are made, as the Cause is before the Effect, and
Eternity before Time; seeing the things that are made are made by him, Joh. 1.
3.

His Unity also proves his Eternity, being one uncompounded and undivided
Being, and so before all, as Unity is before Multitude: and whatever Beings
are, they are derived from Unity; and without End, for take off Unity and
nothing remains. The Scriptures bear full witness to the Eternity of Christ:
Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth,
and the World, from Everlasting to Everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90. 2. I am
the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God, Isa. 44. 6. He is
the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the Ending, which is, which was, and
which is to come, Rev. 1. 8. He is before all, and by him all things consist,
Col. 1. 17. And though Christ be called the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.
14. and so implies the Father to be before the Son; yet this priority is of
Order, not of Time; Christ, as God, is Eternal with the Father, and so before
all Time, Joh. 1. 1. and to Everlasting.

And this greatens the Believers Happiness beyond all conception, that his
Treasure is Eternal: Time limits all the Comforts and Interests of Christless
Souls, let them seem never so amiable and great (through the multiplying*glass
of mistaken Sense) yet the shortness of their Duration narrows up their
Felicity; whereas the portion of Heaven-born Souls exceeds all Dimensions and
Terminations: The Moth of Time cannot consume their Treasure: their Lease can
never expire: thousands of years, that comprise the extent of Earthly Estates,
substracts nothing from that Eternity, which gives duration to the Saints
Treasure. Rejoice, O Believer, in the assured perpetuity of thy best Interests;
here thy most desired Mercies are but of short continuance: Thy Privileges are
but Tabernacle-priviledges; thy Enjoyments determinable, thy Frames are
transient, thy Pleasures fading, Hope, Peace, Love, Grace, endures but for a
Season, but thy Possessions beyond the Grave, are eternal: and as long as
Christ lives, shall thy Treasure last, thy Holiness, Happiness, Pleasures, and
Perfections in the other World, shall be coexistent with thy Soul; and as far
from expiring as the Love that gave them was from beginning.

And as thy Comforts here are short lived, so are thy Troubles too, Sorrow
enduring for a Night, light Afflictions, and but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Tears contained within a Bottle, Fears, Wants, Losses, Dangers, confined within
this Span of time, and expired* with this short Vapor of Life, but thy
Consolations, Gain, Enjoyments, Peace, Safety, shall be eternal, no more liable
to the Injury of time; thy wet and weary Sowings, are but for a Season; thy
weak and wasting Duties, will be over; but thy reaping, thy resting shall know
no end, but endure while the Eternity and Omnipotency of Christ can make them
good.

Fourthly, The Divine Nature of Christ is immutable also, above all Alteration
and Change, He is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. Heb. 13. 8.
Immutable is his Nature, being a most simple Essence, free from parts or any
Mixture, that might render him capable of Corruption; he is also the first
Being, and so free from the Influence and Dispose of a higher Power. Change in
any thing comes, either from a Corruptibleness in its Nature, or from the Will
of a Superior Power: but God being the first and supreme Cause, is above all,
and so unalterable in his Nature. Isa. 44. 6. I am the first and the last. He
is infinite too, and so comprehends all Fullness of Perfection in himself, and
cannot meet with Alteration; they are imperfect things, that are subject to
change, old things that pass away, but God is infinitely perfect, and therefore
cannot change or be moved from what he is, by any external or internal Cause;
he cannot cease to be what he was, or begin to be what he was not: (as to his
Divine being) indeed the Word, the second Person, in time assumes the humane
Nature, into a Union with himself, but then he does not cease to be what he
was, that is perfect God, and so does not change: and though he alters his Laws
and Administrations of Worship, in the times of the Gospel, yet he alters not
his mind, this Change was decreed from all Eternity: God determined them to be
mutable, and therefore they must change, or God would not be immutable. And
whereas it may be urged, that God does threaten to do what he does not, and
promise to perform, what he has never fulfilled, and therefore is mutable. I
answer, that God never threatens and promises in his word absolutely, but
conditionally, and the Condition failing, the Act on which it depends fails:
but God does not change his Mind, neither was this Mutability in man,
accidental to God, but foreseen and sure, and so Gods Purposes thereabout, are
not alterable, but eternal. And whereas God is said, now to be angry, and then
to Love, which argues a Mutation: yet that Change is not in Gods Will and
Affection, which is one Essence with himself, but in his outward Dispensation.
So that the Divine Nature in Christ is unchangeable, both in his Nature and
Will, he cannot, he will not vary; in him is no Variableness, or Shadow of
turning; he is a Rock, and his Work perfect; Time or Change in Creatures, work
no Change in God; it is the Mistake of Unbelief, to think that the Heart of God
changes, as the poor Believer does; like those that row by the Shore, fancy the
Land and Houses on it to move, when it is but the Vessel changes his place.

Comfort thy Heart poor Soul (who have sincerely chosen the Lord to be thy
Portion) on this Assurance, that the Thoughts of God are the same toward thee
as ev^^: all thy changeable Frames, and unfaithful Dealings with him, works no
more Alteration in his Heart to thee, than the interposing Clouds, do on the
essential Light of the Sun; or the Provocations of the Child, on the Fathers
Relation, who is still a Father, how unlike soever he carries himself to the
Child: but these Instances are too short to adumbrate and set out the
Immutability of God, who cannot but be Truth, though every man be a Lie: he is
faithful and cannot deny himself to his, though they believe not: It Is his
Faithfulness secures thy Faith, and not thy Faith makes good his Faithfulness.
Romans 3. 3. 4. Shall their Unbelief make the Faith (or Faithfulness) of God, of
none Effect? God forbid. Mat. 3. 6. I the Lord, change not, therefore ye Sons
of Jacob are not consumed.

Is Christ immutable? Then there is Ground enough for Believers to cast Anchor
on him, and to bottom their strong Hopes upon his Promises: for faithful is he
that has promised. Heb. 10. 23. He is not as man that he should lie, or as the
Son of man, that he should repent. Numb. 23. 19. Has he spoken, and shall he
not make it good. He cannot alter the Word that is gone out of his Mouth,
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one Tittle of his Word, till all be
fullfilled: For this end has God showed to the Heirs of Promise, the
Immutability of his Council (confirmed by an Oath) that by two immutable things
(his Purpose and Promise) in which it is impossible for God to lie, they might
have strong Consolation who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set
before them. Heb. 6. 18. 19. O Believer, suffer not thy Soul to be tossed to
and fro, with every change of Providence without, or of thy heart within, but
roll thy Hopes on this Rock of Ages, on whom the Pillars of the Earth hang for
their Stedfastness, the whole Creation for its Sustentation, by whom Winter and
Summer, Day and Night are kept within their Seasons, and all the changes of his
People, reduced into a Consistency with his Covenant Fidelity.

This also yields encouragement to Believers, for perseverance in the way of
Duty, whatever Alterations are in their Conditions and the Times they live in:
because he that leads them is the same, in the worst, as well as the best of
Times; and as able to secure them, and as firm in his Affections to them,
seeing he changes not, and therefore cannot, will not leave them.

Again, To this Immutability of God in Christ, may gracious Souls go to get
their unsteddy Hearts fixed, and derive by Faith more constancy to their
Spirits toward God: He who is faithful has engaged it, to establish their
Hearts with Grace, and keep them from Evil. 2 These. 3. 3. But the Lord is
faithful, who shall establish you and keep you from evil. 2 Chro. 20. 20.
Believe God, so shall you be established. As Christ's Life is Security for the
Believer's Life, Joh. 14. 19. His Power for their Preservation, 2 Timothy 1. 12.
so is his Immutability for their Stedfastness, Psalm. 102. 12. The Author of
this Psalm, under the sense of his weakness, and the languishing state of Sion,
comforts himself in the consideration of Gods Immutability: But thou, O Lord,
shall endure for ever: And upon this mountain of Spices raises his hopes of
Sion (this he takes for granted, from his unalterableness) He shall appear in
his Glory. Go, Believer, and lay (by Faith) thy changeable Heart on Christ's
Constancy; as the Shunamite did her dead Child on Elisha's Bed, till she
received him to Life again, 2 Kings 4. 21. And she said (when her Child was
dead) It shall be well, verse. 23. So in the same Spirit of Faith with her,
Leave thy Soul with a Faithful Jesus to be made faithful also. 1 These. 5. 24.
Faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it.

Fifthly, The Omniscience of Christ is another of his Divine Attributes, by
which he does perfectly, and in one Eternal and immutable Act, know himself,
and all things that were, are, or shall be: and things that are not, that never
were or never shall be; things natural and voluntary, necessary and contingent;
things in their Causes and Effects, acted or intended, good or evil, finite or
infinite; all are most clearly and fully naked and open in his sight. He alone
fully knows himself and his Divine Perfections, 2 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, ver. 11. For what man
knows the things of man, save the Spirit of a man, which is in man, even so
the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God So Matthew. 11. 27. No
man knows the Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, save
the Son: That is, No man can know the Divine Nature but God himself,
immediately and perfectly; That knowledge which the Saints have of God, is but
a secondary and communicated knowledge, of Gods back parts, as revealed in his
Works, Word, and in a Mediator, according to the measure of the Gift of
Christ: But God knows himself immediately and fully as he is: for his Knowledge
is his Essence, and so as Infinite as his Being is. He is a pure Act without
any potentiality: therefore his Understanding and himself are the same. He
knows also all things else that are in Being and not in Being; things past,
present, or to come, in one eternal Act, without any search into Principles or
Causes; as Humane Understandings do, in a discoursive way, and by succession:
but has the Idea's of all things in himself, his Essence being the Exemplar of
those things, seeing he gives them their Being: As the Artificer knows the
Forms of the Pieces he makes, and the Writer the proportion of his own Letters;
so does God, the first Cause, know all things that receive their Nature from
him; they being first in him, and so eternally present to him. Hence the
knowledge of God is most certain and infallible, and things are as he knows
them, seeing his Knowledge gives them their Being: which must be understood of
the things that God approves of, as his Creatures, his Providence, and Evils
of Punishment, which are just and righteous: But sinful Evils have no
dependence on his Foreknowledge, or Influence from his Essence. Indeed
Actions, as they are natural, have their Being from God; but the pravity and
sinfulness of those Acts (Sin being but the privation of that good which was,
and should be in them) is derived from the Subject whose Acts they are: As the
Motion of the Clock is from the Art of the Artificer; but the obliquity of the
Motion is from some defect in the Clock it self: Gods foreknowledge of Sin
confers no Physical Virtue and necessity to the Being and succession of Sin,
and yet his knowledge of it is certain; all things being naked and manifest in
his sight, who is Truth it self, and cannot deceive or be deceived: He
determining to permit the Being of Sin, must needs foreknow it; else his
Knowledge would not be perfect: and if his Knowledge should be imperfect, his
Essence would be so too, they being both the same; but this cannot consist with
the Fountain of all Perfection: He is the Holy One, and can do no Iniquity,
Zeph. 3. 5. His Foreknowledge of Sin, does not offer Violence to the Nature of
man, or destroy the natural Freedom of his Will, but foreseeing what man would
be, determined to leave him to the natural Motion of his own Will. Judas
betraying Christ, as it was sinful, was the Consequent of Gods Foreknowledge,
but the effect of his own Covetousness. Acts 2. 23.

All Contingencies are perfectly foreseen of God also, both in himself as the
first Cause, and so they are necessary to succeed in due time; he sees them
also in the second Causes, in respect of which they are said to be contingent,
for to God nothing is accidental, although it seems so to men, through an
Unacquaintedness with their Dependence on the first Cause: Rebeccah's meeting
Abraham's Servant at the Well, and her Discourse with him. Genesis 24. 15. seem to
Standers by, to be things contingent: but look back to the former Verse, and
you will see them to be the answer of Prayer, and so before appointed: The like
was the Midianites drawing Joseph out of the Pit, Genesis 37. and the Wind blowing
down the House on Job's Children, Job 1. though they look like Accidents, yet
were the Effects of Gods Permission and fore-appointment.

Again, God fore-knows all Contingencies, not only as they are in their first
and second Causes, but as they are in themselves; for all things being present
to him, he perfectly knows what every Cause will produce in time, and so must
necessarily come to pass; according to that Axiom; Every thing that is, when
once it is, it appears necessary that it should be: Acts 15. 18. Known unto God
are all his Works, from the beginning of the World. Heb. 4. 13. Neither is
there any Creature which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked
and open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do. Psalm. 56. 8. Thou tellest
my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy Bottle, are not they in thy Book?
Psalm. 139. 2. Thou understandest my Thoughts afar off: that is, before they are
in Being. Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the
evil and the good. This Wisdom of Christ, as God, is part of his Unsearchable
Treasure, and so great a Deep, that it is past finding out, by his most
intelligent Creatures in Heaven and Earth. Romans 11. 33. O the depths of the
Riches, both of the Wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Again, as God is infinitely wise in himself, so is he the Author of all Wisdom
to his Creatures; He enlightneth every one that comes into the World. Jo. 1.
9. This is laid down to prove the Divine Nature of Christ, he is the Word,
which is God; this appears both in his making all things verse 3. and in his
incomprehensible Essence, He is the Light shining in Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehends it not: Also, he is the Fountain of all that Light and Life his
Creatures enjoy, and therefore must needs be God. The Evangelist does not speak
here of Christ as Mediator, and so of that saving Light, which he gives to his
Elect, by his Spirit; but of his divine Essence, which the Jews would not own,
and as a proof of it; does instance in his creatorly Power: he is the Fountain
of that natural Light, which all men have: all Wisdom comes from him, who is
the Father of Lights; he is the Fountain of Light, able to fill the Children of
men with all that Knowledge that is necessary, to their highest Happiness, to
guide them with his Eye, and lead them into all Truth.

First, This yields wonderful Comfort to Believers, that they have chosen such
a Savior, as is able to make them wise to Salvation; who not only knows what
is best for them, but can also reveal and make out the Knowledge thereof to
them, that they might know and choose, what makes for their best Good here and
for ever: He is the Son of Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. The bright Morning Star.
Rev. 22. 16. The Light of Israel, Isa. 10. 7. The Pillar of Fire by Night. Neh.
9. 12. To show them their way, in their greatest Difficulties and Obscurity.

Secondly, This assures gracious Souls, that he who has undertaken their
Conduct, Supply, and Preservation to Glory, knows how to make it good and
finish the work he is entrusted with: he can keep that good thing committed to
him; he can help them in the worst of Straits, and lead them through the
greatest Improbabilities, Weaknesses, Dangers, yea Impossibilities to their
desired Rest.

Thirdly, This also relieves them, that they have a Friend in Heaven, who knows
their Soul in Adversity, and is acquainted with all their Troubles, Wants,
Weaknesses, Wrongs, Fears, Dangers, yea with all their Labors, Duties, Desires
and Designs for him, and knows how to succor, comfort, support and deliver
them, when all Refuge fails them, and there is none to help; and how to
requite, and crown all their Duties and Sufferings for his Name: He knows their
Corruptions, the Strength, and Prevalency of them, and how to subdue and
destroy them; he sees their Ways and Infirmities, and how to heal them, he
knows the Power and Malice of their Enemies, to restrain them, and discovers
the most secret Plots against his innocent ones, to disappoint them, that in
vain is the Snare laid in his Sight against them. He observes thy Tears
Believer, thy corner Duties, thy Bedside Breathings after him, though hid from
others; he takes notice of thy Innocence, when men revile thee, and knows how
to plead thy Cause, and bring thee to the Light.

Fourthly, This will serve to humble the proud Heart of men, that God is
acquainted with all their Vileness; he sees their high, their fretful, their
vain, their unclean, their unsound, their rebellious Hearts. Souls; men see the
best of you, your fair and specious Duties, but he sees your inside and all
your secret Rottenness, when you sit before him, as his People sit, and seem
devout in your Services; he at the same time knows where your Thoughts are
wandering, and espies every vain Motion and sinful glance of your deceitful Eye:
when thou prayest with greatest Zeal, his Eye is upon thy close Hypocrisy, thy
spiritual Pride, thy base ends, and those conceived Lusts, which will break
out, when thy Duties are over. O how should this abase thy proud Heart, and
prevent thy swelling Thoughts upon conceited Excellencies in thy self, or
supposed Worth in thy Duties, seeing he knows what is in thee, and how vain man
would be wise.

This also should advise thy Soul to Sincerity, in thy Profession, Purposes,
Promises, Duties, because he beholds thee, and weighs thy Paths, searches thy
Heart, tries thy Reins, and will shortly bring thy secret things to Judgment.

Lastly. This counsels such as want Wisdom, to be looking to Jesus, and waiting
at the Fountain, and Springhead, for their Instruction.

Sixthly, the Omnipotency of Christ, is another of those glorious Properties of
the divine nature, which renders him so vast, and unconceivable a Treasure, to
all that receive him, He is the mighty God the everlasting Father. Isa. 9. 6.
who has infinite Strength to order and establish his Kingdom, and to exert his
Government in Sion, and over Nations: his Strength must needs be infinite,
because his Kingdom is eternal; no created humane arm, can sway the Scepter of
the World, and maintain an everlasting Rule over the Hearts and Conversations
of all his People, in all Ages; and therefore, he must be God, and the mighty
God, to transact the whole Work, that concerns him, as Mediator, and to answer
the Appellations given him in Scripture. Things are ascribed to Christ, which
cannot be performed by less than an infinite Power.

First, His creating all things in Heaven and Earth, Col. 1. 16. By him were
all things created, that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
all things were created by him, and for him: He is the eternal Word, the
Exemplar, and efficient Cause of all created Beings; The Heavens and Earth,
Angels and men, the Inhabitants of the upper and nether World, were all formed
by Jehovah, Christ, who gave Being to all his Creatures, as pleased him; and
therefore his Power must needs be Almighty, who is the everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth, that faints not, be that gives
Breath unto the People upon it, and Spirit to them that walk therein. Isa. 40.
28. chap. 42. 5.

What a potent Lord have Believers chosen, who can supersede all their
Difficulties, by his Creation-help? if his whole Storehouse of Heaven and
Earth be not full enough to supply their Wants, he can soon set forth a new
Edition of Mercies by his own immediate arm; if their way to Glory, lie through
a waste howling Wilderness where no Footsteps can be seen to guide them, he
can create a Cloud by day, and Pillar of Fire by Night to conduct them: If
their Provisions fail to relieve them in their Journey, he can rain a Shower of
Manna from his secret Granary, and open the Caverns of the Flinty Rock, and put
new Springs into the barren Wilderness to refresh them; when they are environed
with Troops of Death, he can, in a Moment, interpose his fiery Chariots and
Horsemen, and when all their Deliverers fail, send from Heaven, and save them:
when the Visibility of Religion ceases, and the Heavens pass away as a Scrole,
when the Glory of the Lords House is dissolved into a Chaos, when the Gold of
the Sanctuary is become Dross, and the Gospel Church metamorphoz'd into the old
World, he can even then create a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness. Is thy Heart, Believer, full of filthiness? Thy Redeemer can
create a clean Heart: and if thy Tempest-tossed Soul can find no rest, thy Lord
can create the Fruit of the Lips, Peace for thee: What is too hard for a
creating Arm to do? Or what can undo that People, who have a faithful Creator
to commit themselves, and all their Concerns unto?

Secondly, Another Proof of the Omnipotency of Christ, is the upholding all
things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 4. Who being the Brightness of his
Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person, and upholding all things by
the Word of his Power. Here Is another Royalty of the divine Nature of Christ, a
new beaming out of his Glory as God, even in the bearing up, maintaining, and
Dispose of the whole Creation, in the former ver. the forming of the Universe,
and whole World, was ascribed to Christ: and here the Preservation of it also,
is laid upon him, as a further Evidence of his oneness with the Father: having
begun his Work in the Creation, he carries it on in his providential
Sustentation thereof, He is before all things, and by him all things consist.
Col. 1. 17. He is the Foundation that underprops the whole Fabric of Heaven
and Earth, which would soon sink down into its first nothing, if everlasting
Arms were withdrawn from beneath it, he that first gives Being to his
Creatures, must continue it; Conservation is but a Continuation of the first
act of Creation, to preserve the World from Destruction, to continue the
Creatures in their peculiar Nature and Properties, and to govern those
Diversities in an united Subserviency to his Will and Glory; and the Well-being
of the whole, is a work of infinite Power, and needs the same Strength, that
first produced them. And this is the work (Christians) of your Messiah, that
person who is God-Man; who by his divine power and efficacious Providence,
animates, actuates, cherishes, quickens, and sweetly disposes of all Creatures,
Actions and Affairs in the World. He is the great Monarch of Heaven and Earth,
that changes Times and Seasons, whose hands are under his Wings, and has a
wheel within the Wheels, that turns about things as pleases him; brings Light
out of Darkness, Order out of Confusion, Good out of Evil: who has the
Government on his Shoulders, and absolute Power in his hand, to dispose of all
persons and things, as may most further the Pleasure of his own Will, the
Advance of his Glory, and the Good of them that fear him.

And is not this Security enough to those, who have entrusted themselves and
all their Concerns, with this glorious Potentate, and King of Kings, who has
the Management of all things in Heaven and Earth, that it shall be well at last
with the righteous? the momentous Affairs of the world, and of Sion, shall
issue in the best Good of those that love his Name. How should this calm the
tumultuous Fears of the godly into a sweet Serenity of Spirit, and still their
tempestuous Thoughts in a quiet Relyance on the Arm, Care, and Faithfulness of
their Lord, who knows how to govern the World, and can, and will bring about
his Work to gracious ends by all seeming Contrarieties, and interfering
Providence in the World. Why art thou afraid, says Caesar, to the Master of
the Ship, that began to be disturbed in his Spirits, by reason of the Storm and
the Darkness of the Night? Thou carryest Caesar. How much more should Believers
be sedate and quiet in their Minds, who have embarked Christ. Caesar had only
some Command at Land, none over the Sea; he governed the Bodies of a few men,
but Christ rules at Land and Sea; he sits upon the Floods, and at the Helm of
this great Vessel of the World; how should this lift the Saints Heads above all
their Waters?

Thirdly, Christ's working Miracles by his own Power, proves his Omnipotency,
that nothing is too hard for him; a Miracle is somewhat done, which is above
and besides the Power and Course of Nature; not only as the thing done, but as
the manner of doing, when the Cause is secret, and unknown to us, and the thing
utterly beyond all natural Causes, that is a Miracle which none but God can do,
either mediately by secondary Agents, or immediately of himself. Miracles are
only done by a divine hand, because none but God can change the Order of
Nature: and this Christ did, not by another, but by his own power: The Humane
Nature in Christ was but the Instrument of the divine Action, and the humane
Action received it is Virtue from the divine Nature, says Aquinas. It was by
his own Power, that Christ did such mighty works as no man ever did. It Is said,
Virtue went out of him, and healed all their Diseases who touched him. Luke 6.
19. It was by his word he cast out Devils, and healed them that were sick. Mat.
8. 6. The Wind, and the Seas obeyed him. ver. 27. With Authority he commanded
the unclean Spirits and they obeyed him. Mark. 1. 27. He opened the Eyes of
them that were born blind, made the dumb to speak, the dead to walk; by which
mighty Works, he proves himself to be one with the Father: What he sees the
Father do, these also does the Son likewise; for as the Father raises up the
dead and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will. Jo. 6. 19. 24.

Neither did he show such Wonders himself only, but by his Power he enables his
Servants also, to do such mighty Works, as were above the Power of lapsed
Nature to do. Mark. 16. 17. 18. And these Signs shall follow them that believe
in my Name (i. e. by my Power and Authority from me) shall they cast out
Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if
they d^ink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on
the sick, and they shall recover. And surely, if the exerted Power of Christ by
weak Instruments, could do such mighty things, above the Capacity of natural
Agents, then the essential Power of Christ can do much more than what he has
done.

Fourthly, That must needs be an Almighty Power in Christ, that can bestow on
the Saints, all things that they shall ask of the Father in his name: but such
is the Power of Christ, Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in
my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. He does
not say, my Father shall do it, or that will I procure for you by my Mediation
and Interest in the Father; though that be true also: but that will I do by my
own Power, as God equal with the Father. (I will do it) this he repeats again
in the next ver. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it, being
willing to fix this glorious Truth in their Minds, that as he was resolved to
fulfill all their just Desires, made in his name, so he was able to do it, the
Father and he being one. And this must needs be an Almighty power, to hear and
answer all the Requests of all the Saints on Earth, at once: what multitudes
are there of Believers in every Age, more than can be numbered, who are always
compassing the Throne, and sending up a Cloud of Incense, to the Mercy Seat
daily; putting up Variety of Requests to the Father, through Christ, and that
not for mean things neither? They beg for the holy Spirit, for the Sheddings
abroad of his Love, and Shinings out of his Glory; for treading down of Satan,
for subduing of Corruption, for Conquest over his Enemies, Enlargement of his
Kingdom; for an Almightiness to do, and invincible Patience to suffer the whole
Will of God, for the Forgiveness of great Sins, and Multitudes of Sins, for
Perseverance in Grace, and for an eternal Crown of Glory; these a^e many things
and great things, things that none but a God can give, and yet no more than
what Christ is engaged to bestow on all that sincerely seek him; and therefore
must needs be God Almighty, and worthy of Sinners Choice, and of the Saints
Trust.

Fifthly, This also sets forth the Omnipotency of Christ, that he is able not
only to do all things for, but in his People, working all their Works in them;
the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are not sufficient of our selves, to
think a Thought that is good; Neither know we what to pray for as we ought.
Romans 8. 26. In them dwells no good thing, as they are in themselves; Neither
can they do any thing without him: their Eyes are unto him for all their Help,
their Springs are in him: in the Lord shall one say have I Righteousness and
S^rength; they are dead as to any self-sufficiency for the least thing that is
good; but he is their Life, the Soul that animates all their Faculties, the
hand that leads them, the Wisdom that directs them, the Power that actuates
them in every good thing. Their Works must be wrought in God or can never be
good; it is he that works in them, to will, and to do, of his good Pleasure, he
teaches them to profit, he held Israel by the hand teaching him to go: he
carries his Lambs in his Arms, and gently drives them that are with young;
drawing those that are indisposed, quickening them that are dead: he is the
Fountain that fills all their Pits, the Head that gives out animal Influences
to every Member, for every Duty: and must not he then be an all-sufficient God,
and have an infinite Treasury to give to all richly to enjoy, and an Almighty
Arm to do all the work of Saints on Earth? O admire Believers, and rely on
this Jesus.

Sixthly, raising the dead is an act of Omnipotency, a peculiar Property of the
divine Nature, which has been, is, and shall be the Work of Christ; I am the
Resurrection and the Life. Jo. 11. 25. i. e. He for whose sake and by whose
Power the dead shall be raised at the last day. Martha suspects Christ's Ability
to revive her dead Brother, she believed indeed, he should rise at the last
day, and not before; why says Christ, they that shall then rise from the dead,
shall rise by my Power; and if I will raise up the dead then, I can as easily
do it now. The hour is coming in which all that are in their Graves, shall
hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done Good, unto the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of
Damnation. Joh. 5. 28. 29. And I will raise him up at the last day. Joh. 6. 54.
That there shall be a general Resurrection of the dead, at the last day; when
every Body (though now consumed) shall be raised up and reunited to the Soul,
and be brought to the final Judgment, is not questioned by those that believe,
and know the Scriptures. The Author of this Resurrection is God, as God, but
the second Person, the Lord Jesus, is delegated to accomplish this Work, which
he shall do by his own Voice, (says Christ himself) by a Shout, by the Voice
of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, says the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 16.
with a great Sound of a Trumpet, says the Evangelist, Mat. 24. 31. That is,
the Lord Jesus shall, at that last day, by his mighty Voice, pronounced by the
Archangel, cause all the dead, both small and great, to arise in their same
Bodies, though changed into an immortal State, and suitable Capacity, to that
Condition, to which they are intended, to receive their Soul, and to come to
Judgment. And is not this a mighty Work, to quicken the dead, a work peculiarly
ascribed to God. 2. Cor. 1. 9. For we had the Sentence of Death in our selves,
that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the Dead: It Is
the work of God, and of none but God, to raise the dead: It Is a work full of
Wonder and Amazement, beyond all Principles of created reason, to conceive how
those Bodies dissolved to dust, mingled with other Bodies in the Grave,
digested into other Natures, by Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, that have devoured them,
should yet return and be separated from other Dust and Natures, into the same
Individuals, is such a Miracle as is only fit matter for Faith, not Sense, and
a firm Foundation for the Believers Hope and Comfort.

It may be thou see nothing but Deaths on thy Graces, Frames and Capacities;
thou find Decays in thy Soul, the Spirit of Life seems to be departed from
thee, thou can not pray, hear, converse, with that sweetness and delight as
heretofore; Comfort thy self Believer; He that is the Life, is the Resurrection
also: He that quickened thy Heart, when Dead, will revive it, when decayed: It Is
as easy with him to restore thy Spiritual Frames, as to bestow them: He that
can raise the whole World from their Bodily, total Death; can easily, and will,
in due time, cure thy Soul-dyings also.

Again, This will cheer drooping Sion, who faints at her Desolations, and fears
what will become of the destruction on her Interests: It Is lamentable to
observing Souls, to see how Religion goes down daily: Holiness is departed from
the Earth: The Rod of the wicked lies on the back of the Righteous: the wicked
are exalted, and the Righteous oppressed: The House of David waxes weaker and
weaker, and the House of Saul waxes stronger: This is a sad Spectacle; yet in
this case Relief is to be fetched from an Omnipotent Jesus: who has said, His
dead men shall live: who can open his Peoples graves, and revive his decayed
Interest, and cause a Nation to bring forth in a day: and Overturn, Overturn,
Overturn, till his Kingdom be established in the Earth.

CHAP. III.
The Humane Nature of Christ, distinctly considered; it is Reality proved: His
Personality, or the Divine and Humane Nature in one Person; showing what kind
of Union it is, and the glorious Consequents and Advantages thereof.

WE have a little enquired into the Divine Nature of Christ: the Beams of whose
Glory, but darkly seen, yield a wonderful splendour, and reviving to a believing
Eye. In the next place, let us consider his Humanity: The Nature of Man, which
the second Person, assumes into a Personal Union with himself: He is perfect
Man as well as God: The Woman's Seed; Made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal.
4. 4. Made of the Seed of David according to the Flesh. Romans 1. 3. For he took
not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham. Heb. 2. 16. The
Children being partakers of flesh and blood, he likewise took part of the same,
ver. 14. And was in all things made like to his Brethren, ver. 17. Called the
Son of Man: the Man Christ Jesus: having the Substante of the Humane Nature;
though not the Personal Subsistence thereof: He did not take the Person of Man
into Union with himself: for then he would have had two Persons: and so have
been no true Mediator: The Mediator being one: 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one
God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus: But if the
Lord Jesus had taken the Person of Man, then he would have consisted of two
Persons: the Divine Subsistence and the Humane; and so there would have been
two Mediators, or Persons mediating, which is contrary to Scripture.

Neither did he take on him the vicious Qualities or Accidents of the Humane
Nature: being holy, harmless, separate from Sinners: the Holy Spirit
overshadowing the Virgin Mary, and purging the Humane Nature of all its sinful
dregs: forming it of the Substance of the Virgin: not of his own Essence:
whence the Holy thing begotten by the Spirit was not God, but Man; called the
Holy Child Jesus: purely conceived in the Womb of a Sinner, without the least
participation of her Sin, or vicious Defects of her Nature, receiving only the
perfect Substance of Man.

Having the Essential parts of the Body. Soul.
Humane Nature,
A true and real Body, and not a Phantasme, and Airy Vehicle, as the
Marcionites and Heretics of old held: He had Flesh and Bones, which a Spirit
has not, Luke 24. 39. Handle me and see me, for a Spirit has not flesh and
bones as ye see me have: This was after his Resurrection, when the Disciples
doubted that it was an Apparition and not him, and even then Christ had a real
Body, palpable and visible, the object of External Senses.

A Natural, and not an Heavenly Body, as the Manichees affirmed from 1 Cor. 15.
47. The first man is of the Earth, Earthy; the second man is the Lord from
Heaven. But to this I answer with Zanchy, The Apostle does not speak here of
the Essential Body of Christ; but of his Heavenly Spiritual Power, which he
lets out in raising the Dead; as in the former verse. The first man Adam was
made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit: He speaks not
here of the Nature, but of the person of the second Adam, as Mediator; the
Difference between whom was great: the first Adam but a Creature, this a
Creator or Quickening Spirit: the first Adam had his Rise from the Earth, this
second Adam, as to his person, from Heaven: whence (says Paraeus) it is
evident, the Apostle does not speak here of the matter of Christ's Body, but of
the Original and Dignity of his Person: for he grants in this whole Discourse,
that Christ's Body is one and the same with ours; else how can his Resurrection
be a proof of ours: and it is said, As by man came death, so by man came also
the Resurrection of the Dead: 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21, 22. And if Christ had not a
real, natural Body, then he could not be the Seed of the Woman; neither had his
Death been a real Death, or a satisfactory Propitiation; if the same Nature
that sinned had not also suffered: And therefore it must needs be that Christ
had a Natural Body: He Eat, Drank, Spoke, Walked, was weary, smitten, bound,
crucified: which are also demonstrations of a Natural Body.

And as he had a perfect Body, so had he a Soul also; contrary to the Doctrine
of Apollinaris; or else he could not be a perfect Man, and in all things made
like unto his Brethren: for it is said, when God made Man, He breathed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life, and man became a living Soul, Genesis 2. 7. Hence,
says Lactantius, A Soul-less Body is no Humane Body: It Is said, His Soul was
exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death, Mat. 26. 38. Had not Christ a real Soul,
he had not been a living man, nor could be said to have died, when he cried
out, Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, Luke 23. 46. And having said
so, he gave up the Ghost. This Spirit the Lord Jesus gave up into his Father's
hands, was not his Divine Nature, for that was one with, and ever with the
Father: and therefore must needs be his Soul; which was his Life; and that
departing, he is said to dye, and give up the Ghost.

Besides, That Knowledge in which he is said to increase, with those Humane
Affections that manifestly appeared in him, and those Acts of his Natural Will,
plainly proves his Soul: these being the Essential Faculties of a Rational
Spirit. Neither could he have perfectly transacted the Office of a Mediator,
and undergone all the Sufferings that were to be borne for the Sin of Man, had
he not consisted of a Humane Soul, as well as Body; part of these Penalties,
yea the greatest part being Spiritual, and such as none but the Soul could be
fully sensible of: And in point of Justice, the Soul of man having sinned,
there must be a Soul also in the Redeemer to undergo Sufferings; wherefore he
must needs be perfect man in the Essential Parts of the Humane Nature,

Body. Soul.
He had also the Properties of the Humane Nature, both Essential and
Accidental: The Essential Properties of man, as well of the Soul, as Body, were
in him: The Essential Properties, and Faculties of the Soul, which are the
Understanding, Will, Affections, were seated in his Nature; he had a created
Understanding, that eminently shined out in his youthful years, being able, at
Twelve years old, to dispute with the Learned Doctors, of his Day, even to the
astonishment of his Hearers. Luke 2. 46, 47. And they found him in the Temple,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
Questions; and all that heard him were astonished at his Understanding and
Answers. And ver. 52. Jesus increased in Wisdom and Stature.

He had likewise Natural Affections, so as without sin: He loved the young man
in the Gospel, for those Excellencies that were in him, Mark 10. 21. And had a
peculiar degree of Affection to John above the rest of the Disciples, Joh. 19.
26. He had compassion on the multitude, Mat. 9. 36. And was grieved for the
Heart hardness of his Disciples, Mark 3. 5. And had indignation against Peter's
tempting him to decline his Redemption-work. Mark. 8. 33.

He had also the Essential Properties of a Humane Body, such as do flow from
the Essence thereof, and are so absolutely necessary to it, as that without
these the Body would cease to be a Body: as Quantity, Figure, Members,
Dimensions: He had a Material Body, consisting of Flesh and Bone, with its
Lineaments and Members; Face, Hands, Feet; he had a Stature, in which he grew,
as other men do, Luke 2. 52. A Body circumscribed in a place, that must needs
have a Circumference, and be in one place at once circumscriptively, not
definitively, as Spirits are: Neither does its Union with the Divine Nature, or
its glorified state in Heaven, alter this Essential Property of a Body: Nor is
the Omnipotency of God a sufficient Argument to warrant the Body of Christ to
be in Heaven, and Earth, and in diverse places at once; seeing God's Absolute
Power never crosses his Actual Power, or infer a contrariety to his Truth, and
to the natural Being of things. Neither did he assume the Parts and Essential
Properties of Man only, but the Infirmities also, and accidental Properties of
the Humane Nature: though not those which were Personal and Vicious, and
procured by Personal Sins, or defection in their particular Natures, as
Diseases, Blindness, Lameness, Deformity, which were not the absolute and
universal Products of Original Sin, incident to every one, but arising from
some particular Causes, and peculiar to some Persons only; these our Lord
Jesus did not take upon him, but such Infirmities as were accidental to the
whole Nature, for that he himself also is compassed with Infirmities, Heb. 5.
2. not sinful; as culpable Ignorance and Error, but Natural Infirmities, such
as were incident to our Natures, (Sin excepted) and such as were the Effects
and Punishment of Sin: these Christ took on him, as inculpable Ignorance,
Humane Passions of Sorrow, Fear, Anger in the Soul, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness,
Pain, bloody Sweat, and Death in the Body. Mark 13. 32. Mark 11. 13. Math. 26.
38. Math. 9. 36. Mat. 16. 23. Joh. 19. 28. Joh. 4. 6. Heb. 5. 8. Luke 22. 44.
Mat. 27. 50.

And O what enriching Privileges, and full Consolation, do flow to Believers,
from the Words assuming the Humane Nature into Personality with himself! And
what glorious Excellencies are in Jesus Christ, as he is God-Man, in one
Person! infinite Treasures, which can never be traced out, nor fully understood
by the Children of men, as will appear, if we consider the kind of this Union,
and the Consequents of it.

First, Consider the kind of this Union, between the Divine and Humane Nature
of Christ; and O what a glorious Mystery is it!

First, It is a real Union: it is not Nominal, in Name only, or Metaphorical,
in Show or Similitude; but in Reality and Truth. The Divine and Humane Nature
do constitute one Person, which is Jesus Christ. We have already proved that
Jesus Christ is perfect God, and perfect Man: he is really so in one person,
Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his
Glory. The Word, that is, the divine Nature, the Godhead of Christ, was made
Flesh; that is, united to the humane Nature, and this in a visible way: and
dwelt amongst us, it was not a Fiction, but really Christ, God-man, dwelt
amongst us, and we beheld his Glory, it was obvious to our view, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels. If this be not real, what can be so? He was
manifest in the Flesh, How? By way of real Union, Justified in the Spirit, by
the divine Nature; here is Flesh, and here is the divine Nature, in one person,
Jesus Christ, God-Man, seen of Angels, Romans 1. 3. 4. Concerning his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the Flesh,
and declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead: Here Is a Person consisting of both
these Natures, real man, born of the Seed of David, then real God; thus the
Divine Nature was manifested to be in Christ, by the Resurrection of the dead,
Romans 9. 5. And of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all,
God blessed for ever. Here both Natures are attributed to one Person; Jesus
Christ, as concerning the Flesh, descended from Abraham, he came from David,
that is, he received the humane Nature from the Virgin Mary, and he is God over
all, blessed for ever. The Godhead is said to dwell in him bodily, Col. 2. 9.

Secondly, It is a very near Union, the nearest Union that possibly can be. As
the Soul and the Body make up one man, so the divine and humane Nature of
Christ, make up one Person. It is set forth by way of Inhabitation, Col. 2. 9.
In him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. God manifest in the
Flesh, and justified in the Spirit makes up one entire Person. As the Matter
and the Form makes up one Being, so this divine and humane Nature makes up one
person.

Thirdly, It is a mystical and unconceivable Union. There Is a relative Union
between Man and Wife, making one Flesh; a real Union between the Head and
Members, constituting one Body; but this cannot reach this Union; it is
unconceivable, above all Conception, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. We may admire it, and adore it, but we
cannot fathom the depth of this Union between the divine and humane Nature of
Christ.

Fourthly, It is a pure and unmixed Union as to each Nature. In regard of
Essence the divine Nature cannot be converted into the humane, nor the humane
into the divine, but each Nature remains distinct, and it is Properties are
distinct, Romans 1. 3. 4. So that there are in Jesus Christ, two Natures, two
Wills, a divine Will, and a humane Will: he has the Will and Affections of a
man, though fully sanctified and glorified: he wills whatever the Godhead
wills, but still, as to his humane Nature, it is with a humane Will; so that
something of the workings of Christ, are by the divine Power, and something by
the humane Nature. This Union consists in the Communication of the divine
Nature with the humane, the Godhead, and the humane Nature agree; so that the
divine Nature of Christ communicates all its fullness as far as may further
Redemption-ends; for the Sanctification and Salvation of the whole body of
Christ, and for the fulfilling of all Redemption-Work, 1 Pet. 3. 18. This is a
glorious Union, but it is worthy to be known. Ah how little of Christ is known
as to these two Natures! how little a portion do we know of him!

Fifthly, It is an inseparable Union, it can never be parted more. Therein lies
the Happiness of Believers, that Jesus Christ is God-man, to all Eternity,
never can there be an end of this Relation; Jesus Christ God-Man, is the same
Yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He was the same while in his
obediential Work, on Earth; he is the same in Glory, and will be the same to
all Eternity. This Union of Christ's two Natures must be eternal, or else he
cannot be said ever to live to make Intercession; But he ever lives to make
Intercession, Heb. 7. 25. That which made Christ's Redemption infinite, was
that he was God as well as Man: Christ the Interceder, God-Man, is now in
Heaven, and this must be for ever. O what a glorious Truth is this, that there
can be no Cessation of this Union! could this Union be separated as Nestorius
holds, then Redemption-work would cease: He is over all, God-Man, blessed for
evermore, Romans 9. 5. If the Saints Union with Christ be inseparable, and their
Interest in the Love of Christ inseparable, then Christ is unalterable; but
because the Saints must have an eternal Union with him, and he is an eternal
Jesus, he must be eternally God-Man, Romans 8. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Joh. 17.
21. 23. 24.

Secondly, What are the Effects and Consequents, that flow from, and issue out
of this Union between the divine and humane Nature ^^ Christ?

First, from this Union of these two Natures in Christ, there follows a
Communication of Properties; so that which is said to be done by each Nature,
is applied to the whole Person of Christ; O this is a very glorious Mystery. as
this, Christ's Sufferings in the humane Nature, is applied to the whole Person
of Christ; therefore the Blood of Christ, which was but the Blood of the humane
Nature, is called the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. Feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own Blood; being of infinite Value and Worth. So the
Sufferings of the humane Nature are ascribed sometimes to the divine Nature,
and to the whole person of Christ; so, 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifest in the Flesh,
and justified in the Spirit; yet both these applied to the person of Christ:
whatever the divine nature can do is applied to the Person of Christ, by a
Communication of Properties, ^^owing from this Union.

Secondly, From this Union, flows this Consequence, That there is Fullness of
Grace placed in Jesus Christ to be given out to all his Seed. The Godhead
fills the humane Nature of Christ, Jo. 3. 34, God has not given the Spirit by
measure to him. When we read of Christ's receiving any thing, understand it of
his humane Nature; for the divine Nature cannot be capable of receiving any
thing; it is as full of Grace as ever it can hold: And, as the Breast is full
of Milk for the Poor Babe, so is Jesus Christ full of Grace in his Humane
Nature, to distribute to his Children: His pity moves him to give out this, and
the other Grace to his People, and it is in him to bestow it. He wills the best
good to all his People, and what he wills, he is able to perform; hence it is
said, Joh. 1. 16. Of his Fullness we have all received, and Grace for Grace. Of
that Fullness which the Divine Nature is always issuing out to the Humane
Nature of Christ, do Believers receive Grace for Grace; Grace suitable to Grace
in Christ; so that the Humane Nature of Christ must needs be always full of
Grace, by reason of its Union with the Divine: As the Sun that gives out Light
is always full of Light, and the Sea that sends forth Waters to the Rivers, is
never vacant. This is a glorious Mystery, of wonderful Encouragement to
Believers, to consider what a full Jesus they are related to.

Thirdly, By virtue of this Union, the Lord Jesus Christ has right to all
Glory, and Adoration of Men and Angels, as Mediator. He is the most
Illustrious Person; all Honor, Blessing, Praise, Glory, Adoration is due to
him. Heb. 1. 6. When he brings in the first-begotten into the world, he
says, And let all the Angels of God worship him. Surely he must be a glorious
Person, when all the Angels must bow at his Feet; Seraphims, Cherubims, and all
the Host of Heaven, stoop and give Homage to him, this the Lord Jesus Christ
has a proper Right to, as he is God-Man: Phil. 2. 9. Wherefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a Name above every name; Every Tongue shall confess
at last, that he is Lord, ver. 11. Rev. 1. 17. And when I saw him, I fell at
his Feet as dead. O the very Vision of Christ is enough to strike a poor
Creature to the Earth, Rev. 4. 9, 10, 11. The four and twenty Elders fell down
and worshipped this glorious Person that sat upon the Throne, which is Jesus
Christ, Joh. 5. 23. That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father: So that God the Son, the Second Person, the Mediator of his People,
deserves all that Divine and Religious Worship which is due to God, as God:
Thrones and Principalities are made by him, and put under him. Col. 1. 16. 17.

Fourthly, By virtue of this Union, the Lord Jesus Christ has absolute
Authority, Kingship, and Headship in his Church, and over all things to the
Church, Matt. 28. 18. All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth. O what vast
Power is this! All Power on Earth, to do what he will there; All Power in
Heaven, to do what he will there, Ephesians. 1. 22. And has put all things under his
Feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church. Jesus Christ,
as God-Man, is invested with all Power and Authority, to transact the Work of a
Mediator, to perform the Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King: The Godhead of
Christ, working, as God, and the Manhood of Christ, working, as Man, yet both
these Natures concur toward the management of Redemption-work.

As a Prophet, he is able to reveal the Will of God, for he knows the mind of
the Spirit, being God, he is infinite in Wisdom, Job. 36. 4. Romans 11. 33. All
Knowledge comes from him, as Mediator: In him are hid the Treasures of Wisdom,
Col. 2. 3. He makes Wise to Salvation; He gives Wisdom, Prove. 2. 6. He
opens the Eyes of the blind, and gives Light to them that sit in Darkness,
and in the Region and shadow of Death, Matthew. 4. 16. Luke 2. 32. Ministers can
but preach to the Ear, but Christ can preach to the Heart: Ministers can but
open the Scriptures, Christ can open the Heart: He is a full and effectual Head
to his Body, the Church, to guide, influence and adorn it, Col. 1. 18.

As a Priest: And so there is an infinite Sufficiency in his Satisfaction and
Intercession, seeing he is God-Man; In his Satisfaction enough to silence all
Pleas against his People; He can arrest all the Sentences and Executions of the
Law against them. As an High Priest; he is a sufficient Sacrifice for the Sins
of the People: He was made Sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. By the Obedience of Christ all Believers are made
Righteous, Romans 5. 19. The Obedience of the Saints is represented complete in
Christ, though imperfect in themselves. Hence Believers that are wounded with
the shortness of their Services in themselves, may lift up their Heads, when
they look upon the perfect Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous: And he is the propitiation for our Sins. Though the Saints do
sin, Christ becomes a Sacrifice for them. This one Offering of Christ ever
appears before God; when new Provocations appear in his People: By one Offering
he perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. By virtue of this
Union, his Blood becomes infinite Blood, equally as large as the Offense: Nay,
it is more able to save, than the Sins of Believers to damn: It is the Blood of
Christ that cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. Therefore his Obedience is a
perfect Obedience, and his Sufferings perfect Sufferings: of more satisfaction
to Divine Justice, than if all the Sinners in the World had lain in Hell to all
Eternity. This Blood is so wonderfully precious, that it is accounted by the
Father as the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. If Infinite can satisfy Infinite,
then the Father is satisfied by the Blood of Christ; because whatever the
Justice of God can expect, the Obedience of Christ can fully satisfy. This
Righteousness to Justification, the perfect Obedience and Sufferings of Christ,
receives no Addition or Diminution by the Obedience, or Disobedience of his
People, Ephesians. 1. 6. He has made us accepted in the Beloved. Ah! little do Souls
know the Bottom they stand upon: It is not (poor Believer) the shortness of thy
Obedience, the multitude and greatness of thy Sins, can outmatch this matchless
Righteousness of Christ. All the Injuri^s and Wrongs thou have done is but the
Injury of a Creature, but the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ is the Satisfaction
of God; it is the Satisfaction of God the Soh, presented to God the Father: O
what a blessed state are Believers in, where there is such a price paid for
their Sins.

Again, By virtue of this Union, There Is Sufficiency in the Intercession of
Jesus Christ: He must needs be able to save to the uttermost all that come to
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession, Heb. 7. 24, 25. How much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who, through the Eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.
14. The Blood of Christ meritoriously purges the Soul from all filthiness,
being offered through the Eternal Spirit. God will not deny himself: whatever
God the Son intercedes for, God the Father will grant; so that Christ's
Intercession must needs be effectual. O what potency has Christ in Heaven!
what Prevalency in all his Addresses to the Father! Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Christ
gave himself for his Church; that he might sanctify and cleanse it; and that
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle.
Here Is a double Effect of Christ's Mediatorship: One is, By virtue of this
Blood, the Spirit comes, and cleanses away the Corruption, and subdues the
Iniquities of his People: this is that cleansing by Sanctification: Then
there is a presenting the Saints to the Father, complete in him, without spot or
wrinkle: thus the virtue of Christ's Intercession, and Righteousness applied by
him to the Believer. does prove such a covering for all Believers, that it
hides every spot from God's Judicial Eye, that the Lord is said to behold no
Iniquity in them, i. e. so as to be angry with them; they are presented lovely,
and comely in Christ, though black and deformed in themselves.

As a King: And so he has Authority to erect a Kingdom of Grace in the World,
to make Laws for the well-being of his Church, and to require Obedience of all
Persons. Hence the Magistrates of the World are called upon to stoop to Christ.
Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry. All Authority in the World is
placed under Jesus Christ, in order to the carrying on his Mediatorly Kingdom:
Hence it is said, Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice:
they have their Power and Authority, by the Government, and disposing of Jesus
Christ, who is said to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. He
has absolute Power over every Creature; Every Knee must bow, and every Tongue
confess to him; all must subject to him, Psalm. 22. 28. For the Kingdom is the
Lords, and he is the Governor among the Nations: He shall have Dominion also
from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the Earth: They that dwell
in the Wilderness shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the dust,
Psalm. 72. 8, 9.

As a King, he is invested with Right and Power, to give out the Spirit of
Grace for the effectual fulfilling of, and completing Obedience to all his
Laws, by his Church and People. Obedience to the Laws of Christ cannot be
yielded but by the Spirit; the best of his People are no further subject to
him, than they are Spiritual; for the Carnal mind is Enmity against God: Hence
he says, When I go away, I will send the Comforter, John 16. 7. It is an
Expression that notes Authority: When I go away, when I mount my Throne, I will
send the Spirit; and he shall promote Obedience: He shall lead his People into
all Truth, ver. 13. 14. Whenever he intends the flourishing of his Kingdom in
the World, he has residues of the Spirit to give out; the more Holiness there
is in Saints and Churches, the more there are of the pourings out of the
Spirit: I will pour out my Spirit upon thy Seed, and they shall spring up as
among the grass, as Willows by the Watercourse, Isa. 44. 3, 4. So Joel 2. 28,
29. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. In those days, that is, in
the time of the Gospel, and especially when the Jews are called.

Again, as King, the Lord Jesus Christ has sufficient Power to protect and
rule his People, to govern and subdue his Enemies. He is altogether complete to
enact his own Purposes, and to fulfill his own Will; for as God, nothing is too
hard for him; He takes up the Isles as a very little thing, Isa. 40. 15. It is
an easy thing with him to blow off the Nations, and subdue all the Powers that
oppose him: He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have
them in Derision, Psalm. 2. 4. He makes nothing of all the Powers of his
Enemies; it is but to look through the Clouds, and trouble their Hosts, Exodus
14. 24. One Angel can suddenly destroy thousands of them: he has absolute
Power over all Creatures to bring down all his Enemies, where and when he will;
and he must reign till he has brought them all down, Heb. 2. 8. Thou shall
break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters
Vessel, Psalm. 2. 9. The Saints are ready to tremble when they consider the
Potency of their Enemies; but it is far easier for Christ to dash all the
Powers of the World in pieces, than for a man to break an earthen Pitcher: He
will order and establish his Kingdom with Judgment and Justice, Isa. 9. 7. It
is not for want of Ability in Christ to order and perfect the Obedience of his
Church and People, that there are such Disorders found amongst them; only he is
pleased to leave Irregularities for a while, that he may come at last with his
Fan, and purge them: So neither men nor Devils can pluck his Sheep out of his
hand, Jo. 10. 28. Enemies may touch them; Temptations may wound and buffet
them, and sometimes Captivate his People; but they cannot remove them out of
his hand; he will still support and preserve, all that the Father has given
him.

Fifthly, In this personal Union of the Lord Jesus Christ, lies his
Mediatorship: In these two Natures he takes upon him, and undergoes the Office
of Mediator. And this is so great a deep, that time is too short to give a full
Display of the Glory of Christ's Mediatorship. Heb. 8. 6. But now he has
obtained a more excellent Ministry by how much also he is the Mediator of a
better Covenant.

But now etc. That is by virtue of this Union of both Natures in the Person of
Christ, he is become a Mediator of a better Covenant; this we may see, if we
look back in verse. 1. The Apostle speaks of Christ's divine Nature, who is set
on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in Heaven; and verse. 2. his
humane Nature is shown, called the Minister of the Sanctuary, and verse. 3.
ordained to offer Gifts: and having spoken of Christ in both his Natures, he
tells us that he is now become a Mediator, betwixt God and Man; a middle
Person, a days-Man, he has a Mediety or Middleness of Nature, as God-Man, and
is a Mediator in regard of his Office, in which Office, the Lord Jesus stands
in a double Relation, first, to God, secondly, to Man; having both Natures, he
is interested in both parties, the Son of God, and the Son of Man, one with
God, Joh. 10. 30. I and my Father are one: of one Nature, one Will, one
Delight, having one Design and one Glory. As man he is of the same Nature,
Flesh and Blood with fallen man, Heb. 2. 11. 14. 17. He has the same
Temptations, the same Weaknesses and Infirmities with them (Sin excepted) that
he might have a fellow feeling of the Infirmities of his people, and put on
Bowels of Compassions, that he might be capable of fulfilling all
Righteousness, suffering for them, and holding Communion with them, Heb. 5. 1.
2.

This Term Mediator, is taken sometimes in a more large sense, sometimes in a
more strict sense.

First, This Term, as it is taken in a large Sense, so the Lord Jesus Christ is
a Mediator, as he is the Head, the middle between God and his Creatures, so he
is the Mediator of Angels as well as men: It is by him the Angels were made,
and in him the Elect Angels are chosen, and by him they are preserved: for
Angels cannot be thought to come to such a State of Felicity, and such near
Union with God, but upon the account of a second person, Col. 1. 20. in the
sixteenth verse, Christ is said to be the Creator of Angels, and in this 20.
ver. there is his Mediatorship for Angels: By him to reconcile all things to
himself, whether they be things in Earth or things in Heaven. This is a place
of very great Difficulty, and has puzzled many Interpreters: some conceive it
is to reconcile man and Angels together, supposing the Angels were enemies to
fallen man, but by Jesus Christ, brought into a State of Amity: but it cannot
be so understood here; for the Parties reconciled, are not said to be men and
Angels, but God, and these things: how then is this understood? Some therefore
conceive, that this Reconciliation is to be understood by way of Proportion and
Similitude, not as if the Angels needed Pardon, for they never sinned; but they
stand in need of a Mediator, that they may not sin; for as Creatures, they are
mutable, and as subject, in their Nature to sin, as the Devils were; and it is
by Jesus Christ they are preserved, and kept in the Favor of God. It is said,
all things in Heaven: The Heavens themselves are, or shall be brought into a
capacity of meetness, for the presence of God, Saints and Angels, by Jesus
Christ, as Mediator: The Angels are called Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21. And
how? but as they are chosen in Christ; for all Election is founded in the Lord
Jesus Christ, as a middle Person, as the Head of Election, Ephesians. 1. 4. According
as he has chosen us in him; all those Creatures that shall be made, or kept
holy, are placed in the Lord Jesus Christ. Likewise the Angels are called the
Sons of God, Job 38. 7. When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons
of God shouted for Joy: Now all Adoption is in the Lord Jesus Christ: If they
are reputed as the Sons of God, this Relation must needs be in Christ, who is
the only begotten Son of God: therefore all the Angels must needs have
dependence upon Christ, as Mediator, Ephesians. 1. 10. That in the dispensation of
the fullness of time, he might gather together in one, all things in Christ,
both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in him. Some conceive it
is meant of those Saints that were in Heaven, before Christ came to suffer; but
that cannot be, it being put in the Neuter Gender, All things in Heaven: so
that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Mediator of Angels, in that he procures for
them Preservation with God: and were it not for a Mediator, they would never be
secured from Falling.

Secondly, More strictly. Christ is called Mediator in respect to God, and
fallen Man, coming betwixt them, as a middle Person, to make up the Breach,
effect a Peace, and reconcile them together, Heb. 9. 15. He is the Mediator of
the New Testament, Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant,
John 14. 6. He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: It is through his Name
alone Salvation is to be had, Acts 4. 12. He is appointed of God the Father to
this end, Joh. 3. 16. Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation
for our Sins: to be one that may reconcile God to Man, and render him
propitious and favorable to him, Acts 2. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Heb. 5. 4. Joh. 6.
24. For him has God the Father sealed: He was anointed and furnished with all
Abilities for this end, Isa. 61. 1, 2. And he is the only Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.
5, 6. The only Surety, Heb. 8. 6. The only Advocate, 1 John 2. 1, 2. It Is God
the Son, the Second Person, is the only Mediator; 'twas he that made man, and
therefore fittest for him to re-make him; It would be a great derogation from
Christ's Honor (says Austin) should another mend and reform that spoiled work
which he made. He is fittest to restore man to the lost Image of God, who
himself is the express Image of the Father: It Is best meet for him to commend
the Love of God to man, who himself is the Son of the Father's Love: He is the
only begotten Son of the Father, and so fit to Adopt others into a state of
Sonship. As Man also, Christ has Right to Redemption-work, Lev. 25. 23. As
God, he has Ability to redeem; As Man he was capable to suffer: As God, he was
able to bear up the Humane Nature under Sufferings; As Man, he could bear the
Punishment of Sin; As God, he could remove our Sins, and purify our Natures:
As Man, he could compassionate his People; As God, he could help them: As Man,
he is capable to tender a Satisfaction; As God, to render it infinite: As Man,
he was able to become a Sponsor, a Surety, to make a promise in the behalf of
his Seed; And, as God, he could make good his Promise: He can reveal the mind,
and disclose the deep things of God, and pour out the Spirit of Grace; He has
all Power in Heaven and Earth, and is able to save to the uttermost: He can
exalt his Interest, and subjugate his Enemies under his Feet; He sits at the
Right hand of God, and is God with the Father, and Man with Man.

CHAP. IV.
Showing, what is the Work of Jesus Christ, as he is Mediator.

WE come in the next place, to show wherein the Office and Work of this
Mediator lies: And it will much conduce to the Glory of Christ, to display his
Mediatorship.

Now we must consider him in a double Relation. The Lord Jesus Christ has to
deal with two different Parties, where there is a Breach.

1. His Work lies with respect to God the Father. 2. His Work lies with respect
to fallen Man.
First, His Work lies with respect to God the Father: And here his Office lies
in several particulars.

First, One great part of the Work of Christ, as Mediator, is, to mediate in
the behalf of fallen Man, with the Father, so as to procure terms of
Reconciliation: Thus a Mediator is to agitate with the offended Person, to
bring to terms of Peace: This was the Work of Jesus Christ, from before all
time; He did act with God the Father, that there might be a way found out for
agreement between him and poor Sinners. This was drawn up in the Covenant
between the Father and the Son, as in Isa. 42. 6, 7. I the Lord have called
thee in Righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give
thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles: To open the
blind eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison. Here Is the result of
Christ's Mediation in the behalf of fallen Sinners: He does treat with the
Father, that he would be pleased to show pity to fallen man; and the Father
returns this Answer, That he will consent to the terms of Jesus Christ, for the
saving of Sinners; that he shall be a Covenant for the People, and give out
Salvation to perishing Sinners: So Isa. 49. 5. to the 10 verse. The Persons for
whom the Lord Jesus Christ mediates, are Jews and Gentiles, and under these are
comprised all the Elect of God: And the Father treats, and concludes with
Christ, about the saving of these two Parties: In an acceptable time (says he)
have I heard thee, and I will give thee for a Covenant of the People. All the
Elect of God, both among the Jews and Gentiles, shall be called and saved by
this Mediation of Jesus Christ.

But what are the terms upon which the Father consents to the Mediation of
Christ, that there shall be Peace for all that come to him?

First, One thing concluded upon between the Father and the Son, is, That the
Lord Jesus Christ shall make up the Breach of the first Covenant: There Is a
Righteous Covenant of God broken, by the Sin of Adam, and upon the breach of
this Covenant, God is bound, in Justice, to lay Death upon Adam, Condemnation
upon all fallen Mankind. Now, that this Blessing may be procured, which Christ
mediates for, the Sentence of Death is to be reversed; and this cannot be till
the Punishment of the broken Covenant be borne. Now the Lord Jesus Christ
voluntarily undertakes to do this, Heb. 10. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come. All
other ways were ineffectual to make satisfaction to the Justice of God for
Adam's Sin. Now, when no way could make up this Breach, then Christ comes, and
consents to pay the price himself, to be a Sacrifice for Sinners; Lo, I come to
do thy Will. What is the Will of God? Why, that Mercy and Justice be
reconciled. Justice was all for Punishment; Justice would not be satisfied till
the Penalty was executed: Now Christ must come in the Sinners room, and undergo
the Penalty of this broken Covenant. Says God, In the day thou breakest this
Covenant thou shall dye; therefore Christ must come and dye. This is one of the
terms; If the Lord Jesus Christ will be a Substitute in the room of the
Offender, and undergo the Punishment, then he will take off the Condemnation,
Romans 8. 3. For Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh, that is, in the Flesh of Christ,
Justice must be satisfied. The Law could not do this: God sends his Son, and he
must undergo the curse, Gal. 3. 13. And this the Lord Jesus Christ did consent
unto.

Secondly, Another thing required is, That the Lord Jesus Christ should obey
the Precepts of this Covenant perfectly, in his own Person, in the behalf of
all his Seed: That God might have no Quarrel with the Children of the Covenant,
Christ must dye to make up the former Breach of this Covenant: He must obey, to
fulfill the End of the Covenant; he was not only to undergo Sufferings, but he
was to complete all active Righteousness: and this the Lord Jesus Christ
consented to* Hence he says, It behooves us to fulfill all Righteousness, Mat:
3. 15. God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.
The Lord Jesus Christ, as Mediator, becomes obliged to the preceptive Law of
God, and must in his own Person fulfill all the parts of this Law, and must work
out a perfect Holiness and Obedience, that the first Covenant might be
fulfilled, if Salvation be obtained.

Thirdly, Another thing which the Father and Jesus Christ agree upon, about
this Work of Reconciliation, is, That the first Covenant, to all its demands,
being fulfilled, and there being nothing now to lay in against the Believer
from this Covenant; that Salvation may be sure, he concludes to make a new
Covenant; which, that it may be faultless, Jesus Christ should now become the
Surety of another, and better Covenant. The first Covenant God found fault
with, and therefore he thinks upon a second, that may be effectual to all the
ends of Salvation-grace, Heb. 8. 7, 8. For if that first Covenant had been
faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second: for, finding
fault with them, he says, Behold, the days come, when I will make a new
Covenant with the House of Israel and Judah. As if the Lord should say to his
Son, The first Covenant will never answer thy Proposals, to save fallen Man,
and that thy Seed may be blessed, therefore there shall be a new Covenant
drawn, that shall be effectual to the ends of Salvation; and thou shall be the
Head and Mediator of this Covenant; this was the agreement between the Father
and the Son. Now Jesus Christ becomes the Angel of this Conant: God agrees with
Jesus Christ for fallen man: Jesus Christ covenants with the Father, in the
behalf of all his Seed, that he will bring them to Life: He promises to work in
them and for them all that is required to Salvation, and that they shall be
saved to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 22, 25. By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a
better Testament: wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost. Thus he
becomes an Engager to the Father in the behalf of all Believers. O Friends!
this is a glorious Mystery; I fear too few are insighted in the glorious Work
of the Mediatorship of Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ becomes a Surety, not only
to pay the Debt, but to perform the Condition. A Surety, or a Sponsor, is one
that promises and undertakes in the behalf of another, to fulfill what he was
bound to do. T^us the Lord Jesus Christ has performed this first Office of a
Mediator, by drawing up an Agreement between God and fallen Man, by bringing
the Father to terms of Reconciliation.

Secondly, The terms being thus concluded upon, the second part of this
mediatory work of Christ is, that he actually set about this Obedience and
Suffering, and make good the Agreement between the Father and himself; and this
he did in the fullness of time; he comes and actually accomplishes all his
Promises to the Father, in point of Merit and Satisfaction. There are two great
things Jesus Christ is to do, in order to the fulfilling of this Promise to the
Father, in behalf of his Seed: First, meritoriously procuring the things for
them; and Secondly, efficaciously applying what he procures, Heb. 9. 15. And
for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of Death,
for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first Covenant,
they which are called might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance. There
could be no Redemption of them that were bound an I cast by the Statute of the
first Covenant, but by Christ's Sufferings; therefore Christ did actually lay
down his Life a Ransom for all his Seed. 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has
once suffered for Sins the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto
God. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has made him to be Sin for us: By way of Stipulation and
Agreement, he was made a Sin-offering, he did actually undergo all those
Sufferings while he was on Earth, which was a full sufficient, equal, just,
valuable, and proportionable Satisfaction to divine Justice, all that it could
demand, in foro judicii; Justice has nothing more to charge; the Extremity and
Rigor of the Law was fulfillled; and whatever the Believer should have
suffered in his own person, was all born by Christ. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave
himself a Ransom. (...), as Gomarus observes, signifies an equal-price of
Redemption, an Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, caput capite redimo, says
Arist. So full is this Satisfaction made by Christ, that God declares himself
well pleased. Math. 3 17. So great was the delight and Pleasure that God took
in his Sons Satisfaction, as that by an audible Voice from Heaven, in the
Presence of men and Angels, he discharges him, and gives him an Acquittance.

Again, This Satisfaction must needs be full, because upon the very Promise of
this Ransom, when the Conclusion was made between the Father and the Son, did
the Lord let his Prisoner free, and give the purchased Possession to the Seed
of Christ, before ever Christ did fully pay the Debt: as much as to say, as soon
as ever the Lord Jesus Christ gave Bond for the payment of this Debt, the
Father gives out the Fruit of it, and so all the Saints that were saved before
Christ came, were saved by Virtue of this Promise of Christ to the Father,
fully to pay the Debt; and the Spirits of just men, were made perfect with God
before Christ came into the World, upon the account of this complete
Satisfaction afterward to be made.

Again, A Proclamation is sent out from Heaven, upon the Death and Resurrection
of Christ, that now Peace is made for fallen man, upon the terms of Sinners
coming to and receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ: now God would never have sent
forth this Proclamation from Heaven, had not the Satisfaction Christ made, been
complete and full. Matt. 11. 28. Come unto me, whoever you be, let your Burdens
be never so great, your Wearyness never so much, your Dangers never so many,
come unto me, and I will give you rest: thus he proclaims in the great Feast.
Joh. 7. 27. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, be he what he
will, here is enough to satiate his Soul, if he comes; here is Redemption
procured: And upon this, by the joint Agreement of the Father and Son, a
Commission is given to a certain number of men, to preach the Gospel and tender
Reconciliation to lost Sinners, Luke 24. 47. And that Repentance and Remission
of Sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, Mark. 16. 15. And he
said unto them, go ye into all the World and preach the Gospel to every
Creature. O Friends! These are glorious things, if they be but believed.
Tenders of Life must be made to all the perishing World, that all may know,
that this was a full and sufficient Ransom which Christ gave, and that the
Father was completely satisfied with it.

Again, Upon the Fathers actual Acceptance of Christ's Redemption and Mediation,
he does give out begun Salvation to Believers, they are admitted to the actual
Enjoyment of this purchase; so all Believers upon their Reception of Christ,
have the Spirit of Christ given them, which to them is begun Salvation, a Seal
of Glory, the first fruits of Heaven, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us,
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. Now seeing the Father, upon
the receiving of this Payment made by Christ, delivers out Grace, and therein
the Begi^nings of Glory, to all that savingly close with Christ, therefore this
price paid by Jesus Christ, must needs be complete and full

That Is the second thing that this Mediator does, he does actually pay down the
price the Father demands, and this becomes a full Satisfaction to divine
Justice, for every Soul that does savingly close with Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Another thing the Lord Jesus Christ does as Mediator, is this. By his
shed blood, he seals to, and engages with the Father in the Behalf of
Believers, that they shall abide with God in his Covenant, and shall no more
wickedly depart from him: we have shown before, that this was one of those
Terms agreed upon, between the Father and the Son; that Jesus Christ should be
the Surety of another and better Covenant: and here the Lord Jesus Christ
stands actually bound for the Preservation of all the Saints to Glory. O if
Souls had this Truth let into their Hearts, it would wonderfully prevent many
stumbling Blocks by reason of their Unbelief: he stands bound to the Father, as
a Sponsor or Surety, in the Behalf of Believers, that he will work all in them,
and for them, that tends to the Salvation of their Souls: for in this new
Covenant, God does not deal with man, but by a Surety; man's single Bond will
never pass more in the Court of Heaven; no, it was broken in Adam's Fall, and
God made no more Covenant with man upon these Terms: there must be a Surety;
hence he is said to be the Surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7. 22. So that
that which is to be wrought in and by Believers, the Lord Jesus Christ
undertakes to do, Romans 8. 4. That the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us: That is, that Righteousness which the Law requires, even a
perfect Conformity to the will of God, might be fully found in Christ our Head,
for us and in us, by way of Imputation and Application through Faith; by virtue
of the Union between Christ and his Members, all the Righteousness and
Obedience, which was wrought in Christ's own person, as their Head, Redeemer,
and Mediator of this new Covenant, is imputed to them as their Obedience and
Righteousness, and accepted of God the Father, as if it were done by them; and
so it is fulfilled in Believers: so that the Lord Jesus Christ stands engaged
to the Father, for the Obedience of all his Seed, that it shall be wrought in
them, and for them, in Truth, and Sincerity. And he begins to place this inward
Conformity to God, in the Soul, when he does new create it in the Image of God;
there is something in every part and Faculty of the believing Soul, that
corresponds and answers to the Holiness of God, though but in Part and Degrees,
in their Understandings, something of the true Light of God: in their Wills
something of real Conformity to the Will of God: a gracious Soul would be holy
as God is holy. O says the poor Believer, I cannot evidence that Holiness I
should, but God knows, I would be holy, I would cast off every Sin, I would
perform every Duty in a right manner: so in the Affections, there is the Seed
of divine Love to God, his Will, and Holiness; there is sincere Love, though
but in part, and imperfect: but seeing this Holiness begun in the Saints in
Truth, is but in part, and full of Spots; Christ comes, in the next place, and
presents his spotless Obedience in the Behalf of Believers, and by Virtue of
this mystical Union between Believers and Christ, this Holiness of Christ is
the Holiness of Believers, and God accepts of it as their Holiness: O if Souls
did but see more into this, they would not take up all their standing upon
their own Legs, and see their Happiness or Misery lie in their complete or
incomplete Obedience, but they would see all Holiness lie in Christ: hence you
see the meaning of that Scripture, Romans 5. 19. By the Obedience of one, many
are made righteous. God looks upon sincere Souls as presented in Christ, that
so far as Christ is holy, they are holy in him; for all the Obedience and
Holiness of Christ as Mediator, is the Obedience and Holiness of his People;
for what he did was not for himself, but for his people. And thus much of the
first, how this Mediator deals with God the Father for fallen man.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ as Mediator, deals with men the other party
too. Now this he does.

First, As an Interceder to Sinners in the Behalf of God the Father, he comes
and treats with men, by virtue of his Mediatorship, to draw and persuade them
to Terms of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18. All things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given us the Ministry of
Reconciliation. The Lord Jesus Christ comes as the Messenger of the Lord, and
delivers over Counsel, and tenders God the Father to Sinners: this he does in
his person: verse. 19. God in Christ reconciling the World to himself; By his
Ministry, in opening the Gospel to Sinners, discovering those great
Transactions between the Father and himself, and the great willingness of God
to be reconciled, and inviting lost Souls to himself. verse. 20. We pray you in
Christ's stead be you reconciled to God. You see the Errand of the Gospel to
you, (Souls) and the Business of Christ in every Sermon, it is to bring you to
a willingness to accept of the Terms of Reconciliation, to come over to God by
Jesus Christ, that you may be saved.

Secondly, By giving out the holy Ghost, by which Sinners are effectually
called, and adopted into the Sonship of God; this is necessary in order to the
Application of what the Lord Jesus Christ has done in his own person, whilst
on Earth: he promised when he left the World, to send the Spirit in his Room,
seeing it is of necessity, he must go away and take possession of the Kingdom
of Glory for his people, and must go within the Veil, as the great High Priest;
therefore that this Work might go on in his Absence, the comforter must come.
Jo. 16. 7. If I depart I will send him unto you. And what shall he do? He will
reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and Judgment, verse. 8. He will
guide you into all Truth, verse. 13. So that the Lord Jesus Christ sends the
Spirit in the Gospel, to make all the Administrations of it effectual, to such
as shall be saved. All that Ministers can do, cannot remove the thick Veil,
that is, upon the Minds of Sinners, we cannot give eyes to see, nor Ears to
hear, it is the work of the Spirit, it must be an Almighty power, must open
this two leafed gate, and let in Jesus Christ into the Heart; it must be by the
Almighty Power, and Energy of the Spirit, that the work becomes successful to
any Soul, we find it so. How many precious Sermons are cast away upon flinty
Hearts, they will not bow nor turn till the Spirit comes; therefore the Lord
Jesus Christ in the exercise of his Mediatorship pours out the Spirit, Gal. 4.
6. That we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. Gal. 3. 14.
Or the promised Spirit through the Word of Faith; for Faith cannot be had till
the Spirit be had: Faith comes by hearing; How received ye the Spirit, by the
Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Gal. 3. 2. There Is no such
Commission given at all to the Law, to give out the Spirit; it is by the
hearing of Faith, by the opening this Box of precious Ointment, this blessed
savor comes to Sinners: till that be done, no Conversion-work can be done;
till the Spirit enters the Soul, Jesus Christ cannot enter the Soul: the Spirit
of Christ is the harbinger, and goes before, and makes way for this blessed
Mediator, to come into the Sinners heart: the Spirit is tendered to all, but the
Lord gives it to whom he pleases; for it is as the Wind that blows, Jo. 3. 8.
So is the way of the Spirit: thus the Lord Jesus Christ gives the Spirit to all
that come to him, and by this he carries on his Mediatory work.

Thirdly, Another thing Jesus Christ does with respect to men, in the exercise
of his Mediatorship; He applies his Redemption-work to all those that do
believe in him, he makes over himself, and all that is his, by a free Donation,
to all that receive him, Rev. 3. 20. If any man open the door, I will come into
him, and will sup with him: The great work is to get open this bolted door of
the Heart to Jesus Christ, and when the door stands open, and the Sinner
consents to take Christ, and esteeming it a good Bargain to have him, upon the
most costly Terms; then he makes over himself to the Soul, I will sup with him,
I will impart my Spiritual refreshings to him, I will give my self to him, he
shall feed upon my Flesh and Blood: we have an Overture made, Rev. 21. 6. I
will give to him that is a thirst of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely,
So Rev. 22. 17. When once God has brought the Sinner to a thirst for Christ,
to a sense of his Misery without Christ, that he cannot live without him; when
the Sinner is persuaded to believe in him, and give up himself to him; then the
Lord Jesus gives out himself, his Spirit, these Waters of Life, the Waters of
Regeneration; then he puts the Believing Soul into the possession of Life and
Righteousness, of Grace, and an earnest of Glory. He gives to such, a Right and
Title to all that is his, Joh. 1. 12. He gives out to them the fruit of his
Sweat and Bleeding, the fruit of his Groans and Dying, as they are capable to
receive. He died that they might have Life, and have it more abundantly: He was
made Sin for them, that they might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. 5. 21. And now he is performing this, and strips the poor Soul of his
filthy Garments, and takes away the filth of Original and Actual Sin, and comes
and clothes the Soul with Righteousness, and puts his fair Ornaments upon it,
and makes it as a fair Jewel in the sight of God; and when the Soul has
bespotted his own Garments, Christ comes and clothes him with pure Raiment: So
that here is always Work for Christ to do for his People, whilst on Earth, to
apply the fruits of his Purchase.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus Christ, in pursuing his Mediatorly Work, does take
upon him the Work of an Intercessor in Heaven, and Advocates in the behalf of
all his People; He has done all that was needful for him to do on Earth, and
now he is entered into the Heavens, and sat down at the Right hand of God, and
ever lives to make Intercession for the Saints, Heb. 7. 25, 27. That is his
Work now in Heaven, to perform that part of his Priestly Office, as is needful
for him to do, as a Mediator there.

CHAP. V.
Wherein is opened the glorious Advocateship of Christ, with the unspeakable
Comforts and Advantages thereof.

THere are two parts of Christ's Priesthood; (1.) His Satisfaction. (2.) His
Intercession. The first I have spoken to already, and proved, That the Lord
Jesus, by his Active and Passive Obedience, has satisfied the Law of God, and
made a full Atonement for the Sins of all Believers; that he underwent all that
they were bound to undergo, and that in their Name, Room, and Stead, for their
Sakes, Heb. 7. 22. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Romans 5. 19. This he did by his Active
Obedience, and also by his Passive, Isa. 53. 4. to verse. 7. Gal. 3. 13, 14.
Joh. 1. 28, 29. And by this one Offering of his, has he perfected them that
are sanctified for ever, Heb. 10. 14. by way of Merit; that God has no more
now to charge on Believers, by way of Punishment for their Sins, seeing Christ
has borne it in his own Body for them on the Tree. By this he has obtained
Salvation for them: that is the first part of his Priestly Work.

But, Secondly, Having dispatched his Expiation, it is needful that he carry on
his Application of this Obedience and Suffering to them; and this is done by
his interceding in Heaven for them. Now, because so much of the Riches of
Christ lies in this part of his Mediatorly Work, and it is of such infinite
Concernment, as to the Faith, Comfort, and Advantage of Believers, therefore, I
shall speak the more fully to this Subject, and shall prove,

1. That the Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man, does now sit down at the Right Hand of
God, Interceding there in Heaven.

2. How the Lord Christ carries on this Work of Intercession in Heaven.

3. For whom he does intercede in Heaven.

4. What he does intercede for.

5. Why the Lord Jtsus Christ, as a Mediator, carries on this Work of
Intercession.

6. What are the unspeakable Comforts and Advanvantages that flow from this
Intercession of Christ.

First, Jesus Christ does now sit down at the Right Hand of God, and is entered
upon the Work of Intercession.

There are two Arguments to prove this.

First, The nature of the Office the Lord Jesus Christ has undertaken now in
Heaven: He has taken on him the Office of an Advocate, on the behalf of his
People. 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous; (...): This word is ordinarily rendered a Comforter, when
applied to the Holy Ghost; but when spoken of Christ (as Gomarus, and other
Learned men affirm) it is taken for an Advocate, or one that undertakes the
Cause of another; an Attorney, or Officer at Law, that appears in Court for one
that is there concerned and accused, to look after, and plead his Cause: He is
one that is, by Law, deputed and set apart to that Office, and so is bound to
do his utmost for his Client, as for himself: Thus is Jesus Christ set apart,
and deputed, by the Father, to this Office of Advocate and Intercessor, Joh. 6.
27. For him has God the Father sealed. That is, appointed, set apart, and
confirmed to be Mediator and High Priest, Psalm. 110. 4. That he might satisfy
for the Sins of his People, and sue out the Benefits of it for them.

Secondly, Christ's Fidelity in the Performance of this Work, proves he is now
in Heaven, interceding. He cannot be content to have a Name and no more; he is
faithful in things pertaining to Men. The Lord Jesus Christ did actually carry
on this Work of interceding for his People, before he took their Nature upon
him, and came into the World, Isa. 53. 12. He bore the Sins of many, and made
Intercession for the Transgressors. Upon his Deputation to this Office, and by
virtue of the Sacrifice to be offered, he did, ever since the Fall, mediate for
his People, and put on Bowels for them. He carried them all the days of Old,
Isa. 63. 9. whilst he was in Heaven, ever since Adam's Fall, as soon as he had
any Seed on Earth. Again, Christ was faithful in this Work of Mediation and
Intercession, whilst on Earth, Heb. 5. 7. Who in the days of his Flesh, when
he had offered up Prayers and Supplications; with strong cries and tears. Those
cries and tears he put up were for his People, not for himself, he needed it
not: He was willing to be subject to his Fathers Will, to drink of the Cup the
Father gave him to drink; But he prayed for the conversion of those the Father
had given him, and prays for the Salvation of his People, Joh. 17. 19, 20.
Luke 22. 32. And this he does now he is in Heaven; he carries on this Work
there in his Humane Nature: He is entered into Heaven it self, there to appear
in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. It is a Metaphor taken from an
Attorney, that appears in the behalf of his Clients: So Jesus Christ is at the
Right hand of God making intercession, by way of Office. When Satan or the Law
does accuse Believers, there is Christ at the Bar, ready to make answer for
them, to plead the Cause of his Clients, and procure their Justification: the
Apostle makes use of Christ's Intercession to this purpose, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8. 33,
34. So Heb. 6. 19, 20. Which Hope we have, as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure
and steadfast, and which enters into that within the veil; whither the
Forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever. By an
entrance within the veil, was typified out Heaven, Glory. As the High Priest
entered within the veil, so Christ, as an High Priest, is now in Heaven, to
carry on Redemption-work: He is there to oppose all Designs against his People,
and secure them against all the Impleadings of their Enemies; He ever lives to
make Intercession, Heb. 7. 25. The word signifies, to attain the Mark, as an
Archer does; or he that throws Darts hits the Mark, so the Lord Jesus Christ
intercedes so as to prevail.

Secondly, How does Christ intercede in Heaven?

Ans. 1. Negatively, Jesus Christ does not intercede in Heaven, Figuratively,
As if his Intercession were no more but the virtue of his Merit, as Abel's
Blood is said to speak, Heb. 12. 24. But formally as one that takes upon him
the Cause of his sinning, suffering people.

Secondly, he does not intercede Charitatively, by way of Courtesy and
Kindness, which he might do or leave undone, as he pleases; but officially by
way of Office and Trust committed to him, for so he is our Advocate, 1 John 2.
1.

Thirdly, Neither does he intercede Precario, in such an humble manner and Mode
of Supplication of bowing the Knee, and submissive Entreaties with Cries and
Tears, as the Saints do, and as once he did whilst on Earth; for this is
inconsistent with that State of Majesty and Glory, he is in at the right hand
of God, Heb. 1. 3. But Authoritatively, by way of Right and Power, as one that
has deposited a sufficient Price, and now demands his Captives, as one that
has made a Purchase, and now requires the thing purchased, as one that has
deserved what he moves for, and has Power, as God, to bestow:

Secondly, Affirmatively, and so.

First, Christ's Intercession in Heaven is, by his appearing there for us, as
our Mediator and Surety, presenting his person, God-man, as our Agent and
High Priest, Heb. 9. 24. As the High Priest of old did appear in the holiest of
all, with the Names of the twelve Tribes on his Breast and Shoulders, for a
Memorial before the Lord, Exodus 28. 9. to 22. to which, says one, the Church
alludes, Cant. 8. 6. Set me as a Seal on thy Heart, as a a Seal upon thy Arm,
as a Manifestation of his Love; so Christ's interceding, is his appearing in
the behalf of his People, as their Advocate; and Christ's sitting in Heaven, in
this Relation to his people may be calle^ his interceding.

Secondly, By presenting his Obedience and Sufferings before the Father on
their behalf, that they might have the Benefit of it, and that God would in
Justice, communicate the Fruits of it to all his Seed, 1 John 2. 1, 2. A type
of this we might see in the High-priest's bringing the blood of the Sacrifice
within the Veil, and sprinkling it on the Mercy Seat, Lev. 16. 11. to 17. First
he killed the Sin-offering, and then brought in the Blood before the Lord
within the Veil; without which his Act was not complete. Thus Christ first
sheds his Blood on Earth, for his People, then enters into Heaven, there to
present his Blood for us, Heb. 8. 4.

Thirdly, By declaring his Willingness, that his People should have all that
Mercy and Salvation which they need, and that he purchases for them. Joh. 17.
24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be where I am; Father, I
will that my Children have their due: it is true, they have sinned but I have
suffered, they have fallen short but I have fulfilled all Righteousness: thou
know I obeyed for them, and dyed for them, that all which thou have promised
might be made good to them: and Father, I will that Justice be done for them in
Heaven; and I will, that this and the other Mercy be given out to them here,
according as their Necessities and Capacities require: whilst Christ was on
Earth, he came to do his Fathers Will, and now he is in Heaven, he must in all
things have his own, Joh. 11. 42.

Thus much may be understood by the manner of Christ's Intercession in Heaven.

Thirdly, For whom does Jesus Christ intercede in Heaven?

Answ. For all that come to God by him, Heb. 9. 27. For all that do believe in
him. Joh. 17. 20. Some desponding Sinners may be ready to say, alas! this is
not for me, I am unworthy of so choice a Mercy: will Christ plead for such a
grace-abusing wretch as I? Why Sinner, if thou art one that come over to
Jesus Christ, and believe on the Son, thou may lay claim to this Advocate
in Heaven, and confidently expect the Benefit of his Intercession.

Again, The Lord Christ intercedes for all his People on Earth, Joh. 17. 11.
And now I am no more in the World, but these are in the World, holy Father
keep, through thy own Name, those whom thou have given me. The Saints on Earth
are the Subjects for whom he intercedes: particularly, for his sinning people:
he made Intercession for the Transgressors. Isa. 53. 12. Some trembling Soul
may say, Christ's Intercession is for them that are holy, but I am vile; but
know, O Soul, Christ interceeds in Heaven for his people that sin against him,
1 John 2. 2. Again, Christ intercedes in Heaven for his weak and impotent
people, that are compast about with Clouds of Infirmities, he has a special
Respect to these, as a tender Father has to a weak Child; Christ's grace was
sufficient for Paul, when his own failed under the horrible Buffetings of
Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Such as are weak in themselves, that know not how to pray*
or wait upon God in any holy Duty as they should; these are the Persons Christ
pleads for to help them, such as are ready to be overcome by Temptations;
Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat,
but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, Luke 22. 31. 32. Poor
tempted Souls, hurryed up and down, sometimes assaulted with blasphemous
Thoughts, then poisoned by ugly Temptations, put upon this Sin, and then the
other Sin, every day the Devil following them with new Temptations, laying in
new Batteries against them: Now the Lord Jesus Christ sits at the right hand of
God, interceding for these.

Again, Christ intercedes in Heaven for his suffering People, such as are in
danger of being overcome by their Enemies, and have no Might, and none to
intercede for them, Isaiah 59. 16. Sore Judgments there were upon the People of
God, and that justly; for their Transgressions, no Righteousness of their own
to plead for them, nothing at all that could justly intervene between Wrath and
them: Now in this case Christ steps in, and he intercedes, and brings
Salvation. These are the persons Christ intercedes for in Heaven.

Fourthly, What does the Lord Jesus intercede for in the behalf of his People?

First, One thing he pleads for is, for their Preservation in the World, and
from the Evil of the World, Joh. 17. 15. I pray not that thou should take
them out of the World, but that thou should keep them from the Evil. This
implies, Christ's mind is, his People should continue in the World till their
Work be done; that neither Sin nor Danger may cut them off till their full time
be come; but that they may be kept from Evil; from the Evil of Temptation, and
the Evil of Persecution.

Secondly, He intercedes for the Sanctification of his People; and this is a
glorious Privilege indeed, Jo. 17. 17. Sanctify them through thy truth; thy
Word is truth: By the word of thy Truth, make them partakers of thy Holiness:
For their sakes. I sanctify my self, ver. 19. I set apart my self, now on
Earth, as an High Priest and Mediator: And why so? That they may be sanctified
through the Truth. It may be a poor tempted Soul has begged for Grace, but
finds no answer; as Paul prayed twice, thrice, many times without return; but
Jesus Christ intercedes, who will prevail; and because he prays, they shall
obtain, according to the measure of Christ, and in his time.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus Christ pleads in Heaven, for Believers Union with
himself, and with one another, Jo. 17. 11, 21, 22, 23. Holy Father, keep,
through thy own Name, those whom thou bast given me, that they may be one, as
we are: That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one. This he died for, to gather his People into one, and this
he will procure in due time. Their Union with himself shall be inseparable;
their Communion may be interrupted, but their Union can never be broken. And it
is a matter of Comfort to Believers, that grieve for the sad Breaches amongst
Saints, how that Christ intercedes in Heaven for their Union, who cannot be
denied.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus Christ intercedes for his Peoples Succor, and
support, under, and deliverance from Temptation, Luke 22. 32. I have prayed for
thee, that tby Faith fail not. Ah Soul! Art thou followed with new Temptations
every day? Does the Devil vex thee, casting in wicked, vile thoughts, that do
make thee tremble, pulling and haling thee? Fear not, says Christ, the Devil
shall not prevail. O, says a Soul, What shall I do for Faith? I cannot take
hold of this, and the other Promise. Why, Christ in Heaven pleads for
Believers, that their Faith shall not fail, shall not sink away, nor faint in
the day of Temptation, He will not suffer you to be tempted above measure, 1
Cor. 10. 13. He will make a way to escape. As sure as Christ himself has
escaped from Satan, and Dangers unto Glory, so sure shall Believers pass
thither also. O Soul! thou can not tell how to pray; this and the other
wicked thought hurries thee; Faith and Hope, all seem to be gone: but, O, what
a blessed thing is this, that there is a Mediator in Heaven to pray for thee!

Fifthly, Jesus Christ intercedes in Heaven for the Pardon of all the Sins of
his People, and for the enjoyment of his Fathers favor, If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. That Is part of Christ's Work in
Heaven, to Advocate in regard of their Sins: So Joh. 17. 26. That the Love with
which thou love me may be in them. I have purchased thy Favor for them, and
Peace with thee, by my own Blood; therefore, Father, O take not away thy loving
kindness from them: O, do not be angry with them for ever. O, what a wonderful
Privilege is this! Christ is not contented that his Father love them with an
ordinary and a common Love; but his Will is, that the same Love with which the
Father loved Christ, as Mediator, be bestowed upon them.

Sixthly, The Lord Jesus Christ Advocates in Heaven for the supply of all the
wants of his People, Phil. 4. 19. My God shall supply all your need, according
to the Riches of his Glory, by Jesus Christ. Observe the ground, and
meritorious cause of all the Supplies of the Saints Needs, is the Riches of
Christ in Heaven; the Riches of Christ's Intercession. O! when the poor Believer
goes mourning under a sense of this, and the other Want, Christ in Heaven is
interceding for them. O, says one, I want a soft Heart; a Heart to love God: I
want more power over Corruptions and Temptations: More Humility, says another:
O, my proud heart! I want more Patience; I am filled with the Fire of Hell: I
want more Purity, unclean Thoughts lodge in my Soul: but Christ in Heaven is
interceding for them, thus. Father, There Is a Child of mine wants a soft Heart;
I will that thou give it to him: there is another goes complaining for want of
more power over Corruptions; I will that thou grant it to him: Another wants
Bodily supplies; he is in straits in the World, and knows not what to do;
Father, thou have made me Heir of all things, and I will that thou give him
some of mine Inheritance. O that Believers did know this! when they are pining
away in their straits, that they would look to Jesus, and by Faith see him
interceding for them.

Seventhly, Another thing Christ pleads in Heaven for, is, the subduing of all
the Enemies of his People: Whatever is like to endanger their wellbeing, in
thelr work of glorifying God, and in their way to Glory with God, Christ pleads
that it may be removed. Are the Snares of the World like to carry away one? the
Snare of Prosperity, or vain Company, like to ruin another? Does the Flesh lust
against the Spirit, and ready to reduce it into Bondage? Christ pleads in
Heaven for the destruction of these Leviathans; and will, in his own time,
bring down all the Enemies of his People: Yea, Gog and Magog, and all the
implacable Adversaries of Sion must be subdued, because Christ intercedes for
it, and Reigns till he has put down all Enemies under his Feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25.

Eighthly, He intercedes for his Peoples Consolation; He seems to be much
concerned in this, that his People be of good cheer in the World, Joh. 16. 33.
Be of good cheer, Pluck up your Spirits, walk comfortably, I have overcome the
World for you, I will not leave you comfortless; I will not leave you in danger
of overwhelming: Christ takes care that his People be not overladen with
trouble, but that they have comfort in due time.

Ninthly, The Lord Jesus Christ pleads for their thorough and complete
Salvation, for their preservation in Grace, and their sure and certain
enjoyment of Glory. Wherefore he is able to save to the utmost, because he ever
lives to make Intercession, Heb. 7. 25. Whatever their dangers, straits, and
hazards be, Christ intercedes in Heaven, for their utmost saving, thorough all,
and from all. The gracious Soul miscarries sadly, this, and the other time; in
this, and the other matter: he falls dangerously, and bruises his Bones; but
Christ pleads in Heaven, that this might not prove a mortal wound: Father, I
will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, to behold my
Glory, Joh. 17. 24. All his Glory, that he has purchased with his Blood, is
for his People. As a Father, if he gets a large Estate, his Children shall fare
the better for it, he will leave it all to them; so Christ in Heaven
intercedes, Father, I will that my Children may share with me in my Glory; may
Reign, and sit on Thrones, and be crowned with Immortality with me. Where I am,
there shall my Servant be.

Thus you see what Christ intercedes for in Heaven.

Fifthly, Why does the Lord Jesus Christ intercede in Heaven?

First, Because he has undertaken this Work for his People: He is their
Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. He is an Officer in Heaven for them, and has undertaken
their Cases; and being bound, he will be faithful: He is there, as their
Forerunner, and his Fidelity lies at stake, to make their way plain to Glory.
If they come not after, how can he be their Forerunner?

Secondly, Because of his Interest in them, they are very near to him, they are
his own. Having loved his own, that were in the World, Joh. 13. 1. Persons use
to love their own. The World loves its own; therefore is Christ so concerned in
the welfare of his People, because they are his Propriety; They are his
Friends, Joh. 15. 14, 15. Ye are my Friends, I have called you Friends. And
will not a man concern himself about his Friends? There Is never a man on Earth,
that has a Friend so near his heart, as the Saints are to the heart of Christ;
They are his Brethren; He is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. 11. He
is their Elder Brother, and they are younger Brethren, and he cannot but have a
tender heart toward them. How full of Bowels was Joseph to his Brethren,
though they had sold him, and injured him; yet how affectionately did he
discover himself to them, he wept, that the Egyptians heard him? Genesis 45. It is
a most affecting Story, to show what the heart of a Brother is, or should be.
O, how much is Jesus Christ concerned in the welfare of his People!

Again, He is their Father; He has the Bowels of a Father: He pleads in
Heaven, at the Right hand of God, as a Father does speak for his Children. O!
if a man had a Child, or some Children, condemned to dye, how would a tender
Father speak for them, and weep for them, that they might not dye! with such
Bowels does Jesus Christ plead for his People in Heaven.

Again, They are his Spouse, his Love, his Dove, married to him, Cant. 5. And
can a tender affectionate Husband shut up his Bowels toward his own Flesh? So
Christ, in Heaven, accounts nothing too dear that might be for the welfare of
his People, because of their conjugal relation to him.

Thirdly, Because of the great Love he bears to them, therefore will he make
Intercession for them, Isa. 63. 9. In his Love and pity he redeemed them. Nor
men, nor Angels can tell the Height, Depth, Length and Breadth of the Love of
Christ; it is Love, passing Knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. Christ's Love to his people,
is unconceivable, unchangeable: many waters cannot quench it, all their
Unkindness cannot diminish it, therefore he remembers their Concernments, and
pleads their Cause.

Fourthly, Because of the Sympathy the Lord Jesus Christ has with them, he
has a fellow-feeling of all their Infirmities and Afflictions: as he is their
head, he cannot but sympathize, with all the Maladies and Distempers of every
Member; he is the high priest, and must have Compassion, Heb. 4. 15. For we
have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities: He cannot be capable of Insensibility, of the Cases, Concerns and
Conditions of his people; Weaknesses, Sins and Wants, whatever becomes the
Burden of his People, it is near his Heart: It is not his own Glory in Heaven,
can take off his Thoughts and Care of them: He that abuses the Saints offers
Violence to Christ's Eye, Zach. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches the Apple
of his Eye. While he was in Heaven, in the Possession of the Fathers Glory, no
sooner did their Cry come up from Egypt, but presently it reached his Heart;
God tells Moses he could not stand still to hear the Complaint of his poor
afflicted people: God in Christ, the second person, the Angel of the Covenant
resents the Miseries and Afflictions of his people, Exodus 2. 23. 24. I have
surely seen the Afflictions of my People which are in Egypt, and have heard
their Cry, and I am come down to deliver them, Exodus 3. 7, 8. And if he was so
pityful, as to be soon afflicted with the Afflictions of his people before he
assumed the humane Nature upon him, is he not as much now since he has taken
our Nature upon him, and stands in Heaven clothed with our Body and Soul? Heb.
5. 2. Christ carries no Weaknesses to Heaven with him, he has no kind of
Wants, Pains, nor Sorrows, but he is compassed with Infirmities, that is, a
Sense of the Weaknesses, and Remembrance of the Afflictions and Infirmities,
whilst he was here: He knows the Heart of a Stranger, he knows what it is to be
under the Wrath of God, therefore cannot but have a fellow-feeling of the
Infirmities of his People. No tender Mother can be more affected with the pain
of a little sucking Child, with the Fear of losing it, than Christ is with the
case of his people, therefore he pleads for them.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ cannot choose but speak for his People in Heaven, because
he has purchased them, he has bought them, and paid for them: he thought it
fit to lay down a very great price for every believing Soul, 1 Cor. 6. 19. You
are bought with a price. He was willing to have his Heart opened, and his Side
opened, that he might let out his Blood for them; and surely he cannot but be
willing to intercede for them, when he was willing to dye, and bear divine
Wrath for them: he has bought Grace and Glory for them, and he must needs
speak, that they might have what he has paid for. It is true, if God should
deal upon the account of Creature-deservings, they would soon be totally
destitute: but though unworthy in themselves, Christ pleads his Worthyness:
Father, I will, that thou give out this and the other Mercy to them, I have
purchased it for them: it is true, they have abused the Gospel, and sinned away
the Light of thy Countenance; but I will that thou speak comfortably to them
for my sake; for I have always obeyed thee, and done thy Will.

Sixthly, Because of his Promise to them, he has promised he will not leave
them, Jo. 14. 18. I go away, says Christ, but I will not leave you; I go to
Heaven but it is for you; I carry your Names on my Heart, that I might think
upon you, when I am in Glory: when I see how Satan buffets and assaults you
from day to day, then I look upon the Palms of my hands and see your names
engraven there, and will not leave you comfortless, I will come again to you.
He sends his Spirit to keep them Company here on Earth, and he will come and
fetch them home at last; he will be faithful to them in all things, that
pertain to God, and for the Salvation of their Souls, Heb. 2. 17. and Believers
may urge him with his Promise and Faithfulness, and this obliges Christ to do
all he can for them.

Seventhly, Because of the great Necessity they have of his pleading for them;
He sees they would be undone if he did not stand up for them. Satan would lay
in his Accusations, he is the Accuser, and what ways he has to accuse the
Saints before God, we know not: he accused Job, and doubtless he is ever and
anon laying in fresh Charges against the people of God; therefore Christ pleads
for them: he sees they want Grace and want Strength, therefore he cannot be
silent: he saw Peter had need of Support, Luke 22. 31, 32. therefore he prayed
for him: Christ sees they stand in need of Promises, Experiences, Consolations
and Privileges, therefore he pleads in Heaven for them.

Sixthly, What are the Comforts and Advantages that flow from the Intercession
of Jesus Christ to believing Souls?

There Is Cause of wonderful Joy and Consolation to Believers, when they cast
their believing Looks toward Heaven, to see their Advocate there.

First, In regard of the Excellency of this Intercessor: O! what a glorious,
mighty, and potent Friend, have Believers to plead for them; he is no mean
person, he is the Son of God, the express Image of his Fathers Person, Heb. 1.
3. He is one that made the World, and upholdeth the World, and after he had
suffered for Sin, he is gone to Glory, and takes his Seat at the right hand of
the Majesty, on high; he does not stand by as a Beggar, but sits down on the
Throne, by the Fathers side, and speak as a Friend for them: O what a glorious
and transcendent person is he! it is not an Angel, it is not a Saint, but it is
the Lord Jehovah, Jehovah Christ. O when the Believer, by Meditation, comes to
reflect on his Glorious Agent in Heaven, how he is honored by Angels, Saints,
and every Creature, it will wonderfully consolate his Languishing Spirit.

Secondly, Consider the Successfullness of this Intercession, and it cannot but
yield much Comfort, the Father hears him always, Joh. 11. 42. The Father and
he are one, of one Nature, one Glory, one Will: what the Son wills the Father
wills; and Jesus Christ is the Executor of his own Will, and has all Power in
his hands to give out, and perform what he pleads for: What would thou have,
Soul? Lord, says the Soul, I would have more Grace, be more holy, have
strength against this, and the other Temptation: I am afraid I shall perish
under these Blasphemous Thoughts. Oh, the horrible injections of Satan! Lord,
support me. Why, (says Christ) Fear not, Soul, In me is Everlasting strength,
thou shall have it in my time, and according to my measure.

Thirdly, Consider the extent of Christ's Intercession, and that will contribute
wonderful Joy to Believers: His Favor is not narrowed up to one or two
Favorites, but for all his Saints: All that come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25.
All that believe in him, Joh. 17. 20. Christ excepts none: In this he out-goes
the Affections of all Creatures. It is rare for the largest Affections of Men,
not to run within some narrow limits; but Jesus Christ has an equal respect
for all his Seed. And then he intercedes for them in all their Matters, Isa.
63. 9. In all their Affiictions he is afflicted: There is no part of their
Trouble but he is concerned in it: As Christ is an Advocate in Heaven, he is
engaged to attend the Concerns of his People, though they should neglect him,
Isa. 57. 18. He is privy to all their Matters: How should this revive the
Believing Soul? It is the usual complaint of Souls, O, I fear Christ will not
intercede for me; I am so Carnal, so full of Deceit, Hypocrisy and
Backslidings. It is true, He takes pleasure in the Prosperity of his People;
but, I fear, I am none of his. They that pray and plead Spiritually may hope,
but I cannot pray, nor look up. But let me tell every poor trembling Believer,
There Is never a Soul that has the Lord for his God, that Jesus Christ can be
unmindful of: He intercedes for all his People, and in all their Concernments.

Fourthly, This may yield wonderful Comfort to Believers, to consider, That
Jesus Christ does not only intercede in Heaven, in their Names, but in their
very Natures: He presents the Humane Nature in his own Person, glorified; and
in this Nature he pleads to God for them. He is set forth as the Man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. He cannot but be full of Pity and Compassion, because he is
of the same Nature with them: They are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and
of his Bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. O, if that Scripture were but put into the Believing
Meditation of Believers, what Comfort will flow from it? O trembling Saint!
thou may object thy Unworthiness and defiled Nature; but Jesus Christ has
thy Nature glorified now in Heaven, at the Father's right hand.

Fifthly, The restlesness and unweariedness of Christ's pursuing the Blessedness
and Salvation of all his Seed, is that which may yield wonderful comfort to the
Believing Soul. Consider his Temper and Disposition, whiles he was on Earth:
His Spirit shall not fail, till he has set Judgment in the Earth, Isa. 42. 4.
And if Christ was so earnest to undergo such work then, and was so restless and
active till it was done; surely he must needs be restless to carry on this Work
now in Heaven: He lives ever to make Intercession, Heb. 7. 25. There are some
times when men on Earth cannot agitate the Cause of their Friends; but Christ
is always taken up about this Work of Mediation: Christ's Authority is capable
to manage all the Affairs of his People, were they millions of men, therefore
it must needs be matter of wonderful Comfort to Believers, that they have such
a Mediator in Heaven.

Sixthly, Consider the Advantages that flow from this Intercession of Christ to
Believers, and it will yield matter of wonderful comfort.

Their Sins shall be surely pardoned. O what wonderful comfort is this! Blessed
is the man whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sins are pardoned, Psalm.
32. 1. He is an Advocate for them, to take away their Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. 1 John 1. 7, 9. No Bill shall be laid in against them at the Bar of God: Who
dares accuse that Soul that is covered over with the Blood of the Redeemer?
Romans 8. 33, 34.

Their Persons and Performances shall surely find acceptance with God, through
this Intercession of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6. Who has made us accepted in the
Beloved. All that glorious Chain of Mercy that is made over to, and fastened
upon the Believer, has its tie to Jesus Christ: Predestination, Adoption,
Justification, Sanctification and Salvation, are all laid upon Christ. It is a
piece of usual weakness in poor Believers, or rather Doubting-souls, to judge
of their Acceptance with God, or Non-acceptance, according to their Deservings,
or ill-deservings, and the nature and frame of their Spirits and Duties: when
they have been drawn out in Frames, and wonderfully raised in Duties, they
think now they shall find Favor; But it is not that which gives your Suits
Entertainment in Heaven; it is as God accepts the Soul in Christ,
notwithstanding all the Failings and Infirmities of Believers; they are
entertained with a well done good and faithful Servant, upon the account of
Christ.

Again, They are sure to be secured against the prevailing Power of all their
Enemies; let Beelzebub with all his Train and Forces be united against them, he
must be broken to pieces; for Christ is at the right hand of the Father,
interceding for them: Sin shall have no Dominion over them, Romans 6. 14. God
will bruise Satan under their Feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. Hence it is, they may
be sure none of their Enemies shall prevail, Luke 1. 74.

Again, They may be sure to receive more Grace, and Life more abundantly, God
gives more Grace, James 5. 6. whilst Christ's Interest holds in Heaven, whilst
he has a Fullness of Grace to bestow, Believers may expect more.

Access to the Throne of Grace at all times in his Name, is another procured
Advantage of his Intercession; it is by the Blood of Christ Believers come to
God with Boldness, Heb. 4. 14. 16. Heb. 10. 21. 22.

Hence the Blood of Christ makes Peace, and an open door for Believers to
approach to God, Ephesians. 3. 12. Because he is there at the Throne of Grace, he
will open his Door to his Children, and let them in, within the Veil: what
tender Mother would shut the door against her weeping Child?

Again, They have not only Access to the Throne of Grace, but Success; they
shall speed when they cry with all their Hearts, Joh. 14. 13. 14. Whatsoever
you shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in
the Son: if you shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. Christ was
leaving his Disciples, and they might tremblingly dispond, how shall we live
when thou art gone? the World will persecute us, and Satan will devour us? Why
says Christ, I will protect you then, as well as now, and hear your Requests:
you think it is only your Concernment, to have your Prayers answered; no, it is
the Concernment of my Father too, his Glory lies at stake for it. O! what bold
Encouragement is this Rev. 8. 3, 4, 5. Prayers ascended up, and presently comes
down Thunders, Noises, Lightnings, and Earthquakes: as a Symbol of God's
Reception: believe it, Saints have still as great Potency with God, on the
Account of Christ, as ever, and their right Prayers shall surely find an answer
at the Throne of Grace.

Again, They shall certainly have Perseverance in Grace: for the Certainty of a
Believers Graces depend not upon his own Strength, that it should dye if he
cease to exercise it; but is secured by the Intercession of Christ, Luke 22.
32. Jer. 32. 40.

Another Effect of Christ's Intercession is this, The Saints have Oneness with
and an Interest in the Love of God, Jo. 17. 21. 22. And they shall be sure of
Grace and of Glory: they shall have a Mansion in Heaven, Jo. 14. 3. Jo. 17. 24.
Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, to
behold my Glory.

CHAP. VI.
Showing the Willingness of Christ, that Sinners should be saved, the Sin and
Misery of such as refuse Christ, with Reproof to several sorts of Persons

WE have a little opened the Transcendent Glory of Christ as Mediator, wherein
so much of his vast Treasury lies: we come now to make some Application of this
glorious point.

First, By way of Information. First, How wonderfully are poor Sinners indebted
to the Lord for giving such a Mediator as Jesus Christ, God-Man; none else in
Heaven or Earth could have procured the Salvation of lost Sinners: had he been
God only, he had had neither Right or Capacity to suffer: had he been only Man,
he could never have born up under the dreadful weight of these Sufferings;
Death would have had Dominion over him, his Sufferings unsatisfactory, his
Intercession rejected, and all the hopes of Sinners perished; but now he is
able to save all that come to God by him: O admire at, and rejoice in this Love
of God, in giving Christ, Jo. 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son. Life and Liberty Health and Strength, Peace and Plenty, are
excellent Mercies; but the giving of Christ is transcendently super-eminent:
Can you bless the Lord for lower Springs? O adore these upper ones, this Grace
that brings Salvation.

Secondly, See the Willingness of Christ, that Sinners should be saved, he
would never else have assumed the work of a Mediator, nor have given himself
for this very end that Sinners might be brought to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. He would
never have undertaken the bloody way of Death, nor drunk off such a bitter
tremendous Cup, that Sin had brewed for him; he would not have interceded with
God for Terms of Reconciliation, nor undergone such direful, unconceivable
Torments, had he not been willing Sinners should live: has Christ so carefully
prepared the Ministration of Reconciliation, and absolutely commanded the
Promulgation of the Gospel to every Creature? Mark. 16. 15. Has he laid such a
Necessity on his Messengers and Ambassadors, and obliged them, by the Penalty
of fearful Woes, to preach the Gospel, and he is not willing that Sinners
should be saved? 1 Cor. 9. 16. See how he charges his Servants to be instant in
Season and out of Season, to reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all
Long-suffering and Kindness, 2 Timothy 4. 1. To persuade and beseech men to be
reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 11. 20. And will he reject them when they come? He would
not have grieved and mourned so much at Sinners Unbelief, and out-standing the
day of Grace, had he been unwilling they should have lived, Joh. 5. 40. Luke
19. 41. 42. Behold how he waits till the last hour of the Day, and treats his
Enemies with an affectionate Kindness, why will you dye, O House of Israel? He
heaps up Coals of Fire on their Heads, and draws them with Cords of Love, and
with the bands of a man, Mat. 5. 45. Hos. 11. 4. he offers Violence by his
Spirit, to unwilling Souls, and attempts the most charming Persuasions to
allure them to him; he thunders and lightens, as on Mount Sinai, and threatens
them terribly if they will not come, Joh. 3. 18. Ah troubled Souls, you that
tremble, least he will no more have Mercy on you; but reject your Selves and
Duties, shut up his Bowels, and harden his Heart against your Cries. Ah! do but
consider and seriously reflect on what Christ has already done and suffered
for you, think on his Carriage whilst on Earth, and his tender Reception of all
that came to him; he debarred none, surely, then his Advancement in Heaven,
produces no Alteration in him: it may enlarge his Capacity but cannot straiten
his Bowels to perishing Sinners. Honor does not puff him up, or make him
unmindful of their Concernments; think upon his Promises, he will cast out none
that come to him, Joh. 6. 37. Let their Sins be as red as Scarlet, he will make
them as white as Wool, Isa. 1. 18. He knows the Heart of a Stranger, Exodus 23.
29. He remembers what it is to lie under the Pangs of a troubled Soul, when he
trod the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath alone; and therefore cannot but
compassionate the Miserable, and those that are consumed with the Terrors of
the Almighty. Cease Soul, to lay thy Charge on Christ, it is thy own
Unwillingness and Unbelief that impedes thy way to Life, not his.

Thirdly, How fearful then is the Sin, and how dreadful will be the misery of
all those that refuse this Mediator, will not hearken to this Prophet, nor
consent to his Proposals for Salvation: The Tongues of Men and Angels are not
capable here to commit an Hyperbole, nor can such themselves sufficiently
conceive it, till they feel it. Ah, Sinners! Weigh a little these ensuing
particulars, and you will find it true.

First, It is a most aggravated Sin, and has all the circumstances of Evil in
it: There Is no sin of so deep a Dye, and foul a Guilt.

It is a sin against the highest Mercy, and greatest Deeps of Divine Favor.
There were some Discoveries of Mercy that God expended on the Gentile World: In
the times of their Ignorance God did wink at them, feed them, and cloth them;
But the Treasures of Grace were reserved for the Fullness of Time, the Gospel
days. O wretched Caitiff! By refusing Christ, thou kickest against the most
sounding Bowels, against rich Mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. Against tender Mercy, Luke 1.
18. Against Free Mercy, Ephesians. 2. 8.

It is a Sin against, and a forsaking of thy own Mercy: Thou stabbest thy own
Soul with the same Dagger thou flingest at Christ. O wretched Sinner! thou
take pains to shut thy self out of the door of Mercy, and to argue thy self
into the depth of Misery: O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. Oh Sinner,
thou sheddest the blood of thy own Soul, Hos. 13. 9.

It is a sin against the choicest and costliest Remedy that ever God prepared:
The Garment God made to cloth thy Soul, is dipped in Blood, and this thou
throwest from thee. How justly will thy Soul rot in chains of Darkness to all
Eternity, that refusest such a chargeable Remedy laid out upon thee? The Law
was but leading to it, Gal. 3. 24. Had you lived to see the Priests killing the
Sheep and Lambs, and cutting the throats of these poor Creatures, to make an
Atonement for Sin, you would have said, surely the Antitype must needs be
bloody: All those charges men were at in their daily Sacrifices, could not take
away one Sin; the Blood of Christ must do it. O expensive Mercy! And this thy
Soul despises: O cursed Sin! All other Dispensations could not make those that
use them perfect, Heb. 9. 9. Nor all the World, if sold, can pay the Debt of
one Soul, or the price of one sin.

It is a sin against the most glorious Majesty that ever was, Phil. 2. 9. Thou
spittest in that Face that is infinitely above all Spots and Stains; that the
Angels admire and adore; one Smile of which maintains all the Life and
Consolation of the Saints in Glory; this Jesus thou despisest. O unbelieving
Sinner! where will thou go to hide thy self from the wrath of the Lamb at the
last day?

Lastly, It Is a rejection of thy own Duty, a throwing Christ out of his own
Vineyard, and how will God deal with such? He will miserably destroy these
miserable men, Matthew. 21. 41. The Lord Jesus Chrst has Right to rule thee, and
thou rejectest the Homage thou owe to him, and despisest his lawful Right and
Authority which is a most grievous Sin indeed.

Secondly, It Is a most unreasonable Sin, there is no Plea at all will bear in
the Court of Reason for such a Sin; thy own Reason will judge and condemn thy
Soul. O! that ever thou should choose Death rather than Life, and take the
Iron Rod of Satan over thee, and despise the golden Scepter of Jesus Christ;
Ah! Sinner, there is cause why thou should leave thy Lusts and wicked
Companions, and depart from the Chambers of Death, in which thy Soul has dwelt
so long, but none at all why thou should not come over to Christ: what does
Christ propose to thee that thou can cavil at? Is it to leave thy Lusts? If
not, these will ruin thy Soul; if thou had Fire in thy Bosom, thou would
think it reason to cast it out; if Fetters upon thy Feet, and Clogs about thy
Body, to shake them off; if a Serpent in thy Bosom, to cast him out: O Sinner,
sit down, and consult with the Principles of Reason, never was a better Bargain
offered thee. Think on it, What if the Gate seem straight, it is not so to thy
Soul, but to thy Lusts, thou can not shun Trouble, but must meet with it
either here or to all Eternity.

Thirdly, It Is a most condemning Sin, Joh. 3. 19. This will justify the
severest Doom of God, that they might have Life, but would not: Salvation came
home to them, but they turned it off. O Sinner, take heed how thou refusest him
that speaks from Heaven, despise not Christ.

Secondly, As it is the greatest Sin so it is attended with the greatest Misery.
For first, it opens the Windows of Vengeance, and lets down divine Wrath on thy
Soul; it takes off all Possibility of Salvation; he that shuts up this door
leaves none open to Life, Acts 4. 12. Christ is the only Way, the Truth, and the
Life, no possibility of escaping Wrath to come, if thou refuse the Lord Christ,
Heh. 2. 3. Don't flatter thy self with Hopes of after Mercy; if thou give
Christ a final Denial, all hopes of Mercy is gone, when once Christ who is the
Blessing, is gone from thy Soul.

Secondly, There Is no Acceptance of any of thy duties, it is his Righteousness
and Intercession makes way for thy Acceptance, Ephesians. 1. 6. All Acceptableness of
the best Services of any, is through him, 1 Pet. 2. 5. None of thy Complaints
or doleful Cries, can ever enter into Gods Ears, if they be not mixed with the
Odours of his Incense: Ah Sinner, thou flatterest thy self with this, that thou will pray, cry, and weep upon a Deathbed; Ah! what are all thy Cries, when God
hears not?

Thirdly, there is sure Damnation waits for thy Soul, the Devil stands by, and
expects the time when Christ will take his final leave of thee. O Sinner, if
once thy time be gone, and precious Overtures of Grace do cease, then certain
Ruin follows: as sure as the Work-man's wages is due to him, so will Damnation
be to thy Soul, that do live and dye in thy Refusal of Christ; every Soul
that will not hear this Prophet shall be destroyed, Acts 3. 23. Psalm. 2. 12.

Fourthly, all the precious Intercessions of Jesus Christ will be turned
against thee; and this is a most doleful Consideration, enough to make the
hardest heart to break: now while there is hope, the blood of Christ pleads,
Father, wait a little longer for this Sinner; when divine Justice says, cease
interceding. that I may take Vengeance on this wretch; no says the blood of
Christ, spare this Drunkard, a little longer, O wait one day longer, one year
longer, for this Swearer: but upon thy final Refusal of Christ, the blood of
Christ pleads another w^y, Father, I will the Damnation of this Sinner, I will
that Mercy be no more tendered to him, Luke 2. 34. This Child is set for the
Fall and Rising again of many in Israel. Christ is for the Fall as well as the
rising of many; and believe it, his blood has as great a Virtue to heighen the
Damnation of willful Unbelievers, as ever it has to further the Salvation of
Believers; and O what a dreadful thing is this, when the blood of Christ shall
plead against thee. It may be upon thy Deathbed, thou will cry, Lord pardon
me, Lord let me never go to the place of Torment: but the Blood of Christ will
say, Father, damn him, he made me wait many Days and Years, and would not let
me into his Heart, Father let him perish; and whom do you think the Father will
hear? This is one of the most trembling Considerations that I know, to heighten
the Wrath of Sinners: that Soul must needs go deep into Hell, that the Blood of
Christ sends thither; the blood of Christ cries for Vengeance: Ah! Sinners
think of it, what a fearful thing it is to refuse this Mediator: the Lord open
your Ears, and the Lord work upon your Hearts that you may turn and live while
there is Hope.

Fourthly, Hence see whence it is that the Prayers of any are so prevailing with
God: what is it that makes Faith and Prayer so omnipotent? It Is the
Intercession of Christ in Heaven that wings our Prayers, and makes them so
speedily arrive at the Mercy-seat, and come off with an answer of Peace. It Is a
Friend in the Court of Heaven that makes the Saints Suits so prevailing with
God, Rev. 8. 3, 4, 5. It Is his Incense makes way for the Prayers of the Saints,
and then Fire comes out of the Censer, and burns up the Enemies of Christ: O
there is wonderful Mightiness in the prayers of the Saints whom Christ favors
with his Mediation.

Use 2. Of Confutation. If the Lord Jesus Christ be the Great and only
Mediator between God and Man; then this will strike down that dangerous,
damnable Error of the Papists, Of Praying to Saints, and setting up other
Interceders besides Christ, making Addresses to the Virgin Mary, placing her in
the Throne with Christ. If there be but one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and one that
lives to make Intercession, and that the Assurance of Salvation depends on
this Intercession of Christ, Heb. 7. 25. Then it is a damnable Error of the
Papists to pray to the Virgin Mary, as they do in their Missal: one of which is
thus; O Virgin, the only chaste Mother, loosing our Sins, give us the Kingdom,
for thou art Queen of the World, art able to do all things, and, with thy Son,
disposest all things. Another is, That God, by the Prayers and Merits of the
ever blessed Virgin, and of all Saints, would bring us to the Kingdom of
Heaven, Amen. Nay, they say, That Prayers made to, and delivered by the Saints,
are better than those by Christ; So Sal. Now, if Christ be the only way to the
Father, and Acceptance is through him alone, then this is a false Way, and
never of Gods appointing, but blasphemous Sacrilege, and horrible Robbery of
the very Flower of Christ's Crown: Nothing plucks the Scepter out of Christ's
Hand, his Crown from his Head, as these irreligious Opinions of the Papists. If
Prayer be an act of Worship, Matthew. 4. 10. then it is only due to God: Indeed
there is a civil Worship due to Superiors, but Religious Adoration is God's
Prerogative. If we must trust on him to whom we pray, Romans 10. 13, 14. then we
must pray to none but God, in Christ; for, cursed is the man that trusts in
man, Jer. 17. 5. He to whom we pray must be able to know our wants, and our
Hearts; to see our Miseries, and hear our Prayers. Now this the Saints in
Heaven cannot do: Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not,
Isa. 63. 16. It Is Omnisciency alone can hear our Prayers, and Omnipotency that
can Answer them, Psalm. 65. 2. Matthew. 6. 6. 8. 32. Eccles. 9. 5. Thus we may see
the Heterodox Assertions of the Papists, in making many Mediators.

Use 3. For Reprehension to the professing People of God.

First, To such as are no more affected with this great and glorious Privilege
of having an Advocate with the Father. Ah! Did Souls but know what an Ocean of
Privileges, and Fountain of Mercies is comprised in this one Mediator, Jesus
Christ, it would fill their Hearts with Joy, tip their Tongues with Praises,
and make them more glad in the Salvation of God. But, it may be, you are more
affected with your Frames, fine Expressions, and your own Duties, than with the
Pleadings of Jesus Christ. This deserves a sharp Reproof.

2dly, Such as make little Use of the Intercession of Jesus Christ. Alas! how
few employ Christ about their Matters in Heaven, and engage him in the
momentous and weighty Matters of their Souls? May not Christ complain still, as
once, on Earth, Joh. 5. 40. You will not come to me that you may have Life.
It Is sad indeed, that the Lord Jesus Christ should enter upon so costly an
Office, and pay so dear for a Right to do thy Soul good, and thou neglect to
use him after all: This is the condemnation to Unbelieving Sinners, That they
turn their Backs upon the Intercession of Jesus Christ. Alas, Soul! Are not thy
wants great, and thy Sins many? thy Provocations and abuses of Mercy daily, and
yet will thou not engage Christ for thy help, to procure thy Pardon, and
Passage from Death to Life? O, how justly miserable will thy case be, who
might be happy, but would not! He is worthily miserable (says one) that
will not be happy for the asking. Who knows but that thy hard heart might have
been softened; thy filthy heart cleansed; thy covetous heart spiritualized, and
thy captivated Soul set free from the damning Power of Sin and Satan, had
thou but improved a Mediator in Heaven? Know, Soul, if ever Life and Salvation
be obtained, it must be by a Mediator.

Thirdly, Here Is a Reproof to such as make Mediators of their Duties; that
trust their Prayers more than Christ, and lay all their hopes of obtaining on
the act of seeking. Indeed the Promise of having is made to asking, Matthew. 7.
7. but not for asking. Thy Matters (says Luther) do not depend on the worth of
thy Self, or Prayer, but solely on the account of Christ, Joh. 14. 13. It is
Prayer in his Name: And therefore (says Luther) Nulla Oration extra Christum.
There is no Prayer at all out of Christ. It Is the Altar that sanctifies the
Gift, Matt. 23. 19. Our very Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, Isa. 64. 6.
When you have done all, you are unprofitable Servants, Luke 17. 10. Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give Glory, Psalm. 115. 1. All
acceptance with God is through Christ. To trust to thy Prayers, is to trample
on the Blood of Christ, accounting it an unholy thing, and the most effectual
course to provoke the Lord to a real abhorrency of thy Duties, and to throw
them back as Dung on thy Face.

CHAP. VII.
Showing, what Consolation flows to Believers from the Intercession of Christ.

IF the Lord Jesus Christ be the only Mediator between God and Man, then
here is Comfort for Believers in several Cases.

First, To weak Believers; such as need Mercy, and are unable to beg it as they
should. Poor Soul! Art thou sensible of thy urgent Necessities? that thy Wants
are more than can be numbered? Know thou the Hardness, Pride, Filthiness, and
Ungratefulness of thy Heart? understandest thou thy need of the Spirit of
Grace, and the Gifts of Grace, but can not pray for supplies so
understandingly, sensibly, affectionately, and believingly as thou ought,
and therefore fear, shall never find an Answer, or obtain any reviving
comfort to thy Soul, in the believing view of Christ's Intercession in Heaven.
Let me tell thee, desponding Christian, thou can not be really poor, and pray
in Faith; thou can not perish for want, and have a Jesus in Heaven
interceding for thee, Heb. 7. 25. Him the Father hears always, Joh. 11. 42.
If the matter depended upon thy own Oratory and Eloquence, thy Case were sad;
but there is one in Heaven that is wise, mighty, merciful, omniscient, who
minds thy case, considers thy needs, hears thy groans, knows thy distresses,
and ever lives to make Intercession for thee.

Object. But, says a Soul, How shall I know that Christ intercedes for me, who
am not worthy to lie under his Table, nor crawl at his Feet; I fear he has
greater concernments upon his Heart than to remember me.

For Resolution in this, look back to Chap. 4. where is shown for whom Christ
intercedes. He prays for all that believe in him, Joh. 17. 15. Art thou one
that believe in Christ? Have thou chosen him as thy Lord and Righteousness?
And is he precious to thy Soul? Could thou be content to part with all for
him? Pleasures, Profits, and Worldly Grandeur, are they nothing, when they come
in competition with him. Can thou not say, O! None but Christ, none but
Christ; Christ with Poverty, with Disgrace, with Bondage and misery, is far
more preferrable than Riches, Repute, Liberty, and Mercies without him? Do
thou consent to all his terms? and art thou willing to take up his yoke, and to
learn of him? to bear his Cross, and follow him? to leave all, and come to him,
and that considerately, and from thy whole Heart? Do thou cast and adventure
thy Soul, and thy All, upon his Ability to save thee? Believe thou all that
the Scripture reports concerning him? his Personal Excellencies, and
purchased Sufficiencies? That he is able and willing to save all that come to
God by him, and will not cast out any that really come? And in this hope art
thou resolved to trust thy All upon him, and if thou perish, to perish at his
Feet? Then art thou that Soul for whom Christ intercedes in Heaven, Luke 10.
42. Lam. 3. 24. Isa. 44. 5. Esth. 4. 16. Mark, 9. 24.

Object. But I cannot pray as I ought, according to the Will of God. Alas! how
cold, dead, spiritless are my Prayers? and will God hear me?

Sol. It Is not for thy name thou art heard, but for the Name of Christ; as you
have already heard, Joh. 14. 13. Romans 8. 26, 27. We know not what to pray for
as we ought. Neither I Paul, nor you believing Romans, know how to pray as we
ought. If thou want words, yet if thou have sighs and groans, thy Prayers
are heard through Christ.

Again, Thou say thou can not pray according to the Will of God.

I Answ. 1. If thy Prayers are for such things as God requires, for things that
concern his Glory, and the good and Salvation of thy Soul; and for these
outward things, as God sees needful for thee: If thou prayest for these, as God
promises them, for Spiritual blessings absolutely, and for others, with
submission to his Wisdom and Will; if thou seek these only in the Name of
Christ, and ultimately for the Glory of God; with all thy Heart, and with all
thy Strength, thou ask aright, and God will grant thee.

Secondly, God in his infinite Grace, through Christ, accounts those things in
his People that are not, as if they were, Romans 4. 17. He judges his People to
be what they would be, Rev. 2. 9. I know thy Works, and Tribulation, and
Poverty, but thou art rich. The Lord judges of his People, not so much by
their Frames, inherent Qualifications, and external Performances, but by their
real Sincerity, and unfeigned desires, Psalm. 38. 9. Thou complainest thy
Prayers be cold, and dead, heartless and lifeless, but does this please thee,
or trouble thee? Is not this the burden of thy Soul? that which thou mournest
over, prayest and strivest against? Does no Prayer content thee, but what is
spiritual and fervent, affectionate and upright? Why, poor Soul, cheer up thy
self, God esteems thy Prayers such, through Christ, as if they were so.

Thirdly, The Procurement of thy needed Mercies, does not depend upon thy
Prayer-frames, or the Modes and Measures of thy Holiness, but on the Mediation
of Jesus Christ. Pray, weigh that Scripture, Joh. 14. 14, 16. If you shall ask
any thing in my Name, I will do it. And I will pray the Father. (Any thing)
that is, any thing you absolutely need; Any thing that is fit for you to ask
and me to give, I will do it. He does not say The Modes of your Prayers, the
measures of your Frames and Holiness shall do it; but if ye ask, though with
broken Language, and troubled Expressions, Sighs and Groans, I will do it. You
have but one Advocate with the Father, I will word your Requests, and perfume
them with my Incense; not the Excellency of your Duties, but the Worthiness of
my Intercession, shall procure your needed Mercies.

Secondly, Here Is Comfort to troubled Believers, such as are in the depth of
Soul-misery, and cast down with the sight of their Sins, guilt of their
Consciences, and Fears of their Condition, that go mourning all the day long,
forget to eat their Bread, feed on Wormwood and Gall, refuse (with Rachel) to
be comforted, because their first born, their Comforts, first Love and Holiness
are not, Jer. 31. 15. This is the case of some poor Souls from day to day; they
meet with no Consolation, eat Ashes in stead of Bread, and mingle their Tears
with their Drink; they go from Ordinance to Ordinance, and their Fear come and
go with them; they feel little Change by all they do, or enjoy, their Hearts
are har^, proud, vain, carnal, unbelieving, hence they fear they are
Hypocrites, and shall be cast away to all Eternity.

Now here is Comfort to such from Christ's Intercession in Heaven, he is there
pleading thy cause, and pressing after thy cure; thou have provoked God, but he
is appeasing his Wrath, 1 John. 2. 1. 2. Thou art angring God every day, but he
is always pleasing him for thee; thou art making Breaches upon the Law of God,
and he is there closing up those Breaches by his Blood and Intercession; thou
art busy making wounds upon the Glory of the Father, and Christ is there
presenting the deep Gashes, and bloody Strokes his Justice laid upon him for
those very Sins: when God is resolved to be avenged for thy Backslidings,
Christ is then discovering his constant Obedience, and upright Faithfulness for
thee, he pleads with the Father thus, Father, shall thy Anger burn for ever,
and thy Vengeance always wax hot against this Soul, My Child? Remember what I
have borne for him, I have already suffered for his Sin, and given a plenary
Satisfaction to the Demands of Justice, and will thou charge it on him? Father,
let his Sins be on me, as David, 2 Samuel 24. 17. Let thy hand I pray thee, be
against me, these Sheep what have they done? It Is I am their Surety, and in thy
Account the Offender; I have answered for their Offenses, and discharged their
Debts, why will thou pursue them in thy Anger? Holy Father, in Justice spare
these Offenders; behold them in my Blood, and clothed with my Righteousness,
Obedience, and Suffering; it is true, their Natures are vile, but mine is holy,
and they are Members of my Flesh and of my Bones, they are diseased but I have
undertaken their Cure, and will present them to thee without Spot and Wrinkle.
And this Intercession of Christ shall certainly prevail with God for thee, that
thy Iniquities may be pardoned and thy Sins remembered no more, Heb. 8. 12. All
that is promised in the new Covenant, Christ intercedes for in Heaven; for he
is the Angel of the Covenant Mal. 3. 1. The Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb.
9. 15. But the Forgiveness of Believers Sins, is part of the new Covenant, Jer.
31. 34. Mich. 7. 18. where God forgives one Sin he forgives them all, Jer. 33.
8. I will cleanse them from all their Iniquities, etc. He will pardon not only
Sins before, but after Grace; not only small but great Sins, Psalm. 25. 11. Not
only Sins that have been once, but often committed, Jer. 3. 22. Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. He does not say once
or twiee, but let their Backslidings be never so great and many upon their
Return God will pardon them; nay though they be as Scarlet, and as red as
Crimson, Isa. 1. 18.

Object. I did once hope that God had pardoned all my Sins, but now I fear it,
because I have back-sliden after Mercy, and wallowed in Sin after washing, and
God threatens he will not forgive such, Jer. 14. 10. chap. 5. 7.

Sol. 1. The Reason why God would not pardon their Sin, was not because they
were too great for Pardon, but because they would not return, Jer. 15. 7. I
will destroy my People, because they return not from their Ways, Jer. 23. 14.
The Lord promises to such as have gone aside from his Ordinances, even from
their Youth, that if they will return to him, he will return to them, Mal. 3.
7. Jer. 4. 1.

Secondly, If God will pardon all their Sins, then he will pardon their
Relapses after Mercy, be they never so great, upon their returning to him; God
speaks indefinitely, I will cleanse them from all Iniquity, Jer. 33. 8.

Thirdly, If God will pardon their Sins before Grace, much more those after
Grace; if he will forgive them when Enemies, then much more being reconciled;
the Apostle uses the same Argument, Romans 5. 8. 9.

Fourthly, If there be no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, then
God will surely pardon all their Sins, that ever they commit: for there is
never a Sin, but will condemn the Soul if it be not pardoned; but the Soul that
is in Christ, is never, no not one Minute of time in a condemned State, Romans 8.
1.

Fifthly, If the Lord Jesus ha^h satisfied for all the Sins of Believers, then
they shall furely be forgiven; otherwise, God would be argued of Injustice, and
Christ would shed his blood in vain: but the Lord Jesus has satisfied divine
Justice to the full, for the Sins of all his People, Isa. 53. 5. 6. The (...)
or Ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6. paid by Christ, was a full and sufficient price, and
therefore his Satisfaction is complete for all their Sins: if this were not so,
he could not have cleans'd them from all Sin, but he cleanses them from all
Sin, 1 John 1. 7. Christ could not have saved them to the uttermost that come
to God by him, were his Satisfaction imperfect, but this he does, Heb. 7. 25.

Lastly, If the Lord should not pardon all the Sins of his People, he would be
unjust and unfaithful, 1 John 1. 9. but that he cannot be, Zeph. 3. 5, He will
not do Iniquity, he is the faithful one that cannot deceive or be deceived,
Isa. 45. 21. Let God be true, and every man a Liar.

Thirdly, Here Is Comfort to Believers, that are dejected in the sense of their
strong Corruptions, and unsubdued Lusts; The Body of Death in some does make
them doubt the truth of Grace, and fills their Lives with Bitterness and
Terrors: The badness of their Hearts, and vileness of their Natures, makes
some conclude their final Ruin; But here is Comfort to such.

Firstly, In that it has been and is the case of the dearest Children of God,
their Corruptions, like the Sons of Zerviah, have been too hard for them.
Abraham accounts himself Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. 27. Job cries out I am vile,
Job. 40. 4. David says, Mine Iniquities are gone over my head, as a Burden too
heavy to bear, Psalm. 38. 4. Isaiah, from a reflex View of God's Glory,
concludes he was undone because a man of unclean Lips, Isa. 6. 4, 5. And the
Church, Isaiah 64. 6. profess they were as an unclean thing. Paul an elect
Vessel, a man of singular Revelations, yet laments that in him dwelt no good
thing, Romans 7. 18. That he was carnal and sold under Sin, ver. 14. and when he
would do good evil was present with him, ver. 21.

Secondly, Here Is Comfort, that their Corruptions in them shall not break their
Covenant Relation to God, Psalm. 89. 30. to 35. There can be no Forfeiture of
this Promise, I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Thy Lie cannot
make God untrue, Romans 3. 3. 4. Thy evil Eye cannot make his Eye evil too,
Matthew. 20. 15. Thy wicked Thoughts cannot alter his gracious Thoughts, Isa. 55.
8. 9. Thy invincible Corruptions cannot overcome his Mercies, nor the Enmity of
thy Nature make God thy Enemy.

Thirdly, Christ is employed in Heaven about this very Work of subduing thine
Iniquities, he intercedes ever, and why? That this People might be sanctified
by the Truth, Joh. 17. 17. That they might have more Grace, and the Spirit
given out to mortify their Corruptions; he reigns in Heaven on purpose to
bring down his and their Enemies, 1 Cor. 15. 25. He carries on the work of
Redemption in Heaven, and what is that but to set his People free indeed: he
has an assured care now in Glory to fulfill his Promises, one of which is that
Iniquity shall be subdued, Mic. 7. 18. Romans 6. 14.

Fourthly, Christ's promise to the Father, is security for the Destruction of
thy Sin, he is engaged to present his people complete to the Father, Ephesians. 5.
27. and to keep them unblameable to his heavenly Kingdom, 1 These. 5. 23.

Fifthly, His Glory and Pleasure is concerned in the Death of thy Corruptions,
Isa. 53. 10. The Pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. What is this
Pleasure of the Lord? It is the Redemption of his People from the Tyranny of
Sin, and the Slavery of Satan, into the glorious Liberty of the first born of
Glory, 2 These. 1. 11, 12.

Lastly, Grace is of a prevailing Nature, and must destroy thy Lusts at last,
and the Spirit of Grace is in his people, Mat. 12. 20. the Interest of Sin and
Sinners cannot always stand before the Interest of God and his people, Esther
6. 13.

Fourthly, Here Is Comfort to tempted Believers, such as are always dogged with
filthy and frigh^ing Temptations, restlessly haunted with vile and blasphemous
Thoughts, and miserably buffeted with dreadful and dangerous Suggestions: if
Christ be interceding in Heaven, then surely he will one day or other, put an
end to all the Temptations, and in the mean time overruled them, that they
shall not prevail over thee, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Heb. 2. 19. For in that he himself
has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor those that are tempted.
Christ is a merciful High Priest, and wants neither Knowledge, Bowels or
Abiliiy, which might render him capable to relieve the tempted; he has the
tempting Serpent, the roaring Lion in Chains, and will mercifully say to that
proud one, come so far, and no farther.

Fifthly, Here Is Comfort to Gods people under their Afflictions and Sufferings
in the World, or by the World; if Christ be interceding in Heaven for them,
then surely he will not leave them comfortless in their Sufferings for him,
Joh. 14. 8. chap. 16. 32. 33. Then Tribulation, nor Persecution, nor any thing
else can separate them from the Love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 35. He that is
for them is stronger than all that are against them, ^ers. 31. He will be with
them in the Fire and in the Water, Isa. 43. 2. Christ is never sweeter than
when the World is most bitter to a Child of God; Afflictions can but file away
the Rust and scour away the Filth, it cannot diminish the, Grace, nor injure
the State of those that are interested in Christ's Mediation; Christ's Cordials
are never better, than when his people are most faint and languishing: Christ
in Heaven, laughs at the vain hopes of his Enemies, and will dash all their
Attempts against himself and Interest in pieces, Psalm. 2. 4, 9. He will
strengthen his tired, distressed Servants under Sufferings, Isa. 42. 10. 2 Cor.
12. 9. His Arm is made bare, his Power displayed and his Strength made perfect
in their Weaknesses, Psalm. 27. 14. This may be the Trouble and dejecting Fears
of some, how they shall hold out-in times of Trial. I am afraid (says one) I
shall never bare Reproaches, Hatred, Bonds, Loss of Goods, and death for
Christ, with a magnanimous and Gospel Spirit: Why Soul? It shall be given thee
in that hour not only to believe, but to suffer for Christ, Phil. 1. 29. The
Fury of the Adversary shall not terrify you, nor their rampent Rage deject
your Courage. Isa. 35. 4.

Sixthly, Here Is Comfort to such as are Mourners for Sion, and grieve at the
Afflictions of God's People: That lament to see Christ's Interest on foot, and
the Wicked on horseback, Transgressors to prosper, and the Godly afflicted,
that weep to behold Divine Providence thwarting his Promises. The Lord has
promised, that to Christ shall every Knee bow, and every Tongue confess. Men
read of glorious things spoken of Sion; but when they look to the Interest of
God, they see nothing but matter of trouble and grief. They look to the Earth,
and behold Darkness and Confusions; they look to the Church of Christ, and lo,
Decays and Dyings: Now this breeds trouble to the Friends of Christ, to see
things run counter, and cross to expectation and promise: yet here is Comfort
from the Intercession of Christ on this account. For,

First, The Lord Jesus sits at Helm, he is upon the Throne, and reigns as King
for ever; and this has been the Faithful*s Refuge and Support in the worst of
Times, Psalm. 10. 2. 4. 16. Psa. 29. 10. The Lord Jesus has the Government of
Nations, as well as of Sion, on his shoulders, Isa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 1. 22. He rules
over all, Psalm. 103. 19. His Kingdom rules over all. Men and Devils cannot
wrest the Scepter out of his hands: In spite of all he is King of Sion, Psalm.
2. 6. and his Government is maintained in all the Confusions that are on the
Earth; and if so, there is no cause for the People of Christ to be dejected.
Fear not, (said Caesar to his Mariners in a Storm) Caesar is here. Why are ye
so fearful, (said Christ to his Disciples, when trembling at their Dangers in a
boisterous Storm) O ye of little Faith, Matthew. 8. 26. That Vessel cannot
miscarry that has Christ at Helm, and if it could (said Luther) mallem ruere
cum Christo quam regnare cum Caesare. I had rather perish with Christ than
reign with Caesar.

Secondly, His Paths are in the deep waters, Psalm. 77. 19. Thy way is in the
Sea, thy paths are in the deep waters, and thy footsteps are not known. The
Psalmist alludes to that Providence of God in leading Israel through the red
Sea; when Deaths were on every hand, God walked on those Waters, and made a way
through them for his People. So Nah. 1. 3. The Lord has his way in the
Whirlwind, and in the Storm and the Clouds are the dust of his Feet. Those ways
that men cannot stand up in, are Gods usual walks, in which he leads on his
Work and Interest. His ways are above our ways, and, In the Mount will the
Lord be seen, Genesis 22. 14. His Providence, Ezekiel. 1. 16. are like a Wheel in
the middle of a wheel, and a skain of Silk strangely entangled. When Israel was
come near the Borders of the promised Land, they must be turned back again into
the Wilderness, and wander up and down forty years in the Deserts: When Sion's
Mercies were come to the Birth, they proved Abortive; Strange indeed is the
Womb of Divine Providence, and seemingly contradictory to Humane Reason.

Thirdly, No cross Providence can hinder Christ's Work in the World: He has
purposed, and will perform it. Combinations of men, Psalm. 2. 1, 2. the Gates of
Hell, Matthew. 16. 18. and the Powers of this World can no more impede the
Success of Christ's Work, than the Barking of Dogs can hinder the Moon's
passage to its Journey end, Isa. 43. 13. I will work, and who shall let it? Who
art thou, O great Mountain, before Zerubbabel? thou shall become a plain, Zach.
4. 7. He takes up the Isles as a very slender thing; Isa. 40. 15. The Lord
brings in his mightiness here, to comfort Israel under Discouragements, by
reason of Difficulties in the way of their Mercy. Comfort ye my People, says
the Lord, ver. 1. Tell her her warfare is accomplished, ver. 2. The glory of
the Lord shall be revealed, ver. 5. O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings,
lift up thy voice with strength: Be not afraid of Dangers, preach my Word, be
undaunted in my Service: Behold your God, ver. 9. He will come, and his Reward
with him, ver. 10. He will feed his Flock like a Shepherd, v. 11. He will keep
up his Word and Ordinances in spite of all opposition. Obj. But our Enemi^s
are many. Ans. Why, he has measured all the waters of opposition in the hollow
of his hand, verse. 12. Obj. But all our wisdom cannot see how these great
things should be brought about. Ans. Why, who has directed the Spirit of the
Lord? ver. 13. He wants not wisdom to accomplish his Work. Obj. But Nations and
Islands combine against God's Israel. Answ. What if they do? they are no more
to God than the drop of a bucket, and the dust of the Balance, ver. 15.
Therefore, fear not, he will perform his Promises, and fulfill his Designs.
Quest. Why, what has he promised? Answ. He has promised, that the stone cut
out of the Mountain without hands, shall become a great Mountain, and break in
pieces the Image of the Beast, Dan. 2. 35, 45. and that he will set up the
Kingdom of his Son in the World, ver. 44. Isa. 2. 2.

He has promised Peaceful times to the Church of God, when the Sword shall be
turned into Plowshares, Isa. 2. 4. Isa. 55. 13. Great shall be the peace of thy
Children: None shall hurt or destroy in all God's holy Mountain, Isa. 65. 25.
Ezekiel. 28. 24, Isa. 16. 18. Psalm. 72. 9.

He has promised times of Light and Knowledge, Isa. 11. 9. chap. 52. 8. chapter
54. 13. chapter 60. 19, 20.

He has promised times of Holiness, Isa. 60. 21. chapter 4. 3. chapter 35. 8. Zech.
14. 20, 21.

He has promised times of Union, Zech. 14. 9. Zeph. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 37. 19.

He has promised times of Joy and Comfort to his Interest, Isa. 65. 13, 14.
chapter 35. 10. chapter 25. 8.

He has promised Enlargement to the Church, Isa. 2. 2. chapter 60. 8, 9, 13.

He has promised Stability and Settlement, Isa. 54. 14. chapter 60. 20.

He has promised Activity and Liveliness, Isa. 26. 19.

Fourthly, As those great and glorious things are spoken of Sion, so they shall
certainly be accomplished in due time, Isa. 60. 22. Deuteronomy. 32. 35. The Vision is
but for an appointed time, Hab. 2. 3. As the Things are appointed, so is the
Time, beyond which God will not go one moment, Exodus 12. 41, 42. The self-same
day; the Jewish Doctors say it was midday, as soon as one hundred and thirty
years was out, to an hour, God fulfilled his Promise.

Lastly, God takes usually the most unlikely time to fulfill his Promises: As
in Abraham, when his Body was dead, Genesis 18. 10, 11. Abraham and Sarah were
sensible of an utter inability and unfitness in themselves for such a Mercy,
yet then was the Promise fulfilled, Genesis 22. 14. So Israel were brought out of
Egypt, when all things made against it; their Oppressions increased, Exodus 2.
23. chap. 5. 7, 8, 19. Pharaoh resolved not to let them go, Exodus 10. 27. and
Moses charged to see his face no more, on pain of Death, chap. 10. 28. When
Gods time was come to bring Israel out of Babylon, they were as dry Bones, and
said, Our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts, Ezekiel. 37. 11, 12. Psalm.
126. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Mic. 4. 10. Thou shall go into Babylon, and there shall
thou be delivered. Before that glorious Salvation of the Jews in Shushan, under
Ahasuerus, they were brought under a Sentence of Death, the Decree was sealed,
and posted away, the time appointed for their destruction, and no possible
hopes left of reversing it, Esth. 3. 12. to the end, compared with Chap. 8. So
much for the Use of Consolation.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing an Use of Exhortation to Sinners and Saints.

IF the Lord Jesus Christ be such a Glorious Mediator, then,

First, Let perishing Sinners be persuaded to get an Interest in him: And for
Motive herein, consider these four or five things.

First, The Lord Jesus will Mediate for, and save none but those that are his.
Many common Mercies, Favors, and Boons he bestows on his Enemies, but
Salvation-blessings are the privileges only of his People, Matthew. 1. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Luke 1. 68.

Secondly, Many will lay claim to Christ, who have no Interest in him, Luke 13.
25. High Pretenders may be shaken off, Math. 7. 22. chap. 25. 12. Some that
shall think themselves something, may be found nothing; some that shall be
thought Saints by others, may yet be cast away, 1 John 2. 19. As Hymenaeus and
Alexander, 1. Tim. 1. 20. The Galathians and scattered Saints, Gal. 1. 6. chap.
3. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 20. Rev. 8. 12. Nay the very Elect shall find it hard to stand,
Matthew. 24. 24.

Thirdly, There is but a time in which Christ may be found, Isa. 55. 6. Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found; intimating, there is a time in which he will
not, when the door will be shut, and Christ will speak, knock, and call no
more; There is but a day of Grace, an hour of Salvation, O Sinner be not wise
too late.

Fourthly, It is a most dreadful, tremendous thing, to leave the World without
an Interest in Christ; to be summoned to Judgment and have nothing to help
them, no Mediator to plead for them, no Righteousness to cover them, no Duties
to accompany them, no Eye to pity them, Isa. 57. 12. chap. 30. 13. Jer. 5. 5.
This is sad indeed, when all Bowels are gone, and boundless Miseries to be
undergone.

Fifthly, Of all perishing Sinners, such as perish under the Gospel, have the
most dreadful Miseries, Matthew. 11. 21. 22. The Heathens and Pagans, Publicans
and Harlots, shall have a more tolerable place in Hell, than such as refuse a
tendered Jesus: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.
3. O miserable Sinners! slight not, Salvation tenders, despise not, Gospel
calls, but hasten away to this Redeemer.

Secondly, Let the People of God be exhorted, first to bless God for this
Mediator, Ephesians. 1. 3. Christ is the Fountain of Blessings, the Author of
Salvation, the Gift of God, and have you no Hosanna's for the Enjoyment of so
rich a person? 1 John 4. 9, 10.

Secondly, Ply hard the Throne of Grace, find Work for Christ, Heb. 4. 15, 16.
Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, make known your Requests unto God,
Phil. 4. 6. Consider Soul,

You have always need of Mercy; not a Moment but you want Supplies from God for
Soul and Body: your Corruptions are always resisting the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
never at peace with Grace, but as a Bow that is bent, are still pressing after
their former Liberty, and as Waters penned back, are striving to force their
way; therefore Christians, you always need the Spirit's help, and fresh
Supplies of Grace: your Guilt is always increasing, James 3. 2. The Righteous
falls seven times a day, hence daily Sacrifices were appointed, because of
daily Sins, Heb. 7. 27. Your Temptations are continually renewed, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
New Trials are daily falling on you, new Difficulties are frequently occurring
your Life, new Troubles and Afflictions are constantly betiding you.

This is God's appointed way, in which he will give out Mercy, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
Matthew. 7. 7. It Is true, sometimes God hears before we ask, but yet preventing
Mercy does not excuse from Duty, and we have no ground to expect Mercy out of
the way of Duty.

You are invested with a holy Priesthood, on purpose that you may be much
employed in this Work, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Your Work and Offices lies in this, to
offer up daily Sacrifices to God by Christ.

The Lord Jesus waits in Heaven to receive your Prayers, it is his Business and
work in Glory, to pursue your Advantages, and therefore he expects to hear from
you, 9. Heb. 24. As an Agent that expects to hear from his Clyent, and receive
Intimation about his Condition; as a Friend in a foreign Country, that is
harkening for Letters from his Friend, Christ in Heaven desires to hear from
his People on Earth; not that he is ignorant of them, or needs to be put in
Remembrance, but this way are his Graces in them exercised, their Love and Duty
maintained, and himself glorified, Isa. 30. 18. Therefore will the Lord wait
that he may be gracious. In the Original it is, he longs and as it were,
greedily and enlargedly desires an Occasion to be gracious; he waits in Heaven
to be pu^ in Remembrance to do his People good.

This way is their blessed Intercourse maintained betwixt Christ in Heaven, and
Believers on Earth, by this Christ hears from them on Earth, and they from him
in Heaven, Cant. 2. 14. chap. 8. 13, 14. Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the
Companions hearken to thy Voice, cause me to hear it: It Is, in the Original,
Cause to hear me, which occasions a twofold reading. First, Cause me to he
heard, they are Christ's Words to his Spouse, Let me be the Subject of thy
Discourse to others. Secondly, Cause me to hear it, that is, let me be spoken
to, let me hear thy Voice in Prayer, as a man desires to hear from his Wife,
when absent; and in the next verse. She eccho's back the same Request to Christ,
that he would hasten his Return to her, that she might have his Company also:
by Prayer Christ and Believers have sweet Intercourse with each other, Cant. 1.
7, 8. chap. 2. 5. 8.

The Lord Jesus is wonderfully delighted to hear from his People, Cant. 2. 14.
chap. 4. 11. chap. 6. 13. Return, Return, O Shulamite, etc. This word Shulamite
comes either from Solomon, and so her Husbands name is named on her, or from
Salem, Peace, which is Jerusalem, showing her Descent to be from Jerusalem
above; hence Christ desires her Company because it was pleasure to him to look
upon her, her Countenance was as two Armies; it is in the Original, Mahanaim,
the same word that Jacob puts on the place where God met him, Genesis 32. 1. 2. As
if Christ should say, thy Sight is Angelical to me, tho thou art impure in thy
self, yet thou art fair in mine Eye.

It Is a mighty thriving way: there is no such course can be taken to grow rich
apace in divine Treasures; Prayer is the Key that opens Christ Treasury, and
fetches out the Riches of Heaven, because such may have of God what they will,
Joh. 15. 7. God is always giving where gracious Souls are rightly asking; God's
readiness to give should be an Argument always to crave: as Sir Walter Raleigh
when Q. Eliz. asked him when he would leave off beging, answered, when your
Majesty leaves off giving.

Thirdly, Trust to an interceding Jesus, expect all your Mercies from him,
Psalm. 5. 3. In the Morning I will direct my Prayer to thee, and look up: the
Arabic, and some other Versions have it, I will prepare or stand before him,
and he will see me. But this agrees not with the Original, where it is, I will
order or dispose my Prayer, as a General does his Army, and will look out as a
man that watches on a Tower, to see what I can espy and what Answer he will
give. By a Metonomy, it signifies to expect or look for some thing, Matthew. 22.
21. In his Name shall the Gentiles trust. The Lord Jesus is the sure and
certain Object of a Believers Trust; O Christians! is Christ entered into
Heaven, there to appear for his People? O then depend upon his Intercession,
expect all your needed Mercies by him, take up your Acquiescence in his
Mediation for you, rest satisfied (Believers) that your case is good, and it
shall be well with you in every Condition, because Christ intercedeth for you.
Now to strengthen your Dependence on Christ. Consider,

His Engagement to the Father to become your Advocate, Heb. 10. 9. Joh. 6. 39.
His Promise to Believers to pursue their Cause in Heaven, Joh. 14. 16. And his
full Accomplishments with whatever is needful to complete this Work. He is
infinitely wise, and knows how to manage your Concerns and prosper, Col. 2. 3.
He has Skill and Counsel to finish his Affairs with Discretion; he knows your
Cases better than your selves, and what Arguments to plead so as to prevail,
Psalm. 103. 14. Joh. 2. 24. 25. Psalm. 31. 7. Heb. 4. 13. Isa. 40. 27. 28. He is
active and laborious; and quick at Work, as well as in Wisdom. Isa. 11. 3. He
is still unwearied in his Business, and his Spirit never fails, Isa. 42. 4. His
Eyes are always open, he never slumbers or sleeps, Psalm. 121. 4. 1 Kin. 8. 29.
Isa. 27, 3. He loses no time, but takes the fittest Occasion to perfect his
Designs, 1 Pet. 5. 6. He is faithful in his Undertakings, and one whom you may
confide, Heb. 2. 17. His name is faithful, Rev. 19. 11. He is omnipotent and
powerful to fulfill his Pleasure, Heb. 7. 25. The Almighty one who can prevail
with the Father, and is one with him, Joh. 11. 42. chap. 10. 30. Consider
Christ's Interest in his people, they are his own, John 13. 1. They are his
Seed, Treasure, Jewels, Members, and Sheep, Joh. 10. 3. They are his Spouse,
and therefore he cannot forget, or neglect their Concerns, Ephesians 5. 29.
Isa. 58. 7.

Think on his Concernments in all the Affairs of his Interest; by virtue of
that Union betwixt Christ and his People, he becomes a sharer with them in all
their Conditions, their Mercies are his Delight, Psalm. 35. 27. and their
Afflictions are his Trouble, Isa. 63. 9. He sympathizeth with them as the head
with the Members, and the Husband with the Spouse; their loss is his Loss, and
their Gain he reckons as his Interest. Should Saints and their Concernments
miscarry at last, Christ himself would be a certain and eternal Looser: he
would loose his Blood, and purchase, his Obedience and Sufferings.

Lastly, Consider, Christ's Glory consists in the Good and Salvation of
Believers, 2 These. 1. 12. His Glory is wrapped up in their Glory, and his Life in
their Life, Joh. 14. 19. 2 Cor. 8. 23. Joh. 17. 10.

Fourthly, acknowledge the Intercession of Christ to be the procuring Cause of
all your Mercies; in every Reception of Mercy see an Interceding Jesus, and say
Lord, it is thy Mediation I owe these Enjoyments, Privileges, and
Prayer-returns unto, Luke 22. 32. Psalm. 115. 1. Pro. 3. 6. In all thy ways
acknowledge him. This is to pay Tribute to Christ in Heaven, and advance the
Glory of the blessed Mediator; this is giving Christ his Due, Romans 13. 7. and a
sacrificing to God and not to your Dreg; as it is Christ in Belelievers is the
Hope of Glory, so it is Christ in Heaven is the Hope and Procurer of Mercy.

Fifthly, If Christ be your Advocate in Heaven, then follow his Instructions on
Earth, Matthew. 17. 5. He that commits his Cause to another, commits himself to
his Counsel also to be guided by him in every thing, that might conduce to his
Success in it; Christ's work in Heaven is to order and regulate his People on
Earth, and therefore he is the Lawgiver, and King as well as Savior, Isa. 33.
22. Jam. 4. 12. and the Duty of all Christ's Clyents on Earth, is to live by
his Prescription and Order given them; and therefore it is said, Numb. 21. 18.
The Princes dug the Well, even the Nobles of the People, dug it by the
Direction of the Lawgiver. This is spoken of that famous Well Beer-Elim: that
is, the Well of the mighty ones, that God gave Israel in the Wilderness: it was
alone the Gift of God, verse 16. I will give them Waters, yet they must dig for
it, as here; and that according to Prescription, as Moses gave them from the
Lord: This well was a Figure of Christ, as the Hebrews themselves, in their
Midrash Koheleth do acknowledge, as (say they) The first Redeemer caused a Well
to spring up, so the last Redeemer shall cause Waters to spring up; as it is
said, Joel 3. 18. A Fountain shall come forth from the House of the Lord, and
shall water the Valley of Shittim; which signified the Graces of the Spirit,
that Well of Water springing up to Life eternal, Joh. 4. 14.

Sixthly, Become Advocates for Christ on Earth, confess his name. Romans 14. 11.
chap. 15. 9. Phil. 2. 11. Plead his cause before men, Hos. 2. 2. Plead with
your Mother. This is spoken to the pious in Israel (as Jonathas Caldaeus,
Jerome, and others conceive) who are the men, and the whole House of Israel
their Mother, and their pious Children must plead, that is, expostulate,
reason, and contend with her for God to bring her to the Sense of her Sin and
Danger; the Lord Jesus underwent all dangers in owning your Cause, so should
you in his: he always intercedes for you, so should you for him in Word and
Deed; your Lives and Lips should plead for him: He pleads effectually for you,
so should you labor to be as successful as you may for him, Joh. 3. 29. and in
order to the Discharge of this important Duty, consider,

That the suitable Qualifications of an Advocate must be acquired, you must get
Wisdom to know Christ and the things of his Will, Kingdom, and Glory, you are
not likely to do much Service to Christ's Interest, if you are ignorant and
unacquainted with his Laws and Concernments, Mic. 6. 8. Col. 1. 9, 10. 2 Pet.
3. 18. Matthew. 10. 16. Phil. 1. 9. Ephesians. 1. 17. You must be active and vigorous
for God, Romans 12. 11. Slothful Spirits are not like to be much serviceable,
Prove. 27. 15. Eccles. 10. 18. chap. 9. 10. Heb. 6. 11, 12. You must be
faithful, and have Truth in the inner parts, Rev. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 2. Luke 12.
42. You must labor after Potency and Mightiness through Christ, that you may
prevail for him, Phil. 4. 13. 1 Chro. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Now the way to get
this Strength for Christ, is by Faith to live on him, Ephesians. 6. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 1.

You must make a thorough and open Profession of him, and of all his Truth, 1 Timothy 6. 12, 13, 14. Heb. 4. 14. 2 Cor. 9. 13. profess him at all times, Matthew.
10. 32. profess him openly, plainly, sincerely, and boldly, so did the Apostles.

You must patiently, persevere under all Sufferings for him, Acts 21. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 10. Heb. 10. 32.

You must speak well for Christ at all times, Mat. 11. 19. Cant. 5. 10. 1 Pet.
2. 9.

You must live out his Glory, Math. 5. 16. Phil. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 9. 13.

Thus have we done with the Applicatory part of this Point, and dispatched the
wonderful Riches of Christ, as to his personal Union.

CHAP. IX.
Opening somewhat of the sweet Dispositions of Christ, viz. His Goodness, Love,
and the Riches thereof, as to the kind, Fruits, and Effects of it.

I Am now come to the third particular, wherein we shall make a Discovery of
the Riches of Christ, as they consist in his excellent and sweet Dispositions
as Mediator, with those precious Graces and Endowments in him, which will much
illustrate the personal Riches of Christ, and be of wonderful Encouragement
both to Saints and Sinners, to think better of him, and to hasten after a
Dependence on him.

Now the first thing we shall treat of, is the goodness of his Nature: He is
Goodness it self, Psalm. 34. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good: This Psalm
was penned by David, when he was driven from Achish, and was in sore danger of
his Life; in this Condition, he seeks the Lord, and found help, by reason of
the Goodness of God, that is, God in Christ; indeed there is Creation-Goodness,
and providential-Goodness, but the choicest is his Redemption-goodness, that
Goodness which he lets out to poor Sinners in a Mediator. Thus is Jesus Christ
the Gift of his best Love, and is qualified, and disposed to commend the
infinite Goodness of God to perishing Sinners: his Goodness is great, Zac. 9.
17. called the Riches of his Goodness, Romans 2. 4. Now this goodness of Christ
appears.

First, In it is Extensiveness, he is good to all, Man's goodness is contracted
and narrow, its greatest Proportion reaches but a few, none but Friends,
Relations, and such as may oblige or requite them, are usually Sharers in it;
but the goodness of Christ is immense, it reaches to all the work of his
hands, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is good to all, by him all things consist, Col.
1. 17. He upholdeth all things by the word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. The very
vilest, and most unworthy Grace-abusing Soul have some kind of share in Christ's
Goodness; he upholds his very Enemies, and maintains the Being and Enjoyment of
such as oppose him.

Secondly, In it is Invincibleness; all the Provocations of his Enemies cannot
impede it is designed current, he is resolved they shall have a share in his
Mercy, though they oppose their own Mercies; nay all the Unkindness of his
people cannot conquer it, nor many Waters quench it: He makes his Sun to shine
upon the good and bad, Math. 5. 45. It Is strange to think how rare a portion of
Mercy the wicked have in their day; he that cried Father forgive them they know
not what they do, cries Father spare them to see what they will be.

Thirdly, It Is Freeness; it is not extracted, but flows out of it is own Accord,
Isa. 65. 24. Before they call, I will answer, etc. It has no Creature-merit to
provoke it, Exek. 16. 6. I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, live,
when there was no Beauty to attract it, no desires to draw it forth: man's
Worthyness is no ground for the Communication of Christ's Goodness, what
Lovelyness had the Ephesians to deserve it is liberal Effusions? Ephesians. 2. 1.

Fourthly, it is unwearied, enduring Goodness, it has not the Shallowness of a
slender Vessel, which is easily emptyed, but the Unfathomableness of the Ocean
that can never be exhausted: the vast Expenses and Communications of it, from
the Creation of the World to it is final Destruction, will not diminish it one
Iota; his Anger indeed has but a momentary Continuance, Psalm. 30. 5. But his
Goodness endures for ever, Psalm. 52. 1.

Fifthly, It Is Communicative goodness, running over, flowing down, and
liberally diffusing it self for the good of others; so it is defined to be a
Virtue by which a person of his own accord is abundantly prone to acts of
Benignity: Christ's Goodness is manifestative, distributive, and it is
Dispensations are as natural as the irradiating Beams of the Sun.

Secondly, Another excellent Disposition in Christ, is his Love, not only his
Phylanthropy, or good Will he bears to all men, and the Desire he has of their
Salvation, Ezekiel. 33. 11. But his (...) his special Love, from (...) valde and
(...) acquiesco, such an ardent Affection has the heart of Christ, for a
person adhering to him, that it greatly acquiesces in, and is fully contented
with him, Ephesians. 2. 4. Such is the Sweetness of Christ's Nature, that it is full
of Love, God is Love, 1 John 4. 16. And as the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you, Joh. 15. 9. Now this Love of Christ to his people, is,

First, A supreme Love, the chiefest Love, he has a love of Benevolence to
all, Mark 10. 21. He beheld the young man and loved him; but the Love he bears
his own, is transcendent, and exceeds the Love of men and Angels, Joh. 15. 13.

Secondly, An infinite Love, Love that passes all Knowledge, exceeds all
Dimensions, Ephesians. 3. 18. Chist's Love (says one) has Length in it, because he
loved his Elect from Eternity to Eternity; O unmeasurable Length that has no
end! his Love has Breadth in it, because not the Jews only, but the Gentiles
also, are sharers in it; it is extended to the whole World, Math. 28. 19. It
has depth in it, because it brought him down into the Deeps, not only of the
Earth, but of unconceivable Sufferings: It brought him as low as the Grave, yea
to the very Borders of Hell, Isa. 53. 3. It has height in it, because it
ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all in all, become our
Advocate there, prepare us for it, and it for us, and at last takes us up to
himself, that we may behold his Glory.

Thirdly, An eternal Love, Jer. 31. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting
Love. All Creature-affections have their Beginning and End, their Risings and
Settings, but the Love of Christ is as himself, everlasting, Rev. 1. 13. The
transiency of his peoples Love, cannot injure its permanency, for where he
loves, he loves to the end, Joh. 13. 1.

Fourthly, An unchangeable Love, it has no Ebbings and Flowings, Waxings and
Waneings, Risings and Fallings, but is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for
ever, Heb. 13. 8. It knows no Alteration, Addition, or Diminution: the Heavens
shall wax old as a Garment, and be changed, Heb. 1. 11. 12. But Christ and his
Love is invariable, Mal. 3. 6. It Is true, the Manifestations of his Love is
mutable, (he may smile to day, and frown to morrow) but not the nature of it;
the Cisterns may be dry but not the Fountain.

Fifthly, A free Love, it has no Consideration of Creature-merit, foreseen
Faith, or persevering Holiness, Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their Backslidings,
and love them freely. What reason can be given, that of the same Lump should be
made one Vessel of Honor, and another of Dishonor; nay that persons of the
most exquisite Abilities, natural Endowments, unspotted Moralities, and
uncontrollable Sovereignty, should be rejected, and left to the hardness of
their Heart, and the righteous Judgment of God, and that others of the meanest
parts, inconsiderable Qualifications, prodigiously vicious Lives and miserable
Penury, should be elected to the highest Privileges, received into the most
intimate Communion, and made partaker of the highest Glory?

Sixthly, The Spring and Fountain of all that Love that is in Believers to God
and one another, Creature-affections are but streams derived from this Ocean,
Candles lighted at this Sun: We love him because he first loved us, 1 John 4.
19. The ascending Love of Saints is a faint Reflection of the descending Love
of Christ; the same Waters that empty themselves into the Sea, have their Birth
from it.

Seventhly, An active love, Creature-affections are dull and sluggish, and
savor rankly of the Vessel they are in, but Christ's are vigorous and
laborious; a parental Love, that sets his Wisdom on designing, his Faithfulness
on securing, and his Power on accomplishing the chiefest Concernments, and
highest good of his Children.

Lastly, a fruitful Love, full of good Works, it is commended love, Romans 5. 8.
manifested love, 1 John 4. 9. Not love in the Womb, or abortive, but love in
the Birth: I shall name some of it is Fruits to his People.

First, the giving of himself for them, Ephesians. 5. 25. Who loved me, and gave
himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. This is the highest Testimony of his Love
imaginable, he could not have bestowed a better thing; he that gives himself,
gives all. He gave himself to procure a purchased Treasure to enrich them, to
destroy the partition Wall, and fill up that bottomless Gulf, that lay in their
way to glory: he gave himself to discharge their Debts, remove their Guilt,
justify their Persons fulfill all Righteousness, and make good the new Covenant.

Secondly, The opening of his heart to them, John 15. 14, 15. I have called you
Friends, for all that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you: O!
the wonderful Love and Kindness of Christ to his People, that he communicates
his Secrets, and opens to them the Thoughts of his Heart from all Eternity; he
leads them into his retired Chambers and secret Recesses, and feasts them
liberally with hidden Manna, and excellent Discoveries of the things freely
given them of God: Saints cannot ascend up into Heaven, and see the Length
Depth, Breadth and Height of those glorious things God has prepared for them,
but they have the Privilege to wade deep into sanctuary Waters, and the Spirit
of Grace is freely given them to reveal the Depths of divine Love.

Thirdly, The Communication of all good things to them, He will give Grace and
Glory, and no good thing will he withhold, Psa. 84. 11. Psalm. 34. 10. O
boundless Love indeed! he may bestow some sublunar Portions on his Enemies, but
his Children only shall have the Inheritance, they shall have his Wisdom to
direct them, his Goodness to supply them, his Power to protect them, and his
Spirit to instruct them, Joh. 16. 13. 14. And O what a wonderful Gift is the
Spirit; he will show them their Duty, reprove them for their Sin, answer their
Doubts, clear up their Way, and enlighten them in their Darkness: he will open
their Hearts, enlarge their Souls, regulate their Wills, illuminate their
Minds, and sanctify their Persons; he will communicate Counsel, reveal Christ,
discover their Inheritance, and seal them up to the day of Redemption.

Fourthly, His minding and pursuing all their Concerns in Heaven, the Business
Believers have in another Country where they cannot come is very weighty; they
need Receptions of more Grace every day, Strength against Corruption, Wisdom in
their Difficulties, Patience in their Sufferings, and Faith in their
Temptations; now Christ does agitate their Cause, becomes their Factor, and
dispatches their Work, Exodus 28. 29. Heb. 7. 25. Isa. 49. 15. 16.

Fifthly, His gracious Presence with them, Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave you
comfortless, Heb. 13. 5. Jer. 32. 40. 2 Cor. 6. 16, He may hide his face for
sometime, and suspend the gracious light of his Countenance: he may stand
behind the Wall, and step behind the Curtain, yet these are but momentary, not
continual, and imaginary, not real.

Sixthly, His bearing with them, and forbearing of them, 1 Cor. 13. 7. Charity
bears all things, it cannot easily be overloaded: what gross Indignities and
abusive Injuries does Christ patiently receive from the hands of his People?
Amos 2. 13. Psalm. 95. 10.

Seventhly, His thinking often and well of them, and his being a Friend to
their Friends, and an Enemy to their Enemies: where a man's Affections are there
will his Thoughts be also; the Adulterers Thoughts are on his Uncleanness, the
wordly man's on his Treasures, and the Ambitious on his Honors, but Christ's
are on his People, Isa. 43. 4. They are his Hephzibah's, the delight of his
Soul, his Jewels and Treasures, Isa. 62. 4. Mal. 3. 17. He esteems their
Enemies as his, Exodus 23. 29. and favors their Friends with peculiar
Blessings, Exodus 1. 20. Genesis 39. 5.

Eighthly, His being troubled with their Troubles, and delighted with their
Welfare, Joh. 11. 33. 35, 36. when the Lord Jesus came to raise Lazarus from
the dead, and saw Mary weeping, and the Jews that were with her, it is said, He
groaned in Spirit, and was troubled: nay when he came to the place where
Lazarus lay, he wept; whereupon the Jews said, Behold how he loved him, and his
Heart is the same now in Heaven, Isa. 63. 9. True love will suffer in the
Trials of it is Friend, Acts 9. 4. hence the Afflictions of Saints are called
the Afflictions of Christ, Col. 1. 24. what Hester said concerning her people,
may be more truly spoken by Christ, Hester. 8. 6. How can I endure to see the
Evil that shall come upon my people. He is grieved at the Evil of their Sins or
Sufferings, Mark. 3. 5. Ephesians. 4. 13. and takes wonderful Pleasure in their
Welfare, Poov. 8. 31. no tender parent can more earnestly desire the Happiness,
and rejoice in the Advantages of his Children, than Jesus Christ in his, Psalm.
147. 11. If the Joy of his Ambassadors does much depend upon the Prosperity of
the Souls of their Auditors, 3 Epist. Joh. ver. 4. Then surely himself is not
altogether unconcerned.

Lastly, His preparing a Heaven for them, John 14. 2, 3. In my Fathers House
are many Mansions, I go to prepare a place for you, etc. The Lord Jesus knows
that his departure from the World with the sad Consequences thereof, would
breed great Trouble in the Hearts of his Disciples; therefore labors to
prevent it, by telling them of the occasion of his Departure, that it was for
their sakes, and in their business; and though the World would abuse them when
he was gone, and cast them out of their House and Country, yet he tells them,
he had a Father in Heaven that would receive them, and he was going thither to
prepare a place for them, and there was store of room for them in Heaven. The
word, translated Mansion here, signifies, an abiding, fixed place. Here you
dwell in Tabernacles, but in Heaven are places for you, out of which you shall
never be turned more. Don't expect much Happiness in the World, but look to
Heaven for all your satisfying Comforts: There Is a Rest for you, after all your
wearying Duties and Troubles; there are pleasant Habitations, after all your
Wilderness Journeyings: There Is a large dewlling place; here you are thrust
into corners, and may be have little conveniences in your Houses: Here you
dwell in Strangers, and perhaps, Enemies Houses, but there your dwelling shall
be in your Father's House. It Is really so, I do not flatter you with vain
hopes, or feed you with false reports: if it were not so, I would have told
you. Some might object here, That there may be Houses in Heaven, and yet they
in Hell. No (says Christ) I go to prepare a place for you; when I come to
Heaven, I will bespeak a House for you, it shall be your own, your own proper
Right, every one of you, and of all my People, shall have a House of their own,
and it shall be Fee simple, theirs to all Eternity. But some may say, How shall
we be sure of this, that when we dye we shall have a place in Glory? Why, says
Christ, As sure as I go to Heaven, shall you have a Mansion there; for, it is
one end of my going thither; it is part of my business there, I go to prepare a
place for you. ((...)) This word, says Grotius, notes a Divine Appointment, a
place that God allots and appoints for you: that you might not think it is
procured by your own Merit and labors. As if he should say, you may be sure,
my People, you shall not miss of a place in my Father's House, because he has
given you a house in Heaven, and I go to possess it for you, and to make it
sure: My Father has given it, and I have purchased it, and now I go to take it
into my own hand for you: yea, to fit and suit your Lot in Heaven, as may be
most meet for you, and as may bear a full proportion to all your Labors, and
Sufferings for me. And thus the word likewise imports (says Dr. Preston) to
fit and fashion one, as a Vessel is fashioned and shaped to its proper Use. But
Believers may urge, Lord, how shall we get thither? the Journey is far, the Way
we know not; many Dangers lie betwixt this and Heaven; the Prince of the Air,
and all the Devils of Hell lie betwixt this and Glory; and how shall we get
safely through all these Dangers? Why, says Christ, I will come again and
receive you, when I have done your Work in Heaven, when I have difpatched my
gathering, and completing work on Earth, when all my Saints are called and
perfected, then will I come again, and receive you to my self; I will come and
unite your Souls and Bodies together, and then will show you the way to Heaven,
and lead you into your own habitations there, and as surely put you into
possession of Glory, as I am going to possess it for my self; and in the mean
time, I will take care of you in the way, and send my Spirit to guide you, and
bear you through it, and my Angels, when you are at your Journeys end, shall
receive your Souls, and bring them unto me, that where I am you may be also,
Joh. 17. 24. Joh. 12. 26. What greater Love can there be than the Engagements
of Christ's Heart, to get all his Children brought home to Heaven, that they
may be ever with him, and partake of his Glory, 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23.

CHAP. X.
Several Deductions drawn from the Love of Christ.

IF the Lord Jesus be so full of Love and tender Affection: then,

First, What reason have Sinners never to be quiet, till the Lord Jesus become
their Friend, till they have an Interest in his special Love. Alas, poor Souls*
the common Love of Christ, though now you fare the better for it, will shortly
be at an end: His Philanthropy, though procious, yet is but like a Box of
Ointment, which may be wasted and consumed, Mark, 14. 4. But his special Love
is like the two Olive Trees, Zach. 4. 12. always emptying out it self through
the golden Pipes of his Ordinandes to his People: Christ's common Love to
Sinners, is like a Land-flood, that will be drained: But his special Love is
compared to a Fountain, a Wood of Water that springs up to Life Eternal. O
then labor after an Interest in this Love of Christ, that brings Salvation:
Put away the Evil of thy doings, hearken to Christ's counsel, receive him into
thy Heart by Faith; obey his Voice, take him to be thy Lord and God, and thou
shall possess his love too, Psalm. 45. 10.

Secondly, Then what an abominable thing is it to hate Christ? how unexcusable
will Sinners Enmity against him be when he comes to Judgment, Jer. 2. 5. Prove.
8. 36. All they that hate me love Death, Psalm. 21. 8, 9. Psalm. 132. 18. Nah. 1.
2.

3dly, Then why should Believers take up such hard thoughts of Christ? Isa. 40.
27. Why say thou, O Jacob, my way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is
passed over from my God? that is, my Condition, my trouble, my Soul is out of
God's thoughts: He takes no notice of, nor cares what becomes of me: And my
Judgment; that is, God's judging my Cause, his righting and helping my
oppressed Soul, is gone from me, or he has laid it aside, he will not help me
in my Affliction. This was Sion's complaint, and hard thoughts of God, and this
displeased him; Why say thou, O Jacob, etc? As if he should say, what cause
have thou, O Israel, my People, to entertain such harsh conceptions of my Love?
what Iniquity have thou found in me? what wrong have I done thee? Have I not
born thee from the Womb, and carried thee all the days of old? Look back to
the Red Sea, and to the Wilderness, who cared for thee there? Call to mind the
Manna, and the Rock, the Bread and Water on the Way; I suffered none to do thee
harm, I delivered thee out of the hands of all thy Enemies, and plagued them
that injured thee: Thus have I been thy help from thy Youth up, and why say
thou then, my way is hid from the Lord? O Jacob, thou do ill to censure me so
severely; Is this the requital of all my love and kindness to thee hitherto?
Repent of these injurious apprehensions, and put more favorable constructions
on my ways; Gracious Souls have no reason to prejudge the Heart of Christ, and
censure him of unkindness and negligence: for it is impossible he should forget
his People, Isa. 49. 15. He has paid too dear for them to do so: They have
cost his Blood, Eternal Counsels, many Troubles, many Wonders, and will he
reject them after all? O no. He has engraven them on the Palms of his hands,
where he cannot but see, and must secure their names, Isa. 49. 16. I cannot
look upon my hands, but I must remember thee: I should forget my self, should I
forget thee: thou art set as a Seal upon my Heart, and thy Walls are
continually before me: that is, though thy Protection be gone for a time, and I
have left thee to the Will of thine Enemies, yet I will redeem and secure thee,
I will raise up thy Walls, and re-establish thy State, for thy Walls are before
me, though thou see them not, I can and will preserve them; thou art Weak,
but I am strong, I faint not though thou faintest, I am never weary though thou
art tired, and as sure as I have Strength, I will give it thee; they that wait
on the Lord shall renew their Strength, Isa. 40. 28. Again, you cannot see the
way to get out of your Troubles, your Wisdom is non-plust, but mine is not so;
There is no searching of my Understanding: O then do not give up thy Hopes O
Jacob, or conclude I have forgotten thee: He has promised he will not cast off
his People, nor leave them comfortless, 1 Samuel 12. 22. Joh. 14. 18. And he is
not as a man that he should lie, etc. Numb. 23. 19. He has given them his Seal
to it, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 4. 30. Nothing can separate his love from them, Romans
8. 35. 38, 39.

Object. But I am afraid I am none of Christ's, nor have the Spirit, because of
the Filthiness, Obdurateness, and Irregularity of my Heart.

Answer, If ever thou had the Spirit, thou have it still, John 4. 14. Isa.
59. 21. Gracious Souls may sometimes seem to themselves to be carnal, and sold
under Sin, Romans 7. 14. They may not see any good thing dwell in them, ver. 18.
but be like to the slain that lie in the Grave, Psalm. 88. 5. So Heman thought
himself one free among the dead, whom the Lord would remember no more: in the
Winter there is little visible difference between the living and the dead Tree;
neither is there betwixt a Saint and a Sinner in time of Desertion and
Temptation: God's Children may be led captive by Sin, and brought into Bondage
by their Lusts, Romans 7. 23. and then it is hard to say, how unlike they are to
them that never knew God; and therefore Christian judge not thy self by thy
changeable Frames, if thou do not repent of thy Change, thy leaving thy old
Courses and choosing God and Grace, a Corinth. 7. 10. If thou do not approve
of any Sin, or secretly love thy filthy ways, Romans 7. 15. 20. If thy Heart be
discontented with thy state of backsliding, and longs after a return to thy
resting place, then thou art gracious, Jer. 31. 18. Psalm. 14. 7. If thou do
find a War betwixt thy Members and thy Mind, the Law of the Spirit of Life
warring against the Law of Sin and Death, thy state is good, Romans 7. 21, 22 23.
Gal. 5. 17. The Plesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, and these are contrary one to the other. ((...)) The word notes a
vehement and continued Desire, a Desire which is still in Action, and working
till we have it accomplished, not a sudden Motion or momentary Passion. Look how
Corruption and Lust works against Grace, so does Grace against Corruption, for
these two are contrary, ((...)) the one lays Seige against the other, as a
Soldier in a Trench against a Fort. Now if it be so with thy Soul, that thou
find in it two parties, as Twins in the Womb opposing each other, and do
experience something in thy Will against Sin, as well as for it, and something
in thy Affections, an Enemy to thy Corruptions as well as a Friend; if thou
longest as much for Freedom from Sin as from Hell, and thy Heart cannot be at
peace whilst the Body of Sin remains in thee, then lift up thy head, O Soul,
Judgment shall be brought forth to Victory, and the top stone shall in due time
be laid with shouting, Grace, Grace! to it.

Fourthly, Then you that are Christ's, take heed you abuse not his Love, Romans
6. 15. What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the Law but under
Grace? God forbid. That is, shall we yield our Souls to the Service of Sin, as
verse. 16. or give a willing Consent to the Commission of it? God forbid; That
is, far be it from us, noting it to be a vile and abominable thing, to Sin
under Grace, and against Grace; this is a most disingenuous thing to abuse
love, and requite Evil for Good: it is most unjust to injure him that loves
you, it is a costly Sin, and will have a bitter reckoning at last, it is a Spot
notoriously like the Spot of Reprobation, Jude, v. 4. But if it may consist
with Grace, yet it will break your Bones, and scourge you soundly e're God has
done; what did David, Solomon, and Peter, get by abusing divine Love?

Fifthly, Admire Christ's love, his love is admirable passing Knowledge, you
use to admire things that are strange, and beyond your reach, but what more
miraculous and unparellel'd than this, That the Lord of Glory who has Angels
at his Service, should set his Affections on poor polluted Dust and Ashes, on
Fleas and Worms, as Abraham and David acknowledged themselves to be, that so
illustrious a person as the Lord Jesus should fall in love with so deformed a
piece as man, in whom was neither Beauty nor Riches, Virtue nor Honor, and be
enamoured of him so greatly, as to take him into his Bosom, and a conjugal
Relation with himself; it is so stupendous a Miracle, that it is said, he shall
be admired of all that believe when he comes, 2 These. 1. 10. O Christians
gather in all your Valuations from Creatures, for your Creator and Redeemer,
Isa. 63. 1.

Sixthly, Adventure on the Love of Christ, swim on these deep Waters, roll your
selves on these divine Depths, and confide in his new Covenant love, for it is
unchangeable love to the end; many waters cannot quench it, Cant. 8. 7. Trust
his Love (I say) in the way of Obedience, Joh. 14. 21. 23. If his love be free,
then it is not for your sake, Deuteronomy. 7. 17. Not for your Beauty or Holiness, but
for his own good Pleasure, Of his own Will begat he us, Jam. 1. 18. He loves
you Believers, because you are his own, Joh. 13. 1. And because it has pleased
him to make you his people, 1 Samuel 12. 22. If he loves those that love him,
then surely he will kindly resent the Ardency of thy Affections to him; O
adventure on this Love.

Seaventhly, love him who has so loved you, 1 John 4. 19. Psalm. 31. 23. O love
the Lord all ye his Saints. The Reason is laid down from the 19. verse to this,
O how great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
etc. The greatness and Excellency of Christ's Love deserves yours; O love him
at all times, and in all things, with a free, supreme, steady, rational, and
expressed love.

Lastly, Be full of love to others for Christ's sake, Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in Love
as Christ also has loved you, 1 John 4. 11. Love all men, such a love is in
God, he loved the World, Joh. 3. 16. and every Creature in it; such a
Philanthropy is in Christ, he would have all men come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, that they might be saved, 1 Timothy 2, 4. Love your Enemies, Mat. 5. 44. so
did Christ: he prayed, Father forgive them, Luke 23. 34. love his Friends, 1 John 5. 1. Ephesians. 6. 24.

CHAP. XI.
The glorious Excellency of Christ's tender Pity opened and displayed in the
several Acts of it, both to Saints and Sinners.

ANother Discovery of the Sweetness of Christ's Disposition is,

Thirdly, His Pity, this is looked upon as an excellent Qualification, and that
which renders a person lovely among men, Romans 5. 7. For scarcely for a
righteous man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to dye: for a just man, one that is strict and rigid in his Life and
matters of Justice, none will dye; but for a good man, that is, for a
bountiful, liberal man, for a Benefactor (says Beza) for a Friend (says
another) some would even dare to dye; Kindness and Compassion renders men
lovely and amiable in the Sight of Heathens: hence one calls a merciful man a
precious thing, and another makes him equal to God, God himself prefers Mercy
above Sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. This the Lord opened to Moses as part of his
Glory, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord God merciful and gracious, etc. And this
mercifulness is placed in the Nature of Christ, as Mediator, and therefore must
needs render him glorious, and be part of his unsearchable Riches: now that the
Lord Jesus is so full of Pity and Mercy in his very Nature, the Scripture is
clear. This was one Qualification necessary to his Priesthood, Heb. 2. 17.
This was a special Requisite to the Priest under the Law, that he should be one
who might have Compassion on the Ignorant, and them that are out of the way,
Heb. 5. 2. Therefore the high priest must be a Man, not an Angel, that so he
being subject to Infirmities, to Sins, and Weaknesses himself, he might the
better have Compassion upon others in the like ease. The same Argument the Lord
uses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 10. 19. Love ye therefore the Stranger, for ye were
Strangers in the Land of Egypt. Experience of Affliction fits a person for
pity to others, and therefore, our Lord took our Nature upon him, that being
compast with the same Infirmities (Sin only excepted) he might be able to have
Compassion on others: this is necessary in that Office, for a person will never
be active in such laborious work for Sinners, as offering of Gifts and
Sacrifices for Sin, if he have not tender Bowels toward persons in Misery: and
therefore Jesus Christ must needs be such a one, who can have Compassion, etc.
The word is significant, it is in the Original ((...)) to have Compassion on
others according to the Measure and Proportion of their Misery: Paraeus renders
it, to have Compassion as much as is needful; Beza, to be affected according to
the greatness of another Misery, and such is the Compassion of Christ, it is
suited to the Condition of his People: were Christ's Pity but one Grain short of
the Misery and Condition of Sinners, he could never save them to the utmost;
for if he will save to the uttermost, he must ever live to make Intercession;
there is no one moment of time, in which they don't want help, and must have
Gifts offered for them: But this Christ will not do, if he wants Compassion,
Jam. 5. 11. The Lord is said to be pitiful, and of tender mercies ((...)) of
many Bowels; or, as Piscator, multum visc^ralis; much bowelful, all pitiful,
from inward deep Bowels ((...)) The word is to pity with the Bowels of a
Mother, to be prone to compassion: So Aestius; He is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4.
Great in Quantity, and Choice in Quality, great Mercy, and choice Mercy, Psalm.
5. 1. According to the multitude of thy tender mercies. The word Rab,
multitude, signifies Quality as well as Quantity: many Mercies, or weighty
Mercies: Mercies; Rachamim: It Is such love and pity as Mothers bear to the
fruit of their Womb, which is fervent and flaming. The word has no singular
number, because there are many works of Mercy, says Piscator.

Now this Compassion of Christ lies in these two things.

1. In his sympathizing with his Creatures. 2. In supplying and supporting
them.
First, Pity has sympathy in it: an inward Heart-affecting sense of another's
Evils, Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pitieth his children, so the Lord
pitietb them that fear him, Judge. 10. 16. His Soul was grieved for the Children
of Israel. The word signifies, His Soul was short'ned, or contracted in him,
by reason of grief. It Is spoken by an Anthropopathy, according to the
apprehensions of men: As a man is filled with grief, his Breast is straightened,
that he can scarcely breathe; It denotes how much the Lord Jesus is affected
with the miseries of his People, Heb. 4. 15. He is said to be touched with the
Fellow-feeling of our Infirmities, (...), suffering with us. Christ, in Heaven,
has such a fellow-feeling of the Evils of his People, as that he resents their
troubles as his own. He is tenderhearted, and every misery of theirs reaches
his Soul. But this has been somewhat treated of before.

Secondly, Readiness to supply, and support others in their Misery; and this is
eminently manifested in the Lord Jesus, Isa. 38. 20. The Lord was ready to save
me. Men sometimes have a hand, but no heart; they may help, but will not; they
only say, Go and be fed, and be clothed, etc. Others have a heart, but no
hand; they have not to supply the needs of others; their Cruse of Oil, and
Barrel of Meal will reach but a little way: besides, there may be some Cases in
which Men or Angels cannot help, Psalm. 142. 4. I looked on my right hand, and
behold, there was no man would know me, etc. But there can be no Condition in
which Omnipotency fails to help, Heb. 7. 25. Jer. 32. 27. And Christ is as
really willing as able to save: He is an inexhausted Fountain of all good.
Sufficit omnibus (says Paraeus) nec sufficit tantum, sed dat liberalissime.
Dives est (says the same Author) sufficientia and affectu: He is good, and
does good: He feeds, gathers, carries, leads, his poor infirm Flocks, when they
most stand in need of him, Isa. 40. 11. When they are ready to faint for want,
he opens a Well, and fills their Bottles: when they wander from their
resting place, he sends his Dogs, and gathers them to his Fold; when they are
weary, and can go no further, he takes them into his Arms and carries them:
when they are hungry, he feeds them, when they are naked, he clothes them: when
they are sick, he visits them, when they are in Prison, he comes to them: He
gives to his People richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17. He exhibits, or
yields out, all things, (not some things only) and that richly too:
plentifully, not in Title only, but in Fruition also, Heb. 4. 16. He gives
Grace to help in time of need: He sends them seasonable help, help in fit time:
((...)) This word signifies, to run at ones call, to help him as soon as he
cries for help; to run in to his Succor; so does Christ. He is a present help
in time of need, Psalm. 46. 1. When they can hold out no longer, he will relieve
their Siege; when they are ready to perish, he will step in betwixt them and
destruction, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And this he does too from a tender heart, that
feels, and shares in their Dangers. Poor Believer! let thy Condition be never
so bad, the Lord Jesus has an open heart and hand for thy help. It may be, men
may harden their hearts against thee, good men may take little notice of thee,
Priest and Levite pass thee by, and will not know thy Soul in adversity; but
yet comfort thy heart, thou have a Friend in Heaven, that grieves with, and for
thee, and will open Treasures to supply thee.

Now this pitiful Nature of Christ appears in diverse particulars, both to
Saints and Sinners. To Saints.

First, In looking after their Concerns, Exodus 2. 22. It Is said, that God
looked upon the Children of Israel; and had respect unto them. This is an act
of pity to look after the welfare of another. Merciful Jesse, when his Sons
were in danger, sent David to look after them, 1 Samuel 17. 18. So is the heart
of Christ concerned in the welfare of his People, 1 Pet. 3. 12. The eyes of the
Lord are over the righteous, and his Ears are open to their Prayer: He knows
their Souls in Adversity, considers their Troubles, and looks after their
Matters, Psalm. 31. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 7. The want of this looking after a Persons
welfare, is an evidence of the want of pity, Jer. 15. 5. Who shall have pity
upon thee, O Jerusalem, etc? O, what comfort is this to poor afflicted Souls,
that though men look not after them, Friends matter not what become of them,
yet the Lord cares for them.

Secondl^, In laboring to prevent their Evils. This is another act of pity, as
we may see in Mordecai and Esther. A dreadful Danger was near to Israel; a
Decree passed by the King to cut them all off in one day* When Mordecai heard
of this, how industriously does he labor with Esther, to improve all her
Interest in the King to prevent it, Esth. 4. 8, 13, 14. Christ cannot foresee
any Dangers impending on his People, but his Bowels stir him up to employ his
Omnipotency to remove them. And this he does,

First, By warning them of their Danger. He sends them alarms, and gives them
notice, as a Watchman, when their Enemies are near, Ezekiel. 3. 18. Heb. 11. 7.
Noah being warned of God, etc. So Joseph, Matthew. 2. 13. was warned of God in a
dream to flee into Egypt, wh^^ Christ was in danger of Herod's bloody
butcheries. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Turn you, turn you from your wicked ways, for why
will you dye, O house of Israel?

Secondly, By keeping their hearts from closing with Temptations, when they are
like to prove dangerous: So he dealt with Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. Perhaps he may
permit their falling into some lesser Evils, to try, and humble them; but when
the Sin will probably occasion a great dishonor to God, and endanger the final
estate of their Souls, then usually he will give forth preventing Grace to
direct their hearts from closing with it.

Thirdly, By plucking them back, when on the borders of destruction. Thus
David's feet had well nigh slipped, and he was almost gone; and then He opens a
passage for him into the Sanctuary, and graciously reconciles to him his
seemingly contradictory Providence, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 73. 2, 3, 17.
And L^^, when by lingering in Sodom, he had almost exposed himself a prey to
devouring Flames, the Angels suddenly plucked him out, and kept him from that
impending ruin, Genesis 19. 10, 16.

Fourthly, By sore Afflictions, smarting rods, and cross Providence, he
sometimes prevents their sins, and so their destruction, Psalm. 119. 67. Before
I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word. Thus the Waters of
Marah have sometimes led to the Waters of the Sanctuary; and grievous
Distempers on the Body have proved the health of the Soul. I have read of one,
that by breaking ^is Leg saved his Life.

Fifthly, By breaking the Snare when they are in it, and so making a way for
their escape, Psalm. 124. 7. The snare is broken, and we are escaped. When David
was compassed round by Saul, and no possible way was left him to avoid the Jaws
of ruin, then the Lord sent in the Philistims to call off Saul, 1 Samuel 23. 24,
25, 26, 27. So, when the Protestants in France were almost starved with Famine,
and reduced to that extremity that all hopes of Safety, in man's judgment
failed them, then was God's time to come in to their rescue, by sending in
Ambassadors to call off the Duke of Anjou to be King of Poland, by which means
the Siege was removed, and upon the mediation of these Ambassadors, the
Protestants obtained Liberty. Thus he saved Isaac also, when Abraham's Knife
was at his Throat, Genesis 22. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Lastly, By giving them a Vomit, when the Poison is taken in, that so it may be
timely ejected, before the danger be unremoveable. This way God prevented
David's ruin, in the matter of Bathsheba, after he had fallen into the sin, by
giving him Repentance to Salvation, Psalm. 51.

Thirdly, Another act of his pity is, His being soon affected with the Evils of
his People, Zach. 2. 8, 9. He that touches you, touches the Apple of mine
eye. His Soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, Judge. 10. 6. He pitied the
poor Leper in distress, Mark, 1. 41. and was moved with compassion because the
Jews were as sheep without a shepherd, Mark 6. 34.

Fourthly, His visiting them in their distresses: this is an act of love and
pity, Matthew. 25. 36. I have been sick, and ye visited me, Joh. 14. 18. Joh. 20.
19. Exodus 3. 8. A merciful nature will show it self in visiting such as are
afflicted; If others be sick they will go see them, and condole with them: they
will go rather to the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting, Eecles.
7. 2. They are companions of the distressed: and such is the tenderness of
Christ's heart, that he chooses the company of the miserable: If his People be
in the Water, and in the Fire, he will be with them, Isa. 43. 2. If they be
cast out of the Synagogues, persecuted, and deserted for his sake, he will find
them out, and keep them company, Joh. 9. 35. If they be cast on sick beds, he
will sit by them; if they cannot sleep through trouble, he will sit up with
them; when they are solitary and dejected, he will come and see them.

Fifthly, His comforting them in their Troubles: He is the Father of Mercies,
and God of all Comfort, who comfort us in all our Tribulations. Consolating
is an act of pity to those that are in trouble, 1 These. 3. 2. So Job's Friends,
when they had heard of all the Evil that was come upon him, they came every one
from his place to mourn with him, and to comfort him. Herein lies much of
Christ's pity to his People, he would not have them swallowed up of overmuch
grief, 2 Cor. 2. 7. When they are cast down, he charges his Messengers to speak
comfortably to them, Isa. 40. 2. When he brings his People into the Wilderness,
he will speak comfortably to them, Hos. 2. 14. Isa. 66. 13. chap. 57. 18. This
is part of Christ's Intercession in Heaven, that the Father would send the
Comforter to them, Joh. 14. 16. And part of his last counsel that he left with
them, was, That they would be of good cheer, Joh. 16. 33. Joh. 14. 1. He began
his Sermon with a Use of Comfort, Let not your hearts be troubled, etc. and
here he closes the same with a word of Comfort. And indeed, the whole of
Christ's Fare-wel Sermon, was Consolation to his People: He would not have them
be in Heaviness longer than need did require, 1 Pet. 1. 6. but commands them to
rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5. 16.

Sixthly, His counselling them in all cases, wherein they stand in need of his
Advice: Hence they have Line upon line, and Precept upon Precept, that they
might be wise to Salvation; and therefore he is called the wonderful
Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. Psalm. 16. 7. I bless the Lord, who has given me
counsel. Counsel (says Ainsworth) about my Sufferings, and the Glory that
shall follow, Job 36. 8, 9, 10. Adversity sometimes is God's University; and,
Schola Crucis (says Luther) is Schola Lucis: Mysterious Truths many times
spring out of Affliction-depths.

Seventhly, His giving to them, and forgiving of them. Pity has open hands,
and stretched out arms. Christ has left a large witness of his liberality, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Who gives richly all things to enjoy. Men give sparingly, but
Christ bountifully; they with straightened hearts, but he with open bowels; they
sometimes in Reversion, but he in possession. And he does not only give, but
forgive, Mic. 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquities, etc?
Exodus 34. 6. Psalm. 86. 5. Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, Numb. 14.
20. 1 John 2. 1. They run into debt, and he discharges them: They do, as it
were, write down their Iniquities, and he blots them out. Now, Are not these
admirable demonstrations of his Pity, and affectionate compassions of his
tender Bowels toward his People?

Secondly, He has infinite Pity for his Enemies; Mercy and good will for
Sinners, Luke 6. 35. This appears,

First, In his bearing with them, and forbearing of them, Romans 9. 22. Endured
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction: How does
the Lord suffer the vilest of men to live, and that very long? Lo, I have come
these three years looking for fruit, Luke 13. 17. These forty years have I been
grieved with this People, Psalm. 95. 10. An hundred and twenty years did he bear
with that high and uncurable wickedness of the first World, and that after it
was come to the full, Genesis 6. 3. Four hundred years did God bear with the sins
of the Amorites, even after he had given Abraham their Land, Genesis 15. 13, 16.
How long did the Lord bear with the Ten Tribes after their Apostasy from his
pure Service? even the space of two hundred and fifty years; in which time
there were Nineteen Kings, and all wicked men, walking in the steps of
Jeroboam. O! the slowness of God to Anger, even against his Enemies, that dare
him to his very Face, yea, that trample his Glory under foot, and that every
day, yea hour; and yet God spares them to old Age many times. Alas! how soon
are we angry at our Enemies, and if but slighted a little, ready with the
Disciples to call for Fire from Heaven, to consume those that receive us not,
Luke, 9. 54. But the Lord Jesus is not so, he waits that he may be gracious,
and his long-suffering leads to Salvation.

Secondly, His maintaining of them, and that sometimes at the highest rate,
giving them Honor and Riches, Prosperity and Favor. Pharaoh must have a
Kingdom, and yet an Enemy to his People: Nebuchadnezzar, an Empire; Ahasuerus
an hundred twenty and seven Provinces; Croesus vast riches, and Sardanapalus
delicate Pleasures. All the Creatures are pressed at their Service; the Air,
Earth, and Sea are ransack't to satiate their Lusts, Hos. 11. 2, 3, 4. He feeds
and clothes, helps and prospers his greatest Enemies, and all to heap up Coals
of Fire upon their heads.

Thirdly, His affectionate seeking their Salvation. This was his Errand into
the World, he came to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Lost Sinners, Matthew. 18. 11.
Bloody Sinners, Ezekiel. 16. 6. Blind Idolaters, Acts 17. 23. Cruel Persecutors,
Acts, 9. 4. Wicked Sorcerers, Acts, 8. 9. These the Lord Jesus seeks to save;
he sends his Gospel, to invite them to come unto him, Matthew. 11. 28. Yea,
beseeches them, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Makes large promises to them, if they will
return, Isa. 55. 7. Act. 3. 19. Yea, how does the Spirit strive with Sinners,
that they may be saved; Reasons with them, Why will you dye? Come, let us
reason together, Isa. 1. 18. Why will thou not suffer me to save thy Soul, and
to make thee happy to all Eternity? Poor Sinner! I have a real mind to do thee
good, an affectionate kindness for thee; I came from Heaven to save such as
thee. Behold my hands and my feet, see how my heart bleeds for thee: Behold,
how ready my purchase is; yonder is thy fair Estate, if thou will be mine. Lift
up thine eyes to those Mansions, Crowns and Thrones; all these shall then be
thine: See those beautiful Garments, consent to me, and thou shall wear thy
filthy Rags, or lie in those pinching straits no longer; thou shall lodge no
more in those stinking Kennels of thy Lusts: O poor Sinner! why will thou stand
in thy own light, and slight this offer, which thou may never have made thee
more? Lo, how my Bowels move toward thee, see how my Arms are opened to thee;
Be mine, and I will be thine; My Kingdom shall be thine, my Friends will be
thine, my Servants shall be thine: My Angels shall protect thee, yea, attend
thee; my Creatures shall maintain thee, my Wisdom shall guide thee, my
Faithfulness shall keep thee, my Power shall be laid out for thee, my Love
shall delight thee, my Honor shall adorn thee, and my Treasure shall enrich
thee: I will be a loving Husband to thee, I will provide all good things for
thee; I will rejoice over thee, I will forget the wrongs thou have done me; I
will requite thy Unkindness with Kindness, and draw thee with cords of Love:
with cords (says one) woven and spun out of my very Heart and Bowels. O
miserable Caitiff! embrace my Counsels, listen thine Ears to Heaven gate, and
hear the melodious Music that is there made by refined Spirits; why, will thou
rather lie with damned howling Devils, than sing Hallelujah's, and the Song of
the Lamb with saved Souls? Accept of me, and unchangeable Glory, unspeakable
Privileges, and Rivers of Pleasures shall be thine. Thus does the Lord Jesus
woo poor perishing Souls to be happy: and is not this Pity indeed?

Fourthly, His readiness to receive them when they come to him: No sooner do
they open the door but he comes in, Rev. 3. 20. If any man open the door, I
will come in unto him. No sooner does the Prodigal return, but his Father meets
him; yea, runs to meet him, as if he could never come soon enough at him, Luke
15, 20. Mercy is upon the wing, when it comes to receive returning Sinners. No
sooner did Ephraim repent, but God repented too; As soon as he said, Turn thou
me, God said, He shall be turned; when he cries, Thou art the Lord my God,
presently God Answers, Is he not a pleasant Child? So willing is Christ to
receive returning Sinners, as that he promises he will in no wise cast them
out, Joh. 6. 37. Yea, if they cannot come unto him, he will go and fetch them,
and if they cannot go, he will draw them, Joh. 6. 44.

Fifthly, His great Joy when he has obtained them; The Father of the Prodigal
keeps a Feast, and makes merry when his lost Child is found, Luke 15. 23, 24.
Psalm. 104. 31. The Lord shall rejoice in his Works, and this he does when he
has finished them, Heb. 4. 4. But there is nothing the Lord Jesus Christ takes
more pleasure in, than in the Redemption of Souls, Prove. 8. 31. He delighted in
the habitable parts of the Earth. This you will find further amplified in the
Parables of the lost sheep, and lost piece of Silver, Luke 15. from verse. 4. to
11.

CHAP. XII.
The Improvement of the Pity of Christ, by way of Terror, Encouragement, and
Advice.

ARE there such deep, and large Bowels of Pity in Jesus Christ, not only
toward his Friends, but his very Enemies? Then here is,

First, Terror to Impenitent Sinners. Ah, Souls! how fearfully great is your
Sin, being a plain defiance to the Mercy and pity of Christ: Every
Transgression of yours is a kicking the very Bowels of Mercy, and a stab at
the Heart of Divine Pity: O! how vile are your Iniquities, whilst without
Christ! They are no less than a despising of the Riches of the Mercy and
Goodness of God, which would have led you to Repentance, and a treasuring up of
Wrath against the day of Wrath, Romans 2. 4, 5. O Sinners! you run on score in
abusing of the highest Mercy that ever was, you provoke your best Friend
against you: Alas! Who can help you if Mercy it self becomes your Enemy? The
Bowels of Christ are your last Asylum, if this door be shut against you,
Farewell Souls; and can you hope that Mercy will plead for you, when rejected by
you, or will not God hear the Complaint of despised Mercy think you? Sinners,
the Compassion of Christ shall come forth at the last day, and say, I would
have saved that Soul, but it would not, how often would I have gathered it, but
it resisted? Mat. 23. 37. I offered to pay it is Debts, and to get him an
Acquittance in the Court of Heaven, but he refused it; I would have ransomed
him from Death to Life, and adopted him to an Inheritance in Glory, but he
would not; I would have stamped the divine Nature on him, and brought him into
the Likeness of the Lord of Glory, but he would not; I would have put down his
Name in the book of Life, and secured his Title to Heaven, but he would not; I
called, he would not answer; I persuaded, he refused; I beseeched, he despised,
I strived, he resisted; and now Justice, into thy hands do I deliver these
rebellious Souls, to be dealt with according to the Threatenings of the Gospel
and Severity of the Law, that my Wrongs may be avenged. O! what a terrible
Complaint will this be? Sinners, tremble then at the Thoughts of your abusing
divine M^rcy.

Use 2. Of Encouragement to dejected Souls. If there be such tender pity in the
Lord Jesus, O then take Courage hence to hope for Mercy; these Mercies of
Christ are infinite, boundless and bottomless; O what a stock of Mercy is in
him, for troubled Souls to trade upon, what unfathomed Deeps are there in
divine Compassions, enough to serve all thy Turns and Necessities; have thy
Sins been many? The free Gift is of many Offenses to Justification, Romans 5. 6.
Of the Offenses of many persons, be they never so many, or the many Offenses of
one person, there is virtue enough in this free Gift of the Blood of Christ for
the pardoning them all, if such return: he (says one) that had love enough to
give us Christ, has Bowels enough to give us pardon: believing Souls shall
never dye for Debt, if the Bowels of Christ has wherewithal to pay it; O! what
Shifts will tender Parents make to keep their indebted Children out of Prison?
They will beg and borrow of others, pinch themselves, and spare what they can,
rather than their Children shall be undone: and surely the Mercy of Christ must
needs make the most of his Blood and Obedience, of his Intercession and
Satisfaction, for the Pardon of his People. And therefore Daniel joins Mercies
and Forgiveness together, Dan. 9. 9. Is thy Unworthiness great, and deservest
thou nothing but Wrath from God, O bear up thy Sinking Spirit on the Arm of
Mercy, Mercy is in vain, and signifies nothing, if Justice only must take
place: have thou abused Mercy and sinned away the Favor of thy God? Thou have
lost his Gift, but he has not lost his giving, the Child spils his Water and
goes to the Well to fill his Pitcher again: there is more Mercy (O troubled
Soul) in the deep Wells of Salvation, for those that seek it. Obj. But I have
provoked God to withhold Mercy. Ans. Let me tell thee, O distressed Believer,
there are Forgivings as well as Givings in the Bowels of Christ, and I know not
which are greater: Are thy Wants many? Be of good cheer, Mercy has enough to
supply them all, and is as free to give as able, and take this for they
Encouragement: Mercy never gives where there are Deservings. Are thy Griefs,
Labors, Fears, Troubles, and Burdens great? Yet comfort thy self, Misery and
Mercy are a Kin, Mercy lives in the ^lymate of Misery, and never thrives better
than in Misery's Ground; to do good to miserable Creatures, is Meat and Drink
to Mercy, John 4. 32. I have Meat to eat that you know not of.

Use 3. Of Exhortation. First, to perishing Sinners; make use of the Mercy of
Christ whilst you have it; now is the acceptable time, the day of Grace, the
Season of Visitation; now the Sun shines not only in Sion but on Sodom; nay it
has stood still on your Gibeon for a Season, Josh. 10. 12. 13. O let not Mercy
go, and leave you in your blood, and let you lie in your Graves; let not the
Sun of the Gospel set on you, and leave you in inner Darkness, lest outer
Darkness shortly seize upon you: believe it, Mercy seems to be near a
Departure, it looks as it were, about to change Houses, to go from Gentiles to
Jews, from West to East, it seems near setting in England, in these Western
parts of the World. Who knows how soon it may arise in the East? O Sinners,
don't you lie a bed in your Security, and let Mercy give you the slip. O then
you that are yet in your blood, under Wrath, in Danger of Judgment; be advised
to strike in with Mercy, while it is to be had, Isa. 55. 6. while divine Bowels
yearn toward you, weep over you, and wait for you, O turn in, and close with
Mercy, whiles it is face is unveiled to you, it is Arms opened to you, and before
it has breathed it is last Breath to you; believe the Warnings and Treatnings
of Mercy, bow and stoop to the Convictions of Mercy, receive the Tenders
thereof, obey it is Counsel, and persevere it it is way; be persuaded Sinners
this day, it may be the last time, I may beseech you for Mercies sake, to turn
and live: and Oh! how doleful will it be to outlive the day of Mercy, and
possibility of obtaining Salvation, when the Angel of the Lord shall proclaim,
Time shall be no more, Time was, but now is past.

Secondly, to all Souls, both changed and unchanged, if the Lord Jesus be so
pityful to you, O then be not cruel to your own Souls, do not rob, cheat, and
cozen your own Souls, deprive them not of your own Mercies, Jonah. 2. 8. Don't
consent to those ways that will rob you of all the Possibilities and Hopes of
Salvation; O! the sweet Comforts and Pleasures that now you loose for a few
dirty Delights, Prove. 3. 17. Think on the Substance, the tried Gold, the rich
Attire that you deprive your Souls of by refusing to hearken to the Counsel of
Christ, Rev. 3. 18. Don't starve your Souls by feeding on Husks, while the
bread of Life lies before you, this is Cruelty to them indeed, Luke 15. 16. 17.
Do not wound, rend, and tare your Souls by cruel Lusts: he that sins hates his
own Soul, Prove. 15. 32. chap. 29. 24. Math. 16. 26. O the sad Bruises that Sin
gives, and the desperate Gashes it makes in the Sinners own Soul; Isa. 1. 6.
Prove. 8. 36. Every Sin of thine (O carnal wretch) is a deadly blow on thy own
Soul: all thy carnal Pleasures, thy merry jesting Words, thy Swearing, Lying,
Cheating, Oppressing, and Covetousness gives new Stabs to thy Heart; it would
be a barbarous sight to behold one unmercifully wounding another, much more to
see a person torturing his own Soul; do not sell thy immortal Soul for a Lie,
for that which is not, which will not profit in the day of Wrath, Romans 6. 21.
Jer. 16. 19. Thus Elijah told Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 20. That he sold himself to
work Wickedness, that is, he gave himself wholly to the Service of Sin, as a
Servant that binds himself over to another Business, Romans 6. 16.

Thirdly, To the Children of Mercy, whom the Lord Jesus has loved and washed
in his own Blood: you that are chosen, called, justified, sanctified and
adopted unto Glory, be exhorted.

First, be not hard-hearted to Christ, requite not his Pity with Cruelty,
grieve not his Spirit, sadden not his Heart with your sinful and unsuitable
Walkings before him: no Sins make greater Wounds on the Heart of Christ, than
the Sins of his own Children, Ephesians. 4. 30. O be not cruel to him who is so
tender of you, do not feed him with Wormwood and Gall who has feasted you with
Joy and Gladness, yea with his own Heart blood.

Secondly, Put on Bowels of Pity toward others, Col. 3. 12. They that are
cruel to others, shall find God cruel to them, Jam. 2. 13.

Thirdly, Adventure for God in the way of Duty, Psalm. 5. 7. Psalm. 23. 6. Psalm.
25. 10.

Fourthly, Then let the Consideration of Christ's Mercy comfort you under the
World's Cruelty, and your greatest Sufferings for Christ, Psalm. 57. 3. Psalm.
32. 7. 10. Psalm. 59. 17.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is opened the transcendent Humility of Christ.

ANother part of this total Sum of Christ's personal Treasure, consisting in
the Sweetness of his Disposition, is,

Fourthly, His Humility and Lowliness of mind, This is an excellent Virtue, and
that which the very Heathens have esteemed at a high Rate: it is a rare thing
(says Aretius) and rare things are excellent: Chrysostom calls it the chiefest
Virtue, the Salt that seasons all other Excellencies, and the Beginning of all
Good. If any (says Austin) should ask me what is the chiefest Virtue? I should
say, Humility; what is the next? Humility, what is the next? Humility. The
humble Soul (says Manton) is God's second Heaven, Isa. 57. 15* Of so great a
worth is all true Humility in any, especially in Persons of Height and
Grandeur: for these to come down, and humble themselves is exceeding high and
noble. O then what is Humility in the high and lofty one, in the Lord of Glory
and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; yet this is part of Christ's Treasure,
Mat. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meak and lowly: He who best knew himself,
who is Truth it self and cannot lie, has declared that he is lowly, and that
not in Carriage, and external Show only, but in Heart also: O what stupendous
wonder is this, that so glorious a person as the only begotten Son of God
should be lowly in Heart? I speak not here of his divine Nature as God, though
in that respect he is lowly too, Isa. 57. 15. Though he inhabiteth the highest
Heaven, yet he dwells also in the lowest Heart; yea it is wonderful
Condescension in God to behold the things that are in Heaven and Earth, Psalm.
113. 5, 6. But I treat here of Christ as Mediator, God-man, and so he is humble
and lowly in Heart, which will appear, if we consider these particulars,

First, His Humility whilst he was on Earth.

Secondly, His Humility now he is in Heaven.

His Humility on Earth consists, first, in his Willingness (being God over all
and Maker of all) to become man his Creature; this is strange, that the Son of
God should be willing to be accounted, yea to become the Son of man, Heb. 2.
16. He did not take the Nature of Angels upon him, but he took on him the Seed
of Abraham; so verse. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children were Partakers of Flesh
and Blood, he likewise also himself, took part of the same. ((...)) He did
freely receive their Communion-nature, or did freely communicate with them in
the same Nature: He took on him the Seed of Abraham, ((...)) he consented to
take their Nature, and therein to be their Avenger and Redeemer, as the word
imports: O Humility! That this glorious Jehovah should condescend to so near a
Union with man, a Creature so low and of so small Account, Isa. 2. 22. Psalm. 8.
4. A Creature so poor, destitute of all Good, and deprived of its Beauty,
Strength, Riches, and Glory, Psalm. 140. 12. Rev. 3. 17. A Creature so filthy
and vile, that it drinks up Iniquity as water, Job. 15. 16. And a Creature so
guilty before God, of Rebellion and high Treason, one that has forfeited all
his Mercies, and stands bound over to the just Sentence of Death and
Condemnation.

Secondly, in his Birth, He was born of mean and obscure Parents; Joseph his
Father was a Carpenter, he descended not from persons of the highest Dignity,
but of low Estate, as Mary her self acknowledges, Luke 1. 48. He was born in a
Stable, and laid in a Manger, Luke 2. 7. A contemptible place where bruit
Beasts use to lodge and feed; he was worshipped by the wise men of the East,
acknowledged to be King of the Jews, and proclaimed to be Savior of the World
by an Herauldry of Angels, and yet has no b^tter Cradle than a Manger. O
unparellel'd Condescension!

Thirdly, In his voluntary making himself of no Reputation, and taking on him
the Form of a Servant, Phil. 2. 7. He did, as it were, evacuate himself, and
spoil himself of all his Glory as the word signifies; not that he ceased to be
God, or to be equal with the Father, but he concealed all this Glory, and as it
were, deprived himself of all the Manifestations of it, by uniting to himself
the form of a Servant, that is, the humane nature in a servile State: he took
upon him the Form of a Servant, Non dimittendo quod erat, sed assumendo quod
non erat (says Zanchy) As God he was omnipotent, but this Omnipotency was hid
under the weakness of his humane Nature, his Omniscience veiled under a
limited Knowledge, his Glory clouded under Shame, his Riches concealed under
Poverty, his Majesty obscured under Contempt, and his Immortality clothed with
Mortality. Quest. What Servant did Christ take on him the Form of? Ans. Why: 1.
Of the Servant of God, Isa. 42. 1. Behold my Servant whom I uphold. Some take
it passively, on whom I will lean, and in whom I will trust, and commit my
whole Work unto: others actively, whom I will raise up and strengthen, and
carry through my Work. Again, 2. He became the Servant of man also, Matthew. 20.
28. The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.

Fourthly, In his being made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. When the Fullness of time
was come God sent forth his Son made under the Law, and therefore it is said, he
was a Minister of the Circumcision: O! What Humility was this? That the Son of
God should stoop to the Paedagoge of the Law, and enter on this low and legal
Obedience.

Fifthly, In his Obedience to his Parents, and Submission to their low and mean
Condition, both for Food and Apparel, Luke 2. 51. And he went down with them,
and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them.

Sixthly, In his Employment, and Calling he was pleased to use, till he entered
upon his Ministry: He continued with his Father, and (as one of the Fathers
has it) wrought at his Father's Trade, and therefore was called the Carpenter,
Mark, 6. 3. Joseph (says Mr. Lightfoot) taught Christ his own Trade: And Justin
Martyr (an ancient Writer) says, That Jesus Christ, before he entered upon his
Ministry, made Plows and Yokes.

Seventhly, In his Company: He did not choose the Society of Great and Noble,
but of mean and obscure Persons: He set apart Fishermen and Publicans to be his
Disciples, and accompanied Publicans and Sinners, which caused the Senate of
Rome to vote him down from being a God, because all his Disciples and followers
were inconsiderable and beggarly, Joh. 7. 48.

Eighthly, In his contentment with mean things: He had not a house where to lay
his head, Matthew. 8. 20. And it is said, he was willing to be poor, For being
rich he made himself poor, that we, through his poverty, might become rich, 2
Cor. 8, 9. He was content with any fare, Barley Bread and Fishes; a broyled
Fish, and an honeycomb, Luke 24. 42. He was not as proud Persons are, nice,
and choice of his D^et, but was pleased with any food, Joh. 21. 5. Children,
have you any meat?

Ninthly, In his submissive carriages toward God and men; when the Lord
bruised him, and made his Soul an Offering for Sin, we find not one hasty or
undue Expression: But, it is said, He was led as a Sheep dumb before her
Shearer, Isa. 53. 4, 6, 7. All that he said, was this humble complaint, O God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? He was rejected and despised of men, and yet
maintained an humble deportment, ver. 3. He was lowly to all Persons, not only
to the high and noble, but to the poor and despicable; not only to Friends but
to Enemies; not only abroad but at home; not only among the meek and humble,
but among the proud and peevish; not when it was admired, but when despised.

Tenthly, In his doing the meanest Services: He condescended to the lowest, and
most contemptible actions, if he might administer good, Matthew. 20. 28. He
girded himself with a Towel, as a Servant, and washed his Disciples feet, Joh.
13. 4, 5.

Lastly, In his patient bearing others Sins, and Sufferings. Proud men cannot
endure to bear another's Fault, but Christ was willing to be numbered amongst
Transgressors, to be reckoned an Offender, and to bear the Sins of many, even
of all that come unto him, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He humbled himself to the Death, Phil.
2. 8. To a shameful Death; the Death of the greatest Malefactors; and to the
cursed Death of the Cross.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus was not only humble whilst on Earth, when he passed
through his state of Humiliation; but even now, when he is in Heaven, and has
entered into his Glory, he detains this lowliness of heart. This will be
perspicuous, if you consider,

First, His Condescension to behold the things on Earth, Psalm. 113. 5, 6. One
would have thought it beneath the Dignity of Christ, now advanced above all
Glory, to take any notice of Sublunar Affairs: but if he delighted in the
habital Parts of the Earth, before he came down to redeem them, then much more
now he has the possession of the fruit of his Blood among them.

Secondly, His Converses with the meanest, and most despicable Persons on
Earth, by his Spirit, Isa. 57. 17. Joh. 14. 19. 21, 23. Be they never so low
and poor, yet, if holy, he takes up his abode with them, and keeps his Court
amongst them.

Thirdly, His bowing down of his Ear to hear the cries of his poor, and
despised People, Psalm. 10. 17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble,
Psalm. 31. 2. Bow down thine Ear to hear me.

Fourthly, His gentle and kind reception of their poor, pitiful Offerings and
Services, Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and
a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise.

Fifthly, His owning them in the face of the World, before Kings and Rulers, 1
Chro. 16. 21. 22. He is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. 11.

Sixthly, His appearing for them in Heaven, and confessing them before his
Father's Face in Glory, Matthew. 10. 32. Heb. 9. 24.

Seventhly, His looking after their meanest Concerns, and numbering the very
hairs of their head, Matthew. 10. 30.

Lastly, His slowness to Anger. But this properly pertains to another excellent
Disposition of the Lord Jesus Christ, namely his Meekness, where you may find
it fully handled.

Is Jesus Christ of such an humble, submissive Disposition? then,

First, Admire the greatness of Divine Love, in giving such a Savior, of so
humble and lowly a Spirit: Had not the Son of God been of a condescending
Nature, he would never have become man; and what then would have been the state
of Sinners? Had he not been of a lowly mind, he would never have consented to
have come into the World in the form of a Servant; and then enthralled Sinners
could never have been made free: Had he not been humble, he would never have
been willing to be made under the Law; and then the righteousness of the Law
had never been fulfilled: Had he not been lowly, he would never have borne our
Fault and Punishment; and then our Sins must have been charged upon our own
heads.

Secondly, This will serve to shame the proud hearts of men, especially those
that profess Christ: O, see the vileness of your Pride in the glass of Christ's
Humility!

Thirdly, Labor to be like to Christ, and to be enriched with this excellent
adorning Grace of Humility.

Fourthly, Here Is Encouragement to humbled Sinners, from the Lowliness of
Christ: You that see your Iniquities to be heavier than you can bear, and are
afraid because of the Terrors of the Almighty; yet be encouraged to come to
Christ, because he is humble, Isa. 57. 15. You that see no Worthiness in your
selves to come before him, but are fearful to approach into his Presence,
because of your Poverty and low Estate; be encouraged to draw nigh to him,
because he is humble, Isa. 41. 17. You that see an Infinite distance betwixt
God and you, and so dare not approach him; let his Humility encourage you, he
will not despise the Prayer of the destitute, Psalm. 102. 17. You that think
your Souls beneath the thoughts and care of such a God, and that he will take
no notice of you; O, consider his Humility for your Hope, Psalm. 113. 6. Cherish
expectations from Christ's Humility, for the mortification of your Pride;
because it is God's Ordinance and appointment unto this end, Matthew. 11. 29.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein is shown, the transcendent Meekness and Gentleness of Christ; To his
Enemies, and to his People.

ANother Branch of the sweetness of Christ's Disposition and Nature, is,

Fifthly, His Meekness: He is meek and lowly, Matthew. 11. 29. (...), that is,
facil and easy, (as Critics derive it) because they that have this Meekness,
are of a gentle, pleasing, and affable Spirit to others: The Latins express it
by Mansuetus, one used to the hand, alluding to those wild Beasts that are thus
tamed; They are gentle, and brought to the hand; they are sociable and
familiar, not strange and harsh: And such is the Lord Jesus; he is meek, of a
sweet and gentle Spirit and carriage toward all, when he opens himself as a
Savior to them, but especially he is so toward his People. Meekness
especially relates to Anger, as allaying, and moderating of it; So Arist.
defines it to be the sweetning of ones Spirit, removing its roughness,
harshness, and Passion, and rendering it gentle, pleasing, and affable, even to
them that provoke it. Now this is an excellent Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4. It Is spoken
of Moses, as one of his chiefest Excellencies, Numb. 12. 3. Now the man Moses
was very meek. And the Lord Jesus sets forth this to be the greatest Excellency
that he presents in himself for the Imitation of his People, Matthew. 11. 29.
When the Prophet Zachary would delineate the stately Majesty of Christ, in his
Kingly progress to his People, he displayes him in the Glory of his meekness,
Zach. 9. 9. Thy King comes to thee meek, etc. So Psalm. 45. 4. The Glory of
Christ in his triumphant March in the World, is held forth in his Meekness and
Truth; this is part of Christ's excellent Glory, as Mediator, 2 Cor. 10. 1. I
beseech you by the Meekness of Christ, Now the Lord Jesus is replenished with
Meekness.

First, To his Enemies, This he manifested whilst on Earth, to such as hated
him, abused him, and sought to take away his Life; it is of such the Prophet
speaks, Zach. 9. 9. compared with Math. 21. 5. Now this Meekness of Christ to
his Enemies appears.

First, In his Slowness to Anger, Psalm. 103. 8. The Lord is slow to Anger. He
was not easily provoked whilst on Earth, under all the Provocations and Abuses
cast upon him, Matthew. 12. 19. He shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any
man hear his Voice in the Streets. Passionate persons will strive to have their
Will when crossed, to defend their Names, to oppose their Adversaries, and to
revile them that reproach them; but Christ was not so, he strove not in a
contentious, quarrelling way, but being reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.
23. Under all his Sufferings, such as were able to make the meekest man on
Earth to cry out, and to stir up his Spirit against them, yet Christ was
silent, Isa. 53. 7. He was oppressed, he was afflicted, and yet opened not his
Mouth, he is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before his
Shearer is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth. You shall not find one froward
Word from Christ in all his Sufferings, by Jews or Gentiles; look over the
Jeers and Reproaches that were cast upon him in his Life, and at his Death; Is
not this the Carpenter's Son, Matthew. 13. 55. Is not this the Carpenter, the Son
of Mary, Mark 6. 3. They called him a Wine bibber, a Friend of Publicanes and
Sinners, and yet we find him as a Sheep, dumb before the Shearers: The
Pharisees charged him to be on^ that had Correspondence with Devils, Matthew. 9.
34. but he was silent: another time they call him a blasphemer, Matthew. 9. 3.
but see how mildly Christ answers them, verse. 4. Why think ye Evil in your
Hearts? Another time we find him slighted by the Samaritanes; he was coming to
a Village in Samaria, and sent Messengers to provide for him, but they refused
to entertain him, and take him in, because his Face was as though he would go
to Jerusalem, Luke 9. 51. etc. because he seemed to be of another way of
Religion: they could not endure him, because he was for instituted Worship, and
seemed to profess a stricter way than the Samaritanes: He looked like a Puritan
(says Mr. Buroughs) and therefore they shut him out of their Houses: now this
was no small abuse, an ordinary Spirit would not bear to have a door shut
against him; and hereupon, some of the Disciples, James and John, pleaded for
Revenge, and would have had Fire from Heaven to destroy them, ver. 54. Yet see
the Meekness of Christ's Spirit under this Affront, ver. 55. He turned and
rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, for the
Son of man is not come to destroy men's Lives, but to save them.

Secondly, In his mild Answers to them; how mildly did he answer the Jews, who
said, he was a Samaritan, and had a Devil, John 8. 48. 49. All his Answer was,
I have not a Devil, but I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me; see in that
Chapter, how contradictorily and crossly they behaved themselves to him, yet
with what wonderful Gentleness he answers them: when Judas came to betray him,
Matt: 26. 49. with what Calmness does he treat him, verse 50, Friend wherefore
art thou come? Who could have given so gentle words to so vile a Traitor, but
the Mirror of Meekness? Luke has it thus, Judas betrayest thou the Son of man
with a kiss? Luke. 22. 48. what thou Judas my Disciple, who have been so long
with me, known my Kindness, and eat and drunk at my table? what thou betray the
Son of man, and combine to take away thy Master's life? can thou find in thy
heart to deal so treacherously with thy Lord? How did he reprove Peter for
smiting the High-priest's Servant that came to take him, Matthew. 26. 51. to 55.
How scornfully did they treat him? Matthew. 26. 61. This Fellow says I am able
to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days; but he held his
Peace, v. 63. The Jews mocked him, blind-folded, and smote him, Luke 26. 63.
Herod with his men of War set him at naught, chap. 23. 11. The Rulers derided
him, saying, others he saved, let him save himself if he be the Christ the
chosen of God, ver. 35. But lo how gently this patient Lamb revenges these high
Indignities, ver. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Thirdly, In the Offices of Love, he shows them; he went about doing Good to
his very Enemies, heaping Coals of Fire on their Heads, healing their sick,
feeding their hungry, and preaching the Gospel to their poor, Matthew. 14. 14.
chap. 11. 5. His pitying them shows his Meekness, Luke 19. 41. He beheld the
City, and wept over it: now this Meekness of Christ as it is excellent in it
self, so it is eminent in degree; it is large, and abundant Meekness; weigh but
these following Considerations, and you will say the same.

First, The Greatness of those Provocations he has received from them; Sinners
under the Gospel make light of Christ, Matthew. 22. 5. They despise him, Acts 13.
4. They reject him, Joh. 12. 48. They rebel against him, Isa. 1. 20. They
crucify him. Joh. 19. 15. They blaspheme his Name, they belie his Truth, abuse
his Love, undervalue his Blood, trampling it under Foot, deny his Right,
defraud, and injure his Interest, rob him of his Glory, hate his People, and
seek to hinder his Kingdom, and yet he mildly puts up these high Indignities;
Oppression will ^ake a wise man mad, but cannot render Christ ungentle.

Secondly, The Continuance of these Provocations; All the day long have I
stretched out my hand to a gainsaying people, Isa. 65. 2. every day, Isa. 52.
5. Three years, Luke 13. 7. Forty years, Heb. 3. 9. Continually, Genesis 6. 5. And
it is no small Provocation to have a Trial lie on a persons back, yet see the
Lothness of Christ to destroy his very Enemies; he waits that he may be
gracious, and beseeches them to turn and live, Joh. 5. 40.

Thirdly, The greatness of his Person, he is the Majesty on high, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. He has Right to Service and Worship
from all his Creatures, To him every Knee must bow, and Tongue confess, Phil.
2. 9. and yet that he should bear so meekly, the Abuses, Scorns, and Contempts
of the vilest men, is wonderful: great men are soon incensed when their Honor
and Interest are invaded; but the Lord Jesus is great, and yet meek, a King,
and yet lowly, Psalm. 45. 3, 4. Zach. 9. 9.

Fourthly, The Despicableness of the Persons that abuse him; they are his
Creatures, made, and mainrain'd by him, inferior Worms whom he can crush every
Moment, and strike dead with his Look, Isaiah 1. 2. chap. 45. 9.

Fifthly, The great Kindness he has for them, he comes in their Errand to save
their Souls, he sheds his blood, that they might live, underwent the Law, and
bore his Fathers Wrath, that they might enjoy his Favor, and be saved to the
uttermost if they believe: and is not this a wonderful Discovery of his
Meekness?

Secondly, His Meekness to his People is exceeding great, as I shall illustrate
in a few particulars.

First, In his bearing with them, he did not only bear their Sins for them when
on the Tree, but many Provocations and Abuses from them now in Heaven; so he
bore with the Israelites, Isa. 3. 8. Though their Tongue and their Doings was
against the Lord to provoke the Eyes of his Glory; this was not the Carriage of
Heathens, but of his own People; their Provocations was not a single Act from
one part of them, but the whole Body combine against him in Word and Deed:
these were not supposed Injuries, but real; not intermitted, but continued; not
seldom but frequent. How often did they provoke him in the Wilderness, and
grieved him in the Desert, they tempted him, limited him, and murmured against
him for Water, for Bread and for Flesh: they rebelled against him, against his
Institutions, in Moses and Aaron, against his Command about gathering Manna,
sanctifying the Sabbath, and going against their Enemies. They continually
provoked him to Anger, even to his very Face, Isaiah 65. 3. vexed and grieved
his holy Spirit, and yet he bears it in the Wilderness for forty years, in the
Land of Canaan, eight hundred and sixty years before the Captivity; after this,
five hundred, ninety, and six years before he cast them off. O the admirable
length of the Patience and Meekness of Christ toward that People, in bearing
with them, considering the Kind and Length of their Provocations: so under the
Gospel, he has a people redeemed by his Blood, such as avouch him for their
Lord, and tread in his Courts; now to these also he exercises much
Long-suffering and Patience if you weigh,

First, the Multitude of their Sins, they are more than can be numbered, more
than the hairs of their head, Psalm. 40. 12. Sins of Thoughts, Words, and Deeds;
Sins against Law and Gospel, the first and second Table; Sins in Duty and out
of Duty; Sins every day, every moment, Genesis 6. 5. Sins to the last hour of
their Lives, till their Tabernacle be pulled down, and the body of Death
destroyed; and this is not only the Condition of one, or of a few Souls, but of
all the Elect, every man that lives, 1 Kings 8. 46. There is none that sins
not.

Secondly, The Aggravation of their Sins taken,

First, From the persons sinning, The redeemed of God, such as have been bought
with a great price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18. The pardon of whose former Sins
cost so dear, the Sons and Daughters of God, Deuteronomy. 32. 19. Souls loved and
chosen out of all the World, to be his; yea they only elected, and all others
left, Amos 3. 2. Adopted to a glorious state, to be Kings and Priests unto God,
to be Heirs and Coheirs with Christ, to be a name and a Glory to him; and yet
for these to be always grieving, always provoking, always reproaching of him,
is hard indeed, but not too hard for Christ to bear.

Secondly, From the person against whom they sin, they sin against their Father
who loved them with an everlasting Love, drew them with the Cords of Love, and
led them in the paths of Love, who has given his Son for them, and to them,
and fixed his unchangeable Love upon them, imparted the royal Privileges of
Sons to them, and yet to Sin against him who is the Father of Christ, and their
Father, whose Glory was dearer to him than his own Blood, is an aggravated Sin
indeed.

They sin against God the Son, who gave himself for them, and bought them with
a great price.

They sin against the holy Ghost, who visited them in their low Estate, and
brought them the good News of Salvation; who broke open their Prisondoors, and
let them forth into a glorious State of Liberty; who quickened, enlightened,
comforted, and helped them in all their Soul-straits; now to sin against this
God the Father, Son, and Spirit, cannot but exceedingly provoke the Soul of
Christ.

Thirdly, the State in which they sin; O! how inconsistent is this with such an
high and glorious Condition, Romans 6. 14.. Sin shall have no more Dominion over
you, because you are not under the Law, but under Grace. The Sins of such are
the works of Darkness in the day time, Acts of Enmity in a state of
Reconciliation, and grievous Bondage in times of Liberty.

Fourthly, The dangerous Effects of their Sinning; It Is a corrupt Tree that
brings forth sad Fruit, even the Grapes of Sodom, and the Wine of Gomorrah;
their Sins rob God of his Glory, and bring a greater Dishonor to him than all
the Sins of the World besides, Romans 2. 23. They grieve the Spirit of Christ
whereby they are sealed up to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. They depress
and load, yea break the Heart of God, Amos 2. 13. They endeavor to frustrate
divine grace, and render the Death of Christ in vain, Gal. 5. 4. They do (as it
were) reduce the Lord to a great strait, what to do to save their Souls, H^s.
6. 4. they Shipwreck all their Duties, and put a Vanity upon all their
Profession, Labors, and Sufferings; such run in vain, Gal. 2. 2. They sadden
the Hearts, and weaken the hands of the Godly, and become stumbling blocks in
their way, Psalm. 119. 158. And they do a great deal of mischief to the wicked
in prejudicing them against the Lord Jesus, and his holy ways, in hindering
their Reception of the Gospel, and depriving them of the Fruits and Labors of
Christ toward their Conversion, in justifying them in their ways, encouraging
them in their Sins, and in causing them to blaspheme the holy Name of God.

Fifthly, The blessed Advantages they have enjoyed against their Sins; they
have many Obligations against it, and many Experiences of the Evil of it, and
yet still continue in it: O, this does make the burden of the Sins of the Godly
exceeding heavy to Christ, and yet that he should bear them so patiently, and
not consume them: That, though provoked daily by the Brambles, and scratching
Abominations of his People, yet his Fury should not be kindled into a terrible
Flame to burn them up, does manifestly demonstrate his meekness to be exceeding
great.

Secondly, Christ's forbearing of his People, is another Evidence of his
Slowness to Anger: He is not easily provoked, Neh. 9. 17. How long does he
forbear before he strikes? he first threatens, and then waits, calls and
exhorts, shakes the rod, and then strikes gently, Isa. 30. 18. Therefore will
the Lord wait that he may be gracious.

Thirdly, His readiness to be reconciled to them, when angry, Psalm. 86. 5.
Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive. O, consider his persuading them to
Repentance; how does he labor to convince them of their Sin, and invite them
to return; he entreats, reasons, and beseeches them to be reconciled, 2 Cor.
5. 19, 20. Lo, how affectionately does he receive them when they return! how
willingly does he listen his Ear to their confession of Sin, and bemoaning of
their condition? Jer. 31. 18.

Fourthly, The moderation of his Anger, when raised, shows his meekness, Isa.
27. 7, 8. In measure when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it. He
stays his rough wind in the day of his East Wind, Job. 11. 6.

Lastly, His actual forgiving all their Iniquities, Psalm. 103. 3. Who forgiveth
all thine Iniquities, Luke 7. 47. Isa. 44. 22.

Use. Now, if the Lord Jesus Christ be so full of meekness to his very Enemies,
so rich in gentleness, sweetness of Nature, and Patience to his People, then
learn this needful Lesson of him; to be of a meek and patient Spirit. Behold,
how quietly he took up his Cross, and bore reproaches and Indignities from the
worst of men: yea, how still he was under the infinite weight of his Father's
wrath. Learn meekness from his Gentleness, as the Elephant does from the Lamb;
when the Elephant is in his greatest Fury, set but a Lamb before him, and his
wrath will presently be allayed: Learn of Christ to bear Injuries, to restrain
your Anger, not to be angry, but when Duty, and the Cause of God calls you to
it: It Is only Sin should be the Object of a Christian's Anger. Moses was calm
at his own Reproaches, but could not be still when God was dishonored. Learn
from Christ to moderate the measure of your Anger; he corrects in measure: Let
not your Anger exceed the desert of the Provocation; Learn from him to time
your Anger. As a word fitly spoken, so Anger seasonably exerted is beautiful:
and learn from him to remove it when the Cause is gone. Anger should be as
Physic, laid aside when there is no need of it: True meekness may easily be
discerned by its ends and grounds, it must not proceed from a willingness to be
avenged on others, but to amend and reform them.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein is demonstrated the infinite Bounty of Christ to all his Creatures,
with the manner of his giving.

THE next thing which discovers the sweetness of Christ's Disposition, and
greatness of his Personal Treasure, is,

Sixthly, His Liberality: He is of a bountiful Disposition; and this, you know,
is of an endearing Nature, Romans 5. 7. Scarcely for a righteous man will one
die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye. Psalm. 13. 6.
I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with me. Now this
Liberality of Christ appears,

First, To all his Creatures, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 136. 25. Psalm. 145. 15. Whose
heart is so large, whose hand so wide as Christ's? ver. 16. He upholdeth all
things by the word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. And by him all things consist, Col.
1. 17. There is never a moment but he is laying out upon his Creatures, and
that must needs be a large Treasure that maintains the whole World.

Secondly, To his Enemies: He does good to those that hate him: He gives large
portions of this World's goods to Esau's: And uncharitable Dives's do many
times fare deliciously, and are clothed gorgeously, by his Bounty, The wicked
prosper, Jer. 5. 28. Nay, he does not only give them the fat things of this
Life, but the great things of his Kingdom. O, the Privileges and Favors that
Hypocrites enjoy as well as Saints! He sends his Gospel to every Creature, and
causes the very Dews of Sion to fall upon his Adversaris.

Thirdly, Especially to his Children; for to these he gives,

First, Good things: Whatever they have of him shall be good, Jer. 32. 40. I
will not turn away from them to do them good. Their very Afflictions are for
good: their Wormwood and Gall is good: Rebukes of God upon them, stripping and
humbling Providence; nay, their very Corruptions, by this Bounty, prove to
their advantage.

Secondly, All good things. He gives Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11. Psalm. 34. 10. All the
good God sees fit for them, and they are capable to receive, shall be
distributed to them.

Thirdly, Great things: Not Common, but choice Mercies, passing Knowledge,
Mysteries, not only to the World, but to themselves: Things unsearchable, and
things unutterable; Things that cannot be known as they are, nor valued as they
deserve. What one Nation (says David to God) is like thy People, whom God went
to redeem for a People to himself, to make him a Name, and to do for them great
things and terrible, 2 Samuel 7. 23. Redemption-work brings forth great and
terrible things, for redeemed Souls. O, the great things that God does, and
Christ gives to every ransomed Soul, Job, 37. 5. Things which we cannot
comprehend, as you will see, if you give but a general Survey on the Inventory
of Christ's Gifts. I shall instance in some of the most remarkable.

First, That unvaluable Gift of Light. He is the Light of the World, Joh. 8.
12. How deformed is Darkness, how beautiful is Light, Eccles. 11. 7. He is a
Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory, etc. Luke 2. 32. He is the bright
Morning Star: the Sun of Righteousness from whom the light of Life and all true
Wisdom comes; now this is a great and excellent thing, Eccles. 2. 13. Wisdom
excels Folly, as far as Light excels Darkness, and this you know is very
far: Wisdom is preferred before Rubies, and the most excellent things, Prove. 8.
from ver. 10. to 20. That must needs be great which all the World cannot
purchase, but this is Wisdom: now all true Wisdom comes by Jesus Christ, he is
the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So, who has brought to light the (...), the
hidden things of God, and that could by no ways be known but by Revelation: No
man has known the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal
him, Matthew. 11. 27. He gives Knowledge and Wisdom to whom he pleases, that
special Wisdom which none of the Princes of this World can attain unto, 1 Cor.
2. 7. 8.

Secondly, Life; He has brought Life to Light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. and
is not this a great gift? All that a man has will he give for his Life, Job.
2. 4. O! then what is Life from the dead to his people, Ephesians. 2. 1. He is our
Life, Col. 3. 3. I am come that they may have Life, and have it more
abundantly, Joh. 10. 10.

Thirdly, His Love; all the World and Houses full of Treasures cannot be
compared to Love, Cant. 8. 7. Should Christ give all the World and withhold his
Heart, it were but a mean gift: Favors are valuable by the love whence they
come, Isa. 63. 9. In his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, Psalm. 63. 3.
Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All Believers are set as a Seal upon his Heart, Cant. 8. 6. He
has loved them with an everlasting Love; they have his Heart, and none else.

Fourthly, Himself; There being nothing greater than himself, to demonstrate
the Largeness of his Heart to his people; he gave himself, Ephesians. 5. 25. Who
loved the Church, and gave himself for it; that is, sold himself to purchase
them, gave himself to divine Justice to satisfy the Law, and to taste of Death
for them, all that he had as Mediator he parted with for them: and has given
himself to them also, Heb. 8. 10. And I will be to them a God, and they shall
be to me a People. They have his person, Hos. 3. 3. Thou shall not be for
another, so will I also be for thee. All his Beauties and personal Perfections,
as described, Cant. 5. ver. 9. to the end: all Believers have a Marriage right
unto him by way of Gift; again, he has given them his Purchase, all that he
has bought with his Blood, Math. 26. 28. This is my Blood of the New
Testament, shed for you.

Fifthly, His Laws and Scepter to guide them through the World, and to steer
out their Course of Duty and Safety, and this is a great thing, Hos. 8. 12. I
have written to him the great things of my Law (Rabab) the excellent or
honorable things of my Law: for this word notes Quality as well as Quantity;
and if the things of God's Law are so great, what are the Truths of the Gospel,
called so great Salvation? Deuteronomy. 4. 8. And what Nation is so great that has
Statutes and Judgments so righteous? Psalm. 147. 19.

Sixthly, His Spirit; This he gives to all his People, Romans 8. 9. If any man
has not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, 1 Cor. 12. 13, We are all by
one Spirit baptized into one body: This is promised by the Lord Jesus, Joh. 16.
7.

Seaventhly, His Promises; For in him are all the Promises of God, yea, and
Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. That is, they are sure and certain in Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Whereby are given unto us, exceeding great and precious Promises, Gal. 3. 22.

Lastly, His Kingdom; Col. 1. 13. And has translated us into the Kingdom of
his dear Son. A blessed Change indeed, from Sin to Grace, from Darkness to
Light, from the Kingdom of Satan, to the Kingdom of Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 11. So an
Entrance shall be administered to you abundantly into the Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. All Believers are invested with the glorious
Privileges of this Kingdom, they all become Kings and Priests unto God, Rev.
1. 6. Nay a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19. 6. They are entitled to all the royal
Endowments, Investments, and Favors that belong to the Children of a King;
they all wear his royal Robes of Glory, they have noble Entertainment, most
delicious Food, the highest Honors and Thrones to sit on; Christ gives them
the Inheritance, purchased Possessions and Mansions of Glory.

Fourthly, The Liberality of Christ appears in the manner of his giving, now
this may come under a six-fold Consideration.

First, He gives readily and propensly: many give, but by Constraint, as the
unjust Judge, Luke 18. or from fear of Shame or Reproach; men usually give with
Reluctance, but Christ readily, as Paul speaks of the Church of Macedonia, 2
Cor. 8. 3. that they were prone to Charity beyond their power; and of Titus,
ver. 17. that being more forward of his own accord he went unto them; so it may
be more truly said of Christ, that he wants no external Motives or Persuasions
to exert his Bounty. For,

First, Christ's Gifts are his peoples due, they have Right to all his
Fullness; Christ is the Believers and all that is his, John 3. 16. Cant. 6. 3.
I am my beloved's and my beloved is mine, 1 Cor. 3. 21. For all things are
yours, they are purchased for them, and given to them.

Secondly, Christ's Office and public Designation to this Work shows it, he is
set apart for this end, that he might be the Author of eternal Life, the Giver
of all that good that his people need, Joh. 17. 2. As thou have given him Power
over all Flesh, that he should give eternal Life, etc. Joh. 6. 27. Him has God
the Father sealed; that is, deputed to this Office and Trust, to be the Lord
keeper of his House, and Dispenser of his Fathers Goods. All that Christ has
as Mediator, is to be distributed to his: he has nothing but must be employed
for the Salvation of the Elect, for such is the Agreement betwixt the Father
and him, Joh. 17. 10. All mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am
glorified in them.

Thirdly, He has never the less for giving, and therefore never weary of
giving; what is that makes men soon tired with Acts of Bounty, why because the
more they give the less they have, and so fail at last in their Ability; but
it is not so with Christ, he is Fullness still, notwithstanding all the vast
Distributions that go out of his Treasury every day, to fill up Heaven and
Earth, Men and Angels. (I remember a notable saying of a worthy Divine, Should
all the World (says he) set themselves to drink free Grace, Mercy, and Pardon,
dry, drawing Water continually from the Wells of Salvation, nay if they should
set themselves to draw from one single Promise, an Angel standing by and
crying, drink O my Friends, drink abundantly, take so much Grace and Pardon as
shall be abundantly sufficient for the world of Sins which is in every one of
you, they would not be able to sink the Grace of the Promise, one Hairs
breath.) When Beggars come to our doors, they many times promise us, upon the
Reception of an Alms, they will trouble us no more, but this would be an
improper Expression to Christ, whose Heart is so propense to give, and whose
Treasures are inexhaustible, Col. 2. 9. For in him dwells all the Fullness of
the Godhead bodily, Col. 1. 19.

Forthly, He gets by giving; Advantage is a sure Agreement, all men seek their
own, every man his gain from his Quarter: now if giving appears to be Christ's
Advantage, you may be sure he will be willing to give; men lavish out their
Gold for Idolatry, carnal persons pour out their whole Wealth upon their Lusts,
the Merchant adventures all he has for Gain, and can you think that Christ
only will be close handed? Psalm. 68. 18. Here it is said, he receives Gifts,
Ephesians. 4. 8. It Is said, he gave gifts: what Christ received was not for himself,
but to give unto Sinners, and that in order to his Dwelling amongst them;
Christ's Gifts are to further his Service, 1 Pet. 4. 10. and his Peoples
Profit, 1 Cor. 12. 7.

Fifthly, He is never more pleased, than when he gives; This appears in his
earnest inviting Souls to ask of him, Joh. 16. 24. Hitherto you have asked
nothing in my Name, ask that your Joy may be full. Had not the Lord Jesus a
great Delight to dispense freely to his People, he would not have used such
Arguments to persuade them to beg; it is said of Titus Vespasian, that he never
denied any thing to those that asked him, but would call upon them, to ask
something of him.

Lastly, This does wonderfully greaten his Glory, Joh. 14. 13. Whatever ye ask
in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. This
verse shows the Reason why the Saints shall do greater works than those that
Christ did, because they shall have the Power of Christ to help them; he will
do for them what they ask, and give them what they seek; and the reason is,
because hereby the divine Glory is more manifested, the Fathers Glory in the
Sons Glory; for the Father and he are one, and the Fathers Glory is his Glory,
the more he gives, the more the Father is glorified, and the more the Father is
glorified, the more is the Son also.

Secondly, He gives feeely without any respect to Merit or Compensation, Rev.
21. 6. To him that is a thirst, will I give to drink of the Water of Life
freely. ((...)) That is, without any antecedent Cause, Worth or Merit, Romans 3.
24. Being justified freely by his Grace. As Justification comes freely without
any Worth or Righteousness in man, so do all the gifts of God, Romans 8. 32. How
can he but with him freely give us all things? 1 Cor. 2. 12. Christ does not
sell but give his Favors freely, according to the pleasure of his own Will,
Isa. 55. 1. This is a Truth hard to be received, because it is beyond the reason
of men, how Grace should move without any Motives and Attractives besides it
self, but yet this bounty of Christ has no respect of Persons, 2 Chronicles. 19. 7.

Thirdly, He gives presently Mercies in hand, he does not say as the unjust and
covetous man, go, and come again to morrow, and I will give it thee, when it is
by him; he does not delay to bestow Mercies on his poor Creatures, one Jot
beyond the due time, Psalm. 145. 15. Gal. 6. 9. Christ is never at a loss to
give, he only stays for a fit time; he had many things to say to his Disciples,
but he wanted a convenient opportunity; they were not able to bear them, Joh.
16. 12.

Fourthly, He gives heartily; Jer. 32. 41. I will rejoice over them to do them
good, with my whole Heart, and with my whole Soul. He does not pretend
Kindness, and yet begrudge it in his Heart, all his Promises are the Intents of
his Heart, Jer. 30. 24. Psalm. 51. 18. Do Good in thy good Pleasure to Sion.

Fifthly, He gives liberally, Jam. 1. 5. If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask it
of God who gives liberally. ((...)) Simply, purely, with a candid Mind and
full Intent to do good: it is rendered bountifully, as Liberality comes from a
simple and pure Heart, he gives many times more than we ask, as the sick man of
the Palsy came for Health, and Christ gave him Pardon to boot; Solomon asked
Wisdom, and God gave him more than he begged, Riches and Honor too, 1 Kin. 3.
12. 13. He gives richly to his People of all good things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.
17. Suitable to his Treasures, Phil. 4. 10. According to his Riches in Glory by
Christ, above what we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. He gives a Kingdom, Luke
12. 22. and therefore bids us open our Mouths wide, and he will fill them,
Psalm. 81. 10.

Lastly, He gives constantly every day and every moment, he is never weary of
well-doing, Isa. 40. 28. The Lord faints not, neither is weary; men are soon
tired with Acts of Bounty, to which the Apostle alludes, Gal. 6. 9. But the
Lord Jesus is a Fountain that never cease running, he is always doing, there
is never a moment but he is opening his Treasures and filling the hungry Soul,
Psalm. 73. 26. God is my Portion for ever. The Saints are always living on God,
and are ever receiving from him, His Mercies are new every Morning, Lam. 3. 23.
Yea though through Carelessness they have lost their Mercies, as the Spouse lost
the presence of Christ, Cant. 5. and the Tastes of his Love, verse. 2. 6. And
though by Sin they have forfeited their Mercies, and have given the Lord cause
to withhold them, yet he is never weary of doing them good, but always
communicating something or other to them.

Use 1. Is Christ so bountiful? Then this may serve to convince all Christless
Souls under the Gospel of the greatness of their Sin in sleighting and
contemning Christ, because it is utterly opposite to the Streams of his Bounty
toward them; this, Sinner, will gall thy Conscience another day, when Christ
shall say, what Iniquity have thou found in me, that thy Heart is set against
me? have not I born thee all thy days, maintained thee ever since thou wast
born, and fed thee with Food convenient? and yet thou will have none of me, but
liftest up thy heel against me, and crucifyest me with thy Sins every day; so
did the Lord plead with Israel, Hos. 11. 23. 4.

Use 2. This will serve to humble the people of Christ.

First, For their great Unthankfulness to Christ; O how great are the
Obligations of Believers to Christ, both for upper and nether Springs, thy
daily Bread comes out of his Cupboard, all thy Comforts and Preservations are
received from him, but especially thy Souls Mercies are the Products of his
Bounty, thy Enlightnings, Awakenings, Drawings and Begettings to God, thy
Pardon, Peace, and hope of glory are all from him, and yet who renders to
Christ for all the Benefits done to him, who returns to give Glory to God; this
is a grievous Sin, 2 Timothy 3. 2.

Secondly, For their hard Thoughts of Christ; has the Lord Jesus laid out so
much upon thee, and has yet such Riches in Store for thee, and art thou always
distructing of him, and on every occasion jealous and suspicious of his bounty?
Ps. 77. 7, 8, 9. Ps. 78. 22. 32.

Thirdly, For their little Improvement of Christ's bounty; see this in Joash, 2
Kin. 13. from ver. 17. to 20.

Fourthly, For looking to Creatures for their Supplies more than to Christ,
Jer. 2. 13. This is a heathenish Sin, Romans 1. 25. They loved and served the
Creature more than the Creator Isa. 55. 2.

CHAP. XVI.
Wherein the Faithfulness of Christ is opened, in accomplishing all his
Prophesies, fulfilling his Promises to all the Trust committed to him, and in
all the Relations he stands to his People.

THE Sweetness and Excellency of Christ's Disposition consists also.

Lastly, In his Justice and Fidelity; he is righteous, true, and faithful in
all he does and undertakes, and this argues an excellent Spirit; this was part
of that Glory, the Spirit of God puts on Moses, Numb. 12. 7. But my Servant
Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my House, with him will I speak Mouth
to Mouth: even apparently, God puts a singular Value on Moses, has a peculiar
kindness for him, and affords him more intimacy with himself than others have,
because of his Faithfulness: So Daniel, It was his great Honor that his very
Enemies could not spot him, or find any Error in him, on the account of his
Unfaithfulness, Dan. 6. 4. 'Twas this brought Judah into so high an Estimation
with God, as it is said, Hos. 11. 12. Judah ruled with God, and was faithful
with the Saints. Nay a faithful person is a Jewel so rare, that he can scarcely
be found, Prove. 20. 6. Every man will proclaim his own Goodness, but a faithful
man, who can find? That is, as some render it, It Is a common thing for men to
talk of their Goodness, Bounty and Mercy, but it is a rare thing for them to be
so indeed, to be so good as they seem to be. Others comment on it thus, It Is an
easy thing for men to promise fair, and to speak of great things they will do,
but few are found that perform their word, and are what they promise to be.
Take it in either Sense, a faithful man is a rare thing, who can find it, as
seldom seen almost, as a black Swan, or a rich Jewel. Now the Lord Jesus is
thus excellent, he is true, though every man be a Liar, called the faithful
Witness, Rev. 1. 5. His Name as well as Nature is faithful, Rev. 19. 11. The
Lord Jesus gives a faithful Testimony of the love that God bears to Sinners, he
lay in the Fathers bosom, and has given a true Revelation of him, Rev. 1. 5.
Isa. 11. 5. Faithfulness is the Girdle of his Reins. The Prophet alludes to
those Ornaments, Kings did use to wear; they wore a Girdle as an Ensign of
Honor and Power, Job 12. 18. He loses the bonds of Kings, that is, their
Girdle, by which he means their Power and Authority, which he removes: now
instead of this Ensign of Honor which Kings did wear, Christ shall be clothed
with Faithfulness and Righteousness, this shall be his Ornament and Glory, Heb.
2. 17. He is the faithful high priest.

First, He is faithful and just to all men, even to his very Enemies, he will
not wrong them in the least; he renders to every one his due, Romans 2. 6. The
very Hypocrites shall have their Reward, Matthew. 6. 2. The Lord Jesus will not
give cause to any to say at the last day, that he is their Debtor, or does them
Wrong* Matthew. 20. 13. The wicked shall have their Portion in this Life, all
that is coming to them, as much as they can in Justice demand. If Ahab repent
he shall have Reprieve from his Punishment; eternal Repentance shall obtain
eternal Deliverance. If Esau pray for the Blessings of this life with Tears,
God will give them to him, he cannot be a Debtor to any; his very Enemies shall
have their due, as much as their outward Duties or servile Labors amount to;
for the holy one of Israel cannot lie, what Promise soever God makes to any
outward Action or Virtue, it shall certainly be fulfilled, he cannot defraud
any; the Pharisees shall have their Honor, Judas his bag; Demas the World, and
Dives his Pleasures: he that commands his People to render every one their due,
cannot possibly wrong any.

Secondly, He is faithful to his People, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Let them that suffer
according to the Will of God commit the keeping of their Souls to him in
well-doing as unto a faithful Creator: That is, Christ is able to keep you in
Sufferings because he made you of nothing, and he that gave you a being when
you were nothing, he can keep you now, though all the World be set against you:
He can do it because he created you of nothing, and he will do it, because he
is faithful, and has promised; now this Faithfulness of Christ to his people
lies.

First, In his exact Accomplishment of all his Prophesies, All things written
concerning him, are fulfilled in him, Luke 18. 31. A tittle of God's word shall
not fall to the ground, all the Types and legal Figures as they shadowed out
Christ to come, namely, the High Priest, the Altar, the escape Goat, etc. were
perfectly accomplished in him, they were the Shadows, he the Substance; all
Scripture Prophesies concerning divine Providence, the Resurrection of Sion,
and the Destruction of Babylon, shall be fulfilled to one Iota, Luke 21. 22.

Secondly in performing his Promises, never an Engagement made by the Father to
the Son, or by him to his people, but he will see it assuredly made good, Romans
15. 8. 1 Kings 8. 28. 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his
Promises, Tit. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the Promises are in him, yea, and Amen.

Object. Christ's Faithfulness in fulfilling his Promises pertains only to the
Heirs of the Promises: but I cannot call the Promises mine, because of my
unfaithfulness to God.

Answ. The Promises of God are not made to the Doers of the Law or Go^pel, but
to Believers: nor are they made for doing, but upon believing: It Is true, by
Faithfulness and Obedience comes the thing promised, but a Title to the
Promises is procured by believing; pray put a distinction between the Promises,
and the thing promised, Gal. 3. 22. That the promise by Faith of Jesus Christ,
might be given to them that believe, Heb. 6. 17, 18. The promise of Grace,
Healing, and Salvation, depends not upon the fidelity of the saved Soul, but
upon the faithfulness of God, in Christ.

Obj. But I do not find the Promises made good to me; God has said, He will
never leave nor forsake his People, but, I doubt, he has forsaken me; for I
cannot see his outgoings in the Sanctuary: He has promised to hear the Prayers
made in his Name; to dispense Grace, to give out his Spirit, and to create a
new heart; but I find not the performance of these things in me.

Answ. First, If the Lord Jesus does not fulfill his Promises, it is because
thou art not fit for them: God would have brought Israel into Canaan, near
forty years before he did, but they were not fit for that mercy: They were
carnal, lusting, murmuring, rebelling, so that God sent them back again into
the Wilderness. Christ would have taught his People many glorious Truths, but
they were not able to bear them, Joh. 16. 12. Food, yea, the choicest Dainties,
upon a distempered Stomach, are cast away, they feed nothing but the Disease:
If God accomplish not his Word to thee, it is because thou art incapable for it:
Thy Iniquities, it may be, withhold good things from thee, Isa. 59. 1.

Secondly, Christ may be performing his Promises though thou do not see it:
For,

First, Christ does fulfill his Promise, though he does not give the same thing
he seems to promise: If he give thee that which is equivalent in the room of
it: So, if the Lord does not give his People the Comforts of this Life, yet if
he gives them Contentment without them, he fulfills his Promise; So he dealt
with Paul, Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in every state to be contented; and with
David, Psalm. 16. 6. The Disciples had nothing, yet in the want of all, they had
all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. If in the want of Bread, God gives Strength and
Satisfaction, he fulfills his Word. The wicked in their Fullness are in Straits,
Joh, 20. 22. But the Godly in their Straits have a Fullness.

Secondly, Christ does fulfill his Promise, though he gives not the same thing,
if he gives a better thing: If Christ withholds Earthly things, and gives
Spiritual; As Saul found not his Asses, but in the room of them met with a
Kingdom: The Disciples lost their Nets and Boats, and found a Treasure in
Christ: They lost their taking of Fish, and became Fishers of men: Paul
suffered a Shipwreck of all his own Excellencies, and found the Excellencies of
Christ.

Thirdly, Christ fulfills his Promises, though he do not give the same things
his People would have, yet, if he gives them suitable things, such as he sees
best suits and fits their present state: So the Disciples expected a Temporal
Kingdom, but Christ gave them a Spiritual Kingdom. It may be a little Mercy is
more suitable for thee than a great deal; Children must have their meat suited to
their Health, not their Stomach: Paul could not bear much Vision of God, and
therefore must have a Thorn in the Flesh, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

Fourthly, Christ does fulfill his Promise, though he does not give thee what
thou think thou do want, if he give thee what he knows thou want, Romans
8. 26. Thou supposest thou want Comforts, he withholds them, and gives thee
humblings.

Fifthly, Christ fulfills his Promise, though he does not deliver thee out of
thy present Evils, if he thereby preserves thee from a greater Evil: As Paul
had a thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him; lest, through
the abundance of Revelations, he should be puffed up, and his Soul in danger of
Ruin.

Lastly, Christ does fulfill his Promise, if he does it in his own time, though
he does it not in our time. So in Abraham; God promised him a Son, he expected
it many years sooner, but God kept it till the most convenient season. Every
thing is beautiful in its season, Eccles. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Mercies are
Afflictions, when out of due time: Now, it is he that gives the Mercy, can best
tell when to give it, Jer. 49. 19. Who will appoint me the time, Lev. 26. 4.
The Faithfulness of Christ is firm and unalterable, whatever Objections
Unbelief makes against it. He will perform all his Promises, Genesis 28. 15. And
behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go,
and will bring thee again into this Land, for I will not leave thee, until I
have done that which I have spoken to thee of. O what a blessed word is this!
It Is a promise made to Jacob, when he was to undertake a difficult Journey; and
what things are written, are written for our Instruction; Promises made to
particular Saints, are applicable to all the Saints in the same condition; as
we find that of Joshua, 1. 5. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. The
Apostle makes Use of it, Heb. 13. 5. Now I shall give a few Reasons to prove
that Christ cannot fail of fulfilling his Promise. For,

First, He is Truth it self, and cannot lie, Rev. 3. 14. He is called, The
Amen, the faithful and true Witness: The Holy one of Israel, who cannot lie:
For, God is not as man that he should lie, or as the Son of man, that he should
repent; has he said, and shall he not do it, has be spoken, and shall he not
make it good? Numb. 23. 19.

Secondly, He came to fulfill all Righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. It becomes us
to fulfill all Righteousness: (...), It behooves us, I ought to do it, by the
Appointment and Will of my Father, as Chemnitius renders it: Christ came into
the World to fulfill all Righteousness; Now, to perform and make good the
Promises of God, is part of this Righteousness: it is a debt God is engaged in,
and Christ came not only to pay Sinners debts to the Father, but to make good
the Father's Engagements unto them.

Thirdly, Did not Christ fulfill all the Promises of God to Believers, then the
New Covenant would be an imperfect and faulty Covenant; were the Promises of
the new Covenant unfulfilled, then it would be a Covenant of Works* and so
imperfect: But the New Covenant is established on better Promises, Heh. 8. 6, 7,
etc. Now new Covenant-promises are better than the old, not only as to the
Matter of them, but as to the certainty of their performance. The first
Covenant-promises were liable to be broken, Jer. 31. 31, 32. But these New
Covenant-promises are sure to all the Seed. This was the principal thing
undertaken in the New Covenant, for Believers, that the Promises should be
certainly fulfilled, and therefore it is called a better Covenant than the Old.

Fourthly, Christ must needs fulfill the Promises, or he would die in vain, and
shed his Blood to no purpose: for the Blood of Christ is the Blood of the
Covenant, Matthew. 26. 28. and it was shed on purpose to confirm the truth of the
Promise to all that believe, Heb. 9. 15. For this end he came into the World,
and became a Mediator, Romans 15. 8, 9.

Fifthly, That he might finish the Work the Father gave him to do, and so give
up his Account with joy. This is the Work God sent Christ into the World for,
that he might be the Mediator of the New Covenant, and make good the Will of
God to all the Federates thereof, Joh. 6. 38. to 41. and this Christ cannot
fail to perform, Joh. 17. 4. His Spirit shall not fail, till he has set
Judgment on the Earth, Isa. 42. 4.

Sixthly, That he may stop the mouth of Devils, and prove Satan a Liar. The
great work of Satan is to belie God, and represent him to Sinners Unfaithful
and untrue. Now Christ is to fight against the Devil, and destroy his Works, 1 John 3. 8. and prove the Truth of God against all opposers, Romans 3. 4.

Seventhly, He is fully able to do it; He has all Power in his hand, both in
Heaven and in Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. He is a merciful God, and so nothing is too
hard for him: He will work, and none shall let it; besides, he has all that
Grace and Goodness that poor Souls need, in his own hand; He has received the
Spirit without measure, Joh. 3. 34. All Fullness dwells in him; Name any thing
which thou stand in need of, which is not in Christ to give thee. Do thou
want Pardon, Peace of Conscience, Grace, Holiness, Power over thy Corruptions,
Victory over thy Temptations, Comfort under thy Troubles, satisfaction of thy
Doubts, quieting of thy Fears, and remove of thy Burdens. Do thou want
quicknings, softnings for the hardness of thy Heart: strengthnings under thy
weakness, fitness for thy Mercies and Duties, Patience under thy Sufferings,
and Humility under thy Privileges? Do thou want thankfulness for thy
Mercies, clearing up of thy Evidences, Tastes of God's Love, and readiness for
Death, Judgment, and Eternity? Why, all this Christ has in his own hand
already; He is not to seek for these things when thou criest after them.

Again, As he has Power to help thee, and fulfill all the Promises of God to
thee, so he has Right and Authority too: He is the Angel of the Covenant, Mal.
3. 1. He is sent, deputed, and sealed of God, to this very Work, Joh. 6. 27.
All the Promises upon that Redemption-agreement betwixt the Father and the Son,
are made over to him, and put into his hand, 2 Cor. 1. 30. Now all that Christ
can do for the making good of his Father's Word, and benefitting his People, he
will certainly perform, for he ever lives to make Intercession, Heb. 7. 25.
and is entered into Heaven, to appear as their Advocate and Agent, Heb. 9. 24.

Lastly, Christ must needs fulfill his Promises, or else he would weaken the
Encouragement of Souls to believe in him, and so overthrow all his own Design
in, and by the Gospel, which is, to bring Souls to believe in him, Joh. 20. 31.
These are* written that you may believe, Joh, 17. 21. That the World may
believe that thou have sent me, Joh. 10. 38. Now, if Christ fails of his
Promise, how would this discourage Souls from believing in him? who would trust
Christ, should he not be faithful? and the Devil would be sure to make the most
of this Advantage, to prevent believing. Christ will make good his Word in his
own time, way, and measure, Matthew. 5. 18. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
not one jot or tittle of the Law, till all be fulfilled. All shall be fulfilled
for Believers, and in them: and if Christ cannot permit one Jot of the Law to
fall to the ground, surely, he will not suffer so choice a part of the Gospel
as the Promises are, to be unaccomplished. Again, as Christ will perform all
the Promises, so especially those great ones, that concern the Grace and Glory
of all that believe, Psalm. 84. 11. He will give grace and glory, etc. If the
Lord Jesus upbraided the Pharisees for tything Mint and Cummin, and omitting
the weightier matters of the Law, surely he cannot neglect the greatest of his
Gospel*promises to his people.

Thirdly, the Lord Jesus is faithful to the Trust committed to him; thus was
Moses, He was faithful in all God's House, Numb. 12. 7. that is, as a Steward,
he was just and honest in the discharge of that Trust committed to him,
concerning the Work and Interest of God; so it is taken, Math. 25. 21. Well
done, thou good and faithful Servant; Thou have been faithful in thy
Stewardship in the use of those things committed to thee; in this Sense is
Christ faithful also; in a perfect Discharge of that Trust reposed in him, and
that both with respect to God his Father, and with respect to his People.

First, In respect of that Trust committed to him by the Father, God the Father
has entrusted him with the great Concerns of Redemption, Grace, and Glory,
with that glorious Contrivance of saving fallen man, and bringing about the
Recovery of lost Sinners: and therefore he calls him his Servant, Isa. 49. 5.
And now says the Lord that formed me from the Womb to be his Servant, to bring
Jacob again to him. It sets forth Christ's Designation by the Father, to his
mediatorly Office, wherein God the Father calls him to great work, commits vast
Concerns to him, about the gathering in of lost Souls, and undertaking their
Atonement, Sanctification, and Salvation; for the accomplishment of which, the
Father commits all to the Fidelity of Christ, both as to Suffering and
interceding work, and in all this the Lord Jesus is faithful: so the Spirit of
God calls him a faithful High Priest in things pertaining unto God, in making
Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. This the Lord Jesus undertook to the
Father, that he would satisfy his Wrath, and remove his Displeasure from his
People, by bearing their Sins for and from them, that God might again take them
into his Favor, as if they had never sinned; and in this he was and is
faithful, nay in all things that God has charged him with, about the saving of
Souls, Heb. 3. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was
faithful in all his house. So that whatever the Father laid on Christ in the
behalf of his people to make Reconciliation for them, and present them spotless
in his Presence, this he has fully and faithfully discharged, as I have
already shown on this Subject.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus has a Trust committed to him from his People: They
commit the keeping of their Souls to him as to a faithful Redeemer, 1 Pet. 4.
19. Every believing Soul when he comes over to Christ first, does depute,
accept of, choose and entrust the Lord Jesus to be his Redeemer, and he
undertakes the preserving of him unto Glory; he that comes to Christ aright,
takes him for his Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor.
1. 30. For so is Christ given and tendered by the Father, and so do Believers
receive him, and entrust him with their Souls, that they may be made righteous
before God, have their Sins removed, and be presented before the Father,
without Spot or Wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. They trust Christ for Sanctification,
to be made truly, and in his time perfectly holy, as holy as God is holy, and
as holy as God requires. They trust Christ for Wisdom, to be made Partakers of
divine Light, to be made wise unto Salvation, to know all that God would have
them, and that their Natures are capable to understand, and to have the Image
of God perfected in them, which consists in Knowledge as well as Righteousness.
They commit themselves to Christ to be redeemed from every Evil, Sin, or
Danger, or whatever hinders their complete Salvation: thus do Believers, take
Christ, and surrender themselves up to him on these great and glorious ends,
and thus did he undertake, when he gave himself by his Spirit to them, and
therefore is called the Surety of the Covenant, as has been already shown,
Heb. 7. 22. therefore it is said, Ephesians. 5. 25. to 28. That Christ gave himself
for the Church, that he might wash it and cleanse it, sanctify it and present
it to the Father without Spot or Wrinkle or any such thing. This he undertook
when he became a Mediator between God and them, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Now he is faithful
in this also to all his Seed, Heb. 10. 23. He is faithful who has promised, 1 John 1. 9. He is faithful and just to forgive them, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I
have believed, and that he is able to keep that good thing I have committed to
him against that day, 1 These. 5. 24. 1 Cor. 10. 13. O Souls, you that have
committed your selves to Christ in Truth, know that he is faithful, and will
not fail you, but will certainly accomplish and make good all your regular
Hopes and Expectations, he can loose nothing of all that the Father has given
him, Joh. 17. 12. Be sure, what Bargain soever he has made with you, what
Mercies soever he has promised you, he will assuredly fulfill and keep touch to
a tittle; he is the faithful Steward, and Advocate for his People.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus is faithful to all the Relations he stands in to his
people; Herein Fidelity appears in holding forth, and living up to those Duties
of Relation in which a person stands to others; so Sylvanus is called a
faithful Brother, 1 Pet. 5. 12. and Tychicus a faithful Minister, Ephesians. 6. 21.
In this that they were true and just, in holding forth all the Duties of their
Relation, Defectiveness, in which discovers Falseness and Treachery: but the
Lord Jesus is faithful in all Relations to Believers; he fills them up, and
answers the end of them, now the Scripture sets forth the Union of Christ to
Believers, by several Relations.

First, He is their Friend, Isa. 41. 8. The seed of Abraham my Friend, Joh. 15.
14. 15. Ye are my Friends, I have called you Friends, Joh. 11. 11. Our Friend
Lazarus sleeps. Now Christ is a faithful Friend to his people in holding
forth all the Offices of true Friendship to them. As,

First, Love, Prove. 17. 17. A friend loves at all times, such a Friend is
Christ to all his, many Waters cannot quench it, he loves his People when he
hides his Face from them, when he speaks sharply to them, and severely rebukes
them.

Secondly, To own his Friend in all places, times, and conditions, so Jonathan
owned David in his greatest Dangers, when his Father sought his Life, when it
was dangerous to appear for him, 1 Samuel 20. 28. 32. so Christ is not ashamed to
own his People before God; men, Matthew. 10. 32. Whosoever shall confess me
before men him will I confess before my Father's Face, 1 Cor. 16. 21. He
reproved Kings for their sake, saying, touch not mine anointed, etc.

Thirdly, Pity; Job. 6. 14. Pity should be shown from a Friend. And in this is
Christ faithful, he has compassion on the ignorant, and those that are out of
the way, Heb. 5. 2. He cannot hide his Eyes from his own Flesh; he is that good
Samaritane, Luke 10. 33.

Fourthly, Counsel; Prove. 27. 9. Ointment and Perfume rejoice the Heart, so
does the Sweetness of a man's Friend by hearty Counsel: Christ is called the
Counselor, Isaiah 9. 6. He will guide his People with his Eye, and instruct
them in the way they should go, Psalm. 32. 8. Thou gave thy good Spirit to
instruct them, Neh. 9. 20.

Fifthly, Adherence; Prove. 18. 24. There is a Friend, that sticks closer than
a Brother, 2 Samuel 16. 17. So the Lord Jesus he stands by his People in time of
need, Ps. 50. 15. Ps. 91. 15. Ps. 44. 3.

Sixthly, Comfort; So Joh's Friends, Job. 2. 11. Came to mourn with him, and to
comfort him, the Lord Jesus is faithful in this also, Joh. 14, 18. I will not
leave you comfortless, Isa. 61. 2. To comfort all that mou^^.

Seventhly, Communication of Secrets; Judge. 16. 15. How can thou say thou
love me, when thy Heart is not with me? Now the Lord Jesus Christ is such a
Friend, he will open the very Secrets of his heart to his People, Joh. 15. 15.
I have called you Friends for all that I have heard of my Father I have made
known unto you, Psalm. 25. 14. O the secret Mysteries of the Gospel, he
discloseth to his faithful People, that walk much with him, Joh. 14. 2, 3.

Lastly, Supply of wants, Prove. 17. 17. A Friend is born for Adversity, So Paul
tells the Thessalonians of his friendly respects to them, 1 These. 2. 8. A true
friend is ready to impart any thing for his Friend; so Jonathan stripped himself
to his Girdle, and Bow, and Sword, for David, 1 Samuel 18. 4. Christ is such a
Friend as will supply, all the Necessities of his people, Phil. 4. 19. My God
shall supply all your need: Such a Friend he was to Jacob, Genesis 48. 15. The God
which fed me all my Life long.

Secondly, He is faithful as a Brother, for in this Relation also does he stand
to his people, Joh. 20. 17. Go to my Brethren, and say to them, that I ascend
to my Father, and your Father, to my God and your God. Christ and Believers
have all one Father, though in a different way, Christ the natural, Believers
the adopted Children of God. Now as he stands to them in the Capacity and State
of a Brother, an elder Brother, so his Fidelity consists in a faithful
Discharge of the Duties of such a relation. As,

First, One Duty is Love; All the Saints stand in the relation of Brethren one
to another, and so are obliged to mutual Love, 1 John 3. 10. Christ fulfills
this duty to his people, he loves them as himself, Ephesians. 5. 25. perfectly with
the same love with which the Father loves him, Joh. 15. 9.

Secondly; Another brotherly duty is Pity; 1 P^t. 3. 8. Having Compassion one
of another, love as Brethren, be pityful: So Christ can truly say as Esther did
of her Kindred, Esther 8. 6. Now can I endure to see the Evil that shall come
unto my People, or how can I endure to see the Destruction of my Kindred?

Thirdly, Unity is the duty of Brethren, Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and
pleasant is it for Brethren to dwell together in Unity, so is the Lord Jesus
one with his people; This he dyed for, Joh. 11. 52. This he prays for, Joh. 17.
21.

Fourthly, Another brotherly duty is Peace, Genesis 13. 18. Let there be no strife
betwixt me and thee, and betwixt my Herdsmen and thy Herdsmen, for we be
Brethren. So Christ labors after peace for his people, and with them, Jo. 16.
33.

Fifthly, Acknowledgment is another duty of Brethren, So Christ, Heb. 2. 11. He
is not ashamed to call them brethren.

Lastly, visiting one another, and taking hold of Opportunities to enquire the
welfare of each other, and communicate Refreshments. Thus did Moses, Acts 7.
23. He visited his Brethren, and so does Christ his People, he gives them
special Accesses by his Spirit, he leaves them not comfortless, but will come
unto them, Joh. 14. 18.

Thirdly, As a husband to his Spouse, is Christ faithful to his People, Isa.
54. 5. Thy Maker is thy Husband, 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one
Husband, Hos. 2. 19. 20. I will betroth thee unto me in Righteousness, loving
Kindness, and Faithfulness. Now Christ performs all the Offices of a tender
Husband to them.

First, In loving them as himself, Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands love your Wives, as
Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Now I shall give you
eight Proofs of Christ's great love, as a husband to his People.

First, His high Valuation of them, he esteems them beyond all the World
besides, nay above Heaven it self; he could leave the Heaven of Heavens to seek
after, and to save them, and Mansions of Glory to come down, and betroath them:
he despised all the offered Pleasures and Grandeur of the world, when proposed
to divert his Love from them, Matthew. 4. He sets forth their excellencies by
terms of greatest worth, he calls them his Treasure, Exodus 19. 15. A Kingdom of
Priests, verse. 6. His Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. Cant. 1. 10. Thy Cheeks are comely
with Rows of Jewels, thy Neck with Chains of Gold. Cant. 2. 2. As the Lilly
among Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters: He terms them, a Fountain of
Gardens, an Orchyard of Pomegranates, Cant. 4. The only one of her Mother, the
choice one of her that bare her. These high Characters the Lord Jesus gives his
Spouse, shows the wonderful account he makes of her.

Secondly, His costly purchase of them, he sold himself to redeem them, Ephesians. 5.
25. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. He parted with all his Glory, Treasures, Peace,
Pleasures, Strength and Life to procure a people to himself; had not his love
been infinitely great to all his Seed, he would never have bought them at so
dear a rate, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Thirdly, His great Endurings for them; Jacob tells us of some Hardships he
underwent to gain Rachel, Genesis 31. 40. 41. But these are nothing to Christ's
Endurings for his Spouse: he bore infinite Torments for her, all the Wrath and
Vengeance of a consuming Fire, which all the Sins of Believers did merit; he
bore temporal Troubles, Wants, Weariness, Pains, Shame, Death it self, with
whatever the damned in Hell bear to all Eternity, that did he endure, to get a
Spouse among the condemned Sons and Daughters of men.

Fourthly, His amorous Treatments of them, and endearing Converses with them;
see the Exuberancy of his Affection, breathing out at his Lips to them, Cant.
4. 1. to verse. 6. Behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art fair, thou have
Doves Eyes, etc. ver. 7. Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee.
Cant. 2. 10. Rise up my Love my fair one, and come away. chap. 4. 8. Come with
me from Lebanon, My Spouse, from Lebanon. verse. 10. How fair is thy Love, my
Sister, my Spouse, how much better is thy love than Wine, chap. 6. 4. 5. Thou
art beautiful my Love as Tirzah; turn away t^ine Eyes from me, for they have
overcome me.

Fifthly, His large Gifts and dowry to them; he gives himself, his Spirit, his
Purchase, his Laws, his Promises, his Love, Life, Light, and his Kingdom, as I
have already showed, and this does discover his large Affection to them.

Sixthly, His impatient longing after them, shows the Greatness of his conjugal
love to them; Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove that art in the Clifts of the Rock, in
secret places of the Stairs, let me see thy Countenance and hear thy Voice,
Jer. 3. 14, Turn O backsliding Children, for I am married to you: He stands at
the door, knocking with the dew of the night on his locks, saying, Open to me
my Sister, my Spouse, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled, Cant. 5. 2. He is
troubled when he cannot see them, and they will not come unto him, that he
might give them life.

Seventhly, His wonderful Complacency in, and rejoicing over them, he is well
pleased with; he rests in his love over them, Zeph. 3. 17. He takes them for
his only Portion, Seed, and Travel of his Soul, wherein he is satisfied: And as
a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee, Isa.
62. 5. For the Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married, ver. 4.

Lastly, His utter Inability to part with them, proves his great love to them,
Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give th^e up O Ephraim? Isa. 49. 16. Behold I have
graven thee upon the Palms of my hands, and verse. 15. A Woman may forget her
sucking Child, but I cannot forget thee. Nay he sets them as a Seal upon his
Heart, Cant. 8. 6. You must pluck out his Heart before you can make him consent
to let his Spouse go, Joh. 10. 28. None shall pluck them out of my Hands.
That Is the first Testimony of his conjugal Faithfulness, his Love to all his
people; it is a constant Love, Joh. 13. 1. Having loved his own that were in the
World, he loved them to the end.

Secondly, His Cohabitation with them; this is another part of the Husbands
duty to his Spouse, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Ye Husbands dwell with them according to
Knowledge, such is the Fidelity of Christ to his, that he takes up his abode
with them* Joh. 14. 23. and walks with, and dwells among them, 2 Cor, 6. 16. He
does not give them a transient Visit, and look upon them now and then; however
he may sometimes appear a stranger, and draw a Curtain over the light of his
Countenance; yet he does not change his Habitation, but takes up his rest in
Sion, and dwells there, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. Heb. 13. 5. He will never leave them
nor forsake them.

Thirdly, his affectionate and intimate Converses with them, proves his
conjugal Fidelity; he keeps up Intercourse with them; Christ in Heaven
maintains correspondence with his people on Earth, Exodus 25. 22. The^e will I
meet with thee, and commune with thee, above the Mercy Seat: that is, In my
Ordinances and Appointments, I will open my heart to thee, tell thee my Love,
and impart to thee my Secrets, 1 John 1. 3. Our Fellowship is with the Father,
and his Son Christ Jesus, and this Communion is maintained by the Spirit, Joh.
16. 13. 14. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth,
etc. For he will receive of mine, and show it unto you. It Is a notable
Scripture, and as much as if Christ had said, I go to Heaven, my personal
Presence shall be in Mansions of Glory, but I will send my Spirit and he shall
reveal the deep things of God, communicate my mind unto you, and concerning you.

Fourthly, His tender Sympathy with them; In all their Afflictions he is
afflicted, Isaiah 63. 9. He soon feels their Troubles, he that touches them,
touches the Apple of his ^ye; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Act. 9. 4.
and therefore the Sufferings of the Saints are called the ((...)) the after
Sufferings of Christ, Col. 1. 24. What is done to them he reckons as done to
himself. And he does not only feel their Afflictions, but bear their Burdens
for them, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy burden on the Lord, he will sustain thee; yea
he helps and relieves them under all their Afflictions, Psalm. 50. 15.

Fifthly, His patience toward them, shows his Fidelity as a husband; it is
riches of patience and long-suffering that the Lord does exercise toward his
every day, Romans 2. 4.

Sixthly, His gracious Indulgence toward them, covering their Imperfections,
and pardoning their Offenses is another thing his conjugal Relation to his
People, obliges him to, and this he is faithful in; he puts Honor upon the
uncomely parts and carriages of his People, by clothing them with the covering
of his Righteousness, Rev. 3. 18. He calls upon his people to put on their
white Raiment, that the shame of their Nakedness do not appear: He puts up many
a wrong for them, and passes by many a weakness in them, concealing their
Imperfections from the view of others, and all because he loves them, and they
are his Hephzibah's.

Seaventhly, His Care of them demonstrates his conjugal Fidelity to them, 1
Pet. 5. 7. His Eyes are always upon them, from one end of the year to the
other, Deuteronomy. 11. 12. Commit thy way to the Lord, trust also in him, and he
shall bring it to pass, Psalm. 37. 5. Upon him is the care of all the Churches,
and of every Saint, yea of all their Concerns, even their very hairs. He cares
for their Bodies, their Souls, their Families, their names, their Comfort, and
their Profit: he will not leave them comfortless, nor suffer them to be tempted
above what they are able, he will provide all things they stand in need of,
Isa. 46. 3. 4. Psalm. 65. 9. and if he withholds these lower things from them
here, he prepares some better thing for them, both here and hereafter.

Eighthly, Protection of them from their Evils and Dangers; this is a Husbands
duty to be a covering for his Spouse, and a Screen to her from Injury, Genesis 20.
16. So Christ he carries his as on Eagles Wings out of the reach of their
destroying Adversaries, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. Exodus 19. 4. Deu^* 33. 27. The eternal
God is thy Refuge, and underneath are everlasting Arms. He will keep the Feet
of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9. And be a little Sanctuary to them in all places.

Lastly, His cleaving to them for ever, and being one Felsh with them, 1 Samuel
12. 22. For the Lord will not forsake his people; he is a present help to them;
in time of Trouble always with them, never unmindful of them and their guide
unto death, Psalm. 48. 14. Yea in Death and to all Eternity, he will be their
Life and Salvation; here death determines the Capacity of the most faithful
husband, but Christ will accompany his Spouse, and be a Salvation in and beyond
the Grave.

Fourthly, As a head is the Lord Jesus Christ faithful to his people; That is,
another Relation in which Christ stands to believers, Col. 1. 18. He is the
head of the Body, the Church, etc. He is completely furnished with all
Excellencies and Fullness for that end, to be the head of his Body the Church,
both as to natural and purchased grace; As God he is eternal, and so has all
sufficiency in him; Before all things, and is their Maker and Preserver, and as
man, he is the firstborn from the dead, and by his death has purchased a
Mediatorly Sufficiency to be the head of, and to preside his Body, and perform
all the Offices of Headship to it, as to Honor, Government, and Influence: And
he has not only a Fitness to be a head to his Church, but a Right too; for the
Father has given him to be the Head over all things to his Church, Ephesians. 1. 22.
Gave, ((...)) constituit, says Zanchy, he appointed him and parted actually
with him, and made him over to the Church, to the whole body of Believers, and
to every single person, to their use, intent, and purpose, that he should be a
Head to them, a true head, a perfect head, an only head, and an eternal head:
Now in this Relation is Christ faithful also, answering the ends, filling up
the pl^ce, and discharging the Offices of it. Now in this headship of Christ
are six things wrapped up.

First, Counsel and Wisdom; In him are all the Treasures of Wisdom, Col. 2. 3.
All that Light and Knowledge which is needful to make his people wise to
Salvation; all that Wisdom which is requisite to repair the lost Image of man,
and all that Wisdom which may render him exceeding excellent, and glorious; for
in him is the excellency of Knowledge, Phil. 3. 8. And all this Counsel he
stands engaged to impart to his people, as they are able to bear it, Ephesians. 1. 8,
9. Wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence. Wherein,
that is, Qua gratia; By which Grace, says Zanchy, He has abounded toward us;
that is, has made us to abound in. So the Scholiast and Erasmus, He has
plentifully imparted to us; hence it is ensured to all that truly seek it of
God, Jam. 1. 5. He will tell them what to do in all cases, as Christ did to
Cornelius by Peter, Acts 10. 6. He has all Wisdom in him, the stone on which
is seven Eyes, Zach. 3. 9. and will be in every Difficulty and Danger with
them. As Moses said to Hobab, we are to encamp in the Wilderness, but thou
may be unto us instead of Eyes, Numb. 10. 23. So he has engaged to guide
them continually, Isa. 58. 11. Deuteronomy. 1. 33. He is as Eyes to them, where they
are in a Land of Pits and Deserts, to guide them in the Wilderness Journeys,
while they are searching out the Land of Glory.

Secondly, Care; His Eyes and his Heart are on them continually, 2 Chro. 7. 16.
He is measuring Jerusalem, to see what is the Length thereof, and what is the
breadth thereof, that she may be built, Zach. 2. 2.

Thirdly, Conduct is the Office of a Head; It ought to lead and dispose of the
body and all it is Members to their several Offices. So the Lord Jesus is given
to his Church, for their Leader as well as Commander, Isa. 55. 4. chap. 48. 17.
I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the
way thou should go. It Is in the Original, making or causing thee to walk; he
does not only show them the way, but leads them by the hand, and helps them to
go, as, Hos. 11. 3. Deuteronomy. 32. 12. So the Lord alone did lead them. Christ
undertakes to conduct his people thorough the World unto Glory.

Fourthly, Government is another act of Headship, Mic. 2. 13. Their King shall
pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them: that is, The Lord shall be
their Governor and General, Isa. 9. 6, 7. The Government is upon his
Shoulders, Heb. 3. 16. He is the Son over his house, to rule and govern it, and
this he does, by making righteous and perfect Laws, and Rules, thereby to
govern his Church, Matthew. 28. 20. Acts 1. 2. Heb. 3. 1, 2, 3. And by governing
and subduing the Hearts and Wills of his people unto them, Psalm. 110. 3. 2 Cor.
10. 5.

Fifthly, Influence; This comes from the Head; all animal Influence for
Subsistence, Motion, guiding and action come from thence; in the Head are all
the Senses and Intellectuals exerted for the use and Service of the Body, so is
the Lord Jesus the head of all vital Influences, to the whole Church and every
part of it, Psalm. 87. 7. All my Springs are in thee, Joh. 15. 4. As the Branch
cannot bear Fruit, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye
abide in me, Col. 3. 3, 4. chap. 2. 19. Believers can no longer live, than
Christ becomes a quickening Spirit to them; he alone animates their Souls to
every good work, anoints their Eyes, and causes them to see, regulates their
Palate, and makes them to taste the Sweetness of spiritual things, open their
Ears to discipline, causes them to feel the Weightiness of Sin, and to smell a
sweet savor in his precious Ointments.

Lastly, Ornament; The head is the beauty of the Body, if that be removed, the
Body is but a deformed lump; Christ is the Believers Excellency and Glory, he
has the pre-eminence in all things, Col. 1. 18. And his glory is the Glory of
the body, 1 Cor. 12. 24. All the Saints Excellencies are in and from him, Psalm.
68. 34. Psalm. 89. 17. For thou art the Glory of their Strength, it is through
his Comeliness they are perfect, Ezekiel. 16. ver. 10. to 14.

Fifthly, Christ is faithful in the acts of distributive Justice, and renders
to every one their Due, Psalm 62. 1^. Thou renderest to ev^ry man according to
his Work. There is a legal and evangelical Debt; legally, There is nothing due
to the Children of men, but Wrath and Tribulation, Romans 2. 9. But Evangelically
all the Believers Rights are due on the account of Christ. So that all what
Christ has purchased, or the Father promised to Christ, is due to his Seed; so
that Mercy, Grace, and Glory is as much the Believers due, as Death and
Vengeance is the Sinners, on the score of his Sin, 2 These. 1. 6. 7. Therefore
the Justice of Christ is laid to pawn for the pardon of Believers Sins, upon
their penitential Confession, 1 John 1. 9. This is the great Error of troubled
Souls, that they make their Worthyness or Unworthyness the Standard and Measure
of all their Expectations; this is the Impotency the violated Law of God has
left on fallen man, that they cannot get over Mount Sinai, nor see the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Equity of Salvation upon his account; for
their Sins and Unrighteousnesses do so hang in their Eye, that they cannot see
themselves righteous in the Righteousness of another; This Tang of a legal
Spirit is a malady-Grace, is long a curing in Saints themselves; the want of
which robs Christ of the Glory of his Grace and Righteousness: But know O
Believers, the Lord Jesus would be unfaithful if he render not to those that
live on him for Sanctification and Salvation all that he has promised in the
Gospel, and has dyed to purchase for them; but this cannot be as you have
heard abundantly, that the Lord Jesus is faithful in acts of Remuneration; he
cannot keep back another due, who would have all men to render to others their
due: But all that God has made over in the new Covenant to Believers, is their
due, and therefore will Christ render it in it is season. And thus have I opened
and proved this glorious Excellency of the Lord Jesus, even his Faithfulness;
it remains now, that we make some Improvement of it.

Use 1. How great then is the Sin of all those that will not credit the
Faithfulness of Christ; there are none that perish under the Ministry of the
Gospel, but stumble at this stumbling block; they do not judge God faithful,
nor believe the report given of Christ, Isaiah 53. 1. Though Christ be
manifestly held forth to be a perfect Savior, yet few will believe in him; not
one of a hundred (says Calvin) that hear Christ daily will yet believe in him:
you know it Sinners, you may safely adventure your Souls on Christ, he cannot
lie or fail you: you have the whole word of God for your Assurance, all the
Scriptures testify of him, John 5. 39. Acts 18. 28. You have the Evidences of
Christ's Faithfulness in his state of Humiliation, he did and suffered all
things written of him, Luke 18. 31. He fulfilled all Righteousness, Matthew. 3.
15. His Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, prove him faithful in all things
tending to purchase Salvation. You have the Testimony of others, who have found
Christ faithful, 1 John 1. 1, 2. All the Saints on record are witnesses of
Christ's Fidelity. Nay, you your selves have found him faithful hitherto; how
often has he made good his Promises to you, when you have called upon him, and
trusted in him for outward Mercies. You trust other things that are unfaithful,
and yet will not believe in Christ: You trust your own Hearts, and they are
deceitful, Jer. 17. 9. You trust in men, and yet they are a lie, Romans 3. 4. You
trust in Creatures, and yet they are vanity, Eccles. 1. 2. You know, without
Faith you must perish to all Eternity, and yet will not believe in him.

Use 2. Then this reproves the People of Christ for their injurious Thoughts of
him, Joh. 1. 11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. This is an
aggravation indeed, that Christ's own People, such as have professed him,
chosen him, commended him, and born witness of him, and yet will not adventure
their All upon him. O, this secret Jealousy of Christ is a fearful Sin. This
was that our Lord reproved in Thomas, Joh. 20. 5. So Ioh. 14. 11. Believe me,
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, or else believe me for the Works
sake. O the Questions and Doubts that Souls have about the fulfilling of
Promises! how loath they are to trust Christ further than they see him.

Use 3. This should humble Christians, for their great unfaithfulness. Alas!
how few are found faithful amongst the Saints this day! How may we complain
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 12. 1. The godly man cease, and the faithful fail
from among the children of men: and Christ seems to Quere, where he may find a
faithful Steward, Luke 12. 42. And Paul says, I know no man like minded to
Timothy, who so faithfully and naturally cares for your state. O the falsness
of Professors, to the Lord Jesus, and one another! How rare is it to find one
that makes Conscience of Promises and Profession? one that is faithful to his
Trust, to his Word, to his Relation-duties, and in distributive Justice. O,
Christians, Mourn over your great unfaithfulness to God, and men; to those
Souls you are concerned in: Your unfaithfulness to your Children, Servants, and
Neighbors; how little have you done for these to this day? Some of you are
Parents; and Masters, but where has been your Industry in your Families, in
teaching, reproving, and laboring to save the Souls of those committed to you?
The Lord lay not the neglect of this to your Charge, nor being in the Blood of
your ignorant, profane, perishing Families, Children or Servants, on your
head. I must tell you, Friends, it will be dreadfully heavy to bear the blood
of Souls, at the Judgment-se^t of Christ: and yet, I fear, without Repentance,
is like to be the case of some that now hear me, who have been unfaithful to
the Souls of their Relations, Husband, Wife, Children, and Servants; who have
been too furious in reproving their Faults toward them, but scarce ever
reproved their Sin against God. Who can hear their Children and Servants swear,
take God's Reverend Name in vain, and see them profane Sabbaths, and spend
Sacred time in Debauchery and Idleness, and scarce ever check them; that can
suffer them to lie in Ignorance, and ready to perish for want of Knowledge, and
never labor to catechize and instruct them in the knowledge of Salvation: This
is a lamentable case, and will appear so, when these Parents and Masters shall
appear before God, with their garments all gored and stained with the blood of
their Families. O cruel Masters, and Parents, that will be tender of a Horse or
a Dog, to feed them, and secure them from want, but can endure to see your
children and Servants perish for want of knowledge.

Use 4. Here Is Comfort to Believers: Is the Lord Jesus Faithful, then be of
good cheer. For,

First, All the Promises of God shall be made good to you in due season: He
will not suffer a word to fall to the ground of all that good he has spoken
concerning you, 1 Samuel 3. 19. Isa. 55. 11. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Numb. 23. 19. Then you
cannot do too much for God, you cannot be undone for him; your Souls are safe,
your best Interests are secured, and all that God sees fit for you, is beyond
the reach of Men and Devils.

Secondly, All the trust committed to Christ for you, shall be made good: He
will perform it to a tittle: The Father has entrusted your Souls, your Graces,
your Comforts, your Names, your Supplies, your Strength, your Interest, your
Peace, your Welfare, and your Glory, with him, who is faithful, and cannot
wrong you. O Believers, if he will not suffer men or Devils to do you harm,
surely he himself will not wrong you, Psalm. 105. 14.

Thirdly, All your Relation-Rights shall be made good to you: Look what is due
to you from the Lord Jesus, as your Friend, as your Brother, as your Husband,
and as your Head, shall be made good to you.

Fourthly, All that is due to you upon the strictest terms of the Gospel, shall
be communicated to you; All that Christ has purchased, or God has promised,
you shall have in due time; Christ can defraud no man, Luke 12. 42.

Fifthly, Here Is Comfort to you under all the wrongs you meet with on Earth,
that you have a faithful Friend in Heaven: Here the best of men are a Lie, they
are not what you conceive them to be, they don't answer the expectation you
have from them: But Christ will never fail you of that Trust you have reposed
in him; he will be infinitely better but cannot be worse than your expectations.

Use 5. Let this exhort, first, Sinners: If Christ be so faithful, O then choose
him for your Friend: The fidelity of your present Friends cannot be compared
with Christ.

Secondly, Believers, Trust in Christ; Commit your Souls, and all your Concerns
to him; Learn faithfulness from him; and labor to be like him in your fidelity
to God and Men. So much of the first Branch, concerning Christ's Personal
Riches.

CHAP. XVII.
Showing that Christ is become a Purchaser in the behalf of Believers; How he
has made this Purchase, and what he has purchased.

I Now come to the Second Branch of Christ's Unsearchable Treasure, which is his
purchased Riches: Those Treasures which he has as Mediator procured for all
that come unto him. And in the prosecution of this, I shall show,

1. That the Lord Jesus became a Purchaser in the behalf of his People.

2. How and by what means he made this Purchase.

3. What he has procured by this Purchase. And in this I shall use what
brevity I may, having spent a greater time already on this Subject than I
intended.

First, The Scriptures do hold forth the Lord Jesus to be a Purchaser: One that
has bought and procured great and glorious things by a Price. Acts. 20. 28.
Feed the Flock of God which he has Purchased with his own blood: ((...)) that
is, which he has acquired or gotten to himself to be a peculiar People, by the
blood or cruel bloody death of his Son. So Grotius. So Heaven is called the
purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. Until the Redemption of the purchased
possession: ((...)) It Is exceeding significant in the Original, both words
being near of a signification, until or to the purchasing of the purchased, so
it is in the words; (...) signifies a Buying or ransoming by a price, yea a full
sum, so much as the worth of the thing requires: As prisoners are redeemed by a
full price: So Erasmus and Aretius. It signifies also a full and complete
Redemption, as the Preposition (...) implies, being added to the Primitive
(...): and ((...)) as I have shown is an obtaining by purchase, or an asserting
or vindicating a thing to be ones Propriety by right and purchase, which fully
proves Christ to be a Purchaser, so 1. These. 5. 9. To obtain Salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ ((...)) to the getting or purchasing of Salvation by Christ.
So 1. Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a Price. ((...).) The word is a buying in
the Market or public place, by paying the price demanded. So that these
expressions fully Prove Christ to be a Purchaser, one that has procured great
things by buying them at a Price.

Secondly; How and by what means has Christ procured and purchased these great
things.

First; By giving himself in the room and stead of fallen Man, to procure their
Atonement and Salvation. Ephesians. 5. 25. As Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it: ((...)) He delivered over himself freely, and knowingly. To
what? See Ver. 2. For an Offering and Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor, ((...).) The first word signifies any Sacrifice, the second a bloody
Sacrifice, says Zanchy: So Christ made over and delivered up himself to this
end to become a bloody Sacrifice for his People, and to fulfill the Fathers
Terms for the saving of all that come to him. This he did considerately and
willingly: Heb. 10. 7. This was according to the agreement betwixt the Father
and the Son. Isa. 49. ver. 2. to 10.

Secondly; By a perfect and perpetual Obedience of all those Laws that were or
are required of us in order to our holiness and Salvation, and by a subjection
to, and Obedience of the special Law of a Mediator: This has two parts.

First; His Obedience of what was required of Man by any Law: By the Law of
Nature, or by any Instituted Law, either Moral, Ceremonial, or Judicial: All
this did Christ submit to and perfectly obey as in the stead of all Believers;
Mat. 3. 15. It became him to fulfill all Righteousness. Whatever holiness or
Obedience was required of Man in the state of Innocence, or since his fall. And
therefore it is said, Gal. 4. 4. He was made under the Law, as a Man or
Minister, bound by his own consent to the full Obedience of it.

Secondly; His obeying all those things that were required of him as Mediator,
Phil. 2. 7. That he should make himself poor, and of no reputation, and take
upon him the form of a Servant ((...)) He emptyed himself of his Glory: He
stripped himself of all his royal robes, and made himself of no account. This was
not required by any Law natural or positive, but by the Law of a Mediator.
Again he humbled himself to the death, Phil. 2. 8. He had power or liberty,
absolutely considered, to lay down his life or not to do it; but with respect
to his Mediatorship he had a Commandment to lay it down, Joh. 10. 18. Further,
'Twas by this Law Christ was bound to do all that he did for his People. Joh.
17. 19. Only for their sakes sanctify I my self. So ver. 9. I pray for them, I
pray not for the World. So he was not to strive or open his mouth, but
patiently to bear whatever was laid upon him. Isa. 42. 2. Isa. 53. 7. Mat. 12.
19. And by this Obedience of Christ are believers made righteous, Romans 5. 18,
19. For this is necessary to Salvation, that the Commandments be kept, Math.
19. 17. And the Law fulfilled, Math. 5. 17.

Thirdly; By his suffering all things we were liable to by the first
transgression, or any actual Sins flowing from it, Phil. 2. 8. This he did in
all the sufferings of his Life; and at his death, he bore the sins of believers
for them, 1. Pet 2. 24. He was wounded for our Transgressions. Isa. 53. 5. 2
Cor. 5. 21. And became a Sacrifice to God for Sin. Isa 53. 10. Heb. 9. 26. The
end of which was atonement, Heb. 2. 17. He also paid the price that God
demanded for their deliverance. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price. 1
Pet. 1. 17, 18. Math. 20. 28. He gave himself a ransom for us.

Lastly, By his Intercession Christ compleats his Purchase, and carries on the
salvation of his people. Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ
that dyed, yea rather is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God and
makes Intercession for us. Though by this he does not purchase for his people,
yet he does procure and apply mercy to them: As I have largely shown already,
therefore shall wave it now.

Thirdly, What are those great and glorious things which Jesus Christ has
procured by his blood?

First, He has purchased Believers themselves unto God. Acts 20. 28. Feed the
Flock of God which he has purchased with his blood. Rev. 5. 9. For thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood. Every saved soul is part of
Christ's purchase: They are set apart for God. Psa. 4. 3. A peculiar People to
God. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Though the Father has ordained them to life, yet they are
not actually his till purchased by Christ. Hence it is that Believers
Conversion, is not casual or dependent upon Men or means, but is the effect and
fruit of Christ's blood purely designed, and unavoidably perfected by
Redemption-grace: And hence also their Salvation is sure, being founded on the
purchase of Christ. As sure as Christ's blood cannot be spilt in vain, so sure
shall every Believer have his Salvation perfected, because it depends upon the
Obedience, Merit, and Suffering of Christ. Hence also all the Means of
Salvation and the Efficacy of them are certain to believers, Ephesians. 4. 8.

Secondly; He has Purchased pardon of Sin, and peace with God. Col. 1. 20.
Having made peace by the blood of his Cross: Chap. 2. 13. Heb. 8. 12. Romans 5.
1. There is a full Pardon of Sin, of all the sins of believers, and of every
believers, purchased by the blood of Christ. Here are four things I shall speak
to.

First; That there is a full Pardon of sin procured; The Scripture sets this
forth by clear and pregnant arguments, and by several terms that leave no room
for the least Suspicion to the believing Soul. It Is called sometimes Remission
of Sin, Luke 24. 47. And that Repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his Name: ((...)) it signifies Dismission or Releasing. All
unchanged Souls are in Debt to God, bound over to wrath, and laid up in Prison,
but by Jesus Christ there is a discharge of this Debt procured, the bond
Cancelled, the Prison opened, and the Sinners set free, Isa. 61. 1.

Sometimes it is called not imputing sin, not laying it to the sinners charge,
Psa. 32. 1, 2. imputes not iniquity; that is, does not charge, and reckon it,
and lay it on his account: As a Merchant that sends his Bill to his Debtour,
and charges several sums upon him: It Is true every Believer is a Debtor in
himself, but God charge the Debt on another, and not on them.

Sometimes it is termed a covering or hiding of sin, not from the sinners, but
from Gods judicial Eye; Psalm. 85. 2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy
people, thou have covered all their sin. Psalm. 78. 38. He being full of
compassion forgave their iniquity. [Caphar] to cover or conceal; from this Root
is derived Caphoreth, the covering of the Ark or Mercy-seat, in which was the
Law or knowledge of sin, but by the blood of Christ was covered or purged away.

Sometimes it is expressed by not remembering sin any more; Jer. 31. 34. I will
remember their sin no more: I will be propitiously merciful, or pacifiedly
favorable to their sins, and their sinful errors and unrighteousness will I
remember no more; or I will not remember them again: Here are two Negatives
which make the denial the more vehement. It Is an allusion to men that forgive
and forget, and it signifies that God will not upbraid or reproach them with
them any more: hence Paul challenges all the world to lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect, Romans 8. 33.

Further, it is set forth by a taking away of sin; Exodus 34. 7. Forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin. The word in the Original is, lifting up or
taking away all sorts of sins and iniquities.

Again, it is signified by blotting out of sin, so that it shall never be seen
more; Isa. 43. 25. I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions: Like
the Merchant when the debt is paid crosses the Book, throws Ink on it, blots
it out, that it may not be read any more; so God the Father casts the blood of
Christ on a Believer's sin, and blots it out, so that Justice can lay no more
to their charge.

Again, it is called a casting of sin behind his back, Isa. 38. 17. He does
remove them out of his sight as far as the East is from the West, Ps. 103. 12.
He will cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea, Mic. 7. 18, 19. O the
latitude of Believers pardon, and the full discharge of all their sin!
Sometimes God seems to be throwing off his people, and giving them a final
farewell; but, oh! he returns again, and casts their sins, (not them,) into
the depth of the Sea, where they shall be certainly drowned as the Egyptian^
were, never to be seen more.

Thus you see there is a full pardon procured for God's people, not the least
ground for a Question left to them.

Secondly, There is not only a full pardon procured, but a pardon of every sin.
All the sins of Gods people are forgiven: Col. 2. 13. 14. Having forgiven you
all trespasses, blotting out the handwriting: that not one debt may be seen; as
a Book or Bill that is blotted out can be never more sued against one: 1 John
1. 7. The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. Jer. 50. 20. The iniquity
of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be nove; and the sins of Judah,
and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve: The most
cruel Enemy upon the strictest search shall not find one; they shall be all
forgiven: And indeed if Grace be free, there is the same reason why all shall
be pardoned as well as one: And if the grace of God bring salvation then all
must be forgiven or none: And the same blood of Christ can as well pardon all
as one. For if the blood of Christ be the blood of God, then it is of an
infinite value, and can as easily blot out every sin as one sin; and as well
discharge Talents as Pence. Ezekiel. 18. 22. Larga Dei pietas veniam non
dimidiabit. Aut nihil aut totum dabit.

Thirdly, This pardon of sin is procured for repenting Believers, and for all
of them: Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
name whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins: Acts 13. 38.
chap. 26. 18. Faith is necessary to pardon, because it takes off all
self-righteousness, and all pretenses of merit. Faith carries the soul off to a
dependence on another for righte^^sness and salvation. Faith is a self-denying
Grace, and expects all upon the account of the Promise. Believers, and every
Believer, have their sins pardoned, and shall not perish, Joh. 3. 16. Now lest
some should pretend to believe, who indeed do not, the Seripture qualifies this
Faith by certain Characters. It Is also to repenting souls that pardon is
assured, and therefore remission of sin is joined with repentance, Acts 5. 31.
Luke 24. 46, 47. Ezekiel. 18. 30. But what is this repentance? Does it consist
only in an external sorrow for sin, and an audible begging of mercy? No, no,
Judas and Cain were thus troubled for sin, and yet never arrived to sound
repentance: It Is the mourning and returning believer to whom this Promise is
made: and to such, and to every one of these is a full pardon procured.

Fourthly, This pardon is procured by the blood of Christ, and that
satisfaction made to the Father by his suffering. It is an Opinion sprung up of
men of corrupt minds, that pardon of Sin is the procurement of Inherent grace,
and external Righteousness, but not the product of Christ's blood, suffering
and satisfaction, which I shall now endeavor to disprove, Math. 20. 28. To
give his Life a Ransom for many. Heb. 9. 26. But now once in the end of the
World has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, chap. 9.
12. Col. 1. 14. Thus you see it is the blood of Christ offered up to God, that
procures peace, and removes the guilt of sin: and indeed pardon of sin with
respect to Gods Justice could be no otherway obtained. For,

First, God had past an irrevocable sentence, that the Soul that sins should
dye, Genesis 2. 17. Now if this penalty was not inflicted upon Transgressing Adam;
how would there be a fulfilling of this threatening. But some may enquire, How
comes Adams sin to be charged on his Posterity? Answ. Adams Transgression, by
the strict union there was betwixt him and all mankind, (he being their Head,
Root, and Representee) was most justly devolved on his Offspring, Romans 5. 14,
19. And therefore God would not have been true to his word, had not this
penalty been inflicted on the Debtor, or his Surety: But let God be true, and
every Man a liar.

Secondly, Fallen Man could not pay this debt, and make this satisfaction for
sin: For the sin being of an infinite Guilt, and the punishment being Death
Eternal, Romans 6. 23. Man could never pay his ransom, and set himself at
liberty, and therefore some other way must be found out, which was only by the
Lord Jesus, God-Man, whose Godhead was able to support his humane Nature under
suffering, and render his endurings of an Infinite value, Heb. 9. 14. Acts 20.
28. This is the second Fruit of Christ's Purchase; the forgiveness of all the
sins of penitent believers, even past, present, and to come, that nothing shall
be laid to their charge, Romans 8. 1.

Thirdly, Acceptance of their Persons is another Fruit of Christ's purchase,
Ephesians. 1. 6. Where in he has made us accepted in the beloved: It Is not enough to
the completing of Christ's design in saving Souls, that their sins be forgiven,
and the guilt and penalty removed, and a discharge of all the Obligations to
wrath by reason of sin procured. All this a person may have, and yet no
interest in the full favor of God, nor right to any saving blessing from him;
for it is not sufficient to give a Man a Title to Glory, that he be innocent, or
free from offending, but he must come up to the terms of the first Covenant,
and do all things required of him; and have a Positive as well as a Negative
Righteousness: There must be in order to an acceptance with God, not only a not
imputing of sin, but a reckoning of Righteousness (says Dr. Owen); he must be
reputed fully Obedient also. The Law requires a perfect and perpetual
Obedience, Gal. 3. 10. Should thy Soul be set free from all the charge of past
sins, yet thy defect of Righteousness would undo thee for ever. They must be
righteous that enter into Life Eternal, Math. 25. 47. Even as Righteous as God
is Righteous: But this is impossible to be attained by lapsed man, In many
things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. There is none Righteous, no not one, Romans 3.
10. And therefore there must be a Righteousness procured for, and imputed to
Believers, and that is the Righteousness of Christ: The Commutation of his
Obedience for our Disobedience, Romans 5. 19. By the Obedience of one shall many
be made Righteous. This Righteousness is called a white Robe, and fine Linen,
Rev. 7. 9. Chap. 19. 8. The sweet smelling Garment of our Elder Brother wherein
God takes infinite delight and pleasure, Math. 3. 17. Isa. 42. 1. The ground of
all that pleasure that God takes in his people, is the Righteousness of his
Son: not any of their Services and duties: And look what pleasure the Father
takes in his Son as Mediator, the same he takes in every Soul that truly comes
unto him, John 17. 26. That the same love wherewith thou have loved me may be
in them, and I in them.

USE. If Believers are pardoned and accepted with God, then hence it follows,

First, That God never punishes them in wrath and displeasure. All the strokes
of God on Believers are but fatherly chastisements: Not Judicial acts, Heb. 12.
6. He takes vengeance on their inventions, but never on their persons*
Punishment always bears some proportion to the offense, but the sufferings of
Gods people are infinitely less then their deserts, and therefore are the Fruit
of Divine Faithfulness, and Covenant Love, Psalm. 119. 75. Psalm. 78. 30, to 34.

Secondly, God will accept of all their sincere desires and services, though
never so mean, through Christ. Isa. 38. 14. Isa. 63. 8. Exek. 20. 40, 41. Psalm.
51. 17.

Thirdly, They have access to God with boldness at all times, Ephesians. 3. 12. chap.
2. 8.

Fourthly, They are entered into rest, and have peace with God, and with their
own Consciences. Math. 11. 28. Heb. 4. 9. Romans 5. 1. 2 These. 1. 6, 7. Psalm.
116. 7. H^b. 4. 3.

Fifthly, Sin shall never more have dominion over them. Romans 6. 14.

Sixthly, God will withhold no good thing from them, Romans 8. 32. No temporal
blessing, Math. 6. 33. No spiritual blessing, 1 Timothy 4. 8. No instruction, Jer.
31. 33. Isa. 54. 13. Joh. 14. 26. No sanctified correction, Heb. 10. 10, 11.
Romans 5. 3, to 5. No consolation, Isa. 51. 3. 2 Cor. 1. 4. No edification and
increase in Grace, Ephesians. 4. 12, 16. Nay all things shall work together for good
to them that love God, Romans 8. 28.

Lastly, They can never forfeit their state of Grace, and interest in the
Favor of God, Joh. 13. 1. 2 Cor. 7. 10. They shall be sure to be kept by the
mighty power of God unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. There is not the least room
left for a falling off from Grace: Because,

First, Salvation is purchased for them; and if the end be purchased, then all
the means to the end; and God in Justice is bound to make good Christ's
purchase, and to deliver what he bought and paid for, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

Secondly, Preservation in grace is engaged to them. Jer. 32. 40. 1 These. 5.
23, 24. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole
Spirit, Soul, and Body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ: Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it Here we may
see both Sanctification and Salvation is secured to all that are savingly
called of God. Salvation is the End, and sanctification is the Means, and both
are sounded not on the will of Man, or on his care and fidelity, but as
depending on the act and faithfulness of God; not only the first Act of
Sanctification, but Preservation; continuance, and growth in Grace is the work
of God, and it is perseverance is laid upon divine preservation; to which God
has bound himself by promise to every Soul that is truly sanctified, and his
Faithfulness is engaged to make it good.

Thirdly, They are put into the Hands of Christ on purpose to be secured in
Grace to Glory, Joh. 10. 28, 29. They shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand: They are engraven on the palms of his hands; their
walls are continually before him, Isa. 49. 16. Their Walls, that is their
safety: This was spoken in a time when the Walls of Jerusalem were broken down:
Yet at that time God had Walls about them to secure them, which they saw not.
Both Believers themselves, their Graces, and all the Promises are put into the
hands of Christ, hence they cannot fall away.

Fourthly, True Grace is of an abiding nature, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born
of God does not commit sin, for his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God. (...) not at constantiam and penitissimam
inhaesionem, (says one) It Is an abiding, and constant inhesion of Grace. Some
to evade the evidence of this Truth, would pervert the sense of it, taking it
for the new Creature which is born of God; whereas the Original is clear
against it (...), in the Masculine Gender, which notes a person, not a thing.
Again, it would be a Tautologie to add a reason why such a one cannot sin,
because he is born of God, and his seed remains in him, whereas the new
Creature, and the seed of God are all one, but here they note two things;
First, A Person; Secondly, The Regenerate part of the Person; which is fully
explained in the following ver. where he that is born of God, or the Child of
God, is opposed to the Child of the Devil, which is meant of a distinct Person,
not a different Nature in the same Person; and this seed of God is of an
abiding nature wherever it comes, it comes never wholly to depart more, Isa.
59. 21.

Fifthly, Because their Life is hid in Christ, and therefore cannot be lost and
perish at their pleasure, Col. 3. 3, 4. The Believers Grace is sure in the
Root, however it be in the Branch, and therefore Christ engages to his people,
that they shall live because he lives, Joh. 14. 19.

Lastly, They have an Inseparable union with the Spirit of Grace that dwells in
them, Romans 8. 11. He that raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. Where the Article (...) as
one observes, ever notes the Person of the Holy Ghost, not his Graces; so that
the Saints have an abiding union with the Spirit of God the third Person, and
so cannot perish for want of Grace, but are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto Salvation. He can never want Water that may have access to the
Fountain or Ocean; nor can any Soul be destitute of Grace that is united to the
Spirit of Grace. The Graces of Saints are sure; their Faith, their Preservation
is sure: O what a glorious privilege is this that flows to Believers, from
this purchase of Christ, that their Salvation is sure, and they may know it to
be so.

CHAP. XVIII.
Sanctification and Holiness is purchased for Believers, by the Death and
Sufferings of Jesus Christ.

ANother part of Christ's purchased Treasure for Believers, is,

Fourthly, The Sanctification of their Natures and Persons. Here I shall show,

1. That the Lord Jesus has Purchased Grace and Holiness. 2. For whom this
Holiness is purchased. 3. What this Holiness is he has purchased. 4. That this
is part of Christ's Treasure.
First, That the Lord Jesus has purchased the sanctification of the Natures
and Persons of his people. This I shall prove by several Arguments.

First, All the Types under the Law do imply so much, and darkly open this
great truth to Believers. We find that Christ in the nonage and Infant state
of his Church and People dealt with them in Figures and Shadows: So the Laver,
and Sacrifices, the Priests pure and white Robes and Vestments, and the washing
of their Garments, when they were to approach the Divine Majesty, were Typical
of this Holiness, which he was to procure for his people in the fullness of
time, so much the Apostle imports, Col. 2. 17. Which are a shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ. The shadow goes before, and the body follows:
These Types are precedaneous to the coming of Christ, and his full
accomplishment of the things intended, and signified by them, thus Christ is
the Altar that sanctifies the gift; In him we have those true and solid good
things which were shadowed out in those Ceremonies under the Law, (says Daven.
on the place)

Secondly; The Names and Titles given to Christ import so much: He is called
Jesus, because he shall save his People from their sins: Mat. 1. 21. He is
called a Redeemer to deliver them from their Bondages and hard Service: He is
termed the Sanctifier: For he that Sanctifies, and they that are Sanctified
are all of one. Heb. 2. 11.

Thirdly; For this end, he was actually designed of God, and made over to his
People in the Everlasting Covenant, decrees, purposes, and determinations of
God. 1. Cor. 1. 30. He is made of God unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. He is made of God: Non in creatione, sed in
ordinatione (says Paraeus). Not created so according to his Divine Essence, as
some Heretics assert, but ordained and given of God to this end to be
Sanctification, that is the Author of Sanctification, and therefore he is said
to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. which can never be accomplished without
Holiness; For without holiness no man can see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

Fourthly, For this work was the Lord Jesus promised by the Father to come unto
Sion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Romans 11. 26. This Scripture is
quoted out of Isa. 50. 10. from which the Apostle varies, following the
Septuagint Translation (then in great use) rather than the Hebr. seeing it
retains the sense, though different in words: In Isa. it is The Redeemer shall
come to Sion, and unto them that turn from Transgression: The Apostle says, He
shall come out of Sion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob: To reconcile
which, Peter Martyr thinks the Septuagint might mistake (Lashub) To turn, for
(Leshabe) To them that turn: But this is not likely that those Learned Doctors
could be so mistaken in the Original, and therefore it is a far better answer
that Beza and Grynaeus do give, That the Prophet speaks of the Effect of
Christ's coming; which is a turning away from Sin: And that the Apostle speaks
of the Cause of their turning from Sin; which is Christ's taking away of Sin,
for none can turn from sin, till Christ do remove Sin: And this is the end of
his coming into the World: To this end he is promised: Mal. 3. 2, 3. He shall
sit as refiners fire, and purify the Sons of Levi. The Sons of Levi are,
Firstly meant of the Apostles: Secondly, I suppose, of all the Saints: But so
much is clear, that the Lord Jesus is promised to be a refiner to his People in
Gospel times and to purge away their filth and dross, and to make them Holy.

Fifthly; For this end it was the Lord Jesus Christ gave himself up to
Redemption-work. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. As Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it; that he might Sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water
by the word: Here we have; 1. One great end of Christ's Obedience and Suffering;
it is to make his People Holy. 2. Here Is the efficient Cause of this Holiness,
that is, By the Spirit of Christ; The blood of Christ purges away the guilt of
sin Meritoriously, and the Spirit of Christ purifies the filth of sin
Efficiently; signified by Water, as it is often used in Scripture. Joh. 4. 10.
14. Chap. 7. 38, 39. 3. Here Is the instrumental cause of this Holiness, the
means by which it is wrought and carried on, and that is by the word, the
immortal seed of the Soul: This he undertook, and was intended to do in the
Covenant of Redemption betwixt the Father and him. Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3, 4. He
shall not fail till he has set Judgment in the Earth, that is Holiness; for so
it is taken, Joh. 16. 8. And this work is the Lord Jesus here engaged to do.
Some take the word (Ethmoch) I uphold, passively for the Fathers dependence,
and Christ's Faithfulness: He leans or stays upon his undertaking this work,
and trusts to his performance of what he undertook to do: Others take it
actively for the Fathers upholding and carrying Christ through this great work
of Redemption, and Sanctification. In both senses it is true, The Lord Jesus
stands engaged to carry on Redemption-work, and is thoroughly furnished with
grace to accomplish it, Heb. 10. 7. Christ readily consents to the fulfilling
of the Fathers will; and what that was you have Isa. 42. 7. To open the blind
eyes, and to bring out the Prisoners out of the Prison, which is meant of the
work of Redemption, and Regeneration; and it was the will of God the Father
that Christ should do this, 1. These. 4. 3. This is the will of God even your
Sanctification: And this he stood bound to do, to promote and perfect the power
of Holiness in all his Children. Now what Christ did undertake he finished
Meritoriously, whiles on Earth. Joh. 17. 4. I have finished the work thou have
given me to do: And for the application of it, he is in Heaven to see it
performed; and this is the work of his Intercession, Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify them
through thy truth, thy word is truth. This Christ Intercedes for in Heaven, and
therefore it is the fruit of his Purchase; for he Intercedes for no more in
Heaven than what he dyed for on Earth.

Sixthly; His Authoritative sending the Spirit of Holiness to his people,
shows his right to it by his Purchase. Joh. 16. 7. I will send him to you. That
is after the finishing of his work, and re-instalment in Glory, Joh. 7. 39. For
the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Christ was not yet glorified.

Lastly; Were not holiness purchased for saved Souls, Christ's Redemption-work
would be imperfect, neither could Souls ever answer the ends for which he dyed.
Without Holiness were procured and completed by Christ, there could be no
Salvation. For,

First; Man cannot Sanctify himself; We are all as an unclean thing and our
Righteousness as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. And who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? no not one, Job 14. 4. Indeed the Scripture sometimes speaks
after this manner, Make you a clean heart, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Make you a new heart.
So Isa. 1. 16. Wash ye, make ye celan: But there is Man's Duty not his power: It
shows the subject, not the Author or this holiness; and where you find such
Exhortations, they are to lead men to Christ for the getting of this Holiness
wrought in them; as, 1 Pet. 2. 4. To whom come, as as to a living stone, etc.

Secondly, Without this holiness be wrought in Believers they can never be
capable of answering the ends of Redemption; which are,

First, To enjoy Union and Fellowship with God, Joh. 11. 52. 1 John 1. 3. Heb.
8. 10. Now without Holiness no Fellowship with God, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 1.
15, 16. For his Person is Holy; and his offerings and services are Holy.

Secondly, To reconcile together in one all things in Heaven and Earth, Col. 1.
20. But no Fellowship with Angels or Saints in Heaven without holiness for they
are holy Creatures.

Thirdly, To be brought into the nearest Union, and Conformity to himself, Romans
6. 4, 5. But without Holiness this cannot be.

Fourthly, To be a Name and a praise unto God, Ephesians. 1. 12. But without Holiness
no glorifying of God.

Fifthly, To bring Souls to the possession of the purchased Inheritance in
Glory, Ephesians. 1. 14. But nothing that defiles shall enter within the Gate of the
new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 27. So much for the first Head, That Jesus Christ has
Purchased Holiness. We shall now enquire,

Secondly, For whom has the Lord Jesus Purchased Holiness?

Answ. For all his feed; for every Soul the Father has given him, Joh. 17. 9.
Christ's Purchase, death, and Intercession is only for those the Father has
given him, and every one of them, for all his seed that belong to him as the
second Adam. And in this sense is that Scripture to be taken: Romans 5. 18. As by
the offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, even so by the
Righteousness of one the free gift came upon all Men to Justification of life.
That is; As death came by Adams fall to all his seed, so life comes by Christ
to all his seed; neither can it be stretched further, as the Apostle affirms, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life, but he that has not the Son has
not life. Neither will any affirm, that all Men are justified unto life, nor
any but those that believe in Christ, which are his seed: The Lord Jesus tells
us, Joh. 17. 20; It Is for all them that believe on him through his word. Gal.
3. 22. That the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe: The Apostle speaks here of a double Promise made to Abraham, and
through him to Believing Gentiles. 1. The Promise of Righteousness in
Justification, ver. 18, 19. 2. The Promise of the Spirit in Sanctification,
ver. 14. That we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith, and
both these are made over to Believers. You that come to Christ in truth, and
receive him into your hearts by faith, and take his Yoke on your shoulders,
obey his Laws, sincerely give up your all to him, and are no more your own, but
though you see your want of Holiness, yet are really willing to be Holy as God
is Holy, submitting to all the appointments of Christ, in order to it; you are
the seed of Christ, the people to whom the Promise of Holiness does belong.

Thirdly, What is the Holiness Christ has Purchased for his People?

Answ, First; The truth of Grace, in opposition to Hypocrisy: The Lord Jesus
never shed his blood for counterfeit grace. His purchased Treasure consists not
of Counters, but tried Gold, Rev. 3. 17. What he offers to Sinners, that he
purchased and dyed for; but Christ offers tried gold to invited Souls. Any
thing short of saving grace is not worth the shedding of the blood of the Son
of God. That which Christ Promises to his people is the same with that he has
purchased; but he promises true grace, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. He Promises a new
heart, and a new heart is a truly sanctified heart: It Is his Spirit he will put
within them; and his Spirit is a Spirit of truth, Joh. 14. 17. There is never a
Soul whose heart is made willing to be the Lords; but Jesus Christ has
purchased sincerity for him; Christ never dyed for Lies and Untruths, but
seeming grace is a lie and not of the truth. This is wonderful comfort to poor
troubled Souls that are always doubting of the truth of their graces, and would
give a thousand Worlds to be sure that their gold is tried gold, and their
graces true graces. Now if ever thy Soul were brought to desire Christ in
truth, and to receive him with a lively Faith, thou may be sure thy graces
are true, because the Lord Jesus has purchased this for all Believers. Now
this truth of Grace consists in a through change of the Soul, even of the whole
Man; which may be distinguished into these two parts. 1. The taking away of
Sin. 2. The giving of Grace, the delivering the Soul from the power of Satan,
and the reducing it under the power of God, and into his Kingdom: The purging
the Soul from Lust, and possessing it with Grace: the destroying the works of
the Devil, and creating it the workmanship of God: In freeing the Soul from the
Ruling Power of sin in every part, and implanting the Nature and Image of God
on every Power and Faculty of it. Acts 26. 18. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 2. 14 Romans 6.
14.

Secondly; Perseverance in Grace; Their continuance in a state of grace: And
the abiding of the seed of God in them: 1 John 3. 9. (...) it is the same word
that signifies the Spirits abiding with Believers, which Christ says shall be
for ever, Joh. 14. 16. 1 John 2. 27. This he has Promised in the new Covenant,
and therefore this he has purchased, Jer. 32. 40. And therefore the sanctified
are called the preserved in Jesus Christ, Jude ver. 1. And the Saints are said
to be kept by the Power of God through faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. This
Christ stands engaged to the Father to do, Joh. 17. 12. If Jesus Christ has
not purchased perseverance in Grace to the end for all his people, but leaves
their continuance in the truth to their free will, then he leaves them in the
same state in which they were under the first Covenant: For the standing of
Adam in the first Covenant was upon his own choice and will; but this cannot
be, because Christ has taken away the first Covenant from Believers, and
Established the second which makes the Comers thereunto perfect, Heb. 8. 6. to
11. Chap. 10. 9, 10.

Thirdly; Growth in Grace: What he calls them to that he has purchased for
them; for Christ cannot invite his people to uncertainties or disappointments;
what he exhorts them to, he promises to work them to, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work
out your Salvation with fear and trembling; For it is God that works in you
both to will and to do. Now he bids them to grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. And
this he Promises also, Hos. 14. 5. 7. I will be as a dew unto Israel, and he
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, they that dwell
under his shadow shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine. Psa. 92. 12.
The Righteous shall flourish as the Palm Tree and grow as the Cedars in
Lebanon. What God Promised under the new Covenant Christ has dyed for; for
this Covenant is wholly Confirmed by blood, by the death of the Testator, Heb.
9. 14, 17.

Quest: Then what is the reason Gods People grow no more in Grace this day?

Answ. First; All are not Israel that are of Israel; Many pass for Saints in
the Judgment of Men which were never sanctified in Christ Jesus, nor will
appear to be so in the approbation of God; and therefore some in whom you see
no growth, are no contradiction to this truth at all, they being none of the
seed of Christ.

Secondly; The Lords Trees as well as the Trees of the Wood have their growing
times: The Winter is no time to grow; no nor the Winter of Temptation or divine
desertion. Bodies have their growing times, so have Souls. Believer thy growing
time may be yet to come if thou art Christ's.

Thirdly; Souls may grow, though slowly, and invisibly to themselves and
others; Believers have sometimes a vail on their Eyes, and cannot discern their
flourishing, and sometimes the smalnesse of Grace renders it indiscernable to
others. There may be a growing downward in Faith, and Humility, those radical
Graces that strengthen the Souls adherence to Christ, though there be no
growing upwards in fruitfulness for Christ. There is a growing in internal
longings and secret desires after more of God, and in higher valuations of
Jesus Christ, though not in such sensible enjoyments of him. As the truth of
Grace lies beyond the view of Men, so does many times the growth of grace to a
Man's self, and to others.

Fourthly; The People of God shall at last have their growth in grace furthered
by their present decays in Grace. As the sickness of Children, though it makes
them languish for a time, yet it helps on their growth when it is over; so the
Winter season promotes the growth of Trees and herbs when the Summer comes.

Fourthly; The Lord Jesus has Purchased for his people Perfection in Grace
also: This is intended by his death, that they may be made perfect in one, Joh.
17. 23. This he presses them to Mat. 5. 48. Be ye perfect as your Father which
is in Heaven is perfect. And what he exhorts them to he prepares and has
redeemed them to. For this end he gives them Ordinances, that they may come to
a perfect Man, to the fullness of the measure of the stature of Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. Heb. 10. 14. This perfection of grace is nothing else but
glory. 1 Cor. 13. 10. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away: And this Christ has purchased for Believers, Joh. 10.
28.

Quest: If Christ has Purchased perfection in Holiness; Then what is the
reason the professing people of Christ are so imperfectly Holy, never a day
since the Gospel, of more light, and less life; of more profession, and less
Power of Holiness; Whence comes this so?

Answ. First; These are the last days, yea the latter part of the last days,
and the Iast days are days of great unholinesse, and little grace. O the
Catalogue of sins the Scripture gives us that will abound at that time, 2 Timothy
3. 1. In the last days Perilous times shall come, for Men shall be lovers of
themselves -- Having a form of Godliness but denying the Power thereof. Christ
himself shows us the complexion of the last times: Mat. 24. 12. Then Iniquity
shall abound, and the love of many wax cold. The days before the Coming of
Christ to avenge his Elect are days of little Grace: When the Son of Man comes
shall he find Faith on the Earth? Luke 18. 8.

Secondly; Because of the abundance of Hypocrites that get under a profession,
and crowd in amongst Saints: In the last times the greatest number of Men are
formalists, as you have heard, 2. Tim. 3. 5. Half at least of Virgin Professors
will at the coming of Christ be found foolish, and abundance of tares among the
Wheat, and Goats among the Sheep, will be discovered when Christ comes to
Judgment; and this hinders the holiness of professors, when a great number
among them are rotten, and Carnal; unsound Persons amongst the sincere hinder
their thriving in Grace, by their Examples and ensnaring Company; these, as
Gangreens, do eat away all holiness; and as dead bodies become contagious; if
the living touch the dead, they are unclean, Hag. 2. 13. Can a man touch Pitch,
and not be defiled?

Thirdly, Because it is the hour, and power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. it is a
time of great temptation to Gods people: Satan is come down with great wrath,
Rev. 12. 12. This Chap. is contemporary with the Seals and Trumpets, and gives
us a repetition of the Churches State under the first and second Persecution;
this ver. holds forth the second persecution under Antichrist, when Satan is
cast out of the true Church, and Believers, and comes down among rotten
professors, to stir them up to persecution, and then the Devil has great
wrath, especially in the latter part of his Reign, when he has but a little
time; then by temptation as well as persecution, he labors to destroy the
Saints holiness.

Fourthly, Gods leaving his people as a punishment of former sins under present
Corruptions; for their humbling, and driving them nearer to himself. These may
be some Reasons why there is so little holiness; but however, the time will
come when Christ will make up his Jewels, and set holiness in the Earth.

Fourthly, This sanctification of Believers is part, yea, the choicest part of
Christ's purchased Treasure. I have shown before that Riches import two things.
1. Some things that were of worth and value, men never seek great heaps of dus^
or straw, as part of their Riches; but Silver, Gold, and Jewels, are things of
account. 2. Abundance and large measures of these excellent things. Now
sanctification is a thing of wonderful value, and an unknown excellency in its
nature; holiness must needs be excellent because it is a sparkle of Divine
Glory; it is part of the Nature and Image of God himself, 2 Pet. 1. 4. It Is the
Glory of God, Hab. 3. 3. When the Prophet would set forth God in his Glory, he
gives him the name of the holy one, God came from Teman, and the holy one from
Mount Paran, his Glory covered the Heavens. The Prophet here speaks and
Prophesies of the calling of the Jews by the Gospel, after the Ascension of
Christ, in an allusion to his former giving the Law on Mount Sinai, and making
them his people by that Covenant: So Teman is a place in Idumea, Paran in
Arabia, between Sinai and Seir, from whence God gives out his Law, and shows
out his Glory, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Some take Teman for Jerusalem, and
then the meaning is thus; As God did formerly manifest his Glory, by giving out
his Law from Mount Sinai; and his Holiness in keeping and leading his people
through the Wilderness to Canaan and Jerusalem: So will he in Gospeltimes,
manifest his Glory, in giving the Gospel, and calling a People to himself; and
this Glory of his will most eminently appear in the manifestation of his
Holiness. So that Holiness is the Glory of God, and therefore must needs be
most excellent. Nay, Sanctification is the honor of the Creature, Rev. 21. 10,
11. The Glory of the latter Church is set forth by its Holiness: So
Sanctification and Honor are joined together, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. Holiness is the
greatest Treasure; for it is laid up in the choicest Treasury; in Heaven, the
place of Gods Holiness, and the Habitation of the Holy Saints and Angels, Isa.
63. 15. Treasures are not the Possession of every one, they are given usually
but to a few: So is Holiness the privilege of the fewest and least number of
men; few there be that find it, Mat. 7. 13. Riches can procure the greatest
things procurable, as one says; Money answers all things; that is all things
that are saleable among men; so Holiness, though it cannot purchase Mercy, yet
it fits persons for the greatest Mercies, and highest Services. None more
advanced than holy Souls; they dwell in the presence of God, Psalm. 140. 13.
They are through Christ very potent with God; they are fit for the highest
work. When Persons come to dye, they see the excellency of holiness, and would
purchase it with a world: This proves that Sanctification is a rare Treasure.

Again, The purchased Holiness of Christ has not only excellent worth, but
large quantity; he has purchased fullness of Grace; Grace for Grace. O
Believer, though thy heart be empty of grace, yet Christ's Treasure is full, he
has as much as ever thou can need or crave, to make thee as Holy as thou
would be, and that to all Eternity.

USE. If Holiness be the Purchase of Christ, then it is not the Creatures
procurement, or by any ways or means obtained short of the merit of Christ.
what the Apostle says of Righteousness is true of Sanctification, Gal. 2. 21.
If Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. So if holiness
be the Fruit of Men's Purposes, Labors and Duties, then Christ died in vain.
It Is too common an error in many, to charge Christ with too much in some
things, and too little in other things. In justification some lay too much on
Christ; I mean by charging their sins on him for pardon, which they were never
thoroughly convinced or repented of; and in sanctification charge him with too
little, expecting their holiness and meetness from their purposes, duties, and
improvements: As if holiness were to grow out of the Sepulchers of their
Services, and not out of the grave of Christ: It Is true indeed the Lord Jesus
has appointed means for the promoting of Holiness, and given promises and
Ordinances for the conveying and perfecting of it, but the virtue of all
depends upon his blessing, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. Romans 9. 16.

Secondly; Then how unexcusable are perishing Sinners under the Gospel, that
will not come to Christ to be made holy. You that lie in your blood, and from
the Crown of your head to the sole of your feet are full of filthy Ulcers, and
putrefying sores; whose Consciences cannot but condemn you sometimes for
uncleanness; and never being cleansed by the blood of Christ; how will you
appear before the Holy God, a Consuming fire, in your unpurged sins? How
unjustifiable is your filthynesse who might have been cleansed, but would not!
What will you answer in the day of Indignation, when all this tendered, but
refused Grace shall come against you? when you would willingly part with the
whole World if you had it to get a clean heart and a purged Conscience? How
dreadful will that word be in the day of Inquisition; Ezekiel. 22. 24. Thou art a
Land, Thou art a Soul that art not cleansed? How cutting will the memory be of
rejected Grace, when God shall say, I would have healed you, but you are not
healed? Jer. 51. 9. You might have had your natures changed, your Consciences
cleansed, and your hearts sanctified, but you would not: Now away thou profane
hard-hearted wretch: Be gone thou secret Drunkard, Swearer, Thief, Liar, take
him Devil, go and be filthy still, wallow in thy blood; there lie cursing in
torment to all Eternity; as long as I am God, thy blood shall lie upon thee.

Thirdly; Then the Holiness of Believers is and shall be sure, being grounded
on the Purchase of Christ. It Is bought, and paid for (O Believer) for thee:
purchased Sanctification is assuredly thine as thou art not thine own; The
truth, continuance, growth, and perfection of Grace is procured for thee by a
price: A price agreed on betwixt the Father and the Son.

First, God will not deny it, Justice it self cannot withold thy purchased
due. As sure as Christ withholds not one drop of his blood, or penny of the
price, so sure will not God withold any part of this Purchase. Romans 3. 26.
That he may be just, and the justifier of them that believe in Jesus: And if
the justifier, then sure the sanctifier. Poor doubting Believer, when thou
see nothing but unworthiness in thy self of the least Grace, and peace from
God, then think, 'twas Christ, not I, that made this purchase; he who did not,
can not make a forfeit of his right; and whose blood must perish, whose Honor
and Interest must suffer, if one of those for whom Christ dyed should dye and
perish for want of Holiness: O no! this cannot be; The Judge of all the Earth
must do right. Genesis 18. 23.

Secondly, Jesus Christ the believers Advocate cannot suffer to see his poor
and needy deprived of their right: He is the Mediator betwixt God and his
people; The days-Man and Umpire to see truth Established in the Earth, and
every one to receive his due: He will give wicked Men their due, much more his
Children; And all Power in Heaven and Earth are in his hands, Math. 28. 20. He
is the Faithful Witness, Holy, and Just one, and therefore will cause that
believers shall have the distributions of the due Measures of his Purchased
Grace.

Thirdly, there is nothing in thee or without thee that can hinder the
accomplishment of it, Isa. 43. 13. I will work, and who shall let: Let Earth
and Hell, Sin and self, combine together, they shall not keep back the
Communications of grace one day beyond God's time, Math. 12. 20. It Is not the
strength of thy lusts can prevail against the arm of God, and forces of his
eternal Spirit, who is commissioned to bring down all thy Enemies, and set thee
free indeed. Christ will Reign till he brings down all his Enemies under his
feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. The greatest part of which is the Corruptions of his
people.

CHAP. XIX.
Adoption-Grace proved to be the Fruit of Christ's Purchase: The excellency of
this state opened in several particulars.

I Come now to a fifth Fruit of Christ's Purchase, and discovery of that
glorious Redemption-Treasure procured by his death; that is a state of
Adoption, those whom he sanctifies he adopts, and brings into a new Relation to
himself; to God the Father, Son, and Spirit: The work of Sanctification does
change their Nature, Adoption changes their state; they are really altered by
Sanctifying Grace, and relatively by Adoption-love. God now becomes their
Father, and they are his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Come out from
amongst them, and touch not the unclean thing: Here Is a change in their Nature
and Life: And I will be your God, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters:
there is a change in their state: Adoption is the taking of persons that are
strangers, and undeserving in themselves, into a state and Relation of Sons and
Heirs; bringing them into a new Family and Condition: And such is the Adoption
of the Sons of God, it is a Translation of called and sanctified Souls out of
the Family of Satan into the Family of God, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son,
Joh. 1. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
Sons of God, 1 John 3. 2. Now are we the Sons of God: And this
Adoption-Priviledge is the Fruit of the Death of Christ, Gal. 4. 4, 5. When the
fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under
the Law; to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
Adoption of Sons: For though this Adoption be an act of Grace in God, to take
Souls into Sonship with him; yet it is by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5. Having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ: That is, To be
redeemed, and made fit for it by Jesus Christ. Now in the Adoption of
Sanctified Souls into the Family of God there are these five things.

A change, 1. of Relation. 2. Of Obligation. 3. Of Disposition. 4. Of
Condition. 5. Of Duty.

First, There Is a change of Relation; they were the Children of the Devil, Joh.
8. 44. Heirs of Hell, and under the Power of the God of this World, Ephesians. 2. 2.
Who rules in the Children of Disobedience. They were of the kindred of Hell, of
that Family whose Head and Ruler is Satan. This was their state, when
Redemption-grace found them. Now Adoption alters this relation, and being taken
out of this Family by effectual calling, they are by Adoption entered into a new
Relation, and made the Sons and Daughters of God, Gal. 4. 4. Now they can call
God their Father, Christ their Husband; the Saints their Brethren, verse. 5.
Ephesians. 2. 19. Ye are no more Strangers, and Foreigners, but Fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and of the Household of God.

Secondly, A change of Obligation; they were bound to the Law of Satan, under
the Law of Sin, and Slavery of the World, led Captive by Satan at his Will,
Col. 1. 13. But when Adoption-grace comes, it delivers them from this
Obligation, and they are brought under the power of God, and Scepter of his
Kingdom, Acts 26. 18. Romans 6. 14, 17, 18. Heb. 1. 8.

Thirdly, a change of Disposition; they have the Nature and Spirit of Children,
Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your Hearts, etc. They were by Nature Enemies, but now are Children; they have
a disposition to love God, to honor and obey him, it is their Meat and Drink to
do his will, Joh. 4. 34. Mal. 1. 6. To serve Christ before was burdensome, but
now delightful: The Love of Christ constrains them: It Is as natural for them
now to obey Christ, as ever it was to rebel against him; they are never
satisfied but when God is well pleased.

Fourthly, A change in their State and Condition; they are brought into a state
of Glorious Privileges, in respect of, 1. Liberty, 2. Rights and Interests. 3.
Boldness. 4. Instruction. 5. Correction. 6. Provision. 7. Protection. 8.
Inheritance: And by these the state of an Adopted Soul appears to be a glorious
state.

First, They are brought into a state of Freedom, Joh. 8. 36. If the Son shall
make you free then are you free indeed ((...)) The word Imports that Freedom
that is opposed to Servitude, as it appears also by the word, ver. 33. Christ
tells them, ver. 32. The truth shall make them free; And they answered him; We
be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any Man: So that by freedom
here, Christ intends a delivering of them from that bondage they were in by
reason of sin and Satan: and he tells them that this is that freedom that comes
by him; all that are the Children of God are free Men and Women. 1 Cor. 7. 22.
2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty: The Apostle
tells them, ver. 8. That the Ministration of the Spirit is much more glorious
than that of the Law, or letter; that is, the Ministry of the Gospel is far
more Excellent than that of the Law, which he proves by several arguments: And
here he tells us that the Lord is that Spirit, that is, the Lord Jesus is the
Author of that Spirit, or Spritual Ministration, under the Gospel, and where
that Spirit or Administration is, or where the Soul is brought into this
Gospel-state, there is liberty, Romans 8. 21. Now this liberty that all the
Children of God are brought into is a twofold liberty. 1. A liberty from
Servitude. 2. A liberty to service. Or as a Reverend writer expresses it: A
liberty from the Family of Satan, and liberty in the Family of God. There are
some things which all Adopted Souls have a liberty from, and some things they
have a liberty in or to.

First, All that are Adopted in Christ are set free from that slavery they were
in under the Law Sin, Satan, and the World. They are freed from Bondage under
the Law, from Bondagework, and Bondage-wrath: All that are under the Law of
Moses, as all are who are out of Christ, are obliged to Bondage-work, to the
work of slaves, not of free Men.

First, they are bound to do work that is above their strength, which they can
never perform, Romans 8. 3. The Law was weak through the flesh, that is, there
was an impotency in fallen Man ever to fulfill the Law, or attain life by it:
The Law required perfect, and perpetual Obedience; but this could never be
performed by sinful Man, and therefore legal-work, was hard work, work never to
be done by fallen Man, and this is bondage-work.

Secondly; Legal-work is mercenary work; Do this and live. Gal. 3. 12. The Man
that does them shall live in them: Like a Servant, if he does his work he shall
have his wages, if not he must expect nothing; and this is hard indeed, that
the poor weak Creature that is utterly destitute of all strength, worth, and
ability, must have no more than can deserve.

Thirdly; It Is rigorous work, pressed by arguments of severity, threatenings of
death and Hell to all the Transgressors of it. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things written in the book of the Law to do them.

Fourthly; It Is fruitless work, works that cannot make the comers thereunto
perfect. Heb. 9. 9. It Is Labor in vain. Heb. 10. 1.

Fifthly; It Is work without Wages, no reward at all could ever be received from
it. Gal. 3. 21, 22. For had there been a Law which could have given Life,
verily Righteousness had been by the Law. But the Scripture has concluded all
under sin. etc. There is no Life, no Crown, no Kingdom at all is the reward of
all such labors.

Sixthly, It Is work that will surely end in death: Let men work never so hard
yet they must dye, and be damned at last for falling short, and this is
bondage-work indeed; but the Children of God are freed from this work, Romans 7.
6. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we are held,
that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.

Again, As they are freed from bondage-work, so are they freed from
bondage-wrath: The wrath of God is upon all the Children of disobedience; all
Christless Souls are Children of wrath, bound over to an Inheritance of wrath,
Ephesians. 5. 6. Chap. 2. 3. Because the Law works wrath, Romans 4. 15. It brings all
its Servants under wrath, under the curse, and under death. Romans 6. 23. But
from this also are all the Sons of God freed, Heb. 2. 14. And destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil. And not only from the Devil,
but from the works of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8. Romans 6. 14. Chap. 8. 2. Gal. 3.
13.

Again they are free from all yokes of bondage laid on their Consciences by
Men. Gal. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the
Servants of Men: Do not give up your Faith and Conscience to their Commands,
obey not them contrary to the Command of Christ. Gal. 1. 10, 11. if I yet
pleased men I should not be the Servant of Christ. This is the first part of
liberty the Children of God are brought into, even a liberty from Servitude.

Secondly, They have a liberty to service in the Worship of God: Their service
of God is free and ingenuous Service; their offerings are free will Offerings.
Psa. 119. 108. Accept the free will offerings of my mouth. That is, those
offerings or vows which my mouth has freely offered. The Children of God are a
willing people, Psa. 110. 3. They serve the Lord freely from the heart, Romans 6.
17. They obey from the heart that form of Doctrine delivered to them; They
delight in the Law of God after the inner Man, Romans 7. 22. The strictest
Service of God is to them the most desired liberty, the Commands of God are no
ways grievous to them; that is, to their inner Man, indeed so far as flesh and
Corruption get head, they drag heavily to duty, when the spring of their
motions, even their child-like love to God is abated, and all the
Indispositions of a child of God flow from decaies of love to God, and some
abatement of the Adoption-Spirit in him: The Children of God are never in their
Element, or as they would be, but when their hearts slow out after God, and
they can run the paths of his Commandments, this they pray and labor for,
Psa. 119. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge
my heart. So ver. 69. I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart. Their
hearts move naturally after God when in their right temper: As the Waters run
toward the Sea, and the Sun runs his race: Their service of God comes from a
new Principle, even from Faith that works by love, and is directed to new and
higher ends, than all the services of Hypocrites: The sense of divine love
constrains them to duty, that they cannot but choose the things that please God,
further than they are bound back by Corruption, and Temptation; their works are
wrought in God from a Principle of life, raised and revived by grace; They have
no mercenary aims in their Duties to attain any carnal selfish end below God,
but their Motives are high and heavenly, pure and spiritual, as the Love of
God, and care they have to please him: They see a beauty in Holiness, and a
pleasantness in the ways of God, and find a sutableness in their hearts, to
love these though under never s^ great discouragements, and disadvantages a^ to
flesh and blood; hence it is a Child of God cannot cast off God and his Worship,
though he see nothing of good or comfort coming in by them, nor be persuaded to
consent to any thing that is sinful, though to save his purse, person, yea life
it self: All the threatenings of Men, or visible dangers in his way, cannot bring
his heart to comply with ungodliness, or speak or do any thing against God, his
people, or ways, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against the truth. None but a
Judas can come with a Band of men and Officers against Christ to apprehend him,
or his people for owning him: Micaiah would speak nothing against the truth,
though to please a King. 1 Kings 22. 17. Nor Jacobs Soul enter into the secret
of the wicked in their sinful enterprise: A fearful Peter may forsake the
professing of Christ for a time, but he will not be seen on the side of those
that do oppose him; no, this is far from the true Spirit of Gods Children: We
read of the Christians in the primitive times, that left their preferments,
rather than they would be seen against Christ people; and the whole Legion
chose rather to lay down their lives, than to oppose their fellow Christians:
Such shufflings and Compliances are opposed to the Spirit of the true Children
of God; they can run after God in a Wilderness, but cannot be drawn against God
by all the World.

Secondly, They have new Rights and Interests: Believers being once entered into
the Family of God by Christ, are presently invested with new and Glorious
Rights which they never had before, nor any besides the Chil^ren of God have or
can ever have; which will appear in these fix things.

First, They have a right to the special and blessed presence of God the
Father, Son, and Spirit. Psa. 140. 13. The upright shall dwell in thy presence.
The upright, that is, the faithful, the Children of God, these shall dwell in
thy presence, in thy special presence, for all Men and Devils are in the
general presence of God, but the Saints shall be in Gods special presence; and
not step into it only as strangers may, but continue for ever as Sons. Joh. 8.
35. The servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides ever,
Psa. 26. 6.

Secondly. They have a right to the purchase of Christ, to all the fruit of his
Obedience, and sufferings: His blood is theirs, with all the procurements of
it. Isa. 53. 5. He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our
Iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we
are healed: whatever Christ dyed for according to the agreement betwixt the
Father and him, is the Right of his Children, Joh. 17. 9.

Thirdly, They have right to the Promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given to us
exceeding great and precious promises. Whereby, that is, by the knowledge of
him, as ver. 3. Or through Faith in him, that is, by Jesus Christ we come to
have right to the promises, for all the promises are in him Yea and Amen, 2
Cor. 1. 20. The promises of this Life and of that which is to come, all are
theirs, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

Fourthly, They have Right to Communion with, and to the blessing of the whole
Family of Christ: Being entered into Gods Family, they have a Right to
fellowship with all his people, 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit are we
baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, and have
been all made to drink into one Spirit. The great design of the Apostle in this
chap. is to show that all Believers are brought into nearest Union with Christ,
and each other, even into one body; this he proves in this ver. by the end of
the Ordinances of Baptism, and the Supper, both which do signify and seal up
Believers into the nearest Union and Communion, by reason of which they have
equal right to one another, and the whole body, they have right to Communion
with Angels and Saints: All the Sons and Daughters of God, have right to his
House; to his Church, and all the privileges of it, Isa. 56. 5. Ordinances and
Ministers are theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. Yea, they have right to the blessings
of God on all: Psalm. 3. 8. Thy blessing is upon thy People, Ephesians. 1. 3.

Fifthly, They have a right to all the good things of this Life, Rev. 21. 7. He
that overcomes shall inherit all things: Even the good things of this Life,
Ps. 37. 9. They that wait on the Lord shall inherit the Earth. They are Heirs
with Christ, who is Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. They have through Christ a
Right to all the good things of this world, so far as God sees it best for
them; they have their right in the Second Adam, who is Lord of all; this is a
New-Covenant-Right; not over other men's rights to invade or break the civil
properties of any, but to those Creatures God gives them, and to the good of
all things, even wants and enjoyments, and have a sanctified use of them, which
none but the Children of God have, Tit. 1. 15.

Sixthly, They have Right to the inheritance of Glory, Tit. 3. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 3,
4. Heaven is the Country, Home, and Inheritance of all Saints: Their Title is
founded on the Purchase of Christ, and Adoption of Grace: not upon their Merit
or Holiness; and therefore it is called on the account of Christ, the purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
Redemption of the purchased Possession. That is until we are actually redeemed
from Corruption, and put into the possession of purchased Glory; yea their
Reversion in Heaven is so freely procured for them, without any of their money
or price, duties or obedience, further than it is the way to walk in to Glory;
that Eternal Life is said to be the gift of God, Romans 6. 23. Death comes by
Man's merit, but not Life and Salvation: and is not this a glorious state, and
blessed condition, to be made Heirs, and Coheirs with Christ? Romans 8. 17. And
if Children, then heirs, and Joynt-heirs with Christ: partakers of the same
Rights with him, Heirs of the Righteousness of Faith, Heb. 11. 7. So was
Abraham, and so are are all Believers; they have a right to Justification, by
believing; and a right to the Kingdom of Glory, Jam. 2. 5. Heirs of the
Kingdom: They have as good a Title to this by Grace, and through the purchase
of Christ, as any man to an Inheritance here on Earth, yea, and far more sure
of it; for men may be turned out of their Rights and Properties here; but
Believers cannot be deprived of their Title, and Inheritance through Christ.

Seventhly, They have an interest in Gods love, they are upon his Heart at all
times, Joh. 16. 27. For the Father himself loves you: He loves with an
infinite Love, a Love passing knowledge, and transcending the love of all
Creatures, Isa. 49. 15. A Mother may forget her Child, but God cannot forget
his: He loves at all times; Eternally, and unchangeably: He loves his Children
ardently, when they have but little love to him: He loves them notwithstanding
their unkindnesses and provocations, Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33. He loves them when
he seems to be angry with them, and is forced to correct them, Heb. 12. 6. He
always thinks on them for good, Jer. 29. 11. I know the thoughts I think
toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of Peace, and not of Evil. He is very
tender of them, and has the bowels of a Compassionate Father toward them,
Psalm. 103. 8, 13. Mal. 3. 17. And I will spare them as a man spares his Son
that serv^th him.

Eighthly, They have a right to the Spirit of Grace, the Spirit is put into
their Hearts, Gal. 4. 6. Not the spirit of Bondage, but of Adoption, Romans 8.
15, 16. They have union with the Spirit never to be separated more, v. 11. they
have the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Zach. 12. 10. To quicken, teach,
influence, assist in Duty, and make intercession for them, Romans 8. 26. O what a
blessed privilege is this to have the Spirit of the Son, whereby they can go
to God as a Father, and to have the Spirit working in them the disposition, and
working for them the actions of Sons.

Thirdly, They have holy and reverential boldness to come into the presence of
God through his Son, Ps. 26. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will
I compass thine Alter, Ephesians. 2. 18. For through him we both have access by one
Spirit unto the Father. They can come to God at all times, and behold his Face
in Righteousness, unless their sins do cause him to hide himself for a time,
Ephesians. 3. 12. And plead their cause through Christ with boldness, Heb 10. 19, 20.
And they are not only free to come, but sure to speed, Joh. 16. 23, 24. 1 John
5. 14, 15.

Fourthly, Instruction is another Privilege of Sons, They shall be taught of
God, Isa. 54. 1^. He will teach, instruct, and show them things they know not:
He will lead them into all truth, Joh. 16. 16. The Spirit searches the deep
things of God, and reveals them to the Saints, 1 Cor. 2. 20. He wll teach
them all things which they are able to bear: They shall have the openings of
Christ's mind, to steer their course whiles in this Wilderness of the World, and
shall receive the revelation of all truths necessary to Salvation.

Fifthly, They have choice and delicate provisions, and rich maintenance; this
is the duty of Parents to provide for their Obedient and indigent Children, 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any man provide not for his own House he has denied the
Faith: He cares for his Children, Mat. 6. 31, 32. 1 Pet. 5. 7. He that gives
his Son, how can he but with him freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32. Phil.
4. 19. My God shall supply all your wants: He that gives a Kingdom at the
Journeys end, will not deny Bread and Water in the way: He will provide for
their Bodies and Souls, for their Persons and Families.

Sixthly, Correction is theirs, Psalm. 89. 32. Heb. 12. 8. Correction is the
Saints Privilege, and great advantage; they have need of it, 1 Pet. 1. 6.
Though for a season, if need be, you are in heaviness, etc. And they have
advantage by it, Psa. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
Heb. 12. 10. But he for our profit.

Seventhly, Protection is another privilege of Children: He will keep them as
the Apple of his Eye, Psa. 17. 8. He will hide them in the secret of his
Tabernacle, Ps. 31. 20. He will keep them Day and Night, Isa. 27. 3. He gives
his Angels charge concerning them, Psa. 91. 11, 12. Heb. 1. 14.

Lastly, The Kingdom is theirs: O think what rest, what joy, what holiness,
what perfection, what immutability, and Eternity of Glory is in Heaven! and
say, all this is my Estate by Adoption; I shall one day be possessed of it;
here I am poor, but there I shall be rich, here I am empty and hungry, there I
shall be full: here I am despised, there I shall be honored; here I have not a
house* lay my head in, there I shall have a Mansion to all Eternity; here one
and another says, come sit at my Foot, there shall I sit on a Throne, and be a
Crowned King for ever: Here my Comforts go, and my troubles stay; worms breed
in all my enjoyments, but thereis no Rust, nor Moth; no Decay, nor Death. O
blessed state indeed that Believers are Adopted to in Christ!

Fifthly, The last considerable thing in Adoption is, the Duties that flow from
such a state, and this is part of their privilege also, as being the Fruit of
an Adoption-state, and that which they are purchased as well as obliged unto by
the blood of Christ; all the filial duties of Believers are the fruits of
Adoption-Grace, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your Hearts. The Spirit of his Son to make you really such, and
to form in you the Nature, and work you to the duty of Sons. So that Adopted
Souls are not only chosen of God to be heirs with Christ, but are also begotten
of God into the Nature and Image of Christ, Romans 8: 29. Whom he did foreknow,
them he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son; that as
Christ carried himself as a Son, so should the Children of God in their
measure, and time and that by the same Spirit. Now these duties which Gods
Children are spirited and engaged to, are,

First, To love God as their Father, even from a sense of his Fatherly love, 1 John 4. 19. We love him because he first loved us. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy might:
The Lord thy God, because he has pleased to make thee his Son, and to place
thee in so near and high relation to himself, Psa. 31. 23. O love the Lord all
ye his Saints: You that are set apart for him, and Sanctified by him; O you of
all Persons from the sense of this relation should love him. This is a filial
duty, and so essential to Sons, as that it is put for the ground of all their
Obedience. Joh. 14. 13. If a man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father
will love him; that is, manifest his love to him as a Father. This is not a
forced but a natural love to God arising from that new Nature and Spirit of
Adoption in them; so that a Child of God may as well cease to be a Child, as
cease to have a disposition to love him: Indeed a gracious Soul may not always
actually love God, but he has a disposition to love him, and can appeal to God
that he knows he would love him, and there is nothing in all the World he can
value like him.

Secondly, To obey him, 1 Pet. 1. 14. As obedient Children, not fashioning your
selves according to former Lusts. It Is a great duty of Children to obey their
Parents in all things lawful, and so they that are Gods Children are much more
obliged to obey God, whose relation much more binds them, being so far above
all other relations, whose love constrains them, 2 Cor. 5. 14. whose Laws
invite them, they being holy, just, and good, Romans 7. 12. Whose rewards also
encourages them, there is a reward in keeping them, Psa. 19. 11. and a reward
upon those that keep them, Rev. 2. 10. Now this Child-like obedience differs
from all other obedience; in that, 1. It Is the fruit of faith, Joh. 8. 47. He
that is of God hears Gods word, that is obeys Gods word; but what an
Obedience is this, see the former ver. It is an Obedience from faith, ver. 46.
If I say the truth why do ye not believe me? 2. It Is the labor of love, 1
These. 1. 3. Remembering without ceasing your work of Faith and labor of love.
3. It Is delightful Obedience, Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the
inner Man.

Thirdly, A fear of offending him, Hos. 3. 5. And shall fear the Lord and his
goodness in the latter days. This is a filial fear arising from their relation
to God as their Father, 1 Pet. 1. 17. And if you call on the Father, etc. pass
the time of your sojourning here in fear. This is a fear springing from and
consisting with love; there is a fear that love casts out, 1 John 4. 18.
perfect love casts out fear, that is slavish fear: It Is such a fear as keeps
the Soul close to God, and not drive him from him, Jer. 34. 40. O how fearful
is such a Soul of offending God, Job 34. 31. He will do all he can to prevent
sin, Psa. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart that I may not sin against
thee.

Fourthly, A zeal for Gods glory, Psa. 69. 9. The zeal of thine house has
eaten me up: That is, the zeal which I have for thy house or for thy pure
Worship, against them that would corrupt it, has like fire consumed me. Zeal
is the burning fire of love which will not bear any thing that dishonours God:
So Phinehas could not endure to see God dishonored by the whoredoms of his
People, but in his zeal executes the Law upon one of the highest offenders,
Numb. 25. 11. The want of the zeal made Laodicea in danger of being spued out
of Gods mouth, Rev. 3. 16. and therefore God calls her to Repentance, and to
this zealous Spirit in his Worship, ver. 19. Be zealous and Repent. This zeal
was that Child-like temper that God commended in Ephesus, Rev. 2. 2. Thou can
not bear them that are evil: A zealous Soul cannot suffer any reproach on Gods
Name, Psa. 69. 20. Reproach has broken my heart. This Child-like zeal in
Craesus dumb Son opened his mouth when his Father was in danger to be slain.

Fifthly, A fiducial dependence on his care and faithfulness, Psa. 23. 1. The
Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want: Romans 8. 32. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all
your care upon him, for he cares for you: This was the Child-like confidence
of Job in his God, Job 13. 15. Though he slay me yet will I trust in him: This
dependence on the Fathers care quieted Musculus, when he was forced to labor
in the Town Ditch for his Maintenance.

Est deus in Coelis qui providus omnia curat,
Credentes nunquam deseruisse potest.
Mat. 6. 32. Your Heavenly Father knows you have need of all these things.

Sixthly, Humble Submission to him; Heb. 12. 9. Shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits and live, (...), The word notes an orderly
subjection, according to that order and place in which God has set a Man, that
subjection that is in an Inferior to a Superior: The same word is used of
Christ, Luke 2. 51. And he went down with them to Nazareth, and was subject to
them, that is, submitted himself to that place duty he owed to them as his
Parents.

Seventhly, A carefulness to please him, Isa. 56. 4. That choose the things that
please me, to them will I give within my house, a place and a Name better than
of Sons and Daughters. That is, such will I own for my Family, my Sons and
Daughters, that choose the things that please me. So did the Lord Jesus evidence
his filial duty to his Father, Joh. 8. 29. I do always the things that please
him, 1 John 3. 22.

Eighthly, An endeavor in all things imitable to resemble him, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
As he that called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation.
Luke 6. 36. Be ye merciful as your Father in Heaven is merciful. Mat. 5. 48. Be
ye perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect; that is, In the grace of love
to Enemies. Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye followers of of God as dear Children.

Ninthly, A laboring to walk worthy of so high relation, and nearness unto
God. 1 These. 2. 12. That you walk would worthy of God who has called you to
his Kingdom and Glory: Worthy of so high a Calling, like the Children of a
King; like Gideons Brethren, who all resembled the Children of a King; Judges
8. 18. Your duty is to live above the Children of this World, who only are wise
in their generation, Luke 16. 8. But be ye wise in the things of God, evidenc^
your highest wisdom to be in keeping ^he Law of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Live like
them that are Adopted Heirs of a Kingdom, even the Heavenly Kingdom, that
fades not away: O live above the snares and fears of this world.

Lastly, A maintaining a real Love to your Brethren, and an endeavor to live
peaceably with them, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous,
etc. 1 John 5. 1. Every one also that loves him that begets, loves him also
that is begotten, 1 John 3. 11. Genesis 13. 8. Let there be no strife, I pray
thee, between me and thee, between my Herdsmen, and thy Herdsmen, for we be
Brethren, Chap. 45. 24. See that you fall not out by the way, 2 Cor. 13. 11.

USE. Thus you see what a glorious Treasure Adoption-grace is; view over this
Inventory (Believer) and tell me what thou think of it: Is it not a Treasure
indeed, which all the Gold of Ophi^ cannot equallize? Nor all the glory of the
World worthy to be compared with? And see all this procured by the Sweat and
Blood, the Obedience and Death of the Son of God; and then say, whether Christ
be not precious indeed: Look upon the Children of this World in all their
Glory; view their privileges in their utmost latitude and extent; and answer
me whether a Believer in rags does not far surpass them. Christ speaks of
Solomon, that he in all his Glory, was not to be compared to one Lilly in the
Field. So one Saint, and Child of God infinitely excels the Great men of this
World, in all their Grandeur, and Advancements. O then admire the Lord Jesus on
this account also, for procuring Adoption-grace.

1. Quest. But how may I know whether I have obtained this Adoption-grace?

Answ. This is a point worth the enquiring into, and satisfaction in so
fundamental a point is very necessary: But it is the Office of Gods Spirit to
seal us up to the day of Redemption, and bear witness with our Spirits that we
are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. Men may lay down marks, but it is God must
determine the Quest. yet notwithstanding for thy resolution, (Believer)
consider,

First, Such are partakers of the Divine Nature, and are really Sons, as well
as Relatively, 2 Pet. 1. 4. They have the Image of God instampt upon their
Souls: They have the seed of Holiness, Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, and
Humility in them, 1 John 3. 9. Romans 8. 29. And they have received of his
fullness, Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16.

Secondly, Such prize nothing in all the world like to Relation to God, Ps. 73.
25. 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us,
that we should be called the Sons of God.

Thirdly, Christ is exceeding precious to such in whom they are chosen, and by
whom this Grace comes, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you that believe he is precious. None in
Heaven or Earth that they value like to Christ, they account all things but
dross and dung, in comparison of Christ's excellency, Phil. 3. 8.

Fourthly, Such will employ their greatest care to imitate God, Ephesians. 5. 1. 1 John 3. 22.

Fifthly, such have a Spirit of prayer and supplication, Romans 8. 15, 16. Gal.
4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father: Not Parts, not Light, not the gifts of Prayer only,
but such a Soul has the Spirit of Prayer, very strong strains of Faith and
Love run through all his Duties: He has a Spirit of boldness whereby he comes
to God as to a Father. O how earnest and unwearied are his breathings after
God; what wrestlings with God in secret has he, what pourings out of strong
cries to him as Christ did in the days of his Flesh, Heb. 5. 7. O the
struglings! O the wrestlings! O the ardent breathings of such for the pardon of
their sins, for the mortifying of their lusts, and for the reviving of their
graces: Now where the Spirit of Adoption is, there is the state.

Sixthly, Such are enabled to bear, and profit by affliction, Heb. 12. 7. If
you endure chastening God deals with you as with Sons.

Lastly, Such have endeared affections to the people of God, 1 John 3. 14. We
know we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren.

2. Quest. What must we do to obtain this Adoption-grace.

Answ. This is an act of Sovereign pleasure, and Free Grace, Romans 9. 15, 16,
18. It cannot be purchased by any thing in, or done by the Creature. You cannot
with Simon Magus buy this Relation, Act. 8. 18, 19. yet there are some ways in
which Adoption grace may be obtained; as, First, Get your Souls separated from
sin, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Secondly, Get justifying Faith, Ephesians. 2. 13, 19. Thirdly, Beg
the Spirit of Adoption, Gal. 4. 6. Lastly, Open the door of thy heart to the
Spirit, Psa. 24. 7. Rev 3. 20.


CHAP. XX.
The Confirmation of the new Covenant is the Fruit of Christ's purchase, proved
by several Arguments.

ANother glorious Fruit of Christ's blood, and purchased Treasure for saved
Souls, is, the establishment of the new Covenant, to Believers, and Believers
in the Covenant. This is the certain effect of Christ's death, the making sure
the Covenant to all his seed: That there is no more possibility of making it
void to the Heirs of promise. This is the great thing undertaken in the new
Covenant, that it shall be sure to all the seed, Romans 4. 16.

There are Eight things which secure this to Believers.

First, This new Covenant must needs be firm and unalterable, because the
reason why God ^^und fault with the old Covenant; was, because it was weak, and
could not secure those that were within it, Heb. 8. 8, 9. Which Covenant they
brake; though I was an Husband to them, says the Lord, Jer. 31. 32. Now if
this were the reason why God did alter the first Covenant; then the new
Covenant he makes in the room of it, must n^eds be free from this Imperfection
and mutability, or else it would abundantly reflect on the infinite wisdom of
God to make a new Covenant guilty of the same error.

Secondly, This was Gods design in making a new Covenant, that it might be
ordered in all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23. 5. That it might be firm, and
established upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. Why are they called better
promises? Are there better promises than the promises of Heaven and Glory? They
are called better, because more pure and absolute promises, and because it was
Gods design to make them sure, Romans 4. 16.

Thirdly, It is confirmed by the blood of Christ, and therefore the blood of
Christ is called the blood of the Covenant, Mat. 26. 28. This is my blood of
the new Testament: It Is the blood of the new Testament, in that it seals to the
fulfilling of this Covenant. The death of the Testatour makes the Testament to
be in full force, Heb. 9. 17. That now all the Promises and Legacies are
certain, and cannot be disappointed to the Legatees and Heirs of Salvation.
Again, this blood of Christ is the blood of the Covenant, and confirms it, in
that it makes good all the conditions of it, that whatever is required to make
this Covenant good, is undertaken by Christ, in the behalf of all his feed, and
therefore he is called the surety of the new Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. By death he
has fulfilled the Condition of the first, and undertaken for the fulfilling of
this new Covenant, in and by Believers: Yea, his obedience is for them, to
present them complete to the Father, notwithstanding all their failings.

Fourthly, This new Covenant is sure to Believers, because the Administation of
it is in the hands of Christ, Heb. 8. 6. But now he has obtained a more
excellent Ministry, by how much he is the Mediator of a better Covenant. The
whole trust about the Administration of new-Covenant-blessings, is devolved on
Jesus Christ; and therefore he is called the Mediator, and Minister of the
Covenant: So that the Covenant must needs be sure, seeing the dispose thereof
is by compact betwixt the Father and Christ, delivered into his hand upon the
account of his death: Now he that is the Believers Friend, Head, and Husband,
has all power in Heaven and Earth, to make good the Covanent to them, Mat. 28.
18. So that the promises of the Covenant cannot be forfeited by Believers,
being made over to Christ as to a Trustee for them, and their Covenant state
also being so surely confirmed, that they cannot fall from it.

Fifthly, Christ's sufficiency to see new-Covenant-promises made good, and
new-Covenantends accomplished to them, is security enough for their safety. He
is an alsufficient Savior, able to save to the utmost, all that come to God by
him, Heb. 7. 25. He is able to see Gods part fulfilled, having all the promises
in his hand, and all the things promised at his dispose; and he is able to see
the Believers part fulfilled also, for he has all that in him which is needful
for the making of the Condition good on their part: For,

First, He has all Wisdom in him, to make them wise to Salvation, Col. 2. 3.
He is made of God to his people Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Appointed of God to
receive Wisdom for them, whatever they need to guide them in the way, and fit
them for Salvation: Knowledge is necessary to Eternal Life, Joh. 17. 3. The
Image of God consists partly in it, Col. 3. 11. Without it the heart is not
good, Prove. 19. 2. No Faith without Knowledge, 2 Cor. 4. 4. No Obedience
without Knowledge, Psa. 18. 44. This is needful to discern the wiles of Satan,
2 Cor. 2. 11. The sinfulness of sin, Romans 7. 13. The preciousness of Christ, 1
Pet. 2. 7. The beauty of holiness, Ps. 110. 3. The love of Christ, that passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. The hope of your calling, and the things freely given of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. And for this end all Wisdom is laid up in Christ to be given
out to his people by his Spirit through his word; hence it is said, that
Believers have an Unction from the holy one, to teach them all things, 1 John
2. 20, 27. And the promise of the Spirit is made to them, to lead them into all
truth, Joh. 16. 13. So that whatever is needful for Saints to fit them for
Covenant-Duties and Mercies, all this is in Christ for them, and so he is able
to make the Covenant good to them.

Secondly, He has all Grace in him that tends to the fulfilling of this
Covenant in Believers and for them: He has received the Spirit without
measure; Joh. 3. 34. And why is this? But that from his fullness Believers may
receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. He is the fullness that fills all in
all, Ephesians. 1. 23. And therefore has promised Grace sufficient to his people in
all their temptations, 2 Cor. 12. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 13. under all their burdens,
Psa. 55. 22. For all duties and undertakings, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Chap. 4. 13. I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

Thirdly, He has all power in Heaven, and Earth put into his hand, Math. 28.
18. Power to bruise Satan under his peoples feet, Romans 16. 20. To subdue
Corruptions in them, Mic. 7. 19. To vanquish all their Enemies for them, Joh.
16. 33. Rev. 12. 11. To heal all their backslidings, Hos. 14. 4. To work all
their works in them, and for them, Isa. 26. 12. To give them Faith, and to
finish it, Heb. 12. 2. To keep them faithful to the death, 2 These. 2. 3. And to
secure the promised Fruit of all for them, Rev. 22. 12. and therefore
sufficiently able to make good Covenant-Promises to them, and to fulfill
Covenant-duties in them.

Sixthly, Christ's engagement to, and for his people, and his interest in them,
is another ground for the fulfilling of the Covenant; Christ has promised the
Father that he will bring them all to Glory, and has undertaken all their work
for them, Heb. 10. 7. And he has promised to them to make good his Covenant
when he persuaded their hearts to him. Heb. 8. 9, to 13. Isa. 55. 11. Again his
own interest in them is security enough: All the fruit of his death and
purchase lies in the fulfilling of the Covenant; if that be broken, he loses
all his hopes, and Obedience, he has dyed in vain, his blood and Intercession
are to no purpose, for herein lies all the travel of his Soul, Isa. 53. 10, 11.
In this is the enjoyment of all his delights, if this Covenant be not sure then
no Soul can be saved, and Christ should lose those delights he had in the
habitable parts of the Earth before the World was made. Pro. 8. 31. Saved Souls
are Christ's Crown and Glory, and how mangled and defective would Christ's Crown
be, should any one Perish who are interested in this Covenant? Upon this
depends all Christ's Mediatory Glory, Joh. 17. 4, 5. And should there be a
failure here, he would lose his expected Glory as Mediator. So that you see
the fruit of his Purchase, the delight of his Soul, and his Eternal Glory with
the Father, are all wrapped up in the accomplishment of this Covenant.

Seventhly, The Immutability of Gods Counsel, and the certainty of his
engagement, confirmed by an Oath, renders the new Covenant sure, Heb. 6. 17,
18. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of promise the
immutability of his Counsel confirmed it by an Oath: These are two immutable
things, Gods purpose, and his engagement, and because these could admit of no
variation, therefore the things Promised must be fulfilled indue time. Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, but the Counsel of God that must stand: It Is laid
upon Infinite Wisdom, and all things in order to the fullfiling of it, are made
so sure, that it cannot possibly be frustrated: He wants not sufficient Power
and faithfulness to reach his own designs, and therefore what he has
determined must come to pass, and upon this purpose of God is laid his promise:
He having first resolved upon it, is engaged to it.

Lastly, Another reason to prove the certainty of the new Covenant is taken
from the nature of the promises; they are absolute; it is true there are some
conditional promises as the effects of the other, but the fundamental promises,
and those which complete the Covenant of grace are altogether absolute; it is
true also, faith is a necessary qualification to interest a Person in these
promises, but when the Soul comes to have a propriety in them, the tenure of
them then is absolute, Jer. 31. 33, 34. Heb. 8. 9. He will put his Spirit
within them, and will cause them to walk in his Statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 25, to 28.
I will be a God to them, and they shall be my People, Jer. 32. 40. And I will
make an Everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to
do them good: But I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me: In which you see the condition is undertaken and secured, as
well as the promise and things promised; had it indeed depended upon
conditional promises alone, which doubting Souls have most in their eye, then
the failure of the condition would have forfeited the promises, and then they
had been nulled: But you see the promises of the new Covenant are absolute, and
therefore sure to all the seed, even to every one that believes in Jesus
Christ: These are the grounds of hopes the believers have, that the Covenant,
and every tittle of it, shall be made good to them; but that which does
meritoriously confirm it, is the blood of Christ: His death and suffering, on
which account it may be looked on as the sealing and confirming of it, and so
believers may see to whom they are beholding and obliged for all their
New Covenant stability.

USE. From this grand and glorious truth: The fulfilling and assurance of the
new Covenant, flows, 1. Wonderful Comfort to all true Believers. 2. Great
Obligations on them to thankfulness and Obedience.

First, This yields abundant Consolation to Believers, on a double account.

1. From the certainty. 2. From the Excellency of this Covenant.
First, From the certainty of this Covenant flows these streams of comfort.
First, In that all occasions of Jealousy about the love of God are cut off;
for if the Covenant be sure, then Gobs love is sure, and secured from all
mutability, and cessation, this being one great thing contained in it. Jer. 31.
3. I have loved thee with an Everlasting love. Gods love to his People is
Eternal, therefore sure: He does rest in his love to them, Zeph. 3. 17. The
word is (Jacharish) he will be silent in his love. Bucer renders it Silebit cum
dilecta sua: He shall be silent in his Beloved; that is (says he) He shall
cease from contending with her, being wholly delighted in her. But Montanus
renders it in the abstract, he shall be silent by reason of his love. Propter
dilectionem suam. But Cocceius and other Interpreters, render the letter (Beth)
In: He shall be silent in his love, or rest in his love, alluding to the
wonderful excess of affection in a Person, that through exceeding amorousness
cannot speak or express it for a time: Cocceius takes it for the pardoning of
their sin, and ceasing from those former strokes of his displeasure: And this I
suppose may be chiefly intended here; to wit, The greatness of his love no^ed
by silence, and exuberant Joy, with a remove of all tokens of his anger, and
this to be fixed and perpetual; so the Apostle assures Believers, that the love
of God in Christ is irremoveable, Romans 8. 35. All the World cannot withdraw
Christ's heart from his People, where he once loves he loves to the end, Joh.
13. 1. This a believer may be assured of in the New Covenant, that Gods love
changes not, his heart is still toward his people, however his dealings may
be with them.

Secondly, Then all the grounds of tormenting fear are now removed. If the
Covenant of grace be confirmed to believers, then there is no Just ground for
them to entertain slavish fear, Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received the Spirit
of Bondage again to fear. There Is no cause for such to fear, 1. That God is
their Enemy; being once reconciled to them in his Son, he can hate them no
more. 2. Their sins shall never Condemn them, Romans 8. 1. 3. God will never
totally leave them, Heb. 13. 5. 4. They shall not wholly fall from God. Jer.
32. 40. 5. They have no cause to fear the wrath to come, Romans 5. 9. Much more
being justified by his blood we shall be saved from wrath through him. Thus you
see all the grounds of tormenting fears are gone: It Is true a Cautelous fear
and circumspection may be maintained, but the workings of a Bondage-Spirit are
removed.

Thirdly, Then dejecting Conclusions from self-impotency to fulfill this
Covenant, and all seeming difficulties in the way are wholly Insignificant; if
this Covenant be confirmed by Christ to and for Believers, then no
insufficiency in them to make good these Covenant-Duties can render it void.
Because,

First; the Certainty of this Covenant depends not on the Creatures ability,
but on Gods Faithfulness; it is true, if this new Covenant (as the first) did
wholly depend upon the Integrity and Faithfulness of the Soul in Covenant; then
indeed the enjoyment of those mercies and promises comprehended in it would be
very dubious; but it is not so, for God himself has undertaken the
accomplishment of it, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. Who shall also confirm you to the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ; God is faithful
by whom ye are called to the fellowship of his Son Christ Jesus our Lord. So 1
These. 5. 23, 24. So that the Saints Confirmation in holiness, and preservation
to glory depends on the faithfulness of God in Christ, who having persuaded
their hearts to embrace his call, will finish Salvation-work in, and for them.

Secondly, Strength sufficient to finish their work, and to obtain Salvation is
ensured to them. 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is
made perfect in weakness. Grace in thee may fail, but grace in God cannot:
Christ has a stock sufficient for thee, to carry thee through Temptations, and
to lift thee above thy Corruptions. So Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. The Spirit is a Fountain that
will fill up your empty vessels, supply all your wants, and engage your hearts
to keep the way of his Commandments.

Fourthly, Then none of the well-grounded hopes of believers shall be lost,
Psalm. 119. 49. Remember thy word unto thy Servant upon which thou have caused
me to hope. God will never forget to fulfill those promises which he causes us
to confide in, for he is faithful who has promised, Heb. 10. 23. Romans 5. 6.
And hop^ makes not ashamed. That is, by reason of a disappointment; shame
usually arises from some frustrations of expectation, but this cannot befall
well-grounded hopes, because they have their dependence upon the firm word of
God which cannot be disappointed.

Fifthly, Then your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, if the Covenant be
confirmed, then you cannot run in vain, or lose any part of that work you do
for God, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Gal. 6. 7, 8. What a man sows that shall he reap. He
that sows to the Spirit shall reap life Everlasting: O Souls, all your
sincere duties will appear again, and bring their reward with them. All your
pains in serving God, hardships in following him, dangers in owning him, and
industrious labors to please him, shall be fully and certainly recompensed
with a far more and exceeding Massy Crown of Glory.

Sixthly, Then all your warrantable desires shall be satisfied in due time: For
this is part of the Covenant-promise, Psa. 37. 4. Delight thy self also in the
Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart, Psalm. 145. 16, 19. All
the breathings of your Souls after God, and unfeigned longings for more
spotless holiness, more perfect victory over sin, for humble submission to
divine pleasure, more sincerity of heart, and raised capacities for service,
shall certainly be satisfied first or last.

Seventhly, If the Covenant of grace be sure, then nothing can make the
believers state miserable, indeed he may seem to be in a bad condition, when
under the power of temptation and corruption, and pressed grievously with
severe and bitter Providence, and strokes of seeming vengeance, but yet his
state is good; who could have past a favorable interpretation on the
afflictions of Job, when on a dunghill, and on the trials of David when pursued
by Absalom? yet we find there was honey in these Rods, and David could
notwithstanding lie down and sleep in peace, Psa. 3. 5. So Josiah in an evil
day, when wars and frowning providence did surround him all about, yet dyed in
peace, 2 Kings 22. 20.

Lastly, Then a gracious Soul is a blessed Soul, both here and to all Eternity,
because this Covenant takes care for the good things of this ^ife, and that
which is to come: 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the promise of this life and that
which is to come: Hence the Scripture does so often pronounce the Godly Man to
be a blessed Man, Psa. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, Psa. 112.
2. Psa. 141. 2. Thus we have now briefly touched on some grounds of Comfort that
Believers may derive from the certainty of this new Covenant; we now come to
consider,

Secondly, The excellency of this Covenant which the blood of Christ so
confirms to Believers; this new Covenant is a choice and precious Covenant;
what David said of Goliah's Sword may be affirmed of this; That there is none
like it, 1 Samuel 21. 9. This would abundantly apear, could I with consistency to
my design here, run out at large in the demonstration of this great truth; but
to touch a little on some evidences of its excellency under these two general
considerations.

1. The things that are promised in this Covenant. 2. The way appointed of God
to attain them.
First, The things stipulated in this Covenant, are,

First, Great and glorious things, the products of infinite Grace, and
discoveries of unconceivable greatness, such Promises as were never offered in
any other Covenant: In this Covenant God makes over himself to Believers to be
their God, their Sun and Shield, their exceeding great reward, all that he is,
and all that he has to be theirs, so far as they are capable to receive: I
will be to them a God; that is in the Covenant: He whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain; whom the Angels cannot define, far above the searches of the
most refined Spirits, far beyond the knowledge of those that always dwell in
his sight; this invisible unknown God in this Covenant makes himself over to
Believers: He will be theirs for ever, Heb. 8. 10. A God in the nearest
Relations that Creatures are capable to approach to him in: He will be a
Father, Husband, Head to them, and to every one of them in the Lord Jesus
Christ: To love and delight in them; to feed and cherish them; to care and
provide for them; to dwell and abide with them; to impart, and Communicate of
all his fullness and sweetness to them, so far as it suits with the measure of
Christ, and their best good: Is not this a great thing indeed, that God should
make over himself to the Believer? O glorious Covenant!

Again, Another great and glorious thing engaged in this Covenant is, That
Believers shall be to him a people, a peculiar people; his own people, his
Jewel, his Treasure, Mal. 3. 17. They shall be the Apple of his Eye; the
delight of his Soul, a Seal upon his Heart: A people near to God, Psa. 148. 14.
Nearer to him than all the world besides; nearer than the Angels, that never
sinned: What a wonderful thing is this! They shall be dandled on his knee: Lie
in his Bosom; sit at his Table here; and sit down on Thrones in his Kingdom to
all Eternity: O what a wonderful Covenant is this! This should fill the
Believers heart brim full of Joy and Consolation.

Again, He has promised in this Covenant, that he will write his Law in their
Hearts, and put his truth in their inward parts, Jer. 31. 33. They shall be his
Epistle known and read of all men, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. He will lead them into all
truth, Joh. 16. 13. He will show them his Covenant* Psa. 25. 14. He will be
merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and remember their sins no more, Heb. 8.
12. He will put his Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his ways,
Ezekiel. 36. 27. He will give them Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them, Psa. 84. 11. He will admit them into his special presence at
all times, through the blood of his Son, Heb. 10. 19, 20. He will give them the
Spirit of Adoption to cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15. They shall be Kings and
Priests to God, clothed with beautiful Garments, a right noble seed all
glorious within; and advanced into intimate familiarity with God in Christ by
the Spirit, Rev. 1. 6. They shall be kept by his mighty power through Faith to
Salvation, 1 Pet. 4. 5. O, are not these great things indeed for poor sinful
Dust and Ashes, mercy-abusing Creatures! O we want Hearts to contain them, and
Tongues to express them.

Again, As this Covenant is made up of great things, so it contains in it all
good things, Jer. 32. 40. All Gods Thoughts and Resolves, are to do them good;
all his dispensations are bringing them in good, Romans 8. 28. O what a Glorious
thing is this! Yea they are suitable things that are wrapped up in this Covenant:
Such as are suitable to their Natures; suitable to their Spiritual desires;
suitable to their wants, and suitable to their advantages: The new Covenant
carries nothing Hetrogeneous to the well-being of the Saints: O what a
wonderful thing is this! Great things indeed are contained in this
New Covenant, that tends to the infinite contentment, pleasure and profit of
saved Souls: Surely this must needs fill Believers Joys, and yield them merry
days here, and prepare for them Rivers of pleasure to all Eternity.

Secondly, Consider the way which God has appointed for the attaining those
glorious things, and this will advance the Believers comfort: Persons may come
at good things in a bad way, and that would abate much of their consolation:
But these great and glorious things contained in the Covenant of Grace for
Believers, are g^ven out in a most excellent way: For,

First, It is in a way of Grace; If God had given them to be bought and sold,
to be purchased by man's merit, it would not have been so sweet: But they are
held out freely, without money, without price, Isa. 55. 1. It is by Grace you
are saved, not of your selves, Ephesians. 2. 8. There Is nothing for man to glory in,
about his Salvation, that is of his own: Saved Souls are created to their
mercies: They are prepared for their mercies, Romans 9. 23. And their mercies are
prepared for them, 1 Cor. 2. 9. They are also prepared for their Duties, in
order to their mercies: They are Vessels of mercy fitted and prepared for mercy
and glory, 2 Timothy 2. 21.

Secondly, It is in a self-humbling, and abasing way: The more the Creature is
abased, the more Divine Glory is exalted; and the more God is all in all, the
more is the saved Souls Glory, Comfort, and Joy; the more the loftiness of man
is brought down, the more God alone is exalted, Isa. 2. 17. And the more God is
exalted, the more Believers are pleased: Now God gives out these New Covenant
mercies in such a way, as may most abase self; for he gives them out in a way
of Believing, and no Grace more cuts off self than Believing: All boasting and
Self-glorying is cut off by Believing, Romans 3. 27. Therefore God has ordered
such a way for Souls to come at New Covenant Mercies, as may cut off all Self
glorying, that so their comforts may rise to the greatest measure, to be full
Joy and Consolation, to see the Creature abased, and God exalted: There Is
nothing but Man's cursed self can indeed prove a real Enemy to his comforts: A
Child of God is never more filled with the pure Wine of Consolation, than when
he is emptied of all the Lees and Dregs of his own vainglory.

Thirdly, It is in a pure and clean way, that God brings saved Souls to these
New Covenant mercies: It is in a way of Holiness: No uncircumcised shall pass
therein: It is in that way of Grace, and Purity, without which none shall see
the Lord: It is the upright, pure in Heart, the sincere Soul shall attain to
these great and glorious things: The clean Hands, and the clean Heart, Mat. 5.
8. Psa. 140. 13. Psa. 24. 4. Isa. 35. 8.

Fourthly, It is in a sweet and pleasant way: A delighful way, for such are all
the ways of Holiness to gracious Souls, sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb:
They take wonderful ^leasure in Holiness, Psa. 119. 17. Prove. 3. 17. Legal ways
were hard and troublesome ways. The Yoke of the Law is a heavy Yoke, Act. 15.
10. But the Yoke of Christ is an easy Yoke, Mat. 11. 30. O that God should
confirm such a Covenant as this, that contains such glorious things, and all
these ensured to Believers, and they led to them in such a choice way; surely
this must needs yield wonderful comfort, and advance the Believers Joy.

Another improvement of this grand truth is by way of Duty.

There Is nothing more strengthens the Believvers Bond to Obedience, than the
consideration of the certainty of the New Covenant: Not to mention all those
arguments that might be urged to engage Redeemed Souls to all manner of
Holiness from the certainty of the Covenant: I shall insist only on these two.

First, The consideration of that Infinite Love of Christ, that led him through
such a costly way to make good this Covenant: O what manner of Love is this, if
duly weighed? That the Son of God should come down, and be made man, take upon
him the form of a Servant; engage to the Service of the first Covenant, to make
good all the violated conditions thereof by his sufferings, and all the
precepts thereof by his Obedience: That he should be made a Curse, and taste of
death, and all to make this Covenant sure: That he should shed his blood, to
make firm this Covenant in all the parts of it: That he should come and melt
himself to death, that the seal might be put upon this new Covenant. O what
wonderful Love is this, for nothing could make it sure, but the Testatours
blood, and that he would shed his Blood to make it sure. Now then there is no
greater constraints to duty, than the sense of the Love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.
14. The Love of Christ constrains us. Arguments of Love are irresistible; it
silences the Believing Soul in all his resistances: When Arguments fetched from
the Law, do only drive the Soul to Duty; nay sometimes bind back from duty:
That at such a time the sense of the Love of Christ does draw, yea post the
Soul away to Obedience, Draw me, and we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. that
is, Let out the potent influences of thy sweet Love upon me, and then I will
hasten after thee, or further my Obedience of thee.

Secondly, Another reason for Obedience is taken from the certain blessed Ends,
and Fruit of New Covenant Obedience, which is no less than Eternal Life, Romans
6. 22. All the blessings of the everlasting Covenant are ensured to such, Ps.
103. 17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him; to such as keep his Covenant, to them that remember his
Commandments to do them: Mercies in the way, mercy in the end, are all ensured
to them that fear him, to them that Evangelically keep his Covenant, Psa. 25.
10. All the paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep his
Covenant and his Testimonies. There Is great reward in the very keeping his
Commandments, and reward in the latter end: O what promises are entailed to
Gospel-Obedience: Nay, you will not only have the Fruit of your own Graces, but
you will have the Fruit of Christ's Grace, the Fruit of his Obedience, and his
Righteousness too: Therefore, O what reason have such to obey! seeing the
Covenant is made sure, they cannot miscarry, their labor shall not be lost;
considering the Love of God, that should engage them to Obedience, and the
blessed Issue of it.

Thus much of the sixth Branch, and Item of Chist's Inventory, and the Riches
of his Purchase.

CHAP. XXI.
The Heavenly Inheritance is the Fruit of Christ's purchase.

WE shall briefly add one particular more of the Purchase of Christ, that is,
The Consummation, and completing of all the Believers happiness, and
comprehension of his chiefest treasure, which is the purchased possession of
Glory, Ephesians. 1. 14. Until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the
praise of his Glory: that is, unil we come to inherit this glory purchased by
Christ: O what a blessing is this! All that have been treated of already, are
but little parcels of this total sum of a Believers happiness: O when the whole
treasury of Christ shall be opened, and set forth to the view and enjoyment of
saved Souls: When all Christ's personal Glory, as Mediator, shall be discovered
to them, and become their Glory; when all his purchased Glory for them also,
shall then be entered on by them; all that he has received for himself, and all
he has procured for them, shall all be made over to them; This will be a
blessed Eternity indeed; when their Crowns of Massy Glory shall be set upon
their heads, and when they also shall be set down upon Thrones of dignity,
honored with the reflections of Christ's Majesty, and unconceivable grandeur.
This is a mystery indeed, but a real truth to all Believers: O blessed purchase
indeed! who can tell over this sum, when the Saints shall be so enriched with
the Riches of Christ, clothed with the beautiful Garments of his praise? O
wonderful Glory indeed! Decked with the Jewels of the Graces of his Spirit; and
filled with his holiness brim full: When they shall be satiated with his
pleasures, but never tired; sit down at the Well head, and drink full draughts
of pleasure; Take in their fill of the highest consolations; and unknown
Sweetness, Love, and delight from Christ. O this must needs be wonderful
enriching! when they be, ever, ever, ever with the Lord; where no clouds can
darken their sights, of their blessed mansion, and their blessed God; where no
vail can intervene between them and their Beloved: Where Rust, Moth, Worms,
Time, and Death can never come to wear out their enjoyments: O blessed Treasure
indeed! Where Eternity shall be the Date, Immensity the Bounds, and
Immutability the fixation of their happiness. But so it shall be with saved
Souls in Heaven, when they are got through the Sea of Christ's blood to Glory.
O Believers, Do not your hearts leap within you? What no kind of affection at
all to these things? Is all this as a dream to you? Where are your Hearts? O be
affected at this wonderful blessedness Christ has procured in Heaven for you.
O blessed, blessed Eternity! where saved Souls shall wear a Crown, that fades
not away; where their Garlands shall be ever fresh and green; their joys ever
new; and their enjoyments never wearing; where all their sown seed of
Spiritual-Duties and Gospel-sufferings, shall spring up to Glory, to a full
crop of blessedness, to an harvest of pleasure, proportionable to all the Love
of God to them; to the utmost measures of their Graces, and acts of their
Faithfulness; the large extent of divine promises, yea suited to the infinite
deservings of Christ for his saved ones, Glory, as much as can be claimed: This
will set forth the Treasures of Christ to be boundless, bottomless, endless,
without all circumference; higher then all Altitude, broader than all Latitude,
deeper then all profunditude: O treasures indeed! Saints and Angels may look
into them, but can never see the bottom: In comparison of which Riches in
Heaven, all the warmest Apprehensions, all the sweetest tastes, all the highest
enjoyments of Saints here, are no more than a drop to the Ocean; like one ear
of Corn compared with all the fields in the world, clothed with fruitfulness;
No more then a single Dust, to all the Beds of Sand in the whole Sea. O what is
glory! Christians* are these Jewels so valuable, that you can bear about with
you here? O what a Cabinet then is Heaven? O what are the Treasures laid up
there! O wonderful large indeed! Weigh the utmost pleasures, and delighting,
ravishing consolations that all the Believers in the World can get by this side
Heaven, all the graces, all the Joys of all the Saints in the World put
together, compared with glory, is no more than a single grain to a Massy weight
of Glory: O it is that which Men and Angels cannot express: All that Believers
have here of Heaven, it is but as Bread and Water in the way, the choicest and
richest feasting is reserved for the other World, for the Kings Table, where
are all Varieties, all Rich Dishes, all the choice Procurements, that may feed
and satiate the most curious desires of saved Souls: Do thou meet with high
Comforts at a Sacrament? wonderful refreshings in Ordinances? yet they are but
a Morsel or two thy Father gives thee to cheer thy Spirits, compared with the
varieties he has reserved for thee in Heaven: Or as the short allowance of
some Rich Heir whiles in his Nonage, compared with the great Inheritance he is
to possess when at full age; or as the first fruits which are inconsiderable
compared with the lump. This is glory, this is Heaven, there is the place where
all Christ's Treasures are laid up: O Christians! could you but get a look into
glory, you would say; O unsearchable riches indeed: Treasures past finding out.

Thus have I dispatched the first assertion, and shown somewhat of those vast
riches that are in Christ; and though sometime has been spent in opening them,
yet it is but little of all those Treasures, which are prepared for them that
are Heirs of the Promise.

CHAP. XXII.
The second and third assertions proved: Showing that those vast treasures of
Christ are opened in and by the Gospel, that it is the will of God they should
be tenderd to the chiefest of Sinners.

I Come now to demonstrate the truth of the second assertion, which is this,
That those vast and hidden Treasures which are found in Jesus Christ, are
opened in and by the Gospel.

For the proof of which I shall demonstrate these three things.

First, That those treasures of Grace and Glory, which are in and come by
Christ, can no otherwise be known, than by the Gospel, they are deeps that
cannot be fathomed by all the greatest lengths of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God: Things that lay
deep in his breast, which none could know but himself, and his own Spirit. By
these deep things the Apostle understands the hidden grace of God in Christ,
with the fruits of it, called ver. 12. The things freely given us of God. These
are the Riches of Christ, or that come by Christ, called, Romans 11. 33. The
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: These riches of
grace that come by Christ are so deep, that none can know them except they be
revealed: Therefore the wisdom that makes wise to Salvation is called hidden
wisdom, 1 Cor: 2. 7. And Treasures of wisdom are said to be hid in Christ,
called the mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. (...), from the Heb. word,
Mistar, or hidden, or secret things: Some derive it, (...), from shutting the
mouth up, because such things must be concealed, or as others think it (...),
Shutting up the senses as well as the mouth, it being a thing hard to be known,
such a secret is the great Power of Salvation by Christ: A religious secret
(says one) that cannot be known without some extraodinary flatus, and such are
the riches of Christ, hidden things, hid in God, Ephesians. 3. 9. The fellowship of
the Mystery which from the beginning of the World have been hid in God, and
therefore cannot be known by all the wisdom of men without the revelation of
the Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 3. 5. And therefore it was an unsound assertion of Mr. John
Goodwin: That the Sun and Moon do Preach the Gospel, seeing it cannot be known
but by the revelation of the Spirit.

Secondly, These Treasures of Christ are Doctrinally contained in the word of
the Gospel, there is the only discovery of them Doctrinally, there is no other
word can discover them, and thus they are set forth, and brought to light, 2 Timothy 1. 10. But now is made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by
the Gospel. There are actually exhibited to the view of Believers, all the
mysteries of godliness, so the Gospel is called the revelation of the mystery
which is kept secret since the World began, Romans 16. 25. The Gospel is the
wisdom of God that makes wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. There are all things
opened necessary to Salvation: There are words whereby we may be saved, Acts
11. 4. In the word of truth are all the Prophesies of Christ, and of those
great and glorious things that God would accomplish upon and by him, Acts 3.
18. In the word are all the promises of grace and Glory, all things needful to
life and godliness, and these promises are revealed in the word of God: All the
promises ever God made to the Sons of Men are in the word, and therefore the
promises are joined with the Law, and the service of God, the glory and the
Covenant, and all those royalties that in Scripture are made over to Believers,
Romans 9. 4. There Is all that God has spoken by the Prophets, Luke 24. 25.
There Is all discovered that ever God Doctrinally revealed of his love to
Sinners, and the things that are freely given to them, there is the whole
Doctrine of Christ concerning his Person, Nature, Offices, Works, Excellencies,
Promises, what he has done for them, and procured for them; what is laid up in
him, and shall be laid out by him to all that come to him; there are the
openings of his heart, and the secrets of his love to them, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
Therein the Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1. 17.
The deep things of God 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 12, 16. Things that eye has, not seen,
nor ear heard.

Thirdly, Those great and glorious things contained in the Gospel, are opened
by the Spirits Ministration in the Gospel: This is Gods appointed way to
discover and bring to light those glorious things. Tit. 1. 3. But has in due
time, manifested his word through Preaching, which is committed to me according
to the Commandment of God our Savior: This is Gods way to manifest the deep
things of the Word by Preaching: This he has appointed as a standing Ordinance
in his Church through all ages, that some should be set apart for this work, to
open and to discover the glorious secrets of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13. 2
Cor. 4. 2, 6, 7. To these the Lord Jesus Christ reveals his truth, even the
mysteries of it by his Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 5. That they might Preach, and open them
to others: This way God is pleased to work* thus he taught the Eunuch by
Philip, Acts 8. 26. and Paul by Ananias, Acts 9. 11. and Cornelius by Peter,
Acts 10. 5.

3. Assertion. It is the will of God that those great and glorious Treasures of
Christ in the Gospel should be opened and tendered to Sinners, yea to the
chiefest of Sinners.

This is as certain, as choice a truth, and precious news to sinners. For the
demonstration of which, I shall, 1. Prove (...) by four arguments. 2. The (...)
by four reasons.

First, That it is really true, that the Lord Jesus Christ is willing that all
those unsearchable Treasures of his should be tendered to Sinners, yea the
chiefest of Sinners.

First, Christ's willingness to shed his blood for Sinners, shows he is willing
his Treasures should be opened and tendered to them: He that gives the cause,
gives the effect, Causa Causae, est Causa Causati; Christ's blood is the
procuring cause of all those Treasures that are purchased for Believers; and
that which gives a right to his personal riches too, Ephesians. 1. 7, 11. Now if
Christ be willing to give his blood for believers to procure those Treasures,
then surely he is willing to have them opened and tendered to them, he that
wills the means to the end, wills the end too: Should not Christ be willing
that his riches should be opened and tenderd to Sinners, it would lay a great
reflection on his intentions in dying for Sinners, and leave the charge of
unfaithfulness on truth it self; which how unjust it is let all that are
rational judge; but it is for sinners Christ has shed his blood, yea for the
chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Romans 5. 6. In due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly: (...), It Is the same word the Apostle uses to express the people
before the flood by, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Now what these were Moses tells us, Genesis 6.
5. Ignorance, Profaneness, Contempt of God, and the vilest abominations were
committed by those whom Christ came to redeem, yet to these would he have the
Gospel sent, and his Treasures opened and tendered.

Secondly, His appointing and sending a Ministry on purpose to Preach the
Gospel to sinners proves it: This was the first thing the Lord Jesus Christ did
when he ascended on high, he gave gifts to Men, that of Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers; and why was this? it was for the work of the
Ministry, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12. And what is the work of the Ministry? Why to
open and Preach Christ Crucified to the World, to discover
reconciliation-mercy, and all the Treasures of Christ concerned therein, 1 Cor.
5. 18, 19. Joh. 20. 21. As my Father has sent me so send I you: Now if the
Lord Jesus sets apart a Ministry on purpose to attend this work, as Acts 6. 4.
Then surely he is willing Sinners should have those riches opened and tendered
to them.

Thirdly, The choice annointings he gives them to this end, evidenceth his
willingness the Gospel should be Preached, and his Treasures opened to the
World; as the Father has anointed him, and given the Spirit without measure
to him, so has he anointed his Messengers with measures of the Spirit for
this work, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 11. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every one to profit withal: That is the gifts of the Spirit by a Metonymy of
the effect; and given to every one to whom it is given, for this end to profit
withal (so Piscator)* The Apostle speaks here of gifted Persons in the Church
of Corinth, whether they were ordinary or extraordinary Teachers, they had all
choice gifts imparted to them by the Spirit to that end: All whom Christ sends
to Preach the Gospel have the annointings of his Spirit to fit them for that
work, Isa. 50. 4. The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: The Prophet
here (says Calvin) does personate all the Ministers of Christ in all ages. And
tells us that all those Christ sends to Preach the Gospel, he does give suitable
endowments to them for that end; he does impart his truth to them by his Spirit
that they might teach others: This is the Reason Christ gives the Spirit of his
Father, Mat. 10. 20. He makes them teachable, that they might teach others:
Hence Cyprian says, Non bonus est Doctor qui non est docilis: Christ reveals
those treasures of his to his Servants that they might open them to others,
Mat. 10. 8. Freely ye have received freely give.

Fourthly, The charge he lays upon his Messengers, demonstrates this truth, he
does command them to go and preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark. 16. 15.
It Is an Hyberbolical Synecdoche of the genus, Every Creature put for all
Nations, says Piscator. The word of reconciliation is committed to them as to
Ambassadors, faithfully to impart it to those they are sent to: There Is a
necessity laid upon them to preach the Gospel, and a woe if they do not, 1 Cor.
9. 16. A necessity, not of Coaction, but Obligation, and divine command, says
Paraeus.

Secondly, The (...), why Christ is so willing those Treasures should be
tendered to Sinners.

First, That so he might give the world a proof of the greatness of his Love to
perishing Sinners, and of the largeness of his bowels to poor mankind, Ephesians. 3.
9. To make all men see what is the Fellowship of the mystery, etc. Now what was
the fellowship of this mystery? The Apostle tells us, ver. 6. That the Gentiles
should be Fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in
Christ by the Gospel. This sets forth the wonderful love of God in Christ to
fallen man; that God is willing the mystery of Salvation should be opened to
such vile Creatures as the Gentiles were; worshippers of Idols and Devils, such
unclean and filthy Creatures, the chiefest of sinners, Tit. 3. 3. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
Such were all before Conversion, they had fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor. 10.
20. And this commends the love of God indeed, that he should reveal Jesus
Christ to the vilest sinners, and tells the world it is by Grace any are saved,
Ephesians. 2. 8. and of the riches of mercy, Tit. 3. 5, 6. It lets sinners know that
God is no respecter of persons, he saves none for any worth in them, but for
his great love in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 19.

Secondly, That the worst of sinners might be encouraged to come to Christ, and
none be exempted from Salvation but those that exclude themselves, Joh. 7. 37.
This is Christ's design thereby to draw sinners to himself by the savor of his
Ointments, Joh. 12. 32. O the precious discoveries of his excellencies are
attractive; the riches of Christ, and the Glory of his Kingdom have a wonderful
influence to persuade sinners to him, Gal. 4. 15. A seen and believed
blessedness in the ways of Christ, will make the Soul part with all for him,
and come on any terms to the enjoyment of it: Terrors contract the Souls
affections to God, but mercy and the excellency of Christ does constrain them;
now Christ is willing that every lost sinner that sees and believes in him
should be saved.

Thirdly, That so all his Elect that lie among the perishing world might
thereby be gathered in, Joh. 10. 16. The Election must obtain, though the rest
be blinded, Romans 11. 7. The Lord Jesus Christ cannot lose one Soul the Father
has given him, they must come in first or last; and for their sakes, as the
evil-days are shortened, Math. 24. 22. so shall the Gospel-days be continued
till Christ has gathered all his Elect into union with himself from the four
winds, even as many as are ordained to Life: Now there is no such way to fetch
in Souls to Christ, as by opening those Treasures.

Lastly, That they who perish under the Gospel might be left without excuse,
Joh. 15. 22. They have nothing to plead against damnation, who despise so great
Salvation, Heb. 2. 3. And turn their backs on such tendered blessedness: To
leave tried Gold for Counters, and Treasures for Trifles, the portion of Saints
for the pleasures of sin, is utterly inexcusable; and this is one reason of
Christ's opening his Treasures to the world, it is to justify his severity
against unbelievers, that will not come to him that they may have life; he will
have every mouth stopped, and the whole world of unbelieving sinners become
guilty before him, Romans 3. 19. Thus have I dispatched the third Assertion.

I now come to make Application of the whole.

CHAP. XXIII.
Containing two Branches of Information: What a great blessing the Gospel is:
The greatness of their sin that oppose the Gospel.

IF there are great, Glorious, and unsearchable Riches in Christ; If it be by
the Gospel these Riches are brought forth, opened, and tendered to sinners; O
then what a mercy is it for Souls to enjoy the Gospel! The Gospel is the field
in which this treasure is hid: The Ministry of the Gospel is the digging out,
and laying open this treasure: The G^spel is the Cabinet in which these Jewels
lie locked up: And the Ministry of the Gospel, by the Spirit, is the opening
and unlocking this Treasury and Cabinet: Jesus Christ is this treasure: The
Ministers of the Gospel are Messengers and Ambassadors of Christ, sent into
the world with news of this Treasure, and empowered to treat with perishing
Souls about making them Rich: The Ministers of Christ are Stewards of this
great Lord of Glory, entrusted with the tendering and Ministerial disposings of
these vast treasures, according to his instructions: This way God brings to
light the hidden things of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this Treasure in
Earthen Vessels: As if the Apostle should say: O Corinthians, there is a
treasure, there are Riches in the Gospel, and we have these Riches in Earthen
Vessels: The Lord commits them to us, that we may open them, and make a tender
of them to perishing sinners, according to his order. Our business is to preach
Christ, and open the treasures of Christ, with all his vast Inheritance to
every Soul that receives him: O then the singular happiness they have, that
have the word of this Grace sent to them: Oh what a mercy is it to live within
the dayspring from on high, and under the joyful found: To hear the good news
of a Saviors being born, and offered to perishing Souls: To have the tidings
of those Soul-enriching overtures; O think upon the blind perishing world, that
live without the Line of Communication, with whom Free Grace holds no
correspondence about Salvation, those Indians and Pagans that live without the
Gospel, and then reflect upon the privileges you enjoy, and see what a mercy
this is; and then say, who has made you to differ; O why should the Sun shine
on your borders, and the day spring from on high visit your coasts; leaving
others to perish without regarding? O is it not Grace that God should visit you
with the Gospel, and suffer others to persecute it? O these are the motions of
Sovereign pleasure, and the paths of distinguishing mercy: O sinners! how much
are you indebted to this free unsearchable Grace, that should pass by so many
parts of the World, and pitch on this little spot of ground? O wonderful Mercy
indeed! That these swarms of Mellefluous dews and privileges should light on
your branches: That the Cloud by day and a Pillar of Fire by night should come,
and stand over you. O little do you know what it is to lie in darkness, and in
the Region and shadow of Death: O! this should cause you to value the Gospel:
who can tell but they that feel it, what it is to be shut up in the Region of
death, and be bound in chains of darkness; to lie in a wast howling Wilderness,
where there is none to guide their feet in the way of peace: O what a sad
judgment is this! O Souls! If ever you live to see, the light put out, and the
Ministry of the Gospel gone from England, then you will know what doleful
miseries are; and will you not prize the Gospel then, that is such a wonderful
mercy, beyond all your Estates, and all the enjoyments of the whole world? How
will some men value those Sciences that feed their natural minds with
knowledge, and feast their Rational desires with discoveries of some unknown
Notions: And will not you love the Gospel, that brings to light the glorious
truths of Christ? How will Tradesmen prize the Rules of their Arts, that make
them skilful! How will the Worldlings hug those Counsels that help to make them
rich! And should not you prize the Gospel, that comes to make you wise to
Salvation? Shall men prize instructions about the obtaining of perishing
things? And shall the Counsel God gives you about the Food that endures, be
slighted? O Souls! what shall I say? O labor to know the worth of the Gospel,
before you feel the want of the Gospel: O prize it, prize it indeed. The Gospel
is the best Treasure, the best Comforter, the best Friend that is in the World:
It Is the best Counselor in all sinners difficulties; it shows you the safest,
and best way out of all your Clouds and darkness, Pro. 8. 14. Counsel is mine,
and sound Wisdom. It is meant of Christ; In his word is the best Counsel to
make men wise to Salvation, 1 Timothy 3. 15. There Is the best Counsel to make you
happy, Rev. 3. 18. It Is the best Interpreter in all the World to resolve your
dark cases, and there is no such way to get solution in all your doubts, and
greatest troubles: The Psalmist found it so, when he went into the Sanctuary,
Ps. 73. 17. Christians, the Gospel and Word of God tells you, what you should
do in all your difficulties, Acts 9. 6. The Gospel is the chiefest comforter: O
what happy Messenger the ministry of the Gospel is, it brings the best Balm to
heal your wounds: Balm of Gilead to heal your soul wounds, it affords the
sweetest Consolations, Romans 15. 4. That we through Patience and Comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. Ah! There Is no such pure Elixir drops to any, as
the Gospel drops: It Is the most reviving Spirits imaginable: the water of Life
that come through the Gospel: O how reviving how chearing are these to drooping
Souls! The Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, Romans 1. 16. It Is the arm of
God to stay up the poor sinking Soul: It Is the Weapons of our Warfare which are
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. O Souls!
what cause have you then to be much affected with the Love of God in giving the
Gospel? get your hearts warmed with the sense of this mercy; and more
appreciative thoughts of these privileges: O, I know not how to commend it to
you: O Souls prize the Gospel, rate it in your esteem above the whole World,
Psa. 119. 167. My Soul has kept thy Testimonies, and I love them exceedingly.
O rest not till you can say so, I love the Gospel exceedingly; I prize it above
gold, above tried gold: It Is better than all treasures, ver. 72. Sweeter, (says
David) than Honey, and the Honey Comb, Psa. 19. 10. If the Gospel be stuffed with
such Riches, who would not prize the Gospel? It Is a rich Cabinet, bespangled
with beauty in every letter: It Is a discovery of the manifold Wisdom of God,
and should not you be affected with the Gospel? O testify your valuation of
the Gospel by all possible demonstrations.

First, Show your valuation of the Gospel, by blessing God for it: O send
Clouds of Incense to Heaven, full of praises and Hosannahs to God for the
Gospel: Paul blesses God that the Phillippians had the Gospel, Phil. 1. 3, 5.
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, for your fellowship in the
Gospel, from the first day until now. As much as to say, that you have enjoyed
the Gospel a great while. O from your whole hearts bless God for the Gospel, 1
These. 1. 2, 5. O I am afraid Christians are not enough in this duty of praising
God for the Gospel: It deserves solemn days of Thanksgiving.

Secondly, Testify your valuation of the Gospel; by doing all you can to keep
it with you: A person that prizeth a Jewel or piece of Gold in his hand will
hold it fast: O Christians! if you prize the Gospel, you will do all you can to
keep the Gospel, Pro. 23. 23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not: Lay out any thing
to enjoy the Gospel; part with your Lusts, part with your Treasures; let all
go, so you may keep the Gospel: But then do not sell it: O the Gospel is
Treasure enough, count nothing too dear for it.

Thirdly, Testify your valuation of the Gospel: By your willingness to part
with all, or any thing, if God call you to it for the Gospel: Does God bid you
pluck out a right eye, cut off a right hand, let it go if God call for it: Does
he call for your liberty, your lives for the Gospels sake, let them go, Acts
21. 13. O Souls! be not like the Gadarens to value your Swine above the Gospel,
and rather let the Gospel go, than part with a little of your Estates, Luke, 8.
37.

Fourthly, Christians, show your high esteem of the Gospel, by your readiness
to attend it at all times: To run at every call of the Gospel, with Mary to sit
at Christ's feet, though other things be out of order, Luke 10. 39, 40. Will not
you part with a little of your business, and let your Plow stand still awhile,
to attend upon the Ministry of the Gospel? O Christians! show your prizings of
the Gospel, by your willingness to sit down under it at all times.

Fifthly, Show your high esteem of the Gospel, by the greatest improvements of
it while you have it; Sirs, you cannot tell how soon it may be taken from you,
or you from it; you see what attempts are made against the Gospel, you have
reason then to make the most of it while you have it: Christ gives this
argument to his hearers to prize it, Joh. 12. 35. Yet a little while is the
light with you, walk while you have the light, lest darkness come upon you: Be
sure at the best, it is but a little time you shall have it, if you live out all
your time under the Gospel, till your glass be run every dust, it is but a
little while you shall sit under the dews of this Hermon hill; the time of your
life is but a little while; the time of your digging in this Mine is but a
little while, Death will draw the Curtain, and set you beyond the droppings of
these dews and golden Oils: O then improve the Gospel while you have it; make
the most of it, get all the good you can from it, by way of illumination,
instruction, Correction, Faith and Consolation: Christians, get your heads and
hearts filled with this precious substance what you can; this will be your
wisdom, you will find it so when you come to reckoning: O fill these Chambers
of your Souls with precious treasures; lay up those choice fruits that may last
you in your Winter Days: Get the kowledge of Christ, and the unsearchable
Riches of Christ more and more, while you may come under the news of it: O draw
hard at these breasts, that you may get much food and nourishment for your
Souls, that may serve you many a day.

Sixthly, Show your high valuation of the Gospel, by your believing in it, by
your loving and obeying of it: Joh. 12. 36. While you have the light believe in
the light: Those friends we value much, we trust much. Souls if you value the
Gospel, you will believe it: The Gospel tells you; He that has the Son has
life; he that has not the Son has not life: It tells you, he that lives after
the flesh shall dye: O believe it! the Gospel says, If you forsake your evil
ways, you shall have mercy; if you hold fast your sins you shall dye: It tells
you, you cannot come at Salvation, but in Salvations ways: O believe the
Gospel; they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, Psa. 9. 10. If
you did but know the worth and truth of it, you would believe it, you may hang
all the weight of your Souls upon the Line of the Gospel, you may adventure
your immortal Souls upon the promises of the Gospel: It will bear all your
weights, then love the Gospel: Love the truth and peace, Zach. 8. 19. Is the
Gospel such a good Messenger that brings you such good news, and will you not
love it? O Souls! love the Ministrations of the Gospel. And then obey the
Gospel: If you love Christ indeed you will keep his Commandments, Joh. 14. 23.
you will obey his voice. This argues your esteem of the Gospel, when you follow
the instructions it gives you. Does God bid you forsake your evil ways? Come
and close with Christ? O! obey those Counsels he gives you in his Gospel.

Lastly, Show your high valuation of the Gospel, by holding forth a
Conversation suitable to it, Only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1. 27. As if he should say, chiefly, this is the main
and sum of all O! live worthy of the Gospel.

First, Then is your Conversation as becomes the Gospel, when you live as
becomes the grace of God discovered in the Gospel: It Is infinite grace is
revealed in it; you should walk so as to honor grace; you should press after
more grace in your Conversations, there should be grace in every step of your
lives, Tit. 2. 1, 12.

Secondly, Then you live suitable to the Gospel, when you live up to those great
and Glorious things held out in it: When the Gospel is opened there are choice
Jewels brought forth to sale: O most excellent things produced by it, and you
should live up suitable to these.

There Is the manifold Wisdom of God held forth in the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 10.
Treasures of wonderful wisdom are opened in the Gospel: O live up to these
mysteries: O Christians, let your lives be exact, for you have curious eyes to
look upon you, labor to hold forth much wisdom and much light in your
Conversations.

In the Gospel is held forth the mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is
the mystery of godliness. O what mysteries are here! God Manifested in the
flesh; God, and yet clothed in flesh: Condemned for sin, and yet justified in
the Spirit; seen of Angels: Preached to the Geutiles, the worst of Sinners in
the World: Now live suitable to the mysteries of Godliness.

Again, the Gospel opens the glorious privileges of Saints, of every saved
Soul: O wonderful privileges! That Enemies should be reconciled, and strangers
made nigh, that Rebels should be adopted Sons and Daughters, made the Children
of God by Christ, Romans 8. 16, 17. O what a glorious privilege is this
Believing Souls are brought into by the Gospel! to a state of Adoption, Gal. 4.
6. A state of glorious liberty, Ephesians. 5. 1. Gal. 5. 1. O live up to these
glorious privileges: You are Children of the light, walk as Children of the
light, Ephesians. 5. 8. The Gospel shows you the the things freely given of God, the
infinite love of God, the wonderful Salvation-Grace of God: O then you live
suitable to the Gospel, when you live up to those great and glorious things held
forth in it.

Thirdly, Then are your lives according to the Gospel, when they are suited to
the Rules of the Gospel, look what the Gospel commands; and requires that you
do, Gal. 6. 16. Math. 28. 20. Now the Gospel requires not only Bodily, but
Spiritual worship; to worship God in the Spirit: It requires not only external
duties, but internal holiness: It calls for Obedience flowing from love, and
labors springing from faith; well principled duties, when you endeavor the
greatest strickness in your lives; That Is suitable to the Gospel.

Fourthly, Then is your Conversation as becomes the Gospel; when it is
Subordinate to the ends of it.

One end of the Gospel is to exalt the praise of the glory of grace, Ephesians. 1.
12. To make you vessels of Mercy, for the glory of Mercy: O Christians live so
as you may most advance the glory of grace, live self-denyingly and humbly,
exclude boasting, then you live as becomes the Gospel.

Another great end of the Gospel is the sanctification of saved Souls, to make
Souls holy, 2. Cor. 7. 1. Then you live as becomes the Gospel, when you carry
on Gospel holiness, inward Holiness, outward Holiness, 1 These. 4. 3.

The Salvation of Souls, that is another great end of the Gospel, that the
Promise may be sure to all the seed, 2 These. 2. 10. That he that believes in
Christ may have Everlasting Life: O then live as you may be saved; you must
tread upon the World you have so much doted upon; you must account all things
loss and dung for Christ, if ever you be saved: O Christians, labor then to
hold forth a Conversation suitable to the Gospel. So much for the first
Inference.

Secondly, If such great and unsearchable treasures are opened and tendered to
Sinners in the Gospel: O then how great is their sin that oppose and persecute
the Preaching of it: O this is a black sin indeed; this activity comes from the
Spirit of darkness. O it is a dreadful thing to oppose, resist, and persecute
the Ministry of the Gospel: For such do all they can to hinder the tenders of
unsearchable Riches to the World; they labor to keep the World poor, to hinder
the Salvation of Souls: And is not this sad work?

Again, such as oppose and persecute the Gospel, are of the cursed brood and
offspring of the Pharisees, who do shut up the Kingdom of God, and neither
enter in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in: So do those
that do oppose and persecute the Gospel, and would put out the light of the
Gospel; they are the Children of the Devil; the firstborn of Hell; they do
their Fathers work, Joh. 8. 41, 44. They that hate the light are the Children
of the Devil; their deeds are evil, Joh. 3. 20. They carry the Devils mark upon
their forehead; wherever they go up and down, to say there goes the Devils
Children, there goes an Heir of Hell.

Again, They are Soul murderers; they do hunt Souls, and shed the blood of
Souls, Ezekiel. 13. 30. As well as they that hinder the Gospel of Life, as they
that bring in false Doctrines, and feed persons with Lies, and occasion death:
They that starve men's Souls as well as they that poison them, both are Soul
murderers. They sight against Christ in Heaven: They go up and down with drawn
Swords pointed against Christ in Heaven. O bloody wretches! that have murdered
Christ on Earth, and now would kill him in Heaven too, Acts. 9. 4. Saul, Saul,
Why persecutest thou me? O Souls! it is a fearful thing to oppose and persecute
the Ministry of the Gospel; for all the blood of all the Saints, from the
beginning of the world to this day, shall be upon their heads, Math. 23. 35. O
it is a sad thing to lie under the blood of one person; but to have all the
blood of all the Saints in the world to lie upon the head of a poor Creature: O
what will that Soul do? That Soul will go to Hell with a vengeance, and lie
tumbling under the wrath of God to all Eternity. Thus much of the Second
Inference.

CHAP. XXIV.
Showing the poor and lamentable State of all Christless Souls.

IF there are such vast and unsearchable treasures in Christ, tendered to
sinners in the Gospel: Hence see then the poor and lamentable state of all
those Souls that are without Christ. O they are very beggarly Souls that are
Christless Souls: As they that are far from the Sun, must needs be far from
Light and Heat; so they that are far from Christ, must needs be far from true
Riches: He that has not a Title to the Field, has none to the Treasure that
lies in it: He that has the Son has Life, he that has not the Son has not
Life. The Character of Laodicea is the complexion of all Christless Souls: They
are Wretched, Miserable, Poor, Blind, and Naked, Rev. 3. 17. They are aliens
from the Common Wealth of Israel, strangers to the Covenant of promise, without
God, and without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. They have none of Christ's personal, or
purchased treasures to enrich them: They have no right to his Person, and so
none to his Excellency: His glorious Attributes signifies no good at all to
them. His most precious and sweet dispositions, bespeaks little comfort to
them: What Christ has done and suffered, imports no advantage to them:
Christless sinners are like beggars, or like poor persons shut out of the Rich
man's door, that have Charity locked up from them; till they come to Christ,
neither himself nor his is theirs; they have not any part of his fullness: No
Treasures of Justification, Pardon, and Peace, are imparted to them: No Riches
of Sanctification are made over to them: No Treasures of Grace, or Glory, are
the Unbelievers interest; therefore he must needs be a pitiful poor Soul: Yea,
all the Symptoms of Poverty are upon Christless sinners. To name a few of them.

First, A poor Person is a very needy person: He is full of wants; ever and
anon in distress, and extremities; always destitute: Poor and needy are
Synonimous terms, Isa. 41. 17. When the poor and needy seek Water. So it is
with Christless Souls, their necessities are many; their wants are more than
can be numbered: They want Wisdom, Light, Grace, Glory, every good thing:
Nothing truly good is imparted to them: Their unbelief mars all the mercies
given to them: To the unbelieving Soul every thing is unclean, defiled, Tit. 1.
15. Their unregeneracy overturns all their mercies. Ah! They want eyes to see
what is lacking in them, and hence it is they go up and down so secure: They
want Eyes to see, Ears to hear, a mouth to speak, Legs to go, and Hands to
Labor: they want Life, and every good thing: And being Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the Covenant of promise, and alienated
from the Life of God; must needs be miserably poor.

Secondly, Poor Persons as they are needy, and their wants great, so they have
nothing of their own to supply them: A poor man may want Bread; but his
Cupboard does not afford it: He may see his wants, but has no money in his
purse, no treasure to repair them; they are poor that have no Estates; no
Barns-floar to go to; no Lands, no Livings, no money to help them in time of
straits: Christless Souls are in this sense poor also: They have nothing to
supply their wants, to relieve them in their necessities: Their own Treasures
are totally exhausted by sin: Where the fountain is sealed, the Cisterns are
dry: When the Creator will not help, the Creature cannot, Angels cannot, will
not help: Scriptures can impart no comfort to them, whiles out of Christ: Where
Christ shuts his door, no good thing gets out to such Souls: They are naked of
all those advantages that might enrich them, stripped of those Consolations that
might cheer and refresh them: Where shall we go? says the Disciples to Christ,
Joh. 6. 68. So may poor sinners say: Where shall we go? they are like the
Lepers that sat without the Gate of Samaria, ready to Famish, and knew not
what to do, 2 Kings 7. 3. This is the case of Christless Souls: They may have
of the fat things of this Life; but not a jot of the Everlasting hills reaches
them.

Thirdly, Poor men usually fare hard; they are much straightened in their
refreshments; they feed on mean things, very low diet; Bread and Water is great
cheer with them: When the Prophet was reduced to a state of poverty, he was fed
with Bread and Water, 1 Kings 18. 4. Yea* sometimes worse fare; as the Prodigal
fed on Husks; nay, glad to have it, he looked for some that would give it. Luke
15. 16. Nay, sometimes feed upon Doves dung; yea their own flesh, 2 Kings 6.
25. O the mean, hard fare poor persons are brought to in a state of Poverty;
they go many times with hungry Bellies: Poor people sometimes with Lazarus
would be glad of the Crumbs that fall from rich men's Tables, Luke 16. 21. Such
is the state of Christless Souls; their fare is bad, and very course: They live
upon the Carrion, the stinking Excrements of sin; They feed upon their Lusts;
their sweetest draughts are (with Darius) dirty Waters: As the Children of God
feed on holiness, it is meat and drink to do their Fathers will; so the
pleasures of sin are the dainties, and sweetmeats of Christless Souls: The
forbidden Fruit is the best cheer such have: No Tree in the garden pleases
them so well as the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil. O such is the meat and
drink of sinners, they feed upon their own dung; yea, they are fed with
Judgment, whiles Saints eat the dainties, the marrow and fat things of Christ's
Table: They eat the Bone, when the Children feed on the Flesh: Sinners come to
Ordinances, and eat up Bran, whiles the Children feed upon the finest of the
Wheat; they have but the shell and outside of Ordinances, when gracious Souls
eat the kernel and inside sweetness: The Friends of Christ feed upon hidden
Manna, when sinners fill their stomachs with husks, yea, gravel: The
appointments of Christ yield no sweetness to them: Their Ear does not try
words, their Palate has lost its taste; it cannot difference sweet Waters from
bitter; the Language of Canaan from the language of Ashdod: Institutions from
Superstition: It Is all one to them what is preached: The pure strains of Gospel
truths is no other to them; than the dull methods of dead preaching, juicy meat
and dry Bones is all alike to them; O they are poor indeed that fare so hard;
If Hypocrites feed on any thing it is but a dream; if they have comforts, it is
but stolen Waters, when they awake they are empty still: Let the fare be never
so nourishing, the choicest privileges they prove not by; they are ill
favored Souls, and look ghastly.

Fourthly, Poor Men have usually mean clothing, so John the Baptists low
estate in the World was set forth by his habit, Mark 1. 6. And John was
clothed with Camels Hair, and with the girdle of a skin about his Loins: A
plain and sordid habit, as Calvin calls it: Ab omni urbano nitore and lautitiis
remotis: A man far from a Court-like neatness, either in habit or apparel, but
in a poor and rustic attire; not but that John might have been better
clothed; he was the Son of Zacharias the Priest, but taking on him the state
of Poverty, he clothed himself accordingly: Poor Men are badly clad, Job 31.
19. Sometimes they go in rags, as Soloman says, Pro. 23. 21. Drowsiness will
cloth a man in rags: It notes the Poverty that slothful Persons are brought
into; when James would discribe a poor man, he sets him forth as clothed in
vile raiment, Jam. 2. 2. And there come in a poor man in vile raiment, (...),
dirty base clothes: The same word that is rendered filthly garments, Zach. 3. 3.
Is the dress of poor men: So Christless Souls are very poor, they go in mean
raiment, they are naked; the Spirit of God tells the Church of Laodicea so,
Rev. 3. 17, 18. Till Souls be clothed with the white raiment of Christ's
Righteousness, they be naked, and their shame appears; they have nothing to
cover their nakedness from the sight of God, Angels, and Saints: They go in
poor raiment; their garments are webs of their own weaving, and their works are
their covering. They are clothed with shame, and covered with Confusion as
with a Mantle, Psa. 109. 29. O what sad raiment do Sinners go in! Saints are
clothed with white Raiment, and beautiful through Christ's comeliness;
adorn'dwith his Graces, bespangled in his Jewels; they go up and down in rich
Attire: But sinners lie in sordid attire, clothed with vile Raiment.

Fifthly, Poor men usually have but bad Lodging; They commonly live in mean
Houses; little Cottages: They sometimes dwell in the dust, Psa. 113. 7. He
raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill; So
the Prophet Isaiah describes a poor man, as one that is cast out, Isa. 58. 7.
The poor that be cast out: O their Loding is hard; they do not spread
themselves on Beds of lvory; nor lie on Cloth of Tapestry: The rich have their
ceiled Houses, fair dwellings. The poor many times their Cottages are in a
Wilderness, and Houses that drop through. So it is with Christless Souls; they
have poor Lodgings; when Saints Lodge in the bosom of Christ, they lie in the
Arms of Devils: They lie upon Thorns; yea, Spears, that will pierce them
thorough: They lie upon Stones; the Earth is their Bed, they are Earthy Souls,
and lodge in the very bosom of the world: They dwell in habitations of
cruelty; they lie in Graves: So the Prophet, when he speaks of the Jews dead in
sin before Coversion, he describes them to be in their Graves, Ezekiel. 37. 12.
Dead sinners lie like Lazarus, bound with a Napkin in their Graves, Joh. 11.
44. O there is your Bed Souls, if out of Christ; there you lie kept till the day
of Judgment; held Prisoners till a call comes to bring you to the Bar of
Christ. O your lodging is mean indeed! Saints dwell in God, Psa. 91. 1, 9.
their habitation is in the City of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. But all Christless sinners
lie without amongst Devils; they dwell on pinacles, and live upon the borders
of death every moment, amongst Dogs, amongst the unclean O see their
habitation, and the place where their honor dwells, Rev. 22. 15. Without are
dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes alye. These are the company Christless Souls lodge
with: they are turned out of doors: O sad, doleful state indeed!

Sixthly, Another Character of a poor man is this: Poor men are Friendless,
Pro. 19. 4 Wealth makes many friends, but the poor is separated from his
Neighbor. Every man seeks the Rulers Favor; every man's Cap, and Hand, and
Knee, and all is for them; But the poor man, his very Neighbor comes now to
leave him, who was his Friend whiles in prosperity: When Rich men sit down in
places of Honor, poor men must stand at the Feet, Jam. 2. 3. They are sure to
find few Friends to own them, to pity, and help them! So Christless Souls are
friendless; they have no true Friends in Heaven or Earth: Those that seem to
flatter them, are not Friends but Foes; they rather wound them, and draw them
into mischief; whiles they lie in their blood there is no eye to pity them, to
do any of these things for them, Ezekiel. 16. 5 No hand to help them, to wash,
salt, and swaddle them, ver. 4. 5. If the Father of Bowels shut up his pity,
Creatures can extend but little; whiles they reject the good Samaritane, none
that passes by regards them. If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud
helpers do stoop under him, Job 9. 13. If God be angry, who can befriend us? O
sinner, If God frown, what is the love of Creatures? O thy case is doleful,
thou thou art a poor Soul indeed, that art out of Christ; if he wound, none can
heal, Job 11. 10. If he cut off, or shut up, or gather together, none can
hinder him. Christless Souls are like a Gangreen member, in danger of being cut
off if a sudden cure be not found: and who then can befriend them? where the
Lord of hosts is a Friend, Creatures are Friends: And where he is an Enemy,
Creatures are Enemies too: If God be in Covenant with a Soul, the Creatures are
in Covenant too. And if God be against a Soul, all his armies fight against
that Soul too: O sinners, who can be friend you? suppose you have Rich kindred,
great acquaintance, what can they do at the Bar of God for you? They will not
go to the Judgment seat of Christ, and speak for you there.

Seventhly, A poor man is one that is lightly esteemed: This David gives as a
Testimony of a mean state; when some were sent to treat with him about a match
with Readiness daughter; he modestly puts it off. Who I, says he, I am a poor man,
and lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 18. 23. The word is contemptible, of little,
little worth. Rich men are sure of honor; but the poor are little regarded:
Great persons are Courted, when the poor are slighted, passed by, little
esteemed. So it is with Christless Souls: They are lightly esteemed: God has a
very low account of them: The ungodly in Gods account are like the Chaff the
Wind drives away, Psa. 1. 4. So are the wicked, let them be what they will, in
greatest dignity here below; they are glittering stars in the worlds Eye, but
falling Comets in God's account: The mighty King of Babylon being a wicked man,
God accounts him but an abominable Branch, Isa. 14. 19. So Christ calls proud
Herod, a Fox, Luke 13. 32. God reckons them as broken Pitchers: Wicked Coniah
is as a broken Vessel in whom is no pleasure, Jer. 22. 28. No more does God
reckon of wicked men, though under all the grandeur of the World: Angels do not
regard them: They do not account them worth their company, and attendance: The
Saints are guarded by Angels; but wicked men are let alone: Angels are
Ministering Spirits to the Heirs of Salvation; not to the Heirs of Hell; they
have no charge at all, to watch over them; but to fight against them: They are
set in battle array against them; good men cannot regard wicked men; let them
be never so high and honorable: Though they give every man his due; yet they
cannot weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary as any thing: They had
rather converse with a poor Saint, than with the greatest persons in the world,
if wicked, 2. Kings 3. 14. And Elisha said, As the Lord of hosts lives, before
whom I stand; Surely were it not that I regarded the presence of Jehoshaphat
King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. So lightly esteemed
are wicked men in the Eyes of God, Saints and Angels.

Lastly, A poor man is liable to dangers and sufferings; he has no might
against the mighty, but lies open to the injuries and oppressions of those that
are above him, Amos 4. 1. Hear ye this word ye kine of Bashan, which oppress
the poor, which crush the needy: Poor men lie under the feet of the potent, and
are subject to their Tyranny: On the oppressors side is power, and on the
oppresseds side are tears, Eccl. 4. 1. So Christless Souls are under the ruling
power of Satan, and taken Captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. They have
no defense against the strokes of Judgment; it is easy with God to crush them
every moment; they no have power to secure themselves from ruining vengeance,
wicked men are no more match for God than Briars and Thorns, Isa. 27 4. Yea
they can no more resist him than the stubble can the fire, Mal. 4. 1. O sinner,
thou art a miserable Caitiff indeed! O see thy poverty, let this stain thy
glory; O sinner, look about thee, whiles thou have a little time: Art thou
willing to die so poor? O it is not Houses, nor Lands, nor Money, nor Friends,
can minister comfort to thee then; O how will thou do to live for ever, if thou
have none of Christ's tried Gold.

So much of the Third Inference.

CHAP. XXV.
Wherein Christ is set forth to sinners, as a Match wortby of their choice, in
regard of the excellency of his Estate: The amiableness of his Person: His
lovely Dispositions and other Considerations to win the hearts of sinners to be
looking after this lovely Jesus.

IF there are such vast treasures in the Lord Jesus Christ; then this will
follow hence: That the Lord Jesus Christ is worth the looking after by
perishing sinners. O what a match is Jesus Christ for undone sinners; could
^hey but obtain him, how happy would they be for ever; this is a principal
thing in a woers eye, to get a rich match; O Souls you cannot get a better
match than Jesus Christ, there is none like him.

First, In point of Riches: O let me commend the Lord Jesus Christ to you upon
the account of his wealth: Sinners, if you would have a rich Husband; there is
none so rich as Christ: He is wonderfully rich; if you but consider the Nature
and number of his riches: If you observe the verity and variety of his
treasures: If you weigh the kind or degree of his substance, you will say he is
exceeding rich: Take him positively, or comparatively, he is vastly rich: he is
really so, and superlatively so: The worlds treasures are but shadows: But he
has substance; true solid subsisting treasures, Pro. 8. 21. That I may cause
them that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures.
Christ's Gold is tried Gold, that which can bear the hardest touch, and abide
the fire: And he is superlatively rich, none like him: Job was a rich man, but
his riches were limited within the Confines of a Country: He was the richest,
not in all the world, but of all the men of the East, Job 1. 3. But Christ is
richest of all: All the Men and Angels in Heaven and Earth put together cannot
vye treasures with Christ: What was said of the virtuous woman is true of
Christ, he excels them all, Pro. 31. 29. O sinners, would you have a rich
match, cast your eyes on Jesus Christ: He has a very taking Estate, that will
be wonderful attractive upon your hearts if rightly set. I shall show in a few
particulars what an Estate Christ has.

First, It is a fair Estate, exceeding large and full; it is incomprehensible,
and past finding out, both as to his personal, and purchased Treasure: It is in
height, depth, length, breadth, passing knowledge, as has been shown at
large, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Christ's Estate is as large as himself is, and he is past
finding out: Who can search out the Almighty to perfection? Job 11. 7. All men's
Estates lie here in the lower world, within the measure of a spot of ground:
But Christ's treasure fills Heaven and Earth: The Heavens, yea the Heaven of
Heavens are his, Neh. 9. 6. The Lord Jesus Christ is rich every way considered:
He is rich in inheritance: Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. He is rich in Jewels,
he has abundance of choice Jewels; he has a day on purpose to make up his
Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. He is rich in mansions too, Joh. 14. 2. In my Fathers House
are many mansions. A mansion for every Heir of Glory: O how many Houses has
this Heir of all things? How many dwelling places in Glory? He is rich in
Crowns and Thrones: We account that man rich that has two or three Kingdoms:
But Jesus Christ has a multitude of Crowns: A Crown for every Subject, Mat. 9.
28. Every saved Soul is a Crowned King, or shall be so to all Eternity, Rev.
1. 6. Every overcoming Soul shall sit on Thrones; and every one wearing a Crown
of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. O what a vast Potentate is Jesus Christ: All the Angels
in Heaven cannot draw an inventory of Christ's Estate, so numberless are his
Treasures: He that has so many millions of Saints, and can give every one of
them a Kingdom: O how rich must this Lord be? O sinners think what a rich
Jointure Christ can make you; he can settle an Estate upon you indeed. O will
you Espouse Christ, he has a fair Estate indeed.

Secondly, Christ has a free Estate: Some men may have large Estates, but many
Mortgages and debts upon them; but Christ's Estate is all free; no debts lies
on Christ to lessen his Estate; whatever he gives to the whole Creation, does
no way lessen his Riches; like the Sun, whatever light it imparts to the World,
or Inferior Luminaries, does not exhaust or diminish it is Original splendor;
all that the Rivers empty from the Sea, do not lessen it, but repay its bounty
by a retribution of all those receptions; so whatever contributions come from
Christ to men, it does not lessen his ability to give to his people: The more
Abraham gave to his Sons by Keturah, the less he had for Isaac: But Christ's
liberality and Obligations do not diminish his treasure; Christ's whole Estate
comes to every Believer, every saved Soul has a whole Christ full of Grace and
Glory.

Thirdly, Christ has a sure Estate, exceeding safe; there is no defrauding of
his Spouse, no pre-mortgage to take it away: If Christ's Life could not be
taken from him without his consent, when he was Mediator, Joh. 10. 18. Then
all the Estate he has purchased with his blood is unremoveable; the Father
has given it, who is greater than all, and in whose hands Believers are put,
and their Estates secured for them: All New Covenant promises are sure, as you
have heard, part of which is the inheritance of the Saints. This Estate is sure
both by donation and purchase: The Father has given Christ and all that is his
to Believers, Isa. 55. 4. I have given him to be a witness to the people, a
leader and commander to the people: This shows the certainty and truth of this
Covenant which is confirmed in Christ, whom the Father has given and made over
to Believers to be the confirmation of his promises. It Is confirmed by
purchase; he has bought and paid for it; he went and sold all to get this
pearl; he parted with his Life, Blood, Glory, his All, to get this Estate for
Believers: The Father has received every Farthing of the money, and gives him
an acquittance under his hand, declares before men and Angels, that Christ ows
him nothing for all the whole Estate he has purchased for Believers, Mat 3.
17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: O it is a sure Estate. A
conveyance is made of it to Christ in the behalf of Believers, Isa. 49. 8.
Math. 28. 18. All power is put into the hands of Christ: The Deeds are drawn,
and interchangeably sealed between the Father and the Son, that the Estate is
firm and sure to all Believers: Nay the seizure and delivery is given, and
Christ has taken possession of it, and he is entered into the Heavens in the
behalf of Believers, and all to make this sure. O sinners will you espouse
Hell, and let go Jesus Christ, who is Heir of Life, and Glory, that has such a
sure Estate for you?

Fourthly, He has a suitable Estate: Let a man have a fair, free, and sure
Estate, yet if it be not suitable to his quality, necessities, and desires, it is
unsatisfying: But Christ's Estate is every way suitable both to himself, and to
his Bride: He has a large inheritance suitable for his dignity, and to his
Spouses quality: Christ having finished his work on Earth, being about to drink
the last draught of the Cup; he comes and treats with the Father about his
receiving, and it is Glory suitable to his quality: O Father glorify thou me
with thy self, with the glory which I had with thee before the World was, Joh.
17. 1. to ver. 5. O unreasonable Souls, that despise Christ; O sinners! had you
ever such a Lover stood at your doors? No, nor never will have the like, if you
refuse this Jesus: Yea, it is a suitable Estate to his Spouse too: It Is a fit
jointure for the Kings Daughter, sufficient to maintain her Immortality, and
Glory, Luke 22. 29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom: Now a Kingdom is a suitable
state to a Kings Daughter: O Souls! will you fall in Love with Christ? he has
Crowns, Thrones, a Kingdom of Glory for you.

Then it is an Estate suitable to your necessities too: There Is enough in Christ
to spend upon, and maintain you bravely, richly, here and for ever: O sinners,
will you match with Christ? whatever you need is in him. My God shall supply
all you wants, Phil. 4. 19. If a Kingdom will do it, you shall not want it: If
a Crown of Glory will make you happy and blessed you shall not want it; his
Estate is fullness that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23. O Believer, it may be
thou want Bread, Clothes, Money, and thou go up and down dejected, sad,
full of fears: But have thou espoused Christ? O consider thou have a fullness,
O what a vast Estate has Jesus Christ for thee. Sinners, your wants are many,
more then you know, God only knows your wants, Sinners, yet there is enough in
Christ's Estate and Patrimony to supply them all.

Then it is suitable also to their desires. Sinners desires are large; O what
wandering things are the desires; persons may desire things to the utmost ends
of the Earth, which they cannot get: But all that the Believer rationally
desires, Christ's Estate can satisfy: He will fulfill the desires of them that
fear him, Psa. 145. 19. Yea, it is above their desires: Desire as much as thou
can, Christ's Estate is above thy desires, Pro. 3. 15. O what a treasure then
is Christ! it fills every chink of the Believers desires, with an overplus:
It Is more than can be desired.

Fifthly, It Is a pleasant Estate, Psa. 16. 6. The lines are fallen to me in a
pleasant place, yea, I have a goodly herritage. The Chaldee renders it in
sweetness, others delightful place: A great Estate if it be not well situated,
and lie not in a pleasant place, is not half so contentful; but Christ's Estate
is well situated; it has all considerations and circumstances that may make
it desirable. Canaan, that was a type of it, is called the pleasant Land, Jer.
3. 19. It Is in the Original, the land of desires: So the Believers portion that
is prepared for him by Christ; it is a Land of desires; an Inheritance of beauty
and Glory: Christ's Riches are very precious and pleasant Riches, Pro. 24. 4.
And by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant
Riches. Rare, as the word imports; delighting Riches: The whole possessions of
Christ are pleasant, the way to it is pleasant, Pro. 3. 17. The borders of
Christ's interest are made with pleasant stones, Isa. 54. 12. And all thy
borders of pleasant stones. The first fruits of Christ's harvest is all
pleasure and delight, much more the lump; the maintenance he allows his
Children here in the way is delighting, much more the Estate reserved at the
Journeys end. The Fruits that fall from this Tree of Life is sweet to those
that sit under its shadow, Cant. 2. 3. how much more to them that climb, and
crop the pleasant fruits thereof. Their drink is pleasant, Psalm. 36. 8. Thou
shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures. And at last he brings
them to his Right Hand, where are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

Sixthly, It is a peaceful state, not liable to contests and controversies, as
men's Estates oft-times are here: A man may have a great Estate, but it may be a
litigious Estate: It may occasion many Law Suits about it: But it is not so in
Christ's Estate: It Is a peaceful Estate; no wars grow out of this Estate:
Christ's Country is called Salem: The Land of peace, Psa. 76. 2. And he is The
King of Salem; The King of peace, Heb. 7. 1. His Kingdom is Righteousness, and
Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. He is their peace, Ephesians. 2. 14.
In him they shall have peace, Joh. 16. 33. His very Doctrine are words of
peace, Ephesians. 2. 17. He came to guide our feet into the way of peace, Luke 1. 79.
He came and Preached Peace: O what a blessed Estate has Christ; what a lovely
Lord is Christ: He bequeaths peace to his people: Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, Joh. 14. 27. They have peace with God who Espouse this
Christ, Romans 5. 1. Peace with Saints and Angels, Col. 1. 20. Peace with
Conscience too, Phil. 4. 7. Heb. 10. 22 The Fruits of the Spirit is Peace, Gal.
5. 22. His Riches have no sorrow annexed with them.

7thly, It is a perpetual Estate: An inheritance that fades not away, reserved
in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Christ's Riches are durable Riches, aged Riches, strong,
solid, Riches: Opes densae, that is ^ultae and firmae, says Mercer, they are
great, stable Riches, Pro. 8. 18. Riches and Honor are with me, yea durable
Riches and Righteousness. His Gold is not liable to rust. It Is said of the
Cedar, worms will not breed in it; sure there is no worm in Christ's Treasure: O
Souls, it is a lasting Estate: That neither time nor changes can wast nor
weaken: All the Saints spending upon it to all Eternity, never detracts from
it: Christ's Treasures are like the deep waters, or like the bottomless Ocean,
that cannot be exhausted; his treasure will last as long as God, the Soul, and
Eternity lasts, which is for ever, for ever, for ever. Some men have outlived
their Leases and their Estates and have seen an end of their Houses and Riches;
but the Spouse of Christ can never outlive her jointure, it lasts to all
Eternity.

Lastly, It Is a possessed estate: Some may have great estates, but it is in
reversion, they may look long for it, as some Heirs do all their days: But
Christ's Estate is all in his own hand, it is actually made over to him by the
Father, and possession given him when he sat down at the Right hand of God,
Heb. 1 3. He has actually obtained this Inheritance with the Fruits of it,
Heb. 1. 4. And is actually invested with this glory, Heb. 2. 7. This sinners is
the Estate of that Beloved that is tendered to you in the Gospel for your
choice; he is very wealthy, he has a fair, free, sure, suitable, pleasant,
peaceful, perpetual possession; an Estate you cannot spend or comprehend; an
Inheritance you cannot lose or out-^ive: riches that will not cloy, nor clog
y^u; a portion that cannot be out-vy'd or matched: Come view the Rentals of his
Lands, the Inventory of his Goods, and see what a rich match Christ is, there is
none like him; where can you mend your penny-worths? all the world, no nor the
Heaven of Heavens can yield you such another bargain. Job 28. ver. 13. etc. Man
knows not the price thereof -- the gold and the Crystal cannot equal it, and
the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine gold, etc. Then Jesus Christ
is worth a looking after if he be so rich as the Scripture reports him to be,
and I presume you question not the truth of this testimony. O slight not this
bargain which will make you happy to all Eternity; if wealth will please you,
here is enough, what say you? Have you any objection against his estate? If not;
what stick you at?

Secondly, Do thou dislike his person? Then it argues thou know him not;
for he is altogether Lovely, the chiefest of ten thousands: The fairest of the
Children of Men: O come, behold the Lamb of God: Look upon this glorious
Jehovah Christ: O see his Personal Excellency, and it will allure you, and
invite you to come to him: he is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the
express image of his Fathers Person, Heb. 1. 3. Sinners look well upon him,
view him from top to toe; there is no blemish in him: O he is the most
exquisite one, his perfections are enough to please you, his beauty sufficient
to allure you: See his excellent lineaments, the sweet proportion of every
part: O how lovely is Christ to the believing eye, in regard of his Person.
Consider his Natures, God Man sweetly concentring in an intimate and Eternal
Union, perfect God, perfect Man in one person: O where can you espy such an
object! sure he is a Non-such; none like him in Heaven, none like him on Earth,
in regard of his Personal Glory as Mediator, God Man: look over his Characters
that his friends have given him; See in that Book of Cant. Chap. 5. How the
Spouse displays him, and you will find him a beautiful Person, ver. 11. to the
end, His head is as the most fine gold: His Wisdom and Government is most pure,
solid and excellent: His locks are bushy and black as a Raven: Which notes not
only his love liness, but his strength and vigor he has his radical moisture,
his vital heat: He is strong, his vigor abides with him; he has strength
sufficient for all his undertakings, and he is able to go through what he sets
his hand unto; he is strong, vigorous, and spritely. His eyes are as the eyes
of doves by the Rivers of Waters, washed with Milk, and fitly set. His sight is
quick, and perfect, his understanding is infinite: His Counsels are holy, and
consistent, all well set, his decrees, his purposes, all methodically ordered
and fixed: His looks are gracious, his aspects lovely, enamouring the eyes of
them that behold him. O such a lovely Christ is tendered to Sinners; O I know
not how to set him forth to your capacities, he is a most taking object indeed.
His face is white and ruddy: Emblems of Rich Beauty, captivating the eyes, and
ravishing the hearts of beholders: The purity of the divine nature, with the
passions of the humane, and procurements of his Redemption, sets him forth as
infinitely amiable in the eyes of Believers. His cheeks are as a bed of spices,
as sweet flowers: His graces and choice discoveries of his Excellencies, does
wonderfully feed and delight the Souls of those that have acquaintance and
fellowship with him; his sweet and lovely perfections discovered to Believers
are like a rich feast that stay with them: His lips like Lillies dropping sweet
smelling Myrrh: The impartings of his wisdom, the droppings of his Doctrine,
his gracious words, his Holy Communications, are savoury and sound, pure and
incorruptible, they strengthen the heart, and heal the Soul of those that
embrace him: His Doctrine carries wonderful strength to those that are in
weakness; how do the words of grace revive the fainting hearts of Believers;
his ways are strength to the upright, like Myrrh, they make the heart sound.
His hands are as gold rings set with the Beryl: His works and administrations
in the World, are full of order, beauty, and excellency: All that he does in
Sion and out of Sion, is all holy; every providence that seems to us sometimes
to be unseasonable, is in infinte wisdom displayed by Jesus Christ for the good
of his people. His belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires: His tender
Bowels, and boundless affections to his people, are wonderfully lovely and
delighting; they are pure, firm, and fixed in their nature, and they are
chearing, and enriching in their effects; O Christ's love is not fleeting, it is
firm as Ivory, set with gold, overlaid with Saphires. O how rich are his
affections, what a Treasure to those that have him. His legs are as Pillars of
Marble, set upon sockets of fine gold. The gracious motions and efficacious
workings of his Spirit, are exceeding mighty and glorious; full of strength: He
has power to bear up all those that follow him: His legs are strong, he can
carry his Lambs that are committed to his arms; there is no burden too heavy for
Christ, his loins are strong, he can bear what is laid upon him; the weight of
all the Saints on Earth is nothing to him: He can carry on all his intendments
and interest in the World; his legs are as Marble, able to bear his Body; quick
in motion: O what a lovely Christ is this displayed in the Gospel! His
countenance is as Labanon, excellent as the Cedars: Those discoveries the Lord
Jesus Christ makes of himself in his word, and works, are wonderful taking;
exceeding enriching: Christ's word is fruit fullizing: O when he speaks to the
hearts of his Children, what a deal of virtue goes through his lips; Grace is
poured out of his lips, Milk and honey is under his tongue: His appearances
carries excellency, riches and glory with them, His mouth is most sweet, yea he
is altogether lovely: His discourses, the openings of his mind is wonderful
pleasing: The word of Christ never cloys the spiritual part. Thus you see what
a Person Jesus Christ is: O Sinners consider his beauty; O how lovely an object
is he! what can you object against his Person, why you will not espouse him?

Thirdly, Consider his lovely dispositions, O Sinners will you accept of him?
He is of an excellent Spirit, of a very sweet nature; full of grace and
goodness: His sweet dispositions have been largely opened already, he is full
of mercy and compassions, meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, slow
to anger, ready to forgive, great in kindness, free and bountiful, of a
generous Spirit; true and faithful: Sinners, you may trust him with your
secrets; you may venture your Souls upon him: He is harmless, and inoffensive;
he does wrong to no man; his company is lovely and desirable: His converses are
pleasant and profitable: O what a person is Christ! O Sinners, never was such a
one offered you as Christ is; why will you not come unto him?

Fourthly, Consider his quality and high dignity, he is no mean Person, but a
mighty Potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15. The sole and only superintendent of the whole
World, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. He has on his
vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords: He is
not only a King, but the King, the only true Potentate from whom all ohters
derive their glory, a King not only of Men, but of Saints; not only of Saints,
but of Angels, of Thrones, Principalities and Powers: Math. 26. 53. And can
command them down now he is in Heaven for the service of his elect, Heb 1. 14.
Are they not all Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall
be heirs of Salvation. O Sinners! shall this prevail with you to accept of him?

Fifthly, Take notice of his potency: He has power as well as honor, Math.
28. 18. All things are put under his feet, Heb. 2. 8. All the Armies of Heaven
and Earth are delivered over to him: He is Lord of Hosts: He has the Keys of
Heaven, Death and Hell: Rev. 1. 18. Who then can lock out Christ, or exclude
him from doing what he pleases, seeing all things are at his beck? He does
whatsoever pleases him in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas and in all deep
places, Psa. 135. 6. He sits in the Heavens, and laughs the Counsels of the
Potentates to scorn; he makes no reckoning of their combinations, but derides
their ambitious attempts against him, Psa. 2. 4. He shall pass through and
overflow, and break all their consederacies in pieces, Isa. 8. 8, 9, 10. Let
all the subtleties of Hell be woven together, to make a web to catch the
interest of Christ in; it shall all be as a spiders web, that can soon be swept
away. O admire the Kingdom of Christ; the glorious power of Christ; nothing is
too hard for him: He has an absolute, unlimited and uncontrollable power: He
is the supreme over all persons, and all things, in all places, Lands, and
Countries: O what power has he! not only Authority, but likewise Might, 2
Chro. 20. 6. In his hand there is power and might, and none is able to
withstand him: O Sinners come away to Christ, he can protect you and defend you
from dangers.

Sixthly, Observe his wisdom too: this is taking with some to have a head that
has intellectuals in him, and marry one that has exquisite parts and eminency
of knowledge. Now all Treasures of wisdom are in him, Col. 3. 3. His judgments
are unsearchable and past finding out, Romans 11. 33. His judgments, his acts in
the World, his Righteous deeds, and the way he takes to accomplish his designs;
O how wonderful deep are they! The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the
Spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and might; the
Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 2. He is of quick
understanding, full of judgment; called The wonderful Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.
The only wise God, from whom all wisdom is fetched, that fills Men and Angels;
all the World do light their Candles at his Torch: He is the Sun that fills the
whole Creation with beams: There Is no searching of his understanding; he can
bring to light the hidden things of darkness: 1 Cor. 4. 5. He has eyes can
reach where men cannot; he can reveal the deep things of God: 1 Cor. 2. 10. O
Sinners, what an excellent one is Christ! O how worthy of your choice!

Seventhly, Weigh the glorious and blessed effects of your closing with the
Lord Jesus Christ: Sinners, the very day you marry Christ he will pay all your
debts, and they are many; he will pardon all your sins, blot out all your
iniquities, remember them no more: He will free you from all your Bondages,
deliver you from all your fears, secure you from all your dangers; if you will
but espouse him. O the very day you marry Christ he will wipe off all your
shame, and remove your reproach: He will heal all your wounds and sicknesses,
he will begin to heal them immediately; and never leave till he has perfectly
cured your Souls: He will strip off all your filthy garments, and cloth you
with broidered raiment; he will advance you to highest dignity; he will lift up
your heads above your fellows: He will make you Kings and Priests to God; he
will set you in Heavenly places; he will seal your title to a Rich Jointure, he
will make sure your interest to all the Treasures of Heaven: He will possess
you with grace, and assure you of glory: O sinners, is not this argument enough
to win your Souls, and make you willing to accept of such a Majesty as Jesus
Christ?

Eighthly, Sinners think upon the greatness of that love the Lord Jesus Christ
bears you: He has good will toward Men, toward sinners, as sinners, whiles
in their blood, he has a love of pity for you: It Is true till you close with
Christ he can have no love of acquiescense in you; but he has a love of
good will to your Souls, he has so much love for you, as has made him willing
to shed his blood for you; his love brought him down from the Fathers Glory,
made him willing to drink the dregs of a cup of wrath for you; the love of
Christ to Sinners, has set up a standing Ministry in the World, sent forth
multitudes to publish glad tidings: O Sinners, did you but believe this, how
attractive would it be upon your hearts, to draw you to Christ. But if none of
these arguments will prevail, let me add one consideration more.

Lastly, The effects of your refusing Jesus Christ will be dreadful: if you
will not accept of this proposal; O think what a terrible answer Christ will
send you: Such shall not taste of his Supper, Luke 14. 24. Not a crumb that
fall from this Rich Table of Salvation-chear shall fall to the share of that
wretched sinner. If you will not have his Person you shall not have his
purchase: He has sworn in his wrath these shall never enter into his Rest,
Heb. 3. 11. O sinner! were there no other Hell but the loss of Heaven, it were
enough to break thy heart in pieces: O think upon the sad Issue of thy final
unbelief: When thy sins get over thy head, and thy guilt follows thee at thy
heels; When Death and Hell shall be at thy back, and then to call and cry, and
knock at the door of mercy and not be heard; O what a doleful thing will this
be! When armies of devils are round about thee, ready to snatch thy Soul into
everlasting burnings, and none to relieve thee; O fearful will the case of thy
Soul be! When thou shall cry; O for mercles sake, Help Lord; I am going to
Hell, for mercies sake help; and then for the Ear of God to be deaf, and thou
not have one good word, and the door be shut against thee; O what a doleful
case will this be! for tender mercy to cease; is miserable: But for mercy to
become cruel to you; O fearful case indeed! when tender Bowels shall become
Brass and Iron, and there shall be no sounding at all in it toward thy Soul: O
sinner if thou will not accept of this Christ, he will laugh at thy Calamity,
and mock when thy Fear comes, Pro. 1. 26. That Is terrible; when God shall not
only cease to pity, but deride thy misery: Be assured, Soul, as quiet as now
thou art, a day of Calamity will come; there will come a time of Fears for thy
poor Soul, and then will mercy it self be turned into wrath, and laugh at thy
Calamity; yet further (sinner) if thou will not accept of Christ; then will
incensed fury send forth its army of destroyers, and ruin, and cut off thy
Soul for ever, Mat. 22. 7. Then shall thou be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of God, and from the glory of his Power, 2 These.
1. 8, 9. Then shall vengeance glut it self upon thy Soul, and seize upon thee
in flaming Fire: O it is a dreadful thing to lie at the mercy of vengeance: O
what will not enraged fury do to its adversaries, when it has them at its
power? But what will divine vengeance do? O sinner, when God shall arraign thee
at the Bar of Judgment for kicking at the Bowels of mercy; for Crowning the
head of Christ with thorns, and trampling his blood under feet; what will thou
do then? (O can thou read this and not shake) when thou shall see Devils
round about thee, and flaming vengeance take hold of thee: But thus it will be.
Then they that would not let Christ reign over them; shall feel Devils rending
of them: Then they that fled from the Arms of mercy, shall fall into the Jaws
of fury: Then they that shut their ears against the fervent wooings of Christ
shall open their hearts to the fiery wrath of Christ: Then they that would not
get into the bosom of Christ; shall lodge in the burnings of Hell: Then the
Furnace of Hell shall be heated seven times hotter for those whose hearts
freezed under the warm beams of Christ's Love: Oh dreadful will thy state be,
Sinner, if thou refuse Christ.

Well sinner, take the Counsel given thee: kiss the Son Jest he be angry; turn
in, turn in hither; reach out thy arms, come away to Christ; say Lord Jesus, I
am willingly thine. Sinners are you persuaded? what answer shall we return to
this Lord of Glory? Will you be his? Will you accept of this grace tendered to
you, before it breathe its last to you.

CHAP. XXVI.
Objections answered. Counsels how to come to Christ.

I shall now endeavor to answer those Objections which are made by doubting
Souls, against their coming to Christ.

1. Objection. Says a Soul: But will this blessed Potentate, this glorious King
of Kings, stoop so low as to look upon such an obscure Creature, such a
worthless worm as I am? Alas! I am too mean to unloose the latchet of his
shoes: I am too unworthy to be the meanest Servant in his House: To be a dog
to his Flock: And will he cast his skirt over me? O do not flatter me into such
vain hopes, and fond dreams, that such a King of Glory will look upon me: I am
too low for one aspect of his Eye.

Answ. Abundant Testimony has this Lord given of his condescending heart to
sinners: Do thou think thou art too low for such a Majesty? When he left his
Fathers Kingdom, and came down from his Eternal Glory with the Father, he gave
abundant proof of the humility of his heart: when he did espouse thy nature,
(sinner) to himself; and took upon him the form of a Servant; he showed his
humble heart, that he was far from contemning sinners: He was the true Jacob,
who served a far harder bondage for thy Soul, than ever Jacob did for his
Rach^l; this shows his humility: His choosing such mean persons, such notorious
sinners for his companions, in nearest Union and Communiwith himself; Matthew
the Publican, Paul the Blasphemer: Poor Fishermen of no regard upon Earth:
These did Christ personally choose for his nearest Converses; this shows his
condescension: And it is not thy low state (sinner) can discourage Christ, if
thy heart be really willing: His preaching the Gospel to the poor, and calling
the base things of this world, and things that are not, shows his lowly mind.
And his humility has been abundantly proved already: He will dwell with the
Lowly, Isa. 57. 15.

2. Object. But I have no portion for Christ: I am exceeding poor and beggarly;
I have no Righteousness, no Grace, no good things dwell in me: I can bring
nothing to glorify him; I have no ability at all to serve him; I cannot pray
or do any thing that is good, and will Christ accept of me?

Ans. Christ's design in these Gospel tenders of himself to sinners, is not to
get, but to give Riches: He wants no treasures for himself, but he rather wants
objects to give them to: He wants no goods, but (like the Rich man in the
Gospel) he wants room to bestow his goods: He is willing to impart his treasure
to sinners, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Of all persons in the world he is sure to hear the
desires of the poor. The rich shall be sent empty away: but the poor that wai^
on him shall be heard, Psa. 69. 33. Art ^^ou a poor Soul in thy own eyes? The
Lord hat^ special regard for such: These are the persons he invites to him that
have no money, no price, Isa. 55. 1. The poor have the Gospel preached ^o them,
Math. 11. 5. Therefore sinners it is ^ot thy poverty can break the match, nor
hinder ^y reception of Jesus Christ, if thy heart be w^^ling.

3. Object. But I am a deformed loveless Creature, I have no beauty at all in
me; I am black with sin, full of all uncleanness, and abominations, polluted in
my blood, wallowing in my Mire and Vomit, scarce such a nauseous Object as I in
all the world. O what a filthy heart, O what an unclean Soul, O what vile
affections bave I! and will this holy one cast a glance of Love on such a
Creature as I? I dare not think he will endure the sight of me; therefore I am
afraid to look to him.

Answ. Believing sinners, though black in their own eye, yet are comely in
Christ's Eye, Cant. 1. 5. Faith puts an amiableness on the believing sinner in
Christ's account: This is one of those eyes that ravishes his heart, Cant. 4. 9.
He looks upon them as lovely that come to him, though unlovely in themselves:
Affections spy no deformity in the beloved object. Christ's love is so great to
fallen man, as that nothing appears unlovely in him, but an unwillingness to be
hi^: He sees no iniquity in Jacob, though ther^ ^e a great deal. The halt,
blind, lame, imp^^^nt are no amorous Objects; yet these Christ invites to his
feast, Luke 14. 21. Others are not worthy, says Christ, but bring these, they
a^e company for me, if they will but come. ^ Let not thy deformity, and the
sense of thy u^worthiness keep thee from Christ, because h^ has beauty enough
for himself, and thee. He has comeliness enough to cover thy nakedness: it is
but for some of his beams to reflect on thy Soul, and thou will be altogether
glorious; thy perfection lies in his, and not thy own comeliness: Christ can
soon fill thee with amiableness: see, in Ezekiel. 16. what a change Grace makes
upon deformed sinners: The beauty of sinners is Christ's beauty put upon them,
and Christ's Holiness imparted to them, and there is enough of it for thee. 3.
Know, that Christ's blood is cleansing blood, it does not only cover spots and
deformities, but it takes away filthiness; if thou come to him, the blood of
Christ cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.

4. Object. But I am a great sinner, none like me, therefore. I cannot think
the Lord Jesus will pass them by; or have thoughts of favor for me.

Ans. So was David's, and yet found pardon, Psa. 25. 11. for thy name sake, O
Lord, pardon mine iniquities for they are great. Manassch's sins were
notorious, and yet upon hi^ Repentance found favor with God, 2 Chro. 33. 3, 4,
5, 6. He reared up Altars for Baalim, worshipped all the host of Heaven, and
served them; he built Altars in the House of the Lord, and caused his Children
to pass through the fire in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom. He also observed
times, and used I^chantments, and Witchcrafts, and dealt with familiar Spirits,
and with ^izards, and when God spoke to him he would not hearken, ver. 10. O
abominable sins! One would think here was a man ripe for Hell; yet upon his
supplication, when he was in affliction, God heard him, and pardoned him, ver.
12, 13. Paul was a flagitious sinner, in his own eyes the greatest that ever
was, 1 Timothy 1. 15. A Blasphemer, a persecutor, injurious, but obtained mercy,
ver. 13. Therefore it is not the greatness of thy sin can stand in the way of
thy mercy, if thou come over to Christ with all thy heart.

5. Object. But I have been an old sinner; I have been rooted in sin, and lived
in sin all my days; I have been a continual provocation to the Lord, for many
years; through my whole Life sin has touched sin, and I cannot think Christ
has thoughts of Love for me.

Answ. So did the Thief upon the Cross, he sinned to the last hour of his Life,
and yet obtained mercy, Luke 23. 40, 41, 42, 43. So did some of those that were
called in at the Eleventh hour, yet embracing the call, obtained mercy, Math.
20. 9, 12. it was not the length of their sinning time excluded the Efficacy
of Salvation-mercy, when they did come in at the call of it. I mention not this
for a Pillow to secure sinners, but for a Cordial for desponding Souls: Now the
Gospel calls thee, nner; if thou come in this hour, and embrace the calls of
mercy; it is not the length of thy sinning time, will make void the Grace of God.

6. Object. But says the Soul: I have slighted many calls already: I have
quenched many motions of the Spirit: I have despised the first call: and may I
have hopes to go to Christ? Will he receive me?

Answ. So did Manasseh, he did reject many calls; God did speak to him, but he
would not hearken; and after his rejection of the first call, yet mercy found
him: The Jews in the wilderness rejected many calls of God; yet the Lord said,
while it is called to day, harden not your hearts, H^b. 3. 7, 8. Though thou
have been guilty of despising many calls, this is matter for thy humbling, but
not for thy despair.

7. Object. But I am never the better for all the means and mercy I have
enjoyed: though I had despised the first calls of mercy, yet if I had been the
better for after tenders of grace, there were some hope: But I am still the
same notwithstanding all the Sermons I hear, and precious overtures of
Salvation; my heart is hard, and dead under all.

Answ. So it was with the Impotent man a great while, he was diseased thirty
and eight years. Joh. 5. 5. He lay at the Pool's side near the means of cure,
but never the better, ver. 6. 7. And so continued till Christ's time came to
cure him. So Israel were barren and unfruitful, till the Lord became a dew to
them. Hos. 14. 5. Therefore this is no discouragement; if thou believe and come
to Christ, God will be a dew to thee, and thou shall quickly find a change.

8. Object. But says one: I am not only never the better for all the means of
grace, but I am worse than I was before; when I was under first awakenings, my
heart was more tender; but now my heart seems to be more brawny and hard; I
find more unbelief than ever, more indisposition to go to Christ: I am worse
than I was.

Answ. So was Sarah too, as to the receiving the promised mercy, more and more
indisposed, she complains of the deadness of her womb; she was past age to be
the Mother of Children, till the time of life came, then Sarah's growing
indisposition becomes no impediment at all to the fulfilling of the promise. So
was Israel, they began to say for their part, their hope was cut off, and God
had forsaken them, when mercy was nearest to them: So the woman that had a
bloody issue twelve years, and had spent all that she had on Physicians, yet
was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, till Christ came and healed her,
Mark 5. 25, 26. Persons are usually worst in their own eyes when mercy is
nearest their doors.

Again, Thy not coming to Christ is the cause of thy decaies and hardnings;
it is thy unbelief that deadens thy heart, and withers thy Soul, Christ does
withdraw his influence from such, and refuses to do any mighty works in them
because of unbelief. O then Soul, come away to Christ, and this is the way to
cure thee.

9. Object. But says the Soul: Christ seems to take no notice of me, I call
but he hears me not, I come to Ordinances, but I cannot see him, nay he seems
to be angry with me; every thing goes against me, his word speaks bitter things
to me; methinks there is never a threatening but belongs to me; I am the
Hypocrite and unclean person, that God strikes at in every Sermon, and his rod
lies heavy on me too, and in the way of his providence he writes bitter things
against me.

Answ. Soul, is this thy case, does Christ take no notice of thee? It is
because thou take so little of him, when he unveils his beauty; thou do not
believe in him, when he makes a promise to thy Soul: When he sends words of
Counsel, thou do not obey him. He has called, and thou have not answered,
and therefore when thou call he does not answer, Zach. 7. 13. Yet at such a
time what follows; does God make an end of such sinners? No, see Chap. 8. 2, 3.
O Soul, if the Lord Jesus Christ seems to take no notice of thee, but to frown
upon thee, it is to frown thee from thy unbelief; it is but to make thee
sensible of thy slighting him: If thou will this day accept of the Lord Jesus
Christ; his frowns will soon pass away, as a dark Cloud does when the Sun
shines; he will remember thy Iniquities no more.

10. Object. But may some Soul say: I would fain come to Christ, but I cannot;
I like the terms well, but O my unbelieving heart! O my impenitent hard heart!
I cannot sense Salvation-kindness.

Answ. O Soul! The afflicting sense of thy unbelief, is a hopeful sign of thy
faith: If thou do see thy unbelieving heart; so as to be burdened under it,
and be weary of it, the Lord reckons it for the beginnings of faith, Mark 9.
24. This is the method of Salvation-Grace in begetting faith, to convince thee
of its impotency to believe, Joh. 16. 9. Soul, is this thy weariness; that thou
can not come to Christ? Would thou have a wider heart for him? Thou art the
Soul he waits for that mournest over thy unbelief, Mark 9. 24.

But there is one thing more may be as a discouragement to some Souls.

11. Object. O says the Soul, I fear the time is past, and that God will be
gracious no more; I have had a day of grace, but that is gone: The Angel came
troubling the Waters, but I would not step in: I bave had the dawnings of
mercy, but I resisted: I fear I have outstood my Market: That I have outstrived
the Spirit so long, that he will strive no more: And this bows me down, that I
am afraid to look up.

Answ. Sinner, if this be thy case, know that thy fears of losing the day of
grace, is a sign it is not lost: The greatest symptom of departing grace is
security, and false peace, 1 These. 5. 3. So it was with the people before the
flood: Noah threatened judgments, but they dreamt of peace, Math. 24. 37. etc.
Security ushered in the departure of grace from them: But while the Spirit of
grace strives with thy Soul, the day of grace is not past from thee. Does God
call upon thee now, and plead with thy heart? And do thou find some movings,
and turnings of thy Bowels in thee, crying out, O that there might be mercy for
me; that this day of grace may not be past? If so, then sure the Spirit strives
yet with thy Soul: Therefore, Soul, if now thou will close with Christ, none of
these pleas can debar thy closing with him.

Well Sinners, consider the Lord Jesus Christ invites you to come to him, once
more he demands your answer: what say you, will you be his or no? Do your
hearts accept of him? Do you like his proposals? will you heartily consent to
be his, upon all his terms? If so, I shall lay down some Counsels to direct you
in your right coming to Christ.

First, Sinner, if thou will come to Christ, thou must come as a poor needy,
empty, undone, Sinner, stripped of all beauty, as having nothing at all that may
deserve his favor: It Is the poor have the Gospel Preached to them. Math. 11.
5. It signifies such as are brought to great necessities, and extremities; So
Beza renders it: Such as are brought very low: Therefore some derive it from a
word that signifies, falling down at the rich Men's feet: As some beggars will.
Ferus interprets it, the poor in Spirit, that acknowledge themselves mean, and
are low in their own eyes. So Calvin takes it, for them that are oppressed with
the sense of their own wants, such as feel their pinching necessities; that lie
down overwhelmed with the apprehension of their emptiness: The Treasures of the
Gospel are designed to such Persons that are poor and afflicted in their own
Spirits. There Is no greater obstacle in this Match between Christ and sinners,
than a sense of self worthyness: This keeps many from seeing the beauty of
Christ; their own Righteousness hangs in their eye; they are too heavy laden
with their own thick clay, I mean the sense of their own worthyness, to be
looking up to Jesus, and lifted up to him: Sinners may be too rich for Christ
in their own opinion, but never too poor; hence the Lord Jesus Christ tells us,
he came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to Repentance, Math. 9. 13. Not
them that Judge themselves Righteous, but them that feel themselves sinners:
The Rich he sends empty away, those that are Rich in their own thoughts, when
the poor and hungry are filled with good things: Men choose empty vessels to put
their liquors in; and low rooms to cellar their wines, so does Jesus Christ
choose empty Souls for his good things: He chooses the Low plains for his
walks, when the high towering Mountains are rejected: The high, and lofty One
comes to dwell in the low and contrite Spirit, Isa. 57. 15. Sinner, thou must
strip thy self of thy own Ornaments, if thou intend to put on Jesus Christ:
Thou must throw down thy Crown at his feet; if thou think to wear his Crown
on thy head: O Soul! thou must come as a poor wretch to Christ; with thy empty
sack, as Jacobs Sons did to Egypt to buy corn, and then thou shall have
Treasure too: Thou must see thy self an undone sinner; thou must come (with
Lazarus) and throw thy self down at this Rich Kings Door; if ever thou will be
fed with his Crumbs; nay rather feasted with his Dainties.

Secondly, Thou must come to Christ as to a full and sufficient treasure, able
to save and satisfy thee; to pay off thy debts, and enrich thy Soul for ever,
Heb. 7. 25. Able to supply all thy wants and fill all thy emptiness, Phil. 4.
19. We have shown already that his treasures are bottomless, boundless,
unfathomable, unexhaustible, never to be wasted or spent: O Soul come to Christ
as such a one: Measure not Christ's gold by thy bushel; nor his plenty by thy
poverty: think not thy debts too great for Christ to pay, because thou know
not where to get money of thy own: Think not thy straits too many for him to
relieve: He has enough for thy Soul to live upon both here and to all
Eternity; O Sinner believe this, and come to him as such a one; suppose not the
Fountain is empty, because thy Cisterns are dry: His Righteousness is like the
great Mountains, Psa. 36. 6. It is in the Hebrew, The Mountains of God: And his
grace is without measure, Joh. 3. 34. Therefore thou must look to him as having
a sufficient fullness for thy Soul.

Thirdly, Thou must look to Christ with expectation, as the poor Cripple did to
Peter and John, Acts. 3. 5. Now shall a poor Creature expect to receive some
needful suitable good from a fellow Creature; and will not thou expect some
mercy from the Lord Jesus Christ, thy Creator, and Redeemer? O sinner come with
expectations to Christ; believe that he is as willing as able to enrich all
that come to him: He has past his word for it. He that comes to me I will in
no wise cast out. Joh. 6. 37. He that believes on him shall not perish, Joh.
3. 16. The weary Soul that comes yea creeps to him, shall have rest, Math. 11.
28. The thirsty Soul shall be satisfied, Joh. 7. 37. He goes up and down in the
Ministry of the Gospel, seeking to save that which is lost, Luke 19. 10. And
he is angry with them that will not come to him, Joh. 5. 40. O sinner, do not
take up hard thoughts of Christ: Such suspicious thoughts of Christ is some of
the Devils seed that he does sow in broken ground. When Christ comes to break
sinners hearts and make them sensible of their undoneness, then the Devil casts
in these tares, and raises up ill thoughts of Christ; It was this did so
enervate the diligence of the unprofitable Servant; some undue thoughts he took
up of his Lords bounty: I knew (says he) thou were an hard, and austere Man:
Hence he puts up his Talent in a Napkin, and his hand in his bosom, Math. 25.
24, 25. Jealousies of Christ's good will to sinners are very destructive to
Salvation-work: The Devil has hindered many a Soul from coming to Christ, by
casting this block in his way. O then come with expectations; at least come to
Christ, with as great hopes as the Lepers came to the Tents of the Assyrians
who were Enemies; come to Christ the friend of Sinners. 2 Kings 7. 4. They
adventured with some hopes; we may live, and we can but dye; they may kill us,
and they may save us alive: But thy case is not so, if thou come and adventure
on Christ, thou may be sure, he will not kill thee: O look to Jesus then
with some hopes; say, who can tell but my Soul may live.

Fourthly, Close first with Jesus Christ himself, and afterward with his
Treasure: I confess usually something from Christ draws the Sinner's first
respects to him: The savor of his ointments, some love tokens, kindnesses,
apprehension of necessity; sense of undoneness may conduce to get the first
glances of Sinners toward Christ; But though these allure to Christ, yet the
first thing the Espoused Soul must eye in his Match with Christ, is Christ
himself; though these things draw the Soul, yet they do not center the
Affections: Christ's kindnesses are designed as motives to beget an esteem of
himself in sinners hearts: The knowledge of what Jesus Christ has for sinners,
an intimation of pardon, peace and Salvation for all that come to him, may be
the Prodromus or forerunner of Christ's Person to sinners view; but when they
come to see him, they must first pitch upon himself; and till they come to this
they cannot have a due and orderly close with Christ: In all right and regular
Matches, the Person must be first regarded, then the Portion: A Soul is not fit
to match with Christ, till he comes to see infinitely more worth in him, then
in all his gifts, and favors: It was the excellency of Christ himself that
drew Paul's highest regards to him, with respect to relation; Phil. 3. 8. The
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: Paul sets that fore-most;
And then to be made conformable to his Death, and Resurrection. The Spouse was
more taken with Christ's Person then with his Gifts: Cant. 1. 2, 3. First
himself was lovely, then his fruits. Cant. 2. 3. David counts nothing in
Heaven, or Earth like to God in Christ. Psa. 73. 25. It Is sordid love, and too
unworthy of a conjugal State, that values the Portion more then the Person;
that Soul is too unworthy of Christ, who values any thing more then him: Math.
10. 37 It must be Christ himself, must sit in the upermost seat in thy Soul.
It Is a saying of Calvin, It Is an unworthy thing not to perfer one Christ above
all: Those Matches never prove comfortable where the Estate is eyed more then
the Person, hence conjugal love is broken, when the estate is gone; but where
true conjugal love is, it is settled upon the Person: Love that is set upon some
Gifts of Christ, more then Christ himself, when these are suspended, the others
will decay; but love placed upon his Person will last: Hence it is many do so
easily leave Christ, when it comes to parting with other things, because their
love was set more upon these things then Christ himself: O Soul be sure it is
Christ himself thou do choose, and not another; O be not guilty of that
mistake as Jacob was, to take Leah instead of Rachel: Be sure it be not a false
Idea of Christ in thy thoughts, but that it be a real Christ thou take; and
then thou will never look for another: Be sure give Christ the pre-eminence:
The Father has given him the pre-eminence, and wilt not thou? Phil. 2. 9. Col.
1. 18. Col. 2. 9. If Christ must take the best place in Heaven, he has reason
to take the first place in thy heart.

Fifthly, If thou would come to Christ aright, then bring thy all with thee
to him; and make a free and full surrender of thy self, and thy all to him:
When God would have Israel out of Egypt, they must not leave a hoof behind,
Exodus 10. 26. 2 Cor. 8. 5. They first gave their own selves to the Lord: Be
sure make over thy self first to Christ, and then all thy interests, and
Capacities: Come and subscribe to Christ, Isa. 44. 5. One shall say I am the
Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord. Calvin has a saying upon this: A Person
(says he) can never have true faith in Christ, till he comes to make this
testification and confession of him: In the espousing betwivt Christ and the
Soul, there is a mutual resignation of each to other with all they have. Christ
gives his Person and Purchase to Believers, and the sincere Soul gives back
himself and all to Christ: To detain the least part from Christ is abominable
fraud, and lying against the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 3. If thou accountest any one
thing too good for Christ; He accounts all his too good for thee.

Lastly, Be sure your acceptance of Christ be considerate and sincere, sit down
first and count the cost, Luke 14. 28. Thou must be no more thy own; thou must
take up thy Yoke and his Yoke: Thy cross and his Cross: Thou must deny thy
self and follow him: Weighty things are not to be undertaken rashly, Diu
deliber andum was an ancient Motto. Hasty matches seldom prove well: O Soul, be
not rash in thy taking Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ Espouseth his in Judgment
as well as in Faithfulness, Hos. 2. 19, 20. in considerate bargains are
oft-times broken or repented of, You will never espouse Christ in Faithfulness,
till you espouse him in Judgment: Weigh all things, consider Marriage Articles,
what they are, and whether you are willing to perform them, Math. 16. 24. O
Soul try, can thy heart consent to this? O the falseness of Souls pretended
match to Christ has undone many! You must take whole Christ with the whole
heart, or else you will never match aright with Christ, You must choose him
never to choose again. You must make him your only choice, and let all your
other choosings be by him: Thou shall choose our inheritance for us, Psa. 47.
4. Say then, I will only choose him; I will choose his Person, his Laws, his
Honor and Glory; but Christ shall choose all for me; Let Christ choose my place,
and condition, high or low: Let Christ dispose of me, where, and how he will in
the World, I will dispose of Christ in my heart.

So much of this Fourth Inference. That Jesus Christ is worth a looking after.

CHAP. XXVII.
Showing the folly of such as pursue earthly things, with neglect of Christ,
considering the Nature of those things; the Terms on which they are to be
enjoyed; The casualty that attends them: The guilt such contract.

IF there be such great and glorious treasures of Christ tendered to sinners in
the Gospel: Then see the folly of those that pursue earthly treasures with a
neglect of Christ: For Souls to turn their backs on Christ, and court the
World, and peri^hing things: O folly indeed! I shall give four Reasons to
convince such persons of folly.

The 1. Taken from the things themselves they pursue with neglect of Christ. 2.
The different terms on which Christ and these are to be enjoyed. 3. The
casual^y that attends Souls attempts after Earthly things. 4. The guilt that
such contract, who pursue Earthly treasures more than Christ.
First, It Is folly, yea madness to pursue Earthly things and neglect Christ
because the things themselves they choose cannot be compared with Christ; which
will appear in several particulars.

First, They are uncertain Riches; There Is no dependence upon them, 1 Timothy 6.
17. Nor trust in uncertain Riches, (...). Riches that are not declared, and
manifested, to be sure and certain, for a dependence; They are not a sure
bottom for Souls to build so much hope and delight upon; when it comes to a
pinch indeed; then i^ ^ppears they are vain, and will not profit in the day of
wrath. Like a broken Staff, when you lean upon it, then it breaks: So the
Riches of this world, when Souls put some stress upon them, then they fail:
They are uncertain; sometimes you enjoy them, and anon they are removed, Pro.
23. 5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not, for riches certainly
make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. They come
slowly, but get off swiftly; when they come to men, they have leaden feet,
and when they leave them, Eagles Wings: To day they flourish like the grass,
and to morrow burn like an Oven: A man has a beautiful house to day, and to
morrow an heap of Ashes* O most uncertain Riches! All the world runs in
changes; To day (says one) they ar^ for the Bosom, and to morrow for the
Beesom: To day men take them into their bosoms, to morrow vengeance sweeps them
away.

Secondly, They are empty things, they cannot satisfy the Soul that feeds upon
them: The world is not filling meat to an immortal Soul; let a person feed
never so heartily, yet he is hungry: The whole world ^^nnot fill one heart;
Alexander wept, that there were no more worlds to conquer: Nature puts bounds
to the Sea; and all Earthly beings have their end, Psa. 119. 96. but sin has
made carnal desires boundless: It is with earthly minded men, as Solomon says
it is with the Grave, and barren womb, and the fire that say it is not enough,
Pro. 30. 15, 16. Wherefore (says the Prophet) do you spend your money for that
which is not Bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2.
One calls the whole Turkish Empire but a bone that is thrown to dogs: very dry
meat; so are all the things of this world: Riches are like meat in a dream: An
hungry man thinks he feeds, when he dreams but when he awakes he is empty.
Riches feed nothing but the Eye; hence Covetousness is called the lusts of the
Eye, 1 John 2. 16. O'tis a vanity indeed to look after that which you can put
in to your Eye! it will not feed your affections, it will not satiate the Soul,
it will not quiet the Conscienc: O that men should adventure their all for that
which will not satisfy!

Thirdly, They are fading things in their Nature: not only uncertain, and
liable to remove in the event, but they are dying in their Nature; Corruptible
riches: Your Houses, Lands, whatever your greedy Eye covets, are but rotten
things: Your Garments are liable to the Moth, and your Gold and Silver Subject
to Rust, J am. 5. 2, 3. Ah poor treasure indeed! Which rust and Moth consume,
rest that strengthens other Creatures eats out these; Houses, Lands, Gold and
Jewels, are subject to wearing away, Tempus teret omnia: Time will wear them
out: Hence Christ advises his Disciples to provide bags which wax not old, a
treasure in Heaven, which fails not, Luk 12. 33. Implying that all the
treasures of this world are not so: If men lay them up in bags, the bags will
wax old, and time will rot them; Thieves can approach to these treasures, and
Moth, and Rust can eat them out: ('It Is a pretty simile one has of it, who
compares the Riches of the world to hailstones, that when they fall upon a
tyl'd House, make a rattling noise for the present, but by and by sl^de down,
and melt away to nothing.

Fourthly, The treasures of this world are ensiaving treasures; they bring
their owners into bondage: as one says; Ducendo vincimur, vincendo ducimur: By
their cunning allurements they overcome us, and overcoming us, they lead us
Captive: They first allure the heart, and then enthrall the heart: They bring
men into the worst bondage of any, for they bring them into a willing bondage
Earthly men are not only led Captive by the world at Satan's will, but are
enslaved by their own will; they consent to be bound: Earthly men do with Esau,
swap a bargain for the things of the world; they consent to let go their birth
right for a mess of pottage; they give up their birth right to their
Inferiors, and consent to become a slave to their own Servants: That word of
the Wiseman is never more true, Eccl. 10. 7. then when men are led Captive by
the love of this world: I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes walking
as Servants upon the Earth. Never did Israel do greater drudgery in Egypt, then
Carnal, Earthly men do to the world: It makes them rise early, sit up late, and
eat the bread of sorrows, and all for a few shaddows, Ps. 127. 2. Earthly men,
(says one) are like Beasts that are set to draw in the Devils Teams, who draw
sin with Cart-ropes, and Iniquity with Cords of Vanity: Isa. 5. 1. Peccata
facile veniunt, sed fortiter ligant.

Fifthly, The riches of this world are ensnaring too. 1 T^m. 6. 9. They that
will be rich fall into Temptations and Snares: The word (...) signifies such
snares as persons use to take Birds and Beasts with, and (...) to fasten down
to the ground as nets are that take beasts; So Earthlyminded men the Devil
stakes them down to the ground: They are held fast in the cords of their own
iniquity, Pro. 5. 22. What a snare was Balack's Gold to Balaam's Covetous heart
to draw him against his light, convictions and a Divine charge. The Bag proved
a fatal charm to covetous Judas, it lead him to the Halter: The things of the
world proved a sad snare to Demas, and led him off from all his profession:
Earthly things are like twigs that are in Bird-lime, that hold fast those silly
Souls that come at them, that they have no mind nor power ^o leave them: O they
are sad snares indeed.

Sixthly, Earthly riches are defiling too: The Apostle calls riches filthy
lucre, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Not for filthy lucre: (...) Obscure gain as the word
implies, filthy, unbecoming, undecent: O it is dishonest gain indeed; which ends
in the loss of the Soul! Such men are the greatest Couzeners in the world, that
cheat themselves, and loose their Souls for sublunary treasures: The Riches of
this world defile the Consciences of those that love them; the Apostle calls
them the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2. 20. It Is considerable that the
Psalmist does use the word, Psa. 52. 7. to fignifie both riches and
unrighteousness: Lo this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted
in the abundance of his Riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness:
noting that riches prove occasions of much evil, hurt, and filthiness to them
that have them.

Seventhly, They are accountable Riches, Talents that must be reckoned for,
Math. 25. 19. After a long time, the Lord of that Servant comes and reckons
with him. All Earthly interests are trusts committed to the fidelity of those
that have them, and they must give an account for them, Luke 16. 2. Give an
account of thy Stewardship for tbou must be no longer Steward ((...)) All thy
undue pursuits of the World; thy inordinate love to it, thy unjust ingrossings
of it to thy self, thy penurious witholding it, from those distributions God
has required must shortly be reckoned for. (...) ab (...) an house and (...),
those things which Families use.

Eighthly, They are afflicting riches: They carry more trouble then comfort
with them, 1 Timothy 6. 10. For the love of money is the root of all evil, which
while Some coveted after -- pierce themselves through with many sorrows: They
run themselves through. So Beza: They stab themselves all over from Head to
Foot with darts; So the word imports. O how great are those anxieties, and
troubles the riches of this world breed for those that have them! they be
troublesome things; They cause a great deal of pains to get them: a great deal
of care to keep them; a great deal of fear to loose them; And a great deal of
trouble when they are gone: Christ compares the love of the world to Thorns,
Mat. 13. 7. Compared with ver. 22. Because they prick and scratch the
Consciences, as well as choke the word: O the many wounds they will see in them
one day that love the world inordinately: Whence Gregory has this upon it: Let
rich men take heed how they handle Throns, least they prick them.

Nint^ly, They are damnifying riches, and bring a great deal of loss with them:
A man can hardly come by much of the world, without a sensible detriment: They
occasion the loss of a great deal of time that should be used about their
precious Souls: The loss of precious peace; O what trouble, what carking,
fretting, rending cares have men about these Riches! They loose their natural
peace many times, and lose their Soul quietness: The cares of this world breed
a great deal of guilt: Then there is a loss of purity too; they sully thy Soul,
dirt thy Conscience: bespatter thy Affections: Many a hopeful Soul is corrupted
by them to fall from their seeming virtue and moral excellencies; as the young
man in the Gospel, Judas Annanias, and Demas. Earthlimindedness like the F^ie
in a Box of Ointment spoil men's natural and moral Virtues: They occasion the
loss of many privileges; the love of the world robs Souls of great advantages,
such cannot wait on God many times in secret duties, family duties, public
duties; they have a Farm, and Oxen, and Merchandise to look after, and
therefore cannot come. Nay, they that will be rich deprive themselves of the
profit of those privileges they do enjoy: The Love of the world takes off the
good of the word, whiles it is preached to them, Math. 13. 22. The things of
the world damp men's affections to Christ, and heavenly things; they stifle men's
Consciences: It duls and blunts the edge of the Sword of the Gospel, and makes
it rebound back again, when it falls upon the rocky heart, hardened with the love
of the World: O they are damnifiing things: And at last they will set you hard,
but they will lose your Souls, and then you have made a cursed bargain indeed,
when you have lost your Souls.

Lastly, They are dangerous and too often damning things; they are dangerous
for they keep the Soul from Christ: As the young man in the Gospel, he came to
the very last step, and yet there he stayed, he could not part withal for
Christ that broke the bargain Mat. 19. 22. He went away sorrowful for he had
great possessions: The love of the World stood in the way of his receiving
Christ; Thorns are the shelter for Serpents and riches for many lusts, that
drown men in perdition and destruction. 1. Tim. 6. 9. The word in the original
signifies a plunging over head and ears in ruin, sunk to the bottom, as one
that has a great weight upon him: One compares rich men to a Pine Tree of
which it is said, that if the bark be plucked off it will last long, but while
that abides it rots: riches are as a deep pit, into which men easily get, but
hardly get out, and therefore Christ says. it is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Math. 19. 24.

The things of the World bar up the way to Heaven, and open the way to Hell,
and hasten the Soul with a vengeance to destruction: They are like the Devils
sleep-drench, that casts Souls into a deep trance, and 'till they come to the
end of their lives they never awake, and then they awake with a vengeance:
That Is the first. Consider what the things of the world are, and they are fools
indeed that pursue them with the neglect of Christ.

Secondly, Consider the different terms on which they are to be had, and it
will appear to be folly for men to desert Heavenly things, and choose Earthly:
If you would have the World, it will cost you a great deal of sorrow, trouble,
and pains, you must tug hard; Adam being turned out of Paradise must work in
the sweat of his brows for his bread. Genesis 3. 10. But Heavenly Treasures is to
be received by believing; They come by gift. It is but to come and take it and
receive it. Isa. 55. 1, 2.

Thirdly Consider the casualty that attends the persuit of these Earthly
things. A great deal of casualty whether you may have them or no; and a great
deal of hazard that attends them: The Merchant engages in dangerous voyages,
and after all, is not sure to bring home any treasure. Eccles. 5. 14. These
Riches perish by evil travel: Suppose they are obtained, they sometimes are
wasted as soon as won; and he that thinks he has enough for many years, many
times leaves, nothing behind him: Many toil, and tug, eat out their bowels, and
spend their days for that which they cannot obtain; how many labor to be rich,
and yet dye Poor: Riches make themselves wings and fly away. Pro. 23. 5

Fourthly, Such as pursue Earthly things with the neglect of Christ, contract
much guilt upon their own Souls; they violate the whole Law of God; for the
whole Law contains supreme love to God: Love (says the Apostle) is the
fulfilling of the Law. Romans 13. 10. And upon this Commandment (says Christ)
hangs all the Law, and the Prophets: Math. 22. 40* Upon supreme love to God,
and equal love to our neighbor, as to our selves: Therefore such as pursue
Earthly things, and love the World more then God, they break the whole Law of
God. 1 John 2. 5. Yea they violate and break the commands of grace also: It
makes men false to all their engagments, and promises; and to all their civil
trusts: O what horrid wickedness will not the love of this World put men upon!
therefore such contract foul guilt upon their Souls: And this shows their folly.

So much for the use of Information.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Containing an use of reprehension to several sorts of Persons, with
consolation to all sound Believers.

IF there be such vast and glorious Treasures in the Lord Jesus Christ, opened
and tendered in the Gospel. Then this reprooves such as have or profess to have
an interest in these vast and boundless Treasures, and yet are so little
affected with them, and have a low estimation of them; O sad indeed! That the
choicest substance that ever was; boundless treasure, should be esteemed no
more then perishing trash. It Is a lamentable thing indeed to see how most
Professors value perishing treasures so much, and Jesus Christ so little: Did
persons prize those Heavenly Treasures, they would have a less esteem of
Earthly; they would be more restless till they saw their Interest in them:
Pursue more after them; be at more pains and cost to secure them: Be more in
the commendation of them, and highly esteem those that have them.

Secondly, It reproves those that have or seem to have a title to this glorious
Treasure, and yet are not contented with it: O Souls, will a few handfuls of
dust please you, and will not a Kingdom, Crown, and Glory? Will a little
Cottage in the world take up your delight, and will not a Mansion and
dewlling place in Heaven satisfy you? O Believer, has God made over himself,
Father, Son, and Spirit to be thine eternal Treasure, and is not he rich enough
to fill all thy heart, and all thy desires? sit down and consider how
groundless are all thy mournings, how unreasonable are all thy frettings and
discontent, who can say of Heaven, This is mine; and of God, and Christ, He
is mine.

Thirdly, It reproves those that have or seem to have a Title to those
treasures, and yet look after others treasures, and eagerly pursue a portion in
this World. O unexcusable! Like Dinah they wander after the things of this
World, as she did after the people of the Land, till they deflower their Souls:
O Christians, have you chosen God, and will you back to the World again? Has
God delivered you from this present World, and will you yield up your selves to
it again! Has grace opened your Prison Doors, and will you enter in again?
Have you tasted God to be gracious, and yet long after the worldlings bottle,
to drink of these Waters of Marah? O unreasonable Souls: How unsuitable is this
to your state and condition! if you are Saints indeed you are not of this
World, Joh. 15. 19. Are you the Citizens of Heaven, Ephesians. 2. 19. And would
Saints and Angels so dig after the World if they come down from Heaven? It Is
contrary to your promises and engagements. You go against your convictions, and
experiences, and by your inordinate love to, and pursuit of the World you are
Enemies to God your own and others Souls.

Fourthly, This reproves those of the People of God, who have an interest in
these vast Treasures of Christ, and yet are miserably poor in their own Souls:
Many complain Times be hard, Estates wast, Trades decay, but the greatest
Poverty lies in Spirituals: Faith, Love, Humility, self denial, Mortifiedness
to the World, persons are destitute of these things chiefly; little grace laid
out, little grace laid up: Few workings of Spirit in duty, and few works of
grace in Men's lives; this argues wonderful Poverty in men's Souls: It Is not
Poverty in Spirit, but poverty in Spirituals, Professors are so guilty of this
day; few acts of Piety toward God, few works of charity toward Men: How lean,
and ilfavoured are most under the Gospel: Many are learning, and never come to
the knowledge of the truth; a strange vail lies yet upon the minds of many:
Little right-kind of knowledge, few know the meaning of the Spirit, few are led
into the mysteries of the Gospel: Others profess themselves wise, and to know
God, but by works deny him, and their Poverty lies here, They are full of
notions, but empty of holiness, Earthly and vain in their Spirit: Most men's
Religion this day lies in the head; little-heart-godliness, little
life-holiness: Little love to God, and Saints: Little fruits brought forth for
God, this shows the Poverty of the times we live in: Again, the difficultness
of maintaining Spiritual life; hard to get to a life of faith, and love, hard
to keep up hope, this comes from Soul Poverty: Hard for Persons to live from
one Ordinance to another: Spiritual life decays, wastes, languishes; it is with
too many Professors as it is with ancient weak Persons, that are grown so
cold, Nature so decayed, that they can hardly keep themselves warm, longer then
by the fire: So it is with many Christians, no longer then under a warming
Sermon, but cold presently; nay it is not ordinary Sermons will heat them: The
richest feedings, the choicest Cordials, scarce keep up faith, love, and
delight in God one moment, and are not these poor men? Corruptions grow, a
light, vain, Eearthy, frothy Spirit abounds; but meekness, savouriness,
humility, gravity, livelyness decays: Little strength for duty, hard to hear,
pray, or to manage one duty aright; little Spirit and Truth in most duties, and
services: Unable to conflict with temtations, corruptions, oppositions: Hard to
live up to light, convictions, resolutions: How do Souls make shipwreck of
faith, and conscience! How easily are they overcome by their hearts lust,
pride, passion, Earthyness presently carries them aside. Unable to bear the
least sufferings: The very shaking of the rod will drive some from duty:
Persons cannot yet digest difficulties, and endurings for the Gospels sake: How
soon are many worn out by the afflictions, and persecutions of this day: This
deserves sharp reproof.

Lastly, It reproves those who partake of those riches of Christ, and yet are
reserved to others: O how unlike are these to Christ! He opens his Treasures to
you, but you shut yours from others; he hands out his bounty to you, but you
shut your eyes from others: His streams make glad the City of God; your narrow
heartedness makes sad the Sons of men: His bowels are enlarged, yours
sttaitned; Milk and Honey are under his tongue, emptiness and vanity under
yours; his steps drop fatness, your hands cause leanness: O Christians! see
your unsutableness to Christ, and be ashamed of your straightened bowels, and shut
hands, toward your poor Brethren, whether as to outward or spiritual supplies!
How few are the better for you in soul or body, whose lips bless God for your
bounty? Deuteronomy. 14. 13. A close-handed Professor is a Paradox in nature, and
differs from God and the whole Creation: The Lord is good and does good: Jesus
Christ ascended on high, and gives gifts to men, Ephesians. 4. 8. He is always doing
good. The Sun diffuseth freely of his light, and heat: The clouds drop fatness:
The Earth brings forth her increase; the Trees yield their fruit, and when fit
for the use of man, lets them fall into their bosoms; the air communicates its
refreshing; the fire its heat, the Sea its store, only man is selfish and with
the unprofitable Servant hides his talent in a Napkin: Christians be humbled
for your nonconformity to Christ, and the little use you have made of your
Talents, and graces for the good of those you live with.

Note That this use of Reprehension was more fully and largely composed by the
Author. but the substance of it is contained in that excellent Treatise of the
Author, called The Heavenly Trade; to which the Reader is referred.

Third Use of Consolation.

If there be such unsearchable riches in Christ for his people: Then here is
wonderful Comfort to those that are in Christ; such have cause to rejoice and
be exceeding glad: For,

First, In your interest in Christ lies your right to all those great and
glorious treasures of Christ: He that has Christ, all that is Christ's is his:
All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 21.
Such are Joynt-Heirs with Christ put down in the same everlasting Covenant:
adopted to the same inheritance, Romans 8. 27. They have a Title to all that
Christ has as Mediator, and that by donation and purchase: A title that
cannot be forfeited nor wasted: A Title to the whole inheritance of God. Ah
Believer if Christ be thine then it is no presumtion to lay claim to any thing
that is his: All that have been treated of him as God-Man Mediator, his
glorious endowments, his personal dispositions, and excellent perfections are
all thine. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Is not this comfort indeed to believers, that have
such a Beloved in Heaven, that is altogether lovely? It Is wonderful reviving
when a Person can see some excellency he is related to beyond what is in
himself: What comfort will a Mother take in a beautiful Child, though her self
be deformed? What delight will the faithful Wife take in the excellencies of
her Husband, and glory in them as her own: Such pleasure does the Spouse take
in the beauty of Christ. Cant. 5. 10. And reckons them as her comeliness though
she was black. Cant. 1. 5. I am black but comely: What consolation is this to a
child of God to be entitled to such a glorious Jesus? Though thou art poor yet
thy beloved is rich: Though thou art unlovely he is fair, though thou art
obscure and vile, yet he is honorable; and his riches, beauty, and honor are
thine; and thy reputation with God, Saints, and Angels shall be in him, and as
he is. Cant. 6. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the
Moon, clear as the Sun. The Lord Jesus has a high account of the Spouses
beauty; she is bright, fair, clear, but it is as the Morning, or Moon, who
borrow their beauty from the Sun: Comfort thy Heart, O drooping Believer,
though thou can see no worth in thy self, yet thou have enough in Christ for
thee. Again, what wonderful Comfort may a Child of God gather from a seen Title
to all the purchase of Christ, his Righteousness, Graces, Privileges, sure
Covenant, and Salvation, when he can upon warrantable grounds lay claim to all
this? but so the Believer may, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Secondly, The time is drawing near when they shall have a full possession of
all those treasures of Christ, Rev. 21. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things: All those great and glorious things promised shall be his possession,
God shall be all in all to him, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Every tittle of his word shall
be fulfilled, though Heaven and Earth pass away, Math. 5. 18. Here Believers
are rich Heirs under age, which differ nothing from a Servant, Gal. 4. 1. but
the day hastens when their great Estate will fall into their hands, and they
shall live upon it to all Eternity; the expectation of which is cause of
comfort; when veils shall be taken away, and thy soul ever with the Lord; when
thy filthy Garments shall be taken off, and thy beautiful raiment for ever
worn; when thou shall live no more at small allowances of Grace, but receive it
without measure; thy Table spread, thy Cup overflow; thy feeding shall be no
more on sent portions from thy Fathers Table, but shall sit down in his
presence, and feast upon his fullness to all Eternity: Then shall all promises
be turned into performances; all hopes shall end in fruition, and all desires
center in delights, then shall parts be turned into perfections, darkness into
delight, changes into immutabilities, fears into joys; wants into fullness;
absence into presence: O blessed Eternity! When the Lord shall bring forth all
his Treasures, open his Wardrobe, and and pay off every saved Soul with an
infinite fullness as much as he can receive, or desire to have, treasures of
love in God the Father, Son, and Spirit; rivers of joy in the presence of God;
and fullness of grace in conformity to God. Things which eye cannot see, nor ear
hear, nor the heart of man conceive. 1 Cor. 2. 9. And is not a cerainty of
these future treasures ground enough for present comfort.

Thirdly, from an interest in this rich Jesus, here is comfort to Saints under
all their present wants whether outward or inward: In that.

First, There Is enough in Christ to supply them: In him dwells the fullness of
the Godhead, Col. 2. 9. Thy wants Believer are but finite, be they never so
great; but Christ's fullness is infinite: Thy necessities are the needs of a
Creature, his ability is the power of a Creator: The Lord Jesus Christ can
more easily supply thy need, then a whole Ocean can fill one pitcher; for
betwixt the Creatures there is some proportion, but betwixt God and the
Creature none at all.

Secondly, As there is enough in Christ to fill all thy wants; so all the
fullness that is in Christ is thy own, Believer, laid up in Christ for thee,
made over to thee, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Deus men's and omnia mea. And therefore may
boldly expect supplies according to the measure of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 11.
Dividing to every man severally as he will. Thou may as boldly go to the
treasury of Christ, as a man does to his Purse for money, or to his Cupboard
for Bread, and as a Child does to his Father for necessary supplies, Math. 6.
32.

Lastly, The Lord Jesus Christ stands engaged to see the wants of his people
supplied, Ps. 34. 20. They that fear the Lord shall want no good thing, Phil.
4. 19. So that thou may boldly say the Lord is my helper, Heb. 13. 6. Do
thou want Food, Raiment, Health, etc. for thy Body, or do thou want Grace,
Wisdom, Faith, Love, Humility, Patience, Courage, Self-denial, Power over
Corruptions, Succor under thy temptations, victory over thy lust; thou may
go to Christ with expectations of all that God sees best for thee: seeing there
are such treasures of all Grace placed and entrusted in Christ for thee.

Fourthly, Comfort under all your losses for Christ; surely if Christ be yours,
and such vast treasures are in him, he will not see you losers for his sake; he
can and will save you harmless; nay, requite your expensive love for him: all
that strength of affection, liberty, time, talents (Christians) you lay out for
him, shall be given in again: Jesus Christ is that good Samaritane, who has
past his word to repay again whatever is laid out for him, or upon his, at his
bidding, Luke 10. 35. If a tender hearted Paul would take the offenses of an
Onesimus on his account, Philemon ver. 18. Much more will Christ take the
expenses for him on his account and repay it a hundred fold in this life, with
Glory in that which is to come, Math. 19. 29.

Lastly, Comfort under all your reproaches for Christ: It Is the lot of gracious
Souls many times to be accounted vile, and the offscouring of all things by the
men of this world, 1 Cor. 4. 13. so ver. 10. We are Fools for Christ's sake, and
despised: It Is part of the Cross of Christ to be reproached for his sake, 1
Pet. 4. 14. But here is Comfort in such a case in the consideration of those
treasures of Christ: Christians, your relation to such a Jesus who is the Heir
of glory will wipe off all your disgrace: Think on that account you have with
God, and the glory you shall shortly have in your own Country, and that will
balance all troubles on the account of disgrace for Christ.

CHAP. XXIX.
Containing an use of Examination; Characters of such as have an interest in
Christ, and in all those glorious treasures.

CHristians; you that have hopes of an Interest in these treasures of Christ:
clear up your title: Be sure your claim be good: Rest not till you can have
your evidences of Christ past dispute, to make the matter plain and certain to
you; that you are Christ's, and Christ is yours: Adventure not at all your hopes
of such great and glorious things upon uncertainties: if you miss and fail in
your propriety to this Estate, you are undone for ever: There Is no repairing
the loss of Christ when you come to dye: All your after-wit cannot mend this
bad bargain when time is past: If you build upon the sand, till the building
time be over, you will have an Eternity to repent your folly: there is no room
for another adventure when the door of Heaven is shut: If you have too
carelessly, and groundlesly laid your hopes of Christ, and Glory, and and so
are secure till the time be past, you can no more make trial of a better
building: O how great will the fa^l of mistaken hopes be at last; when the
Hypocrite shall say too late, woe is me, I am deceived! all my hopes for Heaven
have Proved a Lie; I did suppose my title was good, and others thought so too:
I could tell of Experiences, and dreamt of closing with Christ; I have had my
Convictions, Desires, Tastes, Affections, Parts, Privileges, and high hopes of
Glory: But alas, now I see my building is upon the sand; woe to me, all must
down again! I have run in vain, and now I must sit down in sorrow to all
eternity. O lamentable! when time is gone to come to such a pass: And surely
this will be thy case whoever thou art that have not sure grounds of thy
interest in Christ: Therefore, Christians, take not up upon probable hopes, but
put it out of doubt that Christ is yours, and this state is yours.

Quest. But, says the Soul, I confess it will be sad and doleful to hear of
these excellent treasures, and miss of all at last: But how might I do to be
satisfied in this matter, to know that Christ is mine, and his Riches mine?

For the resolution of this Case I shall speak to four things.

1. How and in what manner a title to Christ and those glorious treasures are
to be obtained. 2. Who they are that do obtain them. 3. What is requisite
toward the obtaining of them. 4. What are the certain and specifical fruits
and effects of such an obtaining.
1. How or in what manner may the soul come to have a Right to Christ?

Answ. There are three usual ways by which persons obtain a Title to a thing:
1. By Birth 2. By Purchase, 3. By Gift.

First, By Birth: On this a natural Relation is founded: A Child comes to have
a right to his Fathers Inheritance by Birth. This way the Blessing and
Birthright fell to the Firstborn: So Esau had his Title to the Birthright
and Blessing could he have kept it, Genesis 27. 32. So Manasseh had a right to the
Blessing, because he was the Firstborn, Genesis 48. 18.

Secondly, Another way of obtaining a Title to a thing is by Purchase: So
Jeremiah bought a Field, Jer. 32. 25, Thus men get a Title to Estates by
Purchase, when they part with a considerable value for them.

Thirdly, Another way of Right to a thing is by Gift and Adoption: So Jacob
came to an Estate in the Land of Goshen, and Joseph to the Government of Egypt,
and Moses the Son-in-Law to Pharaoh, by gift and Adoption: These are the three
usual ways by which an interest is obtained. By the first of these man can lay
no claim to an interest in Christ: By Birth we are Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.
3. By Purchase man can never get a claim to Christ: There Is no buying this
Pearl of price. Therefore a Title to Christ must come the last way, by Gift.
Fallen man having lost his first Estate, with all right to life, and capacity to
regain it, by fulfilling the terms in order to it, it must needs follow, that
now if ever he obtain life again it must be on a new account, even of Grace.
The breach of the first Covenant forfeited all, and bound over the Offender to
death and damnation, till which penalty be removed (which lost man could never
do) there cannot possibly be any purchase made of new life and Salvation. Romans
5. 12. Sin has passed over all men, and Death by Sin for that all Men have
sinned, and by this fall all power of doing good is lost. Rom, 7. 18. So that
now of necessity there must be a change of the first term on which life was to
be had, there being no possibility in lost man to fulfill them, and if ever
Salvation comes it must be by grace Ephesians. 2. 7. and gift: The new Covenant gives
out all his mercies freely, Rev. 21. 7. There Is no place for creature worth and
merit in order to Salvation under the Gospel; he that will be saved must accept
it as a gift: That Is the first, the way of obtaining Christ: He is the Fathers
gift, and his own gift. Gal. 2. 20. God gives Christ to whom he pleases, not
for any distinguishing worth in the Creature, but from the good pleasure of his
will. Ephesians. 1. 11.

2. Who are they that obtain Christ, and Salvation by him?

Answ. It is they that come to, and receive Christ by Faith. Joh. 1. 12. To as
many as received him to them gave he power to become the Sons of God: Christ is
offered in the Gospel by grace, and is received by faith, the acceptance as
offered of God is that which interests the Soul in him; This is called a
coming to Christ, Mat. 11. 28. A letting Christ into the heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. A
believing in him, 1 John 5. 10. He that believes in the Son of God has the
witness in himself: That is the witness of right to Christ and life. ver. 11.
And this is the record God has given us, Life Eternal; and all this in his
Son: For where a gift is freely tendered to all that will receive it, there
needs nothing to make that Person fit for that gift, but accepting the offer as
tenderd to him: Neither does this acceptance make a Person worthy of the gift,
but fulfills the terms in order to an Interest in it: If a sum of money be
offered to a poor man, and he is called to receive it, this receiving does not
merit it, but appropriate it: So that the Persons to whom Christ is tenderd is
to sinners, to all sinners, to the chiefest of Sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15. And to
every one of them, Isa. 55. 1. Ioh. 7. 37. And the terms on which he is held
out is freel^ without money, and without price, and nothing is required to
entitle them to this glorious gift, but their receiving it as tendered.

3. What is necessary to the obtaining of Christ, and and so of those glorious
Treasures in him? Without which Persons cannot, will not, come to him?

Answ. There are prerequisites to the Souls obtaining of Christ: Though they do
not merit Christ, yet are necessary to the receiving of him.

First, That the Sinner be brought to see his absolute need of Christ, and his
everlasting undoneness without him: This course the Spirit of God took with
Laodicea. Rev. 3. 17. And with those Jews, Acts 2. 23, 36. Opens to them their
cursed damning Sin, and wretched state by reason of sin, that their hearts
might be pricked and wounded. So the Jaylour was this way prepared for Christ.
Acts 16. 30. He was made to see his doleful state. Thus the Law is
Schoolmaster to bring to Christ. Gal 3. 24. To beat and wound the sinner that
he may see his need of a healing Jesus: Thus the Spirit is promised to convince
the World of sin, Righteousness, and Judgment. Joh. 16. 8. And so did God deal
with the unconverted under the Gospel. 1 Cor. 14. 25.

Secondly, Another requisite to the Souls getting this title to Christ is this,
that there be a knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ; his sutableness and
sufficiency to save, his grace, and real willingness to heal, and cure all that
come to him, Heb. 11. 6. hence, Eternal Life is said to lie in the knowledge of
Christ, Joh. 17. 3. that is, in the knowledge of his sufficiency, and
willingness to save: therefore when Paul came to obtain Christ in order to it,
says he: It pleased God to reveal his Son in me, Gal. 1. 15, 16. True faith
carries knowledge with it: Faith is not hoodwinkt and blind, but has his
discerning: By faith we come to understand: hence the Gospel is to be preached
to every Creature; what is the Gospel but the opening of Jesus Christ, his
sufficiency, and willingness to save sinners; while persons lie in a state of
ignorance, they cannot come to have a true title to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, It Is necessary that the Soul see the worth and excellency of Christ
to satisfy: That were there no Heaven at the end; yet Christ himself were
Heaven enough: So Paul saw an excellency in Christ, Phil. 3. 8. And the
Apostles also, Joh. 1. 14. The Soul that comes to Christ, must see him to be
the chiefest of ten thousand; the only desirable one, none in Heaven but
Christ, and none in Earth in comparison of him, Psa. 73. 25, He that only eyes
Salvation in coming to Christ, takes him upon necessity, not upon choice.

Fourthly, Another requisite to this coming to Christ is that the Soul be
brought to a real and actual willigness to part with all for him; yea, to a
throwing all over board to take him in, Phil. 3. 8. For whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them dung to win Chrisi. It was no small
sum these Converts parted with before they could close with Christ, Acts. 19.
19. They brought their Books, and burned them, and counted the price, and found
it fifty thousand pieces of Silver; which amounts in our money, to one
thousand, five hundred, sixty and two pounds, and ten shillings: hence it is
said, That he that will be saved must pluck out his right Eye, and cut off his
right Hand Math. 5. 29, 30. And the want of which made the Young man go away
from Christ sorrowful.

Fifthly, In order to a closing with Christ it is necessary that the Soul see an
utter poverty, and inability in himself ever to come to Christ without Christ:
Draw me, and we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. No man comes to me (says
Christ) except the Father, which sent me, draw him, Joh. 6. 44. They must see
themselves poor, that come for satisfaction in Christ, Isa. 41. 17. Thou must
deny thy own Abilities, and Rigteousness, and see thy self utterly unable, so
much as to look to Christ, till he give an Eye, Math. 11. 5.

Lastly, The Soul must be brought to close with all the terms of the Gospel
proposed to him, and made heartily willing to take Christ on his own
conditions, Math. 16. 14. A person is never fit for Christ till he can give him
a blank, and bid him write his own terms, unfeignedly saying, Lord command me
any thing; I stick at no proposals, so I may be thine, he that would fain beat
down the bargain shall never have Christ, Isa. 44. 5. now to such a reception
of Christ it is needful that things be plainly opened, and all the demands of
Christ be known, and considered, Luke 14. 28. So that there may be a known and
hearty consent to Christ, and a full compliance with all his conditions.

4. What are the certain fruits, and effects of the Souls obtaining Christ?

Ans. First, That Soul that has an interest in Christ is a new Creature, 2
Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature; old things are past
away, all things are become new. As the Lord Christ when he was crucified, was
laid in a new Tomb; so when he is received he must be lodged in a new heart: In
redemption work all things are new: there is a new Covenant, Heb. 8. 8. A new
Mediator; the first Covenant had none, Heb. 9. 15. Souls are now brought into
a new state, of new and glorious Privileges: They were dead, but now are made
alive, Ephesians. 2. 1. There Is a new Law also, the Law of the Gospel, called the Law
of the Spirit of life, Romans 8. 2. Therefore it is necessary that the Soul be
renewed also; this is promised under the Gospel, Isa. 65. 17. Behold I create
new Heavens, and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, so 2 Pet. 3. 13.
there will be a wonderful change wrought in that Person above what flesh and
blood can do, an inward change a new heart, and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. new
desires, Ps. 63. 1. Before the Soul did long after the world, pleasures,
vanities; but now, My Soul breaks for the longing it has to thy Judgments at
all times, Ps. 119. 20. Ps. 42. 1, 2. New affections to God, Ps. 116. 1. new
love to Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. new love to the Law of God, Ps. 119. 97, 127.
new love to the people of God, 1 John 3. 14. new love to the name and glory of
God, Ps. 26. 12. Psa. 145. 15. new affections for the Cross of Christ, and
reproach for his name, Gal. 2. 14. Heb. 11. 26. a new will to loath sin and
cleave to God and Holiness, Romans 7. 19* Act. 11. 23. a new Conscience, Heb. 10.
27. 2 Timothy 1. 3. and they have a new Convesation, Rom: 6. 4. Ephesians. 2. 10. Phil.
1. 27. They will walk in newness of the Spirit, Romans 6. 4. They are created to
good works to walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. At least, they design it, though they
fall short of it. Thus a Soul that is come to Christ is a new Creature. That
Soul that has no renewings in him, that has the same Spirit, desires,
affections, will, conscience, that ever he had, cannot prove his interest in
Christ.

Secondly, Tha^ Soul that has received Christ has received the Spirit of
Christ, Romans 8. 9. If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
1 Cor. 12. 13. for by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body. None can
receive the Son, but he must have the Spirit too; for Christ is not divided: He
that has Christ, has the Father and the Spirit, for these three are one. Now
a Soul that has the Spirit of Christ may know it by the effects of it: The
Spirit of Christ is a quickening Spirit, it begets a principle of Life: The
Soul that was dead to God, and holiness; now has a new life, a heart to move
after God: it works from other motives, even from love to God: Do thou find
thy heart always dead to every act of Grace? No heart to pray, hear, etc. and
is this habitual? O then here is no fruit of Christ's Spirit.

The Spirit of Christ is a sin-opposing spirit, always quarrelling with Lust;
always convincing, troubling, humbling the Soul for sin, Gal. 5. 17. Tit. 2.
11, 12. It gives no peaceable possession to it, but always opposes it as fire
does water: Where the Spirit of Christ is, it is a leading guiding Spirit, Romans
8. 14. Christians, what is it leads you? Is it your own Spirits? if you have
received the Spirit of God, you may know it by those Scripture ways it takes to
put you upon duty: such a one is co^vinced by the word, and persuaded, and
helped by the word to this and the other duty.

Again, The Spirit of Christ is a praying Spirit: A Soul that is in Christ
cannot live without prayer; though no eye see it, and no good come by it, yet
he cannot omit secret prayer, Zach. 12. 10. Romans 8. 15. It Is not enlargement of
affections, parts, abilities, and expressions in prayer; but the inditings of
the Spirit; inward breathings, sighs and groans of the Spirit: A man may pray
like a Saint, or an Angel, and yet not have a jot of the Spirit of prayer: but
it is the encouragement of the Spirit to wrestle with God by Christ; the inward
suggestions of hope, when a Soul can go to God as to a Father, when the very
heart goes out to God in prayer, and when prayer is winged with Faith and Love:
These are the effects of a Spirit of prayer, and the fruit of a Souls reception
of Christ.

Thirdly, They that have obtained an interest in Christ, have crucified the
flesh with the lusts there of, Gal. 5. 24. They, and only they that are in
Christ have crucified the flesh; that is, the body of death, original sin: The
general Nature of sin; the universal extents of sin; come under the workings of
this Crucifixtion: O try Souls; ^ath the Axe been ever laid to the root of sin?
Have you ever found felling strokes upon the body of your Corruptions, are you
baptized into the death of Christ, and as he died for sin, so do you die to
sin; and by virtue of his death, and wounds, do you fetch power, and strength
from him to crucify it? There Is a difference between the curbing; and the
crucifying of sin: sin may be chained up, imprisoned, and not crucified:
Hypocrites that are under a seeming change, do restrain, and confine sin; yea
they may punish sin, but do not crucify it: The crucifying of sin is the
giving it a deadly mortal wound, fetched from the blood, and death of Christ:
Faith fetches virtue from the Grave of Christ, to destroy the power of sin,
nothing so mortally stabs this Leviathan as a believing reflection on our
propriety in Christ's Crucifixtion, and a laying hold on promises by Faith in
order to the application of the benefit of a crucified Christ, Romans 6. 4, 6.
Our old man is crucified with him: The putting our lusts into the side, wounds,
and grave of Christ; A levelling the Ax to the body of sin, does strange work
to the crucifying of it. Try then are your corruptions, Pride, Passions,
Earthliness as strong as ever? deceive not your selves, this will never assure
your interest in Christ till sin be destroyed: it is true, when the wound is
given, sin does not immediately die, but the body of sin is dying, and the
believing Soul finds his corruptions has less strength every day; as a man
that loses his blood weakens more and more; so a Soul that crucifies Lust,
finds it to weaken day by day.

Fourthly, Another effect of a Souls union with Christ is this: There will be
some resemblance of Christ. 1 John 4. 17. As he is so are we in this World. As
Christ was Crucified in the flesh, so are his Crucified to the flesh: And as
Christ was risen and justified in the Spirit, so are they sanctified by the
Spirit, and have the nature, and Image of Christ: Hence we are said to be made
conformable to the Image of his Son. Romans 8. 29. They that are Christ's are in
some measure of truth like him. 1 John 3. 3. They have something of Christ's
Nature, and Spirit: Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus. Phil.
2. 5. Christ's mind was off from, and above the World; and herein lies as great
an evidence of interest in Christ as in any thing, that Soul is dead to, and
wonderfully loose from the World. Gal. 6. 14. Christ's mind was heavenly, he
favored the things above, his meat, and drink was to do his Fathers will, If
you are Christ's you will be of the same mind; nothing in the World will so
much delight you as to do something for God: Christ's mind was heavenly, to do
his work, and hasten home; and if you are Christ's this will be your mind to
dispatch your work, and hasten home. Christ was full of mercy, humility,
meekness: If you are interested in Christ, so it will be with you.

Lastly, They that are interested in Christ, do interest Christ in themselves,
and in all that is theirs, 2 Cor. 8. 5. They first gave themselves to the Lord:
Such do devote, and make over themselves, and all to Christ, and glad they have
any interest, parts, capacities, that Christ will accept of; they cannot keep
back a part; no, were it a thousand times dearer, Christ shall have all, Can.
6. 3. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine: The keeping back of part lost
Ananias, and Saphira; they were undone, and damned for ever, Act. 5. If Christ
be yours; you will entitle him to all you are and have. And thus are we come to
a Conclusion in this matter: That Soul that can come to seal to those things,
is a happy Soul: O blessed Soul indeed! Then may thou boldly say, The Lord is
my helper; God, Christ, the Spirit, the Promises the Kingdom, and glory is
mine. Thus much for the use of Examination.

CHAP. XXX.
Containing a Use of Exhortion, pressing Believers to several duties.

HAving already dispatched Motives, Counsels, and Directions to Sinners, about
their coming to this Christ, I shall only apply this last use of Exhortation to
those who are interested in this rich, and glorious Jesus. Christians, you that
are made happy in your Relation to Christ, and invested with a Title to these
glorious Treasures, of all persons; you are most obliged to duty; Christians,
be you advised and exhorted to these several duties.

1 Duty.
First, Be exhorted to Thankfulness to the rich Grace of God, for giving such a
Treasure and Treasury as Christ is; be continually offering up Praises and
Thansgivings to God, Flames of holy Affection, be admiring the Grace of God, as
the Fountain and Spring of these waters of Life, as the deep Mine of those
glorious Treasures: now to scrue up your Affections, and wind up your Hearts to
make way for holy Melody, admiring, triumphing, and blessing God for giving
Christ, consider these following Particulars, as motives to this choice duty.

First, Consider what you were without Christ, O! Christians, look back, and
see what once you were, Ephesians. 2. 11. Remembering that in times past, you were
Gentiles in the Flesh. The worst of men, an idolatrous sort of men, Worshippers
of Devils, you were wild Olives, Enemies to God in your minds, Col. 1. 21.
hateful, and hateing one another, Tit. 3. 3. Lying in your blood to the
loathing of your persons, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5, 6. dead in Trespasses and Sins,
wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked, Rev. 3, 17. Children of Wrath, heirs
of Hell, born to Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. under the Curse and Condemnation of
the whole Law, Gal. 3. 10. O lamentable state! Obnoxious to Death, liable to
everlasting Destruction, every moment, no guard about you, open to Devils,
liable to the pourings out of divine Fury, and the openings of the deep
Treasures of infinite Vengeance, to have no security from the greatest Evils,
nor capacity ever to be delivered out of them; obnoxious every minute to a
fearful looking of a fiery Wrath and Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversary, Heb. 10. 27. This was once your state Believers, you were stubble,
ready for everlasting Burnings, Fuel for that Fire that can never be quenched,
and Food for the Worm that never dies, O! sad case indeed, and was not freedom
and deliverance from such a state, a Mercy worth your highest Thanks? Had you
but looked into the place of Torment, and dipped your Finger into that lake of
Fire and Brimstone, you would have wondered at Redemption-mercy, and adored
that Grace of God that plucked you out of it: and is not your acknowledgment of
preventing Grace, as due now as it would have been to an actual deliverance out
of these Miseries?

Secondly, Consider what you are by Grace, if you are related to Christ, you
are brands plucked out of the Fire, Zach. 3. 2. Bondslaves redeemed from the
Pit, Zach. 9. 11. Condemned Wretches saved from Wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.
Translated from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan into the
Kindgdom of God, Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. Made Sons and Daughters to God,
called to his Kingdom and Glory, 1 These. 2. 12. Gal. 4. 6. Crowned and invested
with a Right to his Presence and most glorious Privileges, Ephesians. 2. 18. 19.
Under the Eye of God, under divine Care; infinite Grace is an Undertaker for
you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. O glorious State! Consider further, how you lie upon the
Heart of God, as a Seal and Signet there, Cant. 8. 6. Reckoned amongst his
Jewels accounted his peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19. 5. Mal. 3. 17. Partakers of
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. Sitting in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus, made Vessels, ^itted for Mercy, filled with Mercy, devoted to
Mercy, Romans 9. 23. And Heirs of Glory, Jam. 2. 5. O wonderful, wonderful Grace;
this is matter of Praises to God to all Eternity: Time would fail to read over
your Inventory, and to look through your Treasury, it is Work for an Eternity to
do: O believe what you cannot see, and admire what you cannot know, and study
out what you yet understand not of your blessed state, both privatively, and
positively considered, and when you have found out a little of your Happiness,
then look on those beneath you, put your Mercies into the scale with the
World's Miseries, rate your Redemption-interest with the lot of Christless
Souls, matter of the same Lump with you, think on your Acquaintance, Friends,
Relations, Neighbors, that have enjoyed the same Gospel-Priviledges with you,
and yet these are left to their Blindness, to perish in the Error of their
ways, and must down into the deep for ever, but you are exalted, and lifted up
to Glory. O! What cause is here for Praises blessings, Thansgivings, and
Hallejuahs to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

Thirdly, Consider the greatness of that Grace which has made you to differ;
Ah! Believers, Redemption-grace saw nothing more in you than in Judas, Demas,
and those that perish; you were of the same Lump, cut out of the same piece,
there was not a Jot of Difference between you and the damned, but only the good
pleasure of Grace, only divine Mercy laid it is hand upon you: O that
astonishing word, because it pleased him to make you his people, 1 Samuel 12. 22.
It was only the free grace of God that chose Jacob, and left Esau, Romans 9. 13.
It was not for your sakes Christians, that the Lot was cast so well for you:
No, Be it known to you O house of Israel, be ashamed and confounded for ever in
your own Eyes, Ezekiel. 36. 32. The moving Cause, the Wheel within the Wheel, that
made you adopted, and others rejected, was only the good Pleasure of his Will,
Ephesians. 1. 5. 7. It was from hence, God so loved the World, out of this Womb
sprung all your Mercies, it was Height of Grace, Length, Breadth, Depth, Love
passing Knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. 19. O ye heirs of Glory, be affected,
astonished, ravished with the sense of this rich grace of God toward you, in
giving Christ not only for you, but to you, and revealing him in you, and
uniting him to you by the Spirit, from the same Mass of fallen man, to single
out some for pardon, and leave others for Punishment: O wonderful! The Sense of
this made the Apostle break out in such a holy Ecstasy, Romans 11. 33. O the
Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, O the depth! A
note of Exclamation, and silencing wonder. O consider this Love of God to your
Souls, it is free Love without any Influences from the Creature, full Love
without Circumference or Bounds, eternal Love without Beginning and without
end. Fruitful Love, abounding in the rich Gifts and Procurements of it, O the
Gifts and Tokens God sends to you now, and O the large store he lays up for
ever for you: it is sympathyzing Love, full of Bowels, delighting Love, full of
pleasure in you, it is resting Love: He will rest over them in his Love; it is
immutable Love without Changes, giving Love, forgiving Love, caring Love,
securing Love, returning Love, overcoming Love. O! where shall I make an end?
How can you come to the bottom of this Deep, wade a little further, till you
have lost your selves in holy wonder: Can you see your brave houses, fine
Clothes, comfortable Relations, and have such high Regards, for these, and no
more for this Grace of God: O wonder more at this Love.

Fourthly, Consider how this is the great Design of God in this grace, that you
should be to his praise Ephesians. 1. 12. That is the end which God aimed at in
Predistinating you to Glory, that you might be to the Praise of his grace, that
his Grace might procure the Manifestation of his Praise; it is not for an
Enlargement of his Revenue, or Advancement of his Profit; for man cannot be
profitable to God, Job 22. 22. or for any addition to his Honor being above
all Praise, but that he might receive the Tribute of his own Glory, and the
returns of his outgoing Goodness: Now if this be the very end why God sets his
love upon you Christians, then you have reason to glorify his Grace, lest you
endeavor to overturn the whole Proj^cts of Salvation-kindness.

Fifthly, Think how delightful Praise is to God, Psalm. 69. 31. This also shall
please the Lord better than an Ox or a Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs. That
is, an Adult, and full grown Beast, which is more fit for Sacrifice; as Rabbi
D. Kimohy notes, a Beast was not fit for Sacrifice under two years old; so that
Praise is preferred here above all Sacrifice, as that which God takes most
delight in of any thing, because this does most honor him to acknowledge him
the Author of all Mercy, and God of all Grace, Psalm. 50. 23. Whosoever offers
Praise, glorifieth me, That is, He does in a singular manner show forth mine
Honor, and this is pleasing to him.

Sixthly, This brings Profit to your own Souls, Psalm. 50. 23. For it is the
means and way to obtain the Salvation of God; Ponit viam aut praeparat viam,
(says one) it opens the way for Salvation to go out to that Soul; this duty of
Praise will bring you Gain, because it engages God to give out more Mercy, and
it leaves Influences of spiritual Good on your own Souls; it puts the heart
into a good Frame to love God, and delight in him, and leaves more obligedness
on the Soul to fear and serve God: so David after that Psalm of Praise to God,
2 Samuel 7. was wonderfully influenced to duty to God, as you may see, chap. 8.
11. and had his Spirit abundantly sweetened to men, chap. 9. 1.

Lastly, Consider also, how pleasant this duty of Praise is to the Soul it
self, it is wonderfully delightful, and abundantly affects, and ravishes the
Heart, to have the sense of divine Mercy in it, Psalm. 147. 1. Praise ye the
Lord, for it is pleasam, and Praise is comely. O Believers! let me effectually
persuade you then to the highest Acknowledgments of Redemption-grace, and to
the utmost Praises for this rich Jesus, who has blessed you with all spiritual
Blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3.

2 Duty.
Secondly, You that have an Interest in this glorious Redeemer, labor to keep
up a high valuation of him in your Hearts; if he be so rich as the Gospel
reports of him, O then prize him acoording to his excellent worth: Great men
are highly esteemed, the Cap, the Knee, the best Room, the chiefest Seat are
theirs, Jam. 3. 3. And how much more worthy is Christ of your account, 1 Pet.
2. 7. To you that believe he is precious. (...) it signifies an high Estimation
of another Worth and Excellency, ready to be attested by all possible and due
Demonstrations: four things should oblige Believers to a high Esteem of Christ.

First, His own transcendent Excellency which singularly resides in him, and
eminently shines out from him, ten thousand times brighter than the Beams of
the Sun, which in their own nature challenge the highest Adoration of men and
Angels, especially of saved Souls, to whom he is most endeared and most nearly
related. As the Apple Tree excells the meanest and most useless Shrub,
infinitely more does the Lord Jesus over top all the Glory of the world as
Mediator, Cant. 2. 3. He is the chiefest of ten thousands, Cant. 5. 10. He is
before all things, Col. 1. 17. Both in dignity and time, he precedes all
Creatures, he is the Fountain of all Excellencies; his divine and personal
Perfections make him the glory of Heaven, the adoration of Angels, the
admiration of Saints, and the object of all Observance and holy Wonder, 2 These.
1. 10.

Secondly, The high honor the Father puts upon him; He is his Well-beloved,
Matthew. 3. 17. The object of his Delight, the Exaltation of his right hand, who
has put all things under his Feet, Heb. 2. 8. Set over the works of his hands,
crowned with Glory and Honor, verse. 7. Worshipped by all the Angels, by the
Fathers Appointment, and set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
Heb. 1. 3. 6. entrusted with all the Concerns and Interests of God, in the
World, made his pleni-potentiary, to compose all Differences betwixt himself
and fallen man: now, has the Father such a high Valuation of Christ? then
surely it is an unworthy thing in you, to detract from his Honor.

3dly, The Lord Jesus Christ deserves your high Estimation, because he is the
Fountain of all those Streams that do make glad your Souls, the Sun of all
those Beams, that warm your Hearts, the Author of all those Mercies that do
supply and delight you; all your Excellencies and the things you mostly value,
are Derivations from his glory; things are ratable as they come from Christ, he
turns your Water into Wine, sweetens your bitter Cups, and makes them to
overflow, all your graces come from his Fullness, he is your Friend, your best
Friend, your old Friend, your nonesuch in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 73. 25. The
Procurer of all your Mercies, the sweetness of all your Comforts, the crown of
all your Glory, and does he not deserve your Estimation? If he hide his Face
all Light goes with him, if he suspends the Communications of his Favor,
nothing is comfortable to you, if he lock up his Treasures, nothing b^t Poverty
and wasting covers your Souls, every thing without him is nothing, and with
him, any little thing is enough; Bread and Water is rich cheer with Christ,
Disgrace and Reproach is Honor with Christ; Poverty is Riches with Christ; O
prize Christ then, for he puts a worth upon all things that you can enjoy.

Fourthly, Consider the wonderful value the Lord Jesus Christ puts upon you,
and let this persuade you to a due valuation of him, Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me,
and gave himself for me, Joh. 15. 16. O amazing, wonderful, sovereign Grace!
That the Son of God should set his highest Regards upon loathsome Dung, swept
out of door by divine Justice, cast out into the open Field, pityful,
loathsome, undone Creatures, that he should account you (Believers) as the
Apple of his Eye, who have been as Thorns in his side, that he should account
you as a Seal on his Heart, who have been spears to pierce through his Bowels,
that he should value you as the travel of his Soul, the Jewels of his Crown,
the Inhabitants of his glorious Presence to all Eternity, that he should
account such spotty Worms as you worthy of his Love, his Blood, and his
Mediation, deserving his Bosom, his Kingdom and his Throne: O what strange
astonishing Grace is this! and will you prefer Creatures, and place Relations
in your Bosom, and let Christ lie out of door, O unworthy act indeed! Surely he
deserves your highest Estimation, O prize Christ! prize Christ! value him.

First, Above all things in Heaven and Earth, count nothing like him, much less
above him; set him in the uppermost Seat, enthrone him in your Heart; Let him
ride in that Chariot of yours that is paved with Love; Esteem his Person above
all Persons, his Purchase above all Purchase: his Love above all Affections;
his help above all Assistance: Value him above Father, Mother, Husband, Wife,
Friends, Pleasures, Credit, Riches, or whatever is dearest to you: Say as Moses
did, Who is like to thee? Exodus 15. 11. Thy Name alone is excellent, thy Glory
above the Heavens. Esteem his Precepts above all the Commands of men; His
Promises, his Privileges, his Comforts, his Ordinances, his People above all:
Christ, in conjunction with other things, accounts himself slighted; He must be
Aut Caesar, aut nullus.

Secondly, Prize Christ in all; in all Persons and things, make him the
Standard to measure the worth of all created Beings by; Reckon things as they
carry Christ in them: when Satan or Corruption tempt you to a high esteem of
any, Ask them, as Christ did, whose Superscription and Image they bear? Matthew.
22. 20. As the Talent of the Temple was of greatest value, so let thy Account
be of those things that have the Temple stamp upon them, in a Sacred Reflection
of Jesus Christ. Reckon not much of any thing that has not Aliquid Christi,
something of Christ in it.

Thirdly, Prize Christ at all times; not only by fits and starts; not when he
brings thee Loaves, and loads thee with his Favors only, but also when he
hides his Face, and holds his Hand, when he seems to take no notice of thee:
Let Christ be thy Sun in the Daytime; let him be thy Diamond in the Night,
when all other Lights are gone, and shadows of Darkness are over thee; let him
be always uppermost in thy Account; Think meanly of him at no time; let him
lie between thy Breasts, to satiate thee at all times, Cant. 1. 13.

3. Duty.
Thirdly, Believers, (Have all your expectations from Christ, Psalm. 62. 5. My
Soul waits only upon God, for my expectation is from him. If the Lord Jesus
be so rich, then he is able to maintain you, and supply all your wants: There Is
Bread enough in his house to feed you; Light enough in him to guide you;
Comfort enough to cheer you: Blood enough to pardon you; Righteousness enough
to justify you: Grace enough to sanctify you: Strength enough to bear and
support you; Treasures enough to satisfy and requite you. Hence it is he calls
his People to look to him, and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. And on this Belief the
Saints resolved to wait and look for him, Isa. 8. 17. O Christians! expect all
you need from Christ: His sufficiency to help you, and his willingness to
supply you, are Arguments enough for your Expectation: why should you look to
Creatures more than to the Creator? to the Clay, more than to the Potter? to
broken Pits, more than to the Fountain? to the Physician, more than unto God?
Is there not a God in Israel? why then are your eyes, Christians, after empty
Cisterns, and things that cannot profit you? Have you chosen Christ to be your
Rock, your Fountain, Life, Sufficiency, and Fullness, to fill all in all; and
yet run to other things for your Relief, as if he were not able to supply you?
O Souls! fasten your eyes on Christ; expect all you want from him, as the
impotent man did on John and Peter, Acts 3. 5. Look not so much on Creatures
and Relations, Friends, Riches, and Wisdom, etc. lest you be ashamed; but wait
for the Vision, for it will speak, Hab. 2. 3. Expect all you need from Christ,
for the expectation of the poor shall not perish.

4. Duty.
Fourthly, Be contented with Christ alone, whatever is wanting; and truly, it is
strange indeed, that an infinite Portion cannot satisfy a finite Being, and a
whole Ocean fill a little Vessel; Believer, Thou have the person of Christ, who
is the wonder of Angels, the Satisfaction, and the Heaven of glorified Saints,
the desire of all Nations, the longed-for Joy of all that truly know and taste
him, and will not this content you? Paul could leave all the World to go after
Christ, and art not thou satisfied with Christ, without the World? This (says
Agnes the Roman Martyr) Even this is he, I now confess that I do love, I will
make haste to meet him. The naked presence of Christ has been a Heaven to
suffering Saints under the want of all things: I have found a nest of Honey
(says Algerius) in the Entrals of a Lion, in a deep dark Dungeon, I have found
a paradise of Pleasure, etc. And if some glimpses of the presence, some
Illapses of the love of Christ, were enough to these Sufferers in the want of
all things, O unreasonable Soul, that thou should complain, and be
dissatisfyed, who have an Interest in Christ, and so much of other things too.
O Christian! If Christ be thine, let it content thee, for all is thine; his
Heart is upon thee, and will not that content thee? He loves thee more than all
the World, he will not leave thee, and will not this please thee? Heb. 13. 5.
He will care for thee, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Thou shall want no good thing, he will make
up the want of creatures with himself, he will sweeten bitter cups; it is but a
little while, and he will take thee to himself, where Wants, Sufferings, Shame,
Reproaches, Griefs, and Sin shall trouble thee no more: O then be satisfied
with a single Christ, in Heaven he must be thy alone Happiness; there is no
House, Land, Husband, Wife, Parent, Children, to make up thy Fullness and
Blessedness, there God will be all in all, and is not this God in Christ enough
now?

5 Duty.
Fifthly, Take up your Delights in this rich and glorious Christ, he is the
Treasure, and his should be the heart also, Math. 6. 21. There is all that in
Christ, which thy Heart can desire, stretch thy Longings to the utmost, and he
is infinitely beyond them; and if he deserves to be the object of thy Desires,
then of thy Delight, for what is Delight but Desire in Fruition? He is the only
adequate object of Delight: other things are unsuitable to a spiritual Heart,
and cannot please; empty; and cannot satisfy; fading, and cannot last;
cloying, and soon become burdensome; but God in Christ is an eternal
Excellency: those things that seem most delectable in Creatures, are but
Derivations from his Excellency, Drops of his Fullness, Sips of his Sweetness,
the impress of his Fingers: The precious Ordinances of Christ, are but the
Galleries in which he walks, the Chariot in which he rides, the Cabinet wherein
his Jewels lie, the Cisterns through which Waters of Life pass to saved ones;
and if these be so pleasant, O what then is himself, and should not Believers
then delight themselves in him.

Quest. But how shall I do to get my Heart to this delight in Christ? I find my
Affections cold, and my Spirits dead, that I cannot taste that Sweetness in
Christ, nor take that Pleasure in the Almighty as I would.

Answ. First, withdraw your Hearts from all other Delights, this course does
the Lord set Israel to get up to a delight in himself, Isa. 58. 13, 14. There
is no greater Enemy to true delight in God, than a persons own carnal Pleasure,
and delight in things below God, Whoredom and new Wine take away the Heart,
Hos. 4. 11. It Is impossible a Soul can take pleasure in Christ and Sin
together, Mat. 6. 24. For carnal Pleasures withdraw the Affections from God,
Job 21. ver. 12. to 15. 1 John 2. 15.

Secondly, Rest not till you have cleared up your Interest in Christ, and can
upon good grounds apprehend him as your peculiar and chief Treasure better than
all the World besides, and appropiate it to your own Souls, Cant. 2. 3. 5. This
drew the Spouses Heart to so much longing after and solace in the Lord Jesus,
even the sight of his transcendent Worth beyond all others, and her title to
all those Excellencies; it is seen Interest in Christ that draws out the Heart
after him, Cant. 7. 10. Doubts of Relation to Christ, and Fears of laying a
claim to these precious Treasures, damps the Soul pleasure in Christ.

Thirdly, Be satisfied about Christ's special love to you, and delight in you,
1 John 4. 19. Jealousies about an Interest in this love of God, did so cool the
Jews Hearts toward him, Isa. 49. 14. But Zion says, the Lord has forsaken
me, and my God has forgotten me: From hence they began to slack their pace
after God, and cried out, behold what a weariness is it, and snuffed at it,
Mal. 1. 13. chap. 3. 14. Suspicion of Christ's Heart toward you will straiten
yours toward him: think well of Christ's Heart to you, cherish daily a good
Opinion of his Nature, Affection, and Faithfulness.

Fourthly, Beg hard for heart-affecting fights of Christ; This so enamoured the
Spouses Heart, she saw the beauties of her beloved, Cant. 2. 1. She beheld him
to be the rose of Sharon, and Lilly of the Valleys, the powrings out of his
Name drew her affections to him, Cant. 1. 3. The Eye affects the Heart, Lam. 3.
51. As with Sorrow so with Joy; 'Twas David's Sight of God in the outgoings of
his Love and Glory, that made his Soul thirst after him, Psalm. 63. 1. 2.

Fifthly, Be much in the consideration of what Christ has done for you, and
bestowed upon you; this so engaged Hezekiah's Heart to God, Isa. 38. 17. and
filled David's heart wiih such an Ecstasy of Joy in God, 2 Samuel 7. 19, 20. Psalm.
8.

Sixthly, Get a nature and Spirit suitable to Christ, Similo Simili gaudet,
Psalm. 17. 15. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Likeness. This made
the Image of Christ glorious in the Souls eye also, when once it becomes
changed into it is Likeness, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Therefore did Paul delight in the Law
of God after the inner man, Romans 7. 22. Because he had his inner parts changed
into the Image of it; what pleasure will wicked men take in a wicked Cause,
from the similitude it has to their own Nature? So will the Soul in Christ,
when once brought into a sutableness to him.

Lastly, Be much in Communion with Christ, and this will beget wonderful Joy in
him, Psalm. 119. 167. David's being much conversant in God's Laws, begat and
strengthened his delight in it. So verse. 14. It Is Intimacy breeds Delight,
whereas Strangeness lessens all that Familiarity and Pleasure we else might
take in Persons, Psalm. 14. 10. A Stranger intermeddles not with his Joy. Be not
contented to keep to duty, but press after Communion with Christ therein.

6 Duty.
Sixthly, Be not troubled at your Wants, Losses and Sufferings, you undergo in
this World; Consider these four things.

First, You can want no good thing, the God of Glory stands bound for your
Supplies, Psalm. 34. 10. They that seek the Lord shall want no good thing, Psalm.
23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. It cannot be, that those who
are so much interested in the Heart, Care, Person, and Treasure of the Lord
Christ, can be destitute; what can you want who are entitled to all good
things? 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. Who are Heirs of the Promises, Promises that concern
the Life that now is, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. You have a surer
Title to your Supplies, than they that have most of the World in their hands;
for God has laid up, in the hands of Jesus Christ, a full Allowance for you,
how short soever he may seem to keep you for a while: the Earth is your Lords,
and the Fullness thereof, and the Cattle on a thousand Hills, Psalm. 50. 10. 12.
Psalm. 24. 1. Heaven, and Earth and all things therein, are made over in the
everlasting Covenant for your use.

Secondly, You shall want or suffer no more than infinite Wisdom, and fatherly
Love sees best for you; it is impossible that divine Purposes should be
frustrated toward you; he that will work will work, and nothing shall let,
it is not Men nor Devils, nor the greatest injury of time, can deprive you of
your Fathers Allowance, and that is upon infinite Wisdom and good Pleasure. The
Wings and Wheels of Gods Providence over his people, and for them, are full of
Eyes within and without, to show the wise Care and Providence of God over his,
in the worst of times, and hardest condition; and these Wheels are moving for
your Good, Christians, and God sees in the darkest Providence, what is best for
you; all his Dealings with his people, are the Fruits of everlasting Love, Jer.
31. 3. God does in infinite Wisdom manage all your Concerns; it is not by
Chance, or through any inadvertency, any Crosses or Losses befall you, but all
is done in wise Counsel.

3dly, The less you have of Creatures, the more will God give you of himself,
if you be looking to him, and by Faith live upon him. God will admit of no
Vacuums toward his people, they can want no good thing; therefore if
creature-supplies be removed, Grace comes in the room; as they say, Water will
ascend to prevent a Vacuum, and Grace will descend to prevent Emptiness in
Believers; God comes in the room of creature comforts: when Job was stripped of
all, he had more of the visions of God, Job 42. 5. John had never more Intimacy
with Jesus Christ, than when he was in the barren Island of Patmos, stripped of
the Confluence of earthly Comforts; Elijah never made a better Meal, than when
he was driven into the Wilderness, and the Angel was his Cook, 1 Kin. 19. 8. Ah
Believers! you have never better Allowance of God, than when you are cut short
in outward things, if you be faithful; therefore you should be quiet under all
Straits and Necessities in the world. The day we live in is full of Trials to
many a gracious Soul, the wants of many may be more than many think of, and
it is now a time to expect more Maintainings from the hand of God, and from the
Spirit of Grace, when outward things are removed; when Israel was brought into
the Wilderness where was no sowing nor reaping, they had their Bread from
Heaven, and it is God's usual way, to send Meat from his own Table, when the
Tables of his Children are empty, I mean, more spiritual Communications from
himself, if they murmur not, but patiently and quietly wait for God's Salvation.

Lastly, Consider, Believers, It Is not long you shall be in the way of Wants,
or Sufferings: the time is hastening that will set you beyond the reach of
offending Providence, nothing shall offend you when you get home to your own
Country. O! the time is hastening, when Moth and Rust cannot consume, nor
Thieves break thorough and steal, Matthew. 6. 20. And when afflictive Providence
cannot injure your Treasure, if the Lord be your Treasure, it is not long you
will be open to the Injury of time, and to those Casualties that pass upon your
Comforts; every day (Christians) brings you farther through the Briars, and
Thickets of this World, and through the barren Wilderness, that leads to your
Canaan; you are traveling apace toward a period of all your Trials, every new
hour brings you a step nearer to the Sight, and Fruition of your blessed
Inheritance. Christian, Think every Evening, now I have a day less to wade
through the deep Troubles, and Red Sea of this World, and to be kept at such
strait Allowances and Supplies in this Life: O a real Faith of this, how should
it patient and quiet Believers, under present Straits and short Allowances
here? O! Think upon the coming of the Lord, Jam. 5. 7. Be patien^ therefore
Brethren unto the coming of the Lord behold the Husbandman, waits for a
precious Fruit of the Earth, and has long patience for it: He waits a long
time before Harvest comes, and bears many a wet-day, and shall not a Believer
wait with more Quietness, and hope for a far better Treasure? O! Christians, if
you feel some Difficulties and Straits through want of Supplies, Comfort,
Credit, Strength, Ease, Peace, Rest, for a little time, know, Eternity is
coming, that will make amends for all.

7 Duty.
Seaventhly, Live upon your Treasure, these unsearchable Riches in Christ; for
this end has the Father provided those rich Treasures, to satisfy you here,
and to solace you hereafter, it is laid up in Christ for you, not locked up from
you. Christians, the Lord Jesus is a Fountain sealed to, not from you, there is
no Bolt between you and your Treasures, you may go and fetch supply at all
times of need, Heb. 4. 16. It has pleased the Father that in Christ should all
Fullness dwell, Col. 1. 19. For the use of Believers, that he might give
eternal Life to all that come to him, and be the head of the Body, the Fullness
that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23. This is the work he has undertaken to do,
and invited all his people to come to him, that they might have Life, and have
it more abundantly, he bids them ask and ask again, that their Joy might be
full, Joh. 16. 23, 24, 26. This is the Will of God, that Believers should eat
their own Bread with Quietness, 2 These. 3. 12. And make use of this Inheritance
for all their Supply and Comfort: Christians, you cannot make too bold with
your own, Christ and all his Fullness is your Interest: you may wear out your
Welcome with men, and beg too often at Fellow Creatures doors, but you cannot
ask too often of free Grace, or take too much of Redemption-treasures, if you
be sure to refer the Measures and time to divine pleasure. In all your need
come to Christ for whatever you want, for the Life that now is, and that which
is to come; this answers the end of the everlasting Covenant, and the Fathers
placing this store in Christ, and Christ's undertaking the Care, Conduct, and
Salvation of all that come to him, and this wonderfully pleases Christ, and
advances his mediatory Glory: this also keeps up the credit and Reputation of
the ways of God in the World, when Strangers see Believers rich fare, and what
a Sufficiency is laid up in Christ for them, that Christ maintains his own
poor, that they need not go a begging; this commends that State and Government,
where care is taken to prevent wandering Beggars: Besides, otherwise the
Promises are useless if you come not to Christ for all your Supplies. These
full Breasts will be injured if you milk them not out, Promises are the Bags in
which this Treasure is carried out to believers, which will wax old if you use
them not. Christ gets nothing (Christians) by your Savingness this way, the
more he lays out upon you, the more he lays up for you.

8 Duty.
Eighthly, Improve your Interest in these vast Treasures, to the enriching of
your own Souls; are there such Riches in Christ, and is this Jesus yours? O
then labor to be rich also. There are two things which I should press you to
be rich in, 1. In Grace, 2. In good Works.

First, You that have Interest in these Treasures of Christ, labor to be rich
in Grace, be not content with the Truth of Grace, with little Measures of
Grace, but strive to abound in Grace, 1 These. 3. 12. For,

First, Grace is the best Treasure, and most rationally desirable for it is
self. All other created Beings are conditionally good, so far as God sees them
best for us, and so far as they conduce to the great end of Gods Glory, and our
Salvation; but Grace is absolutely good, because it is part of the divine Nature
and Image of God, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Which divine Nature he tells us, ver. 5. 6. Lies
in Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, and Charity. It Is
absolutely necessary to the glorifying of God, and being glorified with God,
Heb. 11. 6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, and without Holiness
no man can see God, Heb. 12. 14. Grace is the best Treasure, because the most
enduring Treasure, the most potent Treasure, it can procure more than all the
World can, Mark 9. 23. All things are possible to him that believes. Indeed
created grace cannot, by way of Merit or Purchase, procure any thing but by way
of Appropriation and Meekness, it brings that which all the World cannot: Grace
is Gods high way to Mercy and Peace, being under a Promise of Peace; Grace and
Peace are usually twins in gracious Souls, 2 Pet. 1. 2. Grace can quiet you
under Troubles, strengthen you under Weakness, guide you under Darkness, cheer
you under Sufferings, enrich you under Losses, and fill you under Wants; again,
Gaace is the purest Treasure, earthly Treasures are as those Cities Solomon
gave to Hiram, a mere Cabal and dirty things, defiling the Souls of those that
have them, and use not them aright; Grace is the most pleasant Treasure, it
does not burden those that have it, as earthly things do with wasting Cares
and tormenting Fears. Further, Grace is the best Treasure, in that it will go
with the Soul into the other World; all the Riches of this World must be left
behind, Death puts the Owner and his Interest into a winding Sheet; no man's
Propriety to these out-lives himself, the Grave buries all his Relation to
these things, but Grace never dies, true Holiness goes with the Soul to glory.

Secondly, Labor to be rich in Grace, because if you have but little grace,
you will hardly prove the truth of grace, though the least grace is grace, as a
drop of Wat^r is Water, yet a little grace does not so capacitate a Soul to see
it, 2 Pet. 1. 9. He that wants this thriving Grace, forgets that he was purged
from his old Sins, he cannot remember or make out his saving Change, or putting
off his old state; little Grace is ever skeptical, and subject to Doubtings,
Matthew. 14. 31, O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt.

Thirdly, Because little grace will hardly carry a Soul through the
Temptations, Duties, and Sufferings of the day we live in; these are some of
the last times we are fallen upon, and the last times are perilous times, 2 Timothy 3. 1. This is the Character of these times, Abounding Iniquity, and Decay
of Love, Matthew. 24. 12. And therefore a little Grace will not carry a Soul
through strong Corruptions; where Sin abounds, Grace must abound much more, or
else the Soul will loose ground, Romans 6. 1. What the Apostle speaks there of
grace in God, it is as true of grace in Saints that must abound more than their
Sin, or else Sin will be too hard for them; Judgment must be brought forth to
Victory, or else the bruised Reed will break, Matthew. 12. 20. For this end the
Apostle advises the Ephesians, in his time, which were less liable to such
Temptations, they should put on the whole Armor of God, and having done all, to
stand, Ephesians. 6. 13.

Fourthly, Else you cannot answer the ends of grace, and all the Cost of God
about you; the design of grace in all the means and helps to his people, is to
further their growth in grace, and to make them abound to all well-pleasing
before God, Isa. 5. 2. 4. Joh. 15. 2. Psalm. 92. 13, 14. To whom much is given
of them much is required, Luke 12. 48.

Fifthly, That so you may be more like to God, who is rich to all that call
upon him, Romans 10. 12. He is rich in Mercy, he has abounded in the Riches of
grace toward all his People, Ephesians. 1. 7, 8. Christians should be Epitomies of
Christ, and Resemblers of his Excellency, holding forth his Virtues in the
World, 1 Pet. 2, 9. There can be no greater glory to a Child of God in this
World, than to be like to Christ, who is the glory of the Father; but by being
rich in Grace, you will much manifest the Excellency of Christ in the World.

Sixthly, By being rich in grace, you will become more serviceable to God and
others in your Generation, you will be able to do more work for God than
others. Grace is a Talent, and the more Talents you have, the more Incomes has
God from you, Matthew. 25. 16, 17. Rich men have larger Capacities to honor God
in the World than others have, they can do more, and lay out more for God, and
be more serviceable for God than others; they can feed the Hungry, and cloth
the Naked, and take Outcasts into their houses; they can do more to support
the interest of God, than the poor, and have more Substance to honor God with;
so Souls rich in grace, have larger Abilities to serve and honor God with: the
more Grace the more acceptably can they serve God, Heb. 12. 28. The more
spiritual Services are the more acceptable to God by Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. For
such the Father chooses to serve him, who serve him in Spirit and Truth, Joh.
4. 23. Psalm. 45. 12. And the Daughter of Tire shall be there with a Gift, even
the rich among the People shall entreat thy Favor. Tire was a rich place as
well as vicious, and yet, there would God have a People, which should honor
him with their gifts and large expenses for him, and the richer the People, the
greater will their gifts be; The rich, or richest, for it is the superlative in
the Hebrew, Shall bring Gifts, and entreat thy Favor: noting, that those who
are more spiritually rich, are more serviceable for, and potent with God
through Christ: these can do more with God, as Noah, Daniel, and Job were
mentioned above others for their Potency with God, Ezekiel. 14. 14. And Moses and
Samuel, Jer. 15. 1. As men who had larger faith and grace, and so greater
Intimacy with God than others, and such as could do more. O Christians, labor
after more grace, because hereby you may become more serviceable for God and
others, you may more prevail with God through Christ for Mercies for the
Nation, and can be more helpful for others to teach, counsel, and comfort them,
and have more Gold, Myrrh and Frankincense in your Treasures to offer to, and
for Christ.

Seaventhly, The more rich you are in grace, the more rich you will be in
glory; the more grace you improve for God, the more glory shall you receive
from God, Luke 19. 17. 19. This is the rule of the Lords Procedure in the day
of Judgment, he will render to every man according to his work, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Though glorified Souls receive not for their grace, yet they shall have
according to the Measure of their graces, for grace widens the Vessels of Mercy
for glory. The more Liquor the Vessel has, the larger it is; so the more
grace, the larger is that Soul, and the more capable to take in glory, when
grace shall be turned into glory.

Quest. But some may say, How may we get more of this spiritual Treasure?

Answ. First, Get your Hearts more engaged to it, Desires are the Souls Wings,
that carry it over all difficulties, to it is beloved Object; this is one
Character the Apostle gives of rich men, 1 Timothy 6. 9. They are such as will be
rich: They have an earnest mind, an ardent Desire to be rich, it is a Will and
Purpose grounded on Counsel and Consideration; Christians, this will much
further your obtaining these riches of grace, if you once get your Hearts
resolved for them.

Secondly, Labor for a holy skill in managing Christianity to the greatest
Advantage; this makes men thrive when they have the Mystery of their Art, and
are their Crafts Masters, and understand the Rules of their Trade; unskillful
persons are not like to thrive whatever their Employment be, Prove. 4. 7, 8.
Prove. 3. 13. 14. Prove. 24. 3.

Thirdly, Be diligent in the use of all your helps and advantages to
Soul-profit, Prove. 10. 4. chap. 13. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 5. Take all Opportunities of
waiting at the Pools side, Isa. 55. 1. They that will be rich in the World,
take all Opportunities of getting, and ply Markets and Fairs, and Seasons of
Advantage for their Interest, and so do Souls that thrive in Spirituals, they
are much in waiting on God, they lose no Seasons that will bring them in some
Soul-advantage, Prove. 23. 23.

Fourthly, Be still getting in more and more grace from Christ, it is Christ's
Treasures that enriches the Soul, he that will be rich must buy tried gold of
Christ, Rev. 3. 18. The graces of Christ are true gold, they will bear the
Fire, and hold out in greatest Trials: counterfeit grace will be as reprobate
Silver when it comes to melting, it will be as Hay and Stubble that perish in
the Fire, but true grace will hold in time of Trial, 1 Pet. 1. 7. In this, Gold
differs from all other Metals in that it loses nothing by the Fire, but comes
forth the more pure; so is the grace of Christ, it is as tried Gold, that does
not loose, but get in the Fire of Affliction and Temptation. Naturalists say,
that Gold is more warm in the night than in the day, so true grace cheers the
Heart more in the night of Tribulation, than in the day of Prosperity. O
Christians! if you will be rich, get in grace from Christ, every day, for that
is the true Cornucopia, or the Souls plenty, Joh. 1. 16. Of his Fullness have
we received Grace for Grace. Make some new Additions to your graces every day,
2 Pet. 1. 5. What the Heathen said concerning Learning, Nulla dies sine Linea,
Let the Christian say concerning Grace, Nulla dies sine Gratia. This would be a
notable way to Soul-prosperity, to be getting from Christ some more grace in
every Approach to him: as are your Receivings from Christ, so will your
Thrivings be; put often the hand of Faith into Christ's Treasury, and grasp
large Portions of Grace for thy Soul: Faith is the only receiving grace, Joh.
1. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of
God, Joh. 7. 39. Therefore it is called the Substance of things hoped for, Heb.
11. 1. Faith appropriates to the Believer, the Overtures and Promises of grace,
and by a secret magnetic Virtue derives in from the Fullness of grace needed
Supplies, Faith dips into the Fountain, and fills the Soul with what it needs.

Fifthly, They that will be rich in grace, must be thrifty saving Souls, choice
of their time, and careful that they do not wast their graces, or loose the
things that they have wrought, 2 John ve. 8. So persons that are thriving in
the World, are saving of every thing, that nothing be waste; the same Care is
needful to spiritual Enrichings; Prodigality will soon consume great Estates,
he that is not saving will never be wealthy: Christians, do not consume your
days as a Tale that is told, Psalm. 90. 9. make the most of every hour, do your
proper work every day; a wise and faithful Improvement of time, would tend much
to Soul-flourishings, Ephesians. 5. 16. Spend no words in vain: put Time and Talents
to the greatest Advantage: they got most for God and themselves, who were most
in the Improvement of their Talents; hold fast also the Truths you have
received, Rev. 2. 25. That is, keep and retain the Doctrine, preserve and
maintain the practice of those Truths you have received.

Sixthly, Be much in begging grace, be always asking some spiritual Blessing
from God, as Caleb's Daughter Achsah, Judge. 1. 15. her Father had given her one
Blessing, and she asks another, and it is said, he gave the upper and the nether
Springs; so be not content with what you have, but still be craving for more
grace: like Princes Favorites who have their Lords Ear, will be often begging,
now this place, then that Preferment; so Believers be suing hard for Grace, ply
the Throne of Grace daily, loose no Opportunity wherein you may further your
spiritual Interest by Supplication; this is Gods appointed way to the obtaining
of Mercy, Ezekiel. 36. 37. Follow your Suits till you obtain, let your chiefest
Requests be for Grace, and be restless till you prevail, like Jacob, who would
not let God go till he had blessed him, Isa. 62. 7. Give him no rest, till he
establish and make Jerusalem the Praise of the Earth. Never leave begging till
the Lord Jesus has left off giving, and that will not be whilst he sits upon
the Throne, Ephesians. 4. 8.

Lastly, Maintain constant, intimate, and universal walks with God: He is the
most thriving Soul that keeps nearest to God; as that is the fruitfullest
ground that is nearest the warm Sun, Isa. 18. 4. Deuteronomy. 33. 14. so is it to keep
near to God: This was that which exalted Israel above all Nations, they were a
People near to God, Psalm. 148. 14. This made Enoch so soon ripe for Heaven, he
was one that walked with God, Genesis 5. 24. Christians, it is not your sitting
under God's shadow, will make you thrive, till there be a dew on your Souls,
Hos. 14. 5. 7. Keep much in his presence, with him is the Fountain of Life,
Psalm. 36. 9. Be also constant in thy walks with God, not by sits and flashes,
but drive a steady Trade of godliness: Let thy whole course of Life, both in
thy Civil and Religious Duties be as one constant Walk with God, Genesis 17. 1. In
your Callings, Relation-Duties, in every state, change, and undertaking, keep
close to God; this is a notable way to spiritual prosperity, Deuteronomy. 5. 33. 2
Chro. 17. from verse. 3. to 7.

Secondly, Improve your Interest in Christ, toward your enriching in good
Works; Labor to be rich toward God, as well as in your own Souls, Luke 12.
21. 1 Timothy, 6. 18. Consider, Christians, the more you lay out for God, the
more are you like to God, who gives us richly all good things, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
And in being rich toward God, you will enrich your own Souls also: for he that
sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. Acts of Mercy and
Piety are as good Seed, that shall not miscarry, but shall bring forth a sure
crop in glory, Gal. 6. 8, 9.

9. Duty.
Ninthly, Live up to your Treasure, Walk as becomes so high a Dignity and
Relation to so rich a Jesus, 2 These. 2. 12. This is but reasonable, if God has
changed your State, that you should change your Lives; If your Relation be new,
then your Conversation should be new also, Ephesians. 5. 8. It Is an unsuitable thing,
if God has invested you with new Privileges, to retain your old Practices:
You were Slaves to Sin and Satan, but the Son has made you free; how
unbecoming a state of Liberty are Bonds and Fetters? Grace has given you
Beauty, and, is it fit you should lie in Ashes, and wear your Sackcloth still?
Christians, you are arrived to your adult state, and to your manly years, and
will you be like Children, and Heirs under age? This is unsuitable. How
unbecoming is a carnal Heart to a Spiritual State? Works of Darkness to the
Daytime? Romans 13. 12, 13. You were poor, worth nothing, stripped of all,
destitute, afflicted, and naked; Redemption-Mercy has enriched you, and once
more entrusted you with a glorious Treasure. O, how unmeet is a low Spirit and
sordid Life now! To live on beggatly Elements, to wear filthy Garments, to sit
in the dust, and wallow in the mire of your Corruptions, this is most unworthy
also of the Grace by which you are advanced. Has the Lord advanced you to
Dignity and Honor, and will you disgrace the Throne of his Glory, and walk
unbecoming his Highness and Majesty? O Christians, you bring Dishonor on that
King of Glory you are related to, to live like the Subjects of Satan, and
Inhabitants of the lower World: you disgrace his Family, into which you are
adopted, to be heterogeneous to it in your Spirit and carriages: you disparage
the Table you are admitted to, and the Fare you live upon, to look so
ill-favored and lean in your Souls, as if the Lord Jesus kept a bad House, and
did not allow meat enough to his Children: O Christians! live as becomes your
Riches, and glorious state into which Free Grace has put you. Now, it is
becoming such a change in your condition;

First, Not to keep your old Company: Persons advanced to high Honor, usually
cast off their former and obscure Companions, and converse with Persons suitable
to their Dignity: When David was advanced from the Sheepfold to a Crown, he
leaves his fellow Shepherds, and converses with Nobles: so should you,
Christians, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11. Ye are now fellow Citizens with the Saints,
and of the Household of God, and your Lives should be like those, and your
intimate Converses with them, Psalm. 119. 63. What, a Christian, and yet help on
the ungodly in their way, and love them that hate the Lord? sit with vain
Persons, and maintain Confederacy with Rezin and Remalian's son? Isa. 8. 6.
What a Christian, and look strangely on thy Brethren, and become an Alien to
thy Father's House? O how unbecoming is this!

Secondly, Not to wear your old clothes: when Elijah was mounting to a new
condition of Honor, he left his Mantle behind him, 2 Kin. 2. 13. When Joshua
was advanced to higher dignity, his filthy Garments were taken off, and he was
clothed with change of Raiment, Zach. 3. 4, 5. O Christians! cast off your
filthy garments, your old sins, by Repentance, put off Pride, and be clothed
with Humility, put off Guilt by Repentance, and put on Christ by Faith.

Thirdly, Live not on your old fare: When the three Children were brought to
Nebuchadnezzar's Family, they were called to leave their old Pulse and Water,
and live on the King's Table, Dan. 1. 5. O Christians! Are you taken from your
Kindred and Father's House, and brought into the Family of Christ; leave then
your old Garlic and Onions, your stolen Waters and forbidden Fruit, and feed
on the King's Table, eat and drink abundantly of his Provisions, his finest
Wheat, and Honey out of the Rock of Ages; feast on his Marrow and fat things,
the Bread of his Table, his Word and Ordinances, his hidden Manna; let it be
your meat and drink to do his Will.

Fourthly, Do not your old work, cast off the works of Darkness, Romans 13. 12.
Leave off your old Trade of Sin; and serving your former Lusts in your
Ignorance, 1 Pet. 1. 14. chapter 4. 2. but carry on a new Trade of Godliness, and
Heavenly Conversation, Phil. 1. 27.

Fifthly, Leave your old Language; speak no more the Language of Ashdod, Neh.
13. 24. Let no filthy Communication drop from your Lips, nor vain Discourses be
found among you, but let your Communications be holy, Ephesians. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6.
Persons of Honor usually have their Discourses according to their Greatness;
not so light and familiar, but more grave and stately. O Christians! labor you
to live so, that more gravity and seriousness appear in your Language and
Carriage.

Lastly, Drive on new Thoughts and Designs: when Persons are exalted from
Obscurity to Honor, they will not take up such old Thoughts and Projects: So
Christians should now have new Imaginations, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Grace should bring
into captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. Vain thoughts must now
lodge no more in you, Jer. 4. 14.

10 Duty.
Tenthly, If there be such vast Treasures in Christ, then you that are the
Friends of Christ commend him unto others; so did the Spouse, Cant. 5. 10, etc.
so will the Bridegroom's Friends speak for their Friend, Joh. 3. 29. compared
with Pro. 9. 3. Wisdom should be justified of her Children, Matthew. 11. 19. O
Christians! set forth the Praises of your Beloved, that others may be taken
with him: Do all you can to further the Match between the Lord Jesus and
Sinners: Be advising your Neighbors to forsake their evil ways, and come to
Christ that they may be saved: Be calling upon, and stirring up your Christless
Friends, Relations, Children and Servants, to be looking after Christ, that
they may be delivered from the wrath to come. You should be publishing his
Praises, and commend him to all the World: O, be speaking of his Excellency,
and the Glory of his Kingdom, Psalm. 145. 11.

11 Duty.
Eleventhly, You that are interested in this Rich Christ, be exhorted, above
all Portions, to get Christ to be a Portion to your Children; you know what a
Treasure Christ is, you have found him enriching your Souls; when you were as a
Syrian, ready to perish, he came in, and took you up; he comforted you with the
Wine of his Consolation: O, that you would labor to provide this Treasure for
your Children! It Is strange to see Christians heap up Dust for their Children,
and be so careless to get Christ for them: What if you leave them Houses and
Lands when you are gone, and leave them not Christ, what doleful Creatures will
they be to all Eternity? Time will consume your Earthly Treasures: your
Children may outlive their Money and Lands that you may leave them: O, let
your chiefest Provisions be for their Souls, do what you can to get Christ for
them: Some may be poor in the World, and have no Portions to leave them; O, how
careful should such be to leave them a Treasure in the Promises, a Portion that
will not be spent. If you can say, as the Martyr, Mr. Saunders told his Wife,
when he came to the Stake, he had no Portion to leave her, but a Portion in the
Promises; and surely, if you can leave your Children an Interest in Christ, you
leave them the best Portion.

But, you will say, How might we do this?

First, Labor to Interest them in the Everlasting Covenant: Get sound and
saving Faith your selves, and that will appropriate new Covenant-Mercies to
your Seed, I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed, Genesis 17. 7. This is God's
usual way to the Heirs of Promise. It Is true, Gracious Persons may have Carnal
Children; but this is God's way; Labor to have sincere Faith your selves, and
then you will leave Covenant-Promises for your children.

Secondly, Get a Treasure for your Children that will not waste, by your strong
Cries to God for them: Improve the Spirit of Grace and Supplication for them:
Pour out strong cries and Tears. Few are like Austin's Mother, who did daily
pour out Tears for the Conversion of her Son: It Is impossible (said Ambrose to
her) that a Son of so many Prayers can be lost. May be you pray too coldly for
them. O follow God Day and Night, for your Children! O, skrew your
Supplications higher! It may be you do not pray so fervently, so believingly as
you should for your Children.

Thirdly, Do all you can to convince them of their undone condition without
Christ. Don't daub and flatter them with false Promises; they must be born
again, or else they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3.

Fourthly, Instruct them in the knowledge of Christ: Be opening, and commending
Christ to them: show them the necessity of Faith, and what the Grace of Faith
is: Watch over their Lives; be strict and severe in reproving their Sins, that
they may be sound in the Faith.

Lastly, Lead a holy Conversation before them, that by your Lives you may win
them to Jesus Christ; O your Pride, Passion, Carnallity, Vanity, may stumble
them. Thus do all you can to get a Portion of upper Springs for your Children.

12 Duty.
Lastly, you that have an Interest in these rich and glorious Treasures of
Christ, long to be with Christ, for then you shall partake of all his Riches;
Here you have but a little to carry you in the way, you have but in part, but
when you come home to him, then you shall have according to the measure he has
purchased for you, you shall see and know, as you are seen and known, 1 Cor.
13. 9, 10, 12. In heaven, there you will have a Treasure without Measure, there
you will see all his Riches and Glory, and be glorified with his glory, then
you will live at the full, you will live upon himself, and God will be all in
all to your Souls; O Christians! long then to be with Christ, there is your
Treasure where your Lord is, your Inheritance is above with the Saints in
Light; Christ is gone to Heaven, and there are all his Riches: O long then to
be fit to go home, to be with Christ, that you may partake of all his glory.

And thus have I now come to the further side of this great deep, I mean to the
Conclusion of this Subject; and O that what has been opened of this glorious
Christ, may not be in vain; you have heard much of this Tree of Life, God knows
what Fruit has been gathered: a glorious Treasure has been presented to your
View, and offered to you. O see what Advantage you have gained, how dreadful
will it be, for any that have heard so much of this rich Christ, to be found
poor at last? O it will be sad for any to dye poor in a Loadicean State, Poor,
Blind, and naked, and to be cast away. O Sinners consider this, you that have
been wooed and invited to get this choice, tried Gold, Christ has pleaded with
you, to win your Hearts if possible; O take heed you dye not without an
Interest in Jesus Christ, you will hear all those Truths brought over to you
again at the Bar of Christ: and all the Counsels and Helps you have had to draw
your Hearts to Christ, will be then as burning Fire in your Bones, and as
boiling Lead in your Bowels, if you perish without Christ; Therefore take heed,
take heed, that this Christ become not a stumbling Stone, and a Rock of offense
to your Souls. And such as are Believers, mind your Duty which has been opened
to you; and O that these Truths might be profitable to all. And the Lord give a
Blessing to it. Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Occasion of this Discourse with an Introduction to the words, and
Explication of them, and the main Truth contained in them. Page 1. CHAP. II.
The personal Riches of Christ opened, in his divine Nature, manifested in his
Attributes, with the wonderful advantages thereof to Believers. p. 11. CHAP.
III. The humane Nature of Christ distinctly considered, it is Reallity proved,
his Personallity, or the divine and humane Nature in one person, showing what
kind of Union it is, and the glorious Consequents and Advantages thereof. p.
43. CHAP. IV. Showing what is the work of Jesus Christ, as he is Mediator. p.
65. Which lies, 1 with respect to God the Father, p. 66. 2 with respect to
fallen man. p. 75.
CHAP. V. Wherein is opened the glorious Advocateship of Christ, with the
unspeakable Comforts and Advantages thereof, p. 79. CHAP. VI. Showing the
Willingness of Christ, that Sinners should be saved, the Sin and Misery of such
as refuse Christ, with Reproof to several sorts of persons. p. 102. CHAP. VII.
Showing what Consolation flows to Believers from the Intercession of Christ. p.
113. 1 To weak Believers. ibid. 2 To troubled Believers in the depth of
Soul-misery. p. 116. 3 To Believers dejected in the sense of strong
Corruptions. p. 120. 4 To tempted Believers. p. 122. 5 To such as are under
Afflictions and Suffering, in or by the world. ibid. 6. To such as are Mourners
for Sion. p. 123.
CHAP. VIII. Containing a use of Exhortation to Sinners and Saints. p. 128.
CHAP. IX. Opening somewhat of the sweet Dispositions of Christ, (viz.) His
Goodness, Love, and the Riches thereof, as to the Kinds, Fruits, and Effects of
it. p. 137. CHAP. X. Several deductions drawn from the love of Christ. p. 147.
CHAP. XI. The glorious Excellency of Christ's tender Pity opened and displayed
in the several acts of it, both to Saints and Sinners. p. 153. CHAP. XII. The
Improvement of the pity of Christ by way of Terror, Encouragement, and Advice.
p. 165. CHAP. XIII. Wherein is opened the transcendent Humility of Christ. p.
170. CHAP. XIV. Wherein is shown the transcendent Meekness and Gentleness of
Christ to his Enemies and to his People, p. 178. CHAP. XV. Wherein is
demonstrated the infinite Bounty of Christ to all his Creatures, with the
manner of his giving, p. 188. CHAP. XVI. Wherein the Faithfulness of Christ is
opened, in accomplishing all his Prophesies, fulfilling his Promises, to all
the Trust committed to him, and in all the Relations he stands to his People.
p. 198. CHAP. XVII. Showing that Christ is become a Purchaser in the hehalf of
Believers, how he has made this purchase, and what he has puechased, p. 225.
CHAP. XVIII. Sanctification and Holiness is purchased for Believers by the
death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ. p. 240. CHAP. XIX. Adoption-grace proved
to be the Fruit of Christ's Purchase, the excellency of this State opened in
several particulars. p. 258. CHAP. XX. The Confirmation of the new Covenant is
the fruit of Christ's Purchase, proved by several Arguments. p. 280. CHAP. XXI.
The Heavenly Inheritance is the Fruit of Christ's purchase. p. 303. CHAP. XXII.
The second and third Assertions proved, showing that those vast Treasures of
Christ are opened in and by the Gospel, that it is the Will of God they should
be tendered to the chiefest of Sinners. p. 293. CHAP. XXIII. Conraining two
branches of Information, what a great blessing the Gospel is, the greatness of
their Sin that oppose the Gospel. p. 312. CHAP. XXIV. Showing the poor and
lamentable state of all Christless Souls. p. 323. CHAP. XXV. Wherein Christ is
set forth to Sinners, as a match worthy of their choice in regard of the
Excellency of his Estate, the amiableness of his person, his lovely
Dispositions, and other Considerations, to win the hearts of Sinners to be
loking after this lovely Jesus. p. 334. CHAP. XXVI. Objections answered,
Counsels how to come to Christ. p. 353. CHAP. XXVII. Showing the Folly of such
as pursue earthly things, with neglect of Christ, considering the nature of
those things; the Terms on which they are to be enjoyed, the Casualty that
attends them, the Guilt such contract. p. 370. CHAP. XXVIII. Containing a use
of Reprehension to several sorts of persons, with Consolation to all sound
Believers. p. 379. CHAP. XXIX. Containing a use of Examination, Characters of
such as have an Interest in Christ, and in all those glorious Treasures. p. 389
CHAP. XXX. Containing a use of Exhortation pressing Believers to several
Duties. p. 401. DUTIES. 1 To Thankfulness. ibid. 2 To keep up a high Valuation
of Christ. p. 407. 3 Have all your Expectations from Christ, p. 411. 4 Be
contented with Christ alone. p. 412. 5 Take up your delight in him. p. 413. 6
Be not troubled at Wants, Losses, and Sufferings in this World. p. 416. 7 Live
upon your Treasure. p. 419. 8 Improve your Interest in this Treasure, to the
enriching your own Souls. p. 421. 9 Live up to your Treasure. p. 430. 10.
Commend Christ to others. p. 433. 11 Get Christ to be a portion to your
Children. p. 434. 12 Long to be with Christ. p. 436.




Books sold by William Marshal.
Folio's.
JOsephus's History, large folio Cuts. Raleigh's History of the World. Mead's
Works. Baker's Chronicle. Willson's Dictionary. Taylor's Life of Christ. Caril
on Job, 2 Volumes. Horton's Sermons. Ambrose's Works. Usher's Body of Divinity.
Clark's Martyrology. Clark's Lives. Cowley's Works. Dalton's Country Justice.
Peirson on the Creed. Philips's English Dictionary. Bloom's Maps. Bloom's
Britannia. Roberts's Key to the Bible. Gurnal's complete Armor.
Quarto's.
Goldman's Dictionary. Littleton's Dictionary. Baxter's Saints Rest. Vane's
Meditations. Morning exercise at Cripple-gate. Suppliment to Morning Exercise.
Baxter's Life of Faith. Dr. Bates on the Attributes. Cambridge Bible. Brown's
vulgar Errors. Tuckney's Sermons. Owen of Justification. Flavill's Fountain of
Life. Flavil's mystical Union. Flavil's Husbandry. Gilem's of Temptation. Dr.
Gibson's Sermons. Dr. Raleigh's Sermons. Polhill's divine Truth. Peirce's
Sinners impleaded.
Octavo's.
Cole's Dictionary. Hall's Contemplations. Coley's Astrology. Taylor's living
and dying. Government of the Tongue. Ladies Calling. Baxter's 32 Diversions.
Featley's handmaid to Devotion. Cave's Primitive Christian. Patrick's Witness,
first and second part. Puler's Moderations of the Church. Polhill of Faith.
Ashwood's Heavenly Trade. Stockden's Works. Allen's Works. Barrow's Works.
Locker's Works. Steel of Uprightness. Peto on the two Covenants. Dr. Owen's
Catechism. Spiritual Warfare. Vincent's terrible ways. Gouge's Works.
Twelve's.
Duty of Man. Pilgrim's Progress. Fox's end of time. Doolittle on the
Sacrament. Dyer's Cabinet of Jewels. Dyer's Voice to London. Rider's Young
man's Duty. Great Assize. Practice of Piety. Hugh Peter's last Legacy. Baxter's
poor man's Family book. Barton's Hymns on the Psalms. Marshal's Epigramms.
Pool's Dialogue against Popery. War with the Devil. Flavil's Saint indeed.
Flavil's Token for Mourners. Ashwood's Groans for Sion.
FINIS.

