SOME REMARKS UPON THE LIFE Of that Painful Servant of God Mr. Nathanael
Heywood, Minister of the Gospel of Christ at Ormeskirk in Lancashire. Who Died
in the 44th Year of his Age. Dedicated to the Right Honorable HUGH Lord
Willoughby, by Sir H. Ashhurst, Bart.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry,
over against Stocks-Market. MDCXCV.

TO The Right Honorable HUGH Lord Willoughby, Baron of PARHAM.
My LORD,
I Take the boldness to Dedicate to Your Lordship some Memoirs of the Life of
an Excellent Person, who was Your Countryman, and one for whom Your Lordship
had a just esteem. It is not to recommend to Your Lordship any Party of men
among us, but plain Christianity in Legible and Lively Characters; and to
remove a Common Objection against the most Excellent Precepts of our Blessed
Savior, that they are hard Sayings, and impracticable things. Here, in a very
plain manner, is presented to Your view a Minister of Jesus Christ, who had no
other Design in the World, but that of doing good to Mankind, and is now
partaking of the Eternal Joy of his Lord and Master, to whom he was so entirely
devoted.

It is Your Lordship's Quality, and Ancient and Noble Extraction that sets You
above the common Level of Mankind, and draws the Eyes of the World upon You;
but there is somewhat greater, Your Exemplary Piety and Zeal for our Holy
Religion (in such a degenerate and licentious Age) and the Countenance you give
to Serious Piety, wherever you find it among all the different Parties that we
are so unhappily broken into, that makes you the Ornament of Your Country, and
highly esteemed by Wise and Good Men, and obliges me to be with all imaginable
respect,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and Faithful Servant, H. ASHHURST.

THE PREFACE.
THE great God is greatly seen in the smallest things; a poor Sparrow lighting
on the earth, and a minute Hair of men's Heads, are concerned by the Omnipotent
Providence: How much more does the Glorious Jehovah order the Affairs of the
Children of Men, and most of all the Concerns of his Church, which is the
Sanctum Sanctorum, the inmost Circle of Divine Providence: It is congruous to
the Church's state in this world to be Militant; a Lilly among Thorns: Her
Husband was a Man of Sorrows, and it becomes not his Bride to be a Wife of
Pleasures: If the Head was Non oportet membra deliciari sub capite spinis
coronato.
crowned with Thorns, the Members must not think much to be conformable: If
they do these things to the green tree, what will they do to the dry? Nay, it is
necessary and salutiferous for this Body to be purged: This Herb grows best
when most trodden down: These Vessels are brightest, when most scoured: There
is great need God's Children should be in Heaviness, to poise their spirits,
and prevent Wantonness. The Vine must be lopt, or it will grow wild:
Corn-bearing Fields must be broken up: Afflictions never do the Church hurt;
but Prosperity often rots it, and rocks it asleep, to its great Prejudice, if
not its utter Subversion: Ministers usually stand in the Front, and are put
upon the hottest Service; the Fire is continually burning on the Brazen Altar:
The Priests of old must first enter Jordan, and be the last standing Josh. 3.
8, -- 17.
in the midst thereof: Satan's Malice is most at them, and God usually
furnishes them with more Magnanimity than others. He that still governs the
World with Infinite Wisdom, has appointed to the sons of men their peculiar
Office, Station, and Employment in the world, and qualifies them with Gifts
proportionably; manageth their Work for them, prospers their Undertakings,
accepts their faithful Service, and will give them abundant Recompense: Yea,
their Work is their Wages; it comes with Meat in its Mouth. A Gracious Heaven
is the Preludium of a Glorious Heaven; yea, there is much of Glory upon a
suffering Minister or Christian: When they are loaded with Dirt and Obloquy,
even then the Spirit of Glory and of God rests on them. 1 Pet. 4. 16.
It Is no diminution, but a manifestation of God's Glory, when it shines through
the Glass of Creatures; yea, the less of the Creatures Worth is discovered, the
more of God is illustrated. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of 2 Cor. 4. 7.
the Power may be of God, and not of us. King Solomon must have a Thousand, if
Vine-dressers and Fruit-keepers have their Song 8. 12.
Two hundred. Let Ministers be invisible, so Christ be Illustrious: As Precious
Mr. Wadsworth said, So God's Work be done, I am content to be withdrawn out of
sight. So some interpret that Text, John 3. 29. as though the Friend of the
Bridegrrom will not be seen in the Treaty, but he stands behind the Curtain,
and hears the Bridegroom's Voice, and the Bride's Consent, and greatly
rejoiceth, because the Match is likely to go on: But the more Nothing a
Minister is in his own eyes, the more does God magnify him: As the Wife shines
in the Beams of her Husband's Honor or Riches, so also does God in some sense
shine in his Servants Gifts and Graces. Our Thoughts must go beyond the Gift,
to the Giver. A clear transparent Glass set in the Sun, renders the Sun most
illustrious, the Crystal is scarce visible, the Sun is all; yet to our eyes
the radiant Sunbeams are more beautiful by the Reflection through the Glass,
than shining directly upon us; but the Glass gives not splendour to the Sun, but
receives all from it; thus is Christ all in all: And as these Glasses are
quickly broken, and rendered useless, so are Ministers, but the Sun remains in
its motion, and shines still; for the Sun depends not on the Glass, but the
Glass on the Sun; yea, God sometimes thinks fit to break the Glass we are
admiring, that our eyes may be intent upon the Sun of Righteousness, and behold
all Beauties in him, who is the Lord our Righteousness. God in Wisdom has
thought fit to cause an Eclypse in the Firmament of his Church in these
Nations, by hiding many Lights under a Bushel, about Thirty Years; and also
translated most of them into an Upper Region, where they shine brightest in
their proper Orb, tho to us they disappear: The breaking of the Shell is the
brightning of the Pearl; they were never so bright below as they are now above;
once they saw through a glass darkly, now 1 Cor. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
face to face; and laying aside this Glass, with open face immediately they
behold the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to
glory.

These Blessed Souls, now with God, are subject neither to the black Mists of
Human Ignorance, nor to foggy Vapors of Sinful Defects, nor do they feel or
fear the bespattering Dirt of Opprobrious Scorns, of black-mouthed Slanderers,
but are received up into Heaven by this Cloud of Death, that has hid them out
of our sight, and hindered our Converse with them; yet they have dropped the
Mantle of good Examples, which still we have; and observant Eyes, and diligent
Pens have drawn some Renowned Patriots in lively Colors, in which we may
behold much of God's Image in the face of their conversings amongst men, and
Conversations both in their Personal and Public Capacities: This is a petty
Resurrection; and much good service is done to succeeding Ages hereby; by which
they being dead, yet speak; yea, spiritual life is transfused to Readers,
through the Lines and Leaves transmitted to them: Blessed be God for these
famous Heroes: If the Jews mentioned such Brave Men dead, with Notes of Remark,
[as Rabbi Hillel of Blessed Memory], Why should not the memory of the just be
blessed? Certainly Prove. 10. 7.
there is a vast difference in the ears of Protestants, betwixt Blessed Bradford
and Bloody Bonner.

Men usually say, when they have interred the Corpse of their dead Relations,
and left them in the Dust, that they have done their last Office to them, or
for them: But I judge that to be a gross mistake, for there are several Offices
to which we are bound on their behalf. 1. We ought to lament their Death as a
sad loss for the Church of God, (I speak of pious and useful Persons) Genesis 50.
10.
decent Funeral Solemnities were kept a considerable time in Scripture. 2.
Observing and complying with the Commands and the Genesis 50. 16. Deuteronomy. 34. 10.
Counsels of the Dead, so Joseph's Brethren. 3. Giving the Dead deserved
Commendation. 4. Vindication of their Reputation according to truth. 5.
Monuments erected for a Memorial, as Jacob over Rachel's Genesis 35. 20. 2 Samuel 1.
17. 1 Kings 3. 6. Acts 9. 34.
Grave. 6. Funeral Elegies, as David over Saul and Jonathan. 7. Owning our
Father's God and Covenant; so Solomon. 8. Manifesting Demonstrations of dead
Person's Charity and Piety, as the Widows for Dorcas. 9. An exact imitation of
their praiseworthy Acts. 10. Communion with Heb. 6. 12. Heb. 12. 22.
dead Saints, believing that there are such rejoicing in their Glory, hoping in
a short time to be with them, thinking of them, studying Conformity to them,
that we may do God's Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. 11. Yea, something
is also due from us to the surviving Relations of our pious dead Friends, as
David showed kindness 2 Samuel 9. 2.
to Jonathan's seed. All this (and possibly more) without the imputation of
Saintworship, may surviving Christians do, when their gracious Friends and
Relations disappear in this Lower World; only let us not admire them, but God
in them; so says the Text, 2 These. 1. 10. When he shall come to be glorified
in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. Mark it, Gods
holiest Saints must not be admired, but God in them: Our Admiration must not
respect Men simply, but be terminated upon God through them: Creature-worship
is very natural to us, especially if we see more than ordinary excellency in
the Creature, or receive some singular Benefit thereby. The great Apostle John
was twice guilty of Angel-adoration, and was twice admonished against it. But
doubtless it is a good Work, and no despicable Office of surviving Friends to
commemorate the imitable Acts of dead Ministers or Christians of considerable
Magnitude and Figure in the Church.

This is my Apology for writing this History, knowing how acceptable it will be
to Christian Friends, Natural Relations, and to the Church of God; indeed he
was amiable to all, and very imitable in the Passages of his Life, and
Circumstances that relate to his Death; what was praiseworthy in him, let God
have the Glory of it; what is defective in the Copy or Transcriber, let Charity
draw a Curtain over both.

I do find that the Servants of God have been very careful and critical in
Writing the Lives of Eminent Men, as Camerarius wrote the Life of Luther,
Junius of Ursin, Beza of Calvin, Antonius Jaius of Beza, Josias Simlerus of
Peter Martyr, Dr. Humphry of Bp. Jewel, etc. Melchior Adamus has summed them
up together, and Mr. Samuel Clark has made many Collections; neither the
Person described, nor the Scribe answering these men of God, it does make me
blush to appear in this Undertaking, especially in this so Critical Age; but
this I dare say, The Subject or Person treated of, was full of good Works, and
he that treats thereon is full of Good Will.

Nor have I related all that might have been writ, and that he himself writ,
judging it not convenient, because it might be offensive: Take this in good
part, live up to it, pray for the weak Transcriber, and beg hard that God would
raise up many Masters in Israel, to make up this and other Vacancies made of
late by the Death of Eminent Ministers, which seems to be a sad Omen and
dreadful Prognostic of some desolating Judgment approaching; for our Defense
is departing from us; the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel are ascending in a
Fiery Chariot; Stakes are taken out of the Hedge, that Wild Beasts may enter;
Pillars are removed; the House totters; we have lost much good Blood; Jacob's
Face looks pale: May our dear Lord once at last restore his Ministers to their
Public Employments, pour out a Spirit of Prayer, cause an universal casting of
melted Sinners into the Mould of the Gospel, and revive a Work of Reformation,
that the promise may be performed in Isaiah 29. 22, 23. Thus says the Lord,
who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now be
ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. But when he sees his children,
the work of mine hands in the midst of him they shall sanctify my name, and
sanctify the holy one of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. Amen. So be
it.

March 29. 1694.
A SHORT Historical Account OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Nathanael Heywood, etc.
Mr. Nathanael Heywood was Born in Little Leaver in the Parish of Bolton
le-Moors in Lancashire, descended of godly and useful Parents (Richard and
Alice Heywood); he was baptized in the Parish Church, September. 16. 1633. During
his Infancy he was exceeding weak and sickly, much afflicted with Fits of
Convulsion, and was frequently under the sentence of Death, in the apprehension
of all Spectators: His tenderhearted Parents often gave him up for gone; but
God, who quickneth the dead, raised him from the gates of the grave, that by
him he might raise sinners from Damnable Death to Spiritual Life.
Notwithstanding those violent Fits did so weaken his Spirits, that in his
younger days he was not judged fit to be trained up for the Ministry; and
therefore his Parents did frequently take him from School, and set him to learn
to Write and cast Accounts, in order to sending him to London for an
Apprentice. But he recruiting as to natural strength, and they being encouraged
by his extraordinary capacity for Learning, kept him still at School, having
the advantage of a learned and diligent Master near at hand, who encouraged
them much to breed him a Scholar; especially observing his inclinations that
way: At last they resolved upon it; and when he had passed those juvenile
Studies, at School, making good proficiency (notwithstanding his frequent
interruptions), he was judged ready for the University at fourteen years of
Age; whither he went, and was admitted, May 4. 1648. in Trinity College in
Cambridge; he was well approved of for School-learning, and fell close to his
studies, performed the usual Exercises with applause: He was of pregnant
Natural Parts, of a quick Apprehension, solid Judgment, tenacious Memory; which
seldom meet in one Person; he was fit to manage what he undertook with great
agility and facility: So that he profited in Academical learning beyond his
equals.

As for Religion, as yet his heart was not seasoned with a Principle of Saving
Grace; though he was Religiously Educated, complying with holy Exercises, loved
God's People, and was not tainted with gross scandals; yet he had not discerned
the Evil of Sin, the Malignity of Nature, the Necessity of Christ, till he was
providentially brought under the Ministry of Mr. Hammond, Fellow of Magdalen
College, Preacher at St. Gyles's by whose plain and powerful preaching, his
heart was smitten with a sound Conviction, which cost him many sad thoughts of
heart, as well as tears, but ended at last in a sound Conversion, and sincere
Covenanting with God, and centring his Soul by Faith on Jesus Christ. Then he
associated with serious Christians, and walked exemplarily; howbeit, he
complained of his backslidings, which he repented of, and his Soul was healed.
When he had taken his Degree, he went to London, and there heard Mr. Peter
Sterry; and was much taken with his Parts, and manner of preaching.

When he came down into the Country, his Father judged it convenient to
dispose of him under the Tuition of some Reverend Minister, by whose care and
example he might be prepared for further service. And it pleased God in his
providence to fix him in the Family of that solid judicious Divine, Mr. Edward
Gee, Parson of Eccleston; where he continued about two years, studying hard,
behaved himself orderly, and profited much: So that he often blessed God for
the good he met with in that family. And indeed he was molded and modelled
into the method, manners, and practices of that Holy and Eminent man of God;
whose excellent treatises of Prayer and Government, speak his real worth: A man
of great Learning, Orthodoxness, and exact Holiness; a most substantial
Scriptural Preacher, Son to that famous Mr. Gee, mentioned by Historians in the
fall at Blackfriars.

Whilst Mr. Heywood lived in Mr. Gee's Family, God directed his thoughts to a
young Gentlewoman in the neighborhood, Mrs. Elizabeth Parre, near to Dr.
Parre, Bishop of the Isle of Man; whom in convenient time he Married, and she
became a pious, prudent, provident Wife to him; by whom he had several
Children, Six whereof are yet living, Two Sons, and Four Daughters; his elder
Son succeeds in his Father's place, as Pastor to that people, in their
new-erected Meeting Place; a young man of pregnant Parts, and exemplary Piety.

When Mr. Heywood was Married, it pleased God to give him a Call to a people in
Yorkshire; for he had a great desire to be employed in his Lord's work; and
that very day that an Invitation came to him, he told the Messenger he had been
spending most of it in Fasting and Prayer; wherein he found his heart much
enlarged, and looked upon that Call as an Answer of Prayer; and thereupon
freely embraced it, and in convenient season took a journey.

The place to which he was called was Illingworth Chapel, in the Viccaridge of
Halifax in Yorkshire. When he had preached a day or two with them, the people
laid hold of him, and engaged him to settle with them, which he did; and
continued three or four years, and was an instrument of much good in that
place, having a full Auditory, and some seals of his Ministry. But the Devil
envying the success of the Gospel, raised up some potent Adversaries against
him, who maligned and opposed him for his faithfulness in plain admonitions.
Some meetings there was about his continuance; one said to him, Mr. Heywood,
You have raised differences and disturbances since you came: He answered, I
have not sought the peace of the place, but the good of it. Which he ruminated
upon, and could not tell what to make of that expression; not remembering, that
the principal design of the Gospel, and its Publishers, is the good of Souls;
but the accidental fruit of it, is dissension, through the corruption of men's
hearts, according to what our Blessed Lord expressed, Think Mat. 10. 34, 35.
not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a
sword. In this controversy about his stay, or removal, an earnest request was
sent to him by the people of Orms-Church, to come to them; he hearkened to
them, having several discouragements at Illingworth, not here fit to be named;
notwithstanding some cordial Friends in that Congregation stuck close to him,
and challenged an interest in him; both sides using more than ordinary
arguments and importunity, did exceedingly puzzle him, and set him upon the
rack of suspense: He earnestly sought to God about it, he begged the advice and
prayers of Friends, and at last was counseled to refer the business to several
Ministers indifferently chosen by both sides, to hear what could be said,
understand circumstances, and give their judgments in this weighty case, to
which of these places his way was most clear; indeed a third put in vigorously
for him, viz. Thornton in Bradford Parish; but the controversy was chiefly
betwixt those two, Ormskirk and Illingworth; Ministers met about this concern
at Wigan in Lancashire, in January 1656. and two or three of the Inhabitants of
those three forementioned places; much debate there was, and some hard words
passed; the business was difficult, and cost many hours discourse, both in the
day and in the evening; and upon a serious view of the reasons on all hands, at
last the Ministers concluded that his way was clear to leave Yorkshire and
betake himself to Ormskirk which being a great Parish, and a considerable
Market Town, and the people vacant, and very importunate, they judged that he
might do God and his Church more service in that great place: And indeed his
own inclinations carried him most that way, upon some peculiar reasons: He
removed with his Family thither in the Spring, 1657. where he was entertained
with much respect, and great solemnity: And there he labored faithfully and
diligently in the course of his public Ministry, private Instruction, visiting
the Sick, till August 24, 1662. that black Doomsday, wherein so many were
sentenced and struck dead in Law as to any public Service.

The Annual Incomes of this Vicaridge were very small, not amounting to above
30 l. a year; yet there was an Augmentation added of 50 l. a year by Queen
Elizabeth, upon an Itinerant Preacher, which had been long fixed upon the
Minister of that place. There were four of them in Lancashire, this was one;
and 200 l. per An. was paid out of the Revenues to those four; this was paid by
several Trustees at the Audit.

At the return of King Charles II. one Mr. Stanninghaugh, Parson of Augham,
worth 140 l. a year, about two Miles from Ormskirk, rode up to London, and by
the help of Friends surreptitiously obtained this 50 l. a year to be settled
upon himself; which gave occasion to some persons to reflect upon a Sermon Mr.
Heywood preached at Ormskirk, upon a day of Thanksgiving for the King's
Restoration, upon 2 Samuel 19. 30. And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let
him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own
house. Which was indeed an excellent Discourse, greatly approved and highly
applauded by all, especially the Gentry, who earnestly solicited him to print
it, but he refused; not out of disloyalty, but modesty; not because he durst
not own his Sovereign, but he was not willing to be much taken notice of in the
world.

Mr. Heywood digested this disingenuous carriage of his Neighbor and pretended
Friend, with great aequanimity and calmness; and it proved a Worm to the one,
and at Blessing to the other: for though this Mr. Stanninghaugh's Parsonage was
148 l. a year, and his Tenement was 30 l. a year, and this 50 l. yearly, and he
had no Child, yet he left nothing at his death but Debt, and his Wife in a poor
condition.

But it pleased God from that time to bless Mr. Heywood's small Incomes
incredibly; and it is next to a Miracle to consider what great things he did,
when shortly after he was turned out of all, he paid some Debts, and maintained
his numerous Family in a good decorum; for he had nine Children, whereof six
are yet living; took a Lease for Three Lives of, an House and Land, paid 60 l.
built a good part of it; paid 30 l. for buying but a Lease elsewhere;
maintained his two Sons at School at Holland, which cost him 14 l. a year; sent
one to Mr. Frankland, to be educated in University-learning; besides many sore
Sicknesses in his Family. Yet such was the blessing of God, that he waded
through all, without contracting any Debt, but rather increasing his Estate out
of his small Incomes: This Holy Man was very sensible of this strange
Providence, and often expressed it with admiring thankfulness.

In the year 1662, Aug. 24. that fatal day struck him civilly dead with the
rest of his Brethren; how beit he continued his public Preaching in the Church
after that day without disturbance, till the place was filled up with a new
Vicar, on Mr. Ashworth a Schoolmaster, who lived six or eight Miles from thence
taught his School, rode thither or Saturday, and back on Monday morning; was
absent all the week for several years: so that Mr. Heywood still seemed to have
the sole charge of that Town and Parish, visiting the Sick, instructing them,
praying with them, preaching privately to them as occasion was offered. He was
abundant in the work of the Lord, not only in his own Parish, but at Wigan,
Warrington, Leverpool, Preston, Eccleston, and upon a call in more remote
places.

But in his own Parish, and amongst his old Hearers, he was in Labors more
abundant; he usually preached twice on a Lords day, sometimes several times in
Weekdays, ordering his Labors in several parts of the Parish, both in the day
and night: Yea, in times of great danger he has preached at one house the
beginning of the night, and then gone two Miles a-foot over Mosses, and
preached toward morning to another Company at another house.

Nor was he scant and short in his Sermons, but usually very long, two hours at
least, often three; yea, sometimes he would have continued four or five hours
praying and preaching, his heart was so fully set upon his Master's work, that
he forgot his own strength, and his Hearers patience. Nor did he tediously
dream over his work, but was full of zeal, vigor, tenderness and affection,
often straining his voice beyond what his natural strength could well bear,
which occasioned torturing and mortal Diseases; like a Candle, he spent himself
to give others light.

Neither was he [vox and praeterea nihil] a mere voice, and no more; like some
Preachers, that like Thunder give a loud crack without a distinct sound or
significancy; no, his Sermons were stuffed with solid Divinity, Scripture
Arguments, alluring Similies, heart melting Passages. He was an excellent Text
man, producing solid Interpretations. An experienced Casuist, resolving Cases
of Conscience with great satisfaction. A clear Disputant, stating Controversies
solidly and substantially answering Objections learnedly and distinctly, and
proving the Truth demonstratively. He was a pathetical Preacher, driving the
Nail home, in close Convictions of Conscience, warm Exhortations to Conversion,
or to particular Duties, plain and undeniable Directions, still laying open,
and obviating Satan's wiles, the deceits of a bad heart, and insnaring
insinuations of a wicked world; rifling the Conscience by a thorough
Examination; comforting God's Children with sweet Gospel-Promises.

This, this indeed was his Masterpiece, and main Scope in his Preaching, to
lay open the Beauties and Excellencies of the Blessed Jesus, and Sinners great
necessity of him; displaying in lively colors the love of God in sending his
Son, the love of Christ in the unparalled work of Redemption; the Offices,
Purchases and Undertakings of the Son of God; unfolding the Covenant of Grace,
the Operations of the Spirit; in applying the Merits of Christ, etc. The truth
of this appears in two excellent Discourses, printed since his Death,
transcribed out of his own Notes, as he preached them the same year he died:
The one called [Christ the Best Gift] which was grounded on John 4. 10. The
other entitled [Christ the Best Master] grounded upon John 13. 13. Two
excelent Treatises, Bound up together Printed after his death; for he would
never be persuaded to publish any thing; though, doubtless they would have been
more Acurate, if he had imagined they should have seen the light: But such as
they are, they have proved very acceptable and profitable to the Church of God:
Many have read them with pleasure; and some good Divines have quoted passages
out of them.

His labors in the Ministry were so exceedingly welcome, that the loss of him
in public work was greatly bewailed by the whole Town and Parish; he was
beloved of all, good and bad. A poor ignorant man came to him when he was
turned out, saying, Ah! Mr Heywood, we would gladly have you Preach again in
the Church. Yes, said he, I would as gladly Preach as you desire it, if I could
do it with a safe Conscience in Conforming: The man replied, Oh Sir! many a man
nowadays makes a great gash in his Conscience, cannot you make a little nick
in yours?

That was a remarkable passage which fell out at Ormskirk, on July 30, 1662.
which Mr. Heywood thus describes in a Letter to a Friend; About four a Clock
that day in the Afternoon, was a dreadful Thunder and Lightning for a long time
together; and in the Town of Ormskirk, and about it, fell a great shower of
Hail in a terrible Tempest; Hailstones were as big as ordinary Apples, some say
Nine Inches compass; one Stone that I took up was above Four Inches, after it
had thawed in my hand; the Hail broke all our Glass Windows Westward, we have
not one quarril whole on our backside; so it is with most of the houses in and
about the Town; it has cut off all the Ears of our standing Corn, so that most
Fields that were full of excellent Barley, and other Grain, are not worth
Reaping: It has shaken the Apple Trees, and in some places bruised the Apples
in pieces; the Hail cut Boughs from Trees; and some say there are strange
Apparitions in the Air (of which I shall give you a further account.) All,
especially the ignorant, were much terrified, thinking it had been the day of
Judgment; certainly it was a sad sign and effect of God's heavy displeasure
with us; and I wish it be not a presage of more abiding Judgments. They tell
me, that my small share of loss will amount to 10 l. at least; in half an hour
all this hurt was done. The Lord sanctify this sudden stroke to me and my poor
people. Mr. Clark in his Examples has this Story, and mentions Mr. Heywood his
attestation of it, which yet I thought fit to relate here; partly because this
is fuller than he relates it; partly to show how observant this holy man was of
the remarkable Providence of God. It was his observation, That this natural
storm was a sad presage of a moral storm on Ministers and Churches, which fell
the very month after, that rooted up so many useful fruit-bearing trees, marred
so much good fruit, and shattered the glass by which the light of saving-truth
is conveyed into the house of God. This good man was so endeared to this
People, that he was resolved never to part from them till death made the
divorce; of whom thus he writes: I have a loving, though poor, docible, though
ignorant People; they flock in very great numbers to the Ordinances, and I have
hopes of doing some good (it may be already begun) amongst them: I had some
motion to Conform, but I will not change upon any account whatsoever; let me
have your prayers, help me for this poor people, which I love as my own Child,
and long after in the bowels of Christ.

He had frequent distempers upon his body, which much promoted God's work upon
his heart: In the year 1667. he had a violent distemper, which in a fortnights
time brought his body very low; and by that time he was recovered, his dear
Wife fell into a sad languishing disease, which threatened death; besides
grievous afflictions in her Spirit, and sad apprehensions of death for above a
month together; a Swelling in her Throat, which increased to a hard Tumor in
the hollow of her Throat, which inevitably, in the eye of Reason, threatened
Death; but beyond all expectation, God did graciously remove that, and raised
her up again in mercy to the Family. In the year 1670. his Son Nathanael was
strangely taken with Convulsion Fits, which tortured and distorted his Face,
Limbs, every part of his Body in a prodigious manner; but God also at last
raised him up upon the Prayers of his People. But these Providence found him
work for, and quickened his Spirit in Prayer.

In October 1671. Mr. Heywood fell into a malignant Fever, which (as his two
Doctors, Dr. Fife, and Dr. Grundy said) had seized the Nerves, and Spirits, and
Brain; he was not in extremity of pain, because (as the Physicians said) the
disease lay not so much in the Blood: Upon the 13th. day, after he begun, he
was judged to be a gone man; Dr. Fife (a boisterous man, and Justice of the
Peace, in the Fild-countrey near Garstand) called for a Candle, and bade him
open his mouth, which when he had looked into, he swore a great Oath, and said,
his Tongue is as black as a Thrash; call the Mistress of the house, said he,
let him set all things in order, and make his Will for he is a gone man; these
words astonished his Family; but his own and only surviving Sister, being
present, and hearing these confident Expressions, gathered encouragement, and
thought within herself, This is but a man, and may be deceived; God is God, and
can confute him. Thus Dr. Fife left him as hopeless, and said, it was in vain
to give him any thing: But before he came to his own house, at Houghton Tower,
a Fever seized violently upon the Doctor himself, and in a few days made an
end of him; so he never returned home alive But from that very day Mr. Heywood
began to amend, the Fever abateing. It is likely that was a Crisis, when the
disease was at its height; for it was a dreadful day and night, he had all the
symptoms of death upon him; but God had mercy upon him, as upon sick
Epaphroditus; Phil. 2. 27.
God had much work for him to do: But he continued under weakness and some
disorder in his Head; for he could not be persuaded that he was at home,
confidently affirming he was at Bickerstaff, where indeed he was immediately
before he begun his distemper, to visit Sir Edward Stanly, who was begun in a
Fever, and died shortly after; Mr. Heywood would needs be helped to the Window
to see the Funeral pass by to the Church.

This sore sickness was in the year 1671. and the King's Licenses came out in
the year following 1672. and indeed hitherto he had very little or no
disturbance in his preaching-work, God was preparing him both for service and
suffering. This sickness preceded service; God laid the foundation low,
designing to build high; and often God thinks fit to lay the fairest colors
upon a sable bottom; so God passed the sentence of death upon him immediately
before this petty resurrection; for in the Spring following came out the
Liberty to Preach; Mr. Heywood cordially embraced it, and had two Chapels
Licensed, viz. Bickerstaff, adjoining to Lady Stanly's house, two Miles South
from Ormskirk; the other was Scaresbrick, two Miles North from the
Parish Church, both in Ormskirk Parish; these he supplied constantly, preaching
at the one Chapel one day, at the other the next Lord's day; of which he thus
writes: I bless God my Congregation is numerous and attentive; Oh! that they
were as fruitful! my Family is healthful, Oh! that they were more holy!

He continued two years in these two Chapels; but about April 9, 1674. he thus
writes: I have had more trouble and opposition in my Ministerial employment
these four Months last past, than ever I had in all my life, yet am not taken
off to this day; Archers have sorely grieved us and shot at us 34 Arrows (I
mean Warrants) but our Bow abides in strength, by the hands of the Mighty God
of Jacob; Officers have come Eighteen Lord's days together, but have not as yet
scattered us, -- how easy is it for God to save us while we serve him, if we
could believe? I am encouraged to hope that some good is done, or may be done,
by my poor labors in this season, and it is no ill sign when Satan rages so
violently against us: God can work without, or against means, and can work by
improbable means to accomplish great ends. I was never more inwardly born up
under storms, nor strengthened against difficulties in all my life; it may be
my time is but short, and my work near an end; Oh! that I may live and die in
God's work and way, and be faithful unto death! Dear Brother, let my condition
have a deeper impression on your heart than ordinary: Two Warrants (one for 20
l. the other for 40 l.) have been out against me these Seven Weeks, but we keep
our doors fast Barred, and the Officers are very Civil to us, -- Oh! that I
could see you! I have no Horse, but go all my Journeys on foot.

November 13, 1674. He thus writes: I bless God my Liberty (notwithstanding all
my troubles) is not wholly lost, but sometimes disturbed; we meet in fear, yet
we meet in both Chapels: No Warrant is sent for a Month or more, and my
Auditory increases again; Oh! that I had an heart to improve late experiences
and present opportunities, and do my duty, leaving the issue to him that
judges righteously!

But his excessive Pains (though refreshing to his Spirit) yet were wasting to
his Body; for about that time thus he writes: I am still at work in both
Chapels, -- but I am much cast down with pains and weakness of Body, having
overgone my strength, and wasted my self in these intervals of Liberty God has
given us: But I have no reason to repent any thing I could ever do for so good
a Master; Oh! that I had done more, and better!

About the same time he Writes thus: Some assaults Satan has made upon me with
a right hand Temptation; the whole Parish of Aughton have been importunate with
me, to put my self into a capacity for their Parsonage (worth Seven or
Eightscore Pond per Annum); the Bishop (i. e. Dr. Wilkins) promises favor to
me in it; but God did not leave me so much as to have any serious thoughts to
yield to that Temptation, -- I do preach still, but not so constantly, nor in
so full a Congregration as formerly. Dear Brother, I beseech you for the Lord's
sake, and for the love of the Spirit, strive together with me, in your Prayers
to God for me, you know for what, etc.

At last after many struglings, threatenings, affrightings, peoples withdrawings
and rallying again, a stratagem was contrived to knock all dead at a blow; some
Deputy Lieutenants sent some Soldiers to take Mr. Heywood in the Pulpit; and
though it was known, yet they met in Bickerstaff Chapel; Lady Stanly came out
of her Gallery, and placed herself near the Pulpitdoor, hoping to over-aw their
Spirits, and obstruct their designs; the Soldiers stood without, while Mr.
Heywood was at prayer; but when he had prayed, they rushed in, and required him
to come down, and go along with them; he mildly desired the favor of them,
that they would give him leave to preach, and he would go along with them; but
they rudely run toward the Pulpit; the Lady would have stopped them, but they
pressed forward, opened the Pulpit door, got hold of his Coat and tore it, and
in a sort pulled him out, and took him away with them straight to Holland; nor
could the Lady's mediation prevail to procure him a little refreshment; only in
the road he grew saint, and desired them to call with him at an Alehouse, which
they did, and the Landlady (though he had no acquaintance with her) was
exceeding kind to him, and said, he should have any thing she had in the house;
but those Rogues, said she, shall not have a morsel that took him; so they
carried him away to an Alehouse in Holland, where he lodged that night; and
from whence thus writ to his Wife:

-- I am very well, I bless God, and never in greater honor, or so highly
advanced in all my life; I was pulled out of the Pulpit with a Pistol lifted up
at my head, and a God-dam-me in mine ears, but the man repents his rashness,
and wishes he had let me preach, for he never heard a better prayer, etc. But
be not troubled, God has showed me more mercy than I can be thankful for: Oh!
help me to praise him! Oh! what cause have we to rejoice in suffering upon this
account! God will have Glory, and his Church the benefit, etc. but I fear it
must be an Imprisonment, or promise not to preach, which is my very life, --

But God in his gracious Providence did also scatter this cloud; for the day
after, when it was noised abroad that Mr. Heywood was taken, abundance of
People, and many considerable Gentlemen, and some that were no friends to his
Cause, yet out of respect to his Person, mediated for him; yea, several of good
report, and intimate with the Justices, offered to be Bound for his appearance,
and to give any security that should be required. The Justices then tendered him
the Oxford Oath; he was in a strait, for if he peremptorily refused it, they
had some advantage against him; he told them that persons must swear in
judgment, and therefore he desired some time to consider of it, which was
consented to: And seeing such an appearance of persons of all ranks for him,
they gave him respite; and liberty to go home till the next Quarter Sessions,
which was to be at Wigan a Month after; but they bound him to appear at the
Sessions.

Thus he was delivered out of that snare, and went home, and writ a Letter that
day, dated Jan. 28. 1674. -- Pray help me to praise God, and remember a poor
sufferer for the Gospel in your prayers: People do so throng in to see me, now
I am come home again, that I have not time to write fully to you, but commit
you to God and his protection, that you may long enjoy, and fruitfully improve
that sweet Liberty in God's Vineyard, which, I doubt, I have lost; and indeed
so it proved.

The Sessions at Wigan came on, he attended there according to his Bonds;
several Justices appeared for him, and his friends came to see the issue, and
to mediate for him: Old Lady Stanly came herself, and her Husband, Mr. Henry
Hoghton (a Justice of Peace); yea, Mr. Christopher Banister of Bank, and
several others, spoke much on his behalf; another Justice then upon the Bench
said, If Mr. Heywood was sent to Lancaster Goal, he should be as comfortably
maintained, and as honorably released as ever any Prisoner was; some of his
Adversaries seeing which way the Court inclined, slunk away in a discontent,
took Horse and rid home; so the snare was again broken, and Mr. Heywood was
dismissed to the joy of his Friends, vexation of his Enemies, and amazement of
all that heard of it.

Other snares were laid to entrap him upon the Five-Mile Act, but no body could
be brought to swear that he lived in the Town, though Mr. Heywood was usually
at home, and conversed openly in the Town, he was so generally beloved. A
Warrant was issued out to distrain upon Mr. Heywood's goods for 20 l. but the
Officers said the doors were shut, and they had no orders to break them; yet
they might have taken advantage if they had been severe, but indeed they were
generally very favorable: It Is true, the doors were kept fast for half a year
together, till things wore off, and they never got a pennyworth of his goods,
which was looked upon as a wonderful strange Providence; for Children and
others were frequently passing and repassing through the out-doors, foreside
and backside. God took him off his work by men's rigor, and obstructed his
former diligence by his own immediate hand upon his body, much what at the same
time; and thus he writes,

May 7. 1675. -- I am glad your precious Liberty is continued; I have nothing
to do now at home, but am much abroad, which is an heavy burden to me; pray
continue, increase your fervent prayers for me; Riding is very painful to me.

Jan. 1. 1675/6. he writes thus: I am now very busy, blessed be God, and these
holy days (so called) when others play, I work, having preached oftener
hereabouts in a few days, than I did in the whole year; I was lately at Chester
(being compelled thither by the importunity of friends) where I preached
thrice, and had great encouragement; God has much people (I believe) in that
place; they would persuade me to live with them, but I am resolved to stick
here yet, where Providence has so eminently settled me, preserved, and provided
for me, -- My Lads seem to be inclined to the Ministry. -- Who knows but God
may be fitting Instruments for his work in the next Age! for my part I can see
no reason to look for any thing but Judgments in this.

He was always a zealous impugner of, and a notable Champion against Papists,
of whom there be great store in those parts. When Mr. Heywood has been sent
for to visit sick Persons, (in which work he was constant, careful, and
sometimes successful) Popish Friends, or Neighbors would often procure some
Popish Priest, or one of their Religion, to come also to them; and if they had
but the least pretense to give it out that the Party died in their Faith, they
would wonderfully insult over the Protestants. One Person dying, with whom Mr.
Heywood took abundance of pains, and a Popish Priest also frequented that
house, who was so vexed that he could not prevail with the Party, that he writ
some Quaeries for Mr. Heywood to answer; which he did so acutely and solidly,
that the Ignorant Priest was netled and puzzled, and sent to one of their more
learned Advocates to vindicate their desperate and falling Cause; he made a
large Rejoinder, with abundance of Quotations out of the Ancients. To which Mr.
Heywood made a learned and sufficient Reply; only was lame because he had not
by him the Authors Quoted; therefore sent the Papers to Mr. Illingworth (an
excellent Scholar, and at that time much conversant in the College Library at
Manchester) who took abundance of pains to search and read over some large
Volumes to satisfy and solve a Quotation which referred not to Book, Chapter,
or Page; however, they joining together, that work was incomparably done,
worthy of an Impression; but to this day they heard no more of that Gentleman
(for so the Popish Priests are called) though he had often to do with them.

Another passage he writ in a Letter, dated June 12. 1675. to this purpose: I
do just nothing almost, either publicly or privately; it is much worse with me,
than before the Indulgence; yet God has of late employed me another way (not
so delightful and according to my genius, as Preaching): A Gentlewoman inclined
to Marry a Popish Gentleman, would not Marry till she had satisfaction that it
was Lawful from some Divine; and pitched on me to resolve the case, which I did
very freely and plainly to her once or twice; I never dealt so plainly with any
person in my life, and yet she took all well; whereas she fell out with her
nearest Relations and best Friends for speaking but a little against it. She
would needs have my Reasons in writing, and having got them in a large
dissuasive Letter, she showed it to the Gentleman, and he carried it to a
Priest; and twelve days after the Letter, brought me a long and subtle Answer;
to which I made a large and (I think) satisfactory Reply. In the mean time we
endeavored to divert her to other Matches, but all in vain, her affections
were too strong for her judgment, though she seemed to approve and consent to
my Reply, yet went on with the Gentleman, and was just at Marriage; so that I
could expect no other fruits of my labor in it, but my own satisfaction that I
had done my duty, leaving the event to God; God appeared in the Mount. One Mr.
D. (an hopeful young Gentleman, of Religious Parents in Cheshire) coming very
accidentally to A. and finding this L. there, was struck with Love, Courted
her, and Married her in eight days time. Such a Providence must not pass
without particular notice, and special praise to God. The young Gentleman came
thither also for a diversion, upon the like occasion; yet knowing nothing of
her, but designing another place, was turned by a Minister in his company to
take a night's lodging at A. This is the talk and wonder of the whole Country,
the shame and confusion of the Papists (who had a design upon that Family, and
were confident it was their own) the joy of all good Protestants, and of all
Friends to that Worshipful Family. I want and crave your help to give due
Praise to God for answering Prayers so wonderfully.

Another thing which greatly exasperated the Popish Party, was a sharp and
mettle Sermon Mr. Heywood preached upon November 5. 1673. at Scaresbrick
Chapel, upon Revel. 18. 4. a very learned judicious Discourse against the
Papists; which (together with the forementioned provocations) did so offend
them, that (though they could not take full revenge on him themselves, yet)
prevailed with some Justices to Prosecute him. And this is thought to be the
true reason of all that unparalled rage of some against Mr. Heywood; whereas
several others in the same circumstances as culpable, were let alone to enjoy
their Meetings quietly.

In the midst of these employments and oppositions, God was pleased to lay a
very afflictive distemper upon his Body, which for a long time was judged to be
the Stone or Gravel; certainly it was exceeding acute and painful; yet it is
disputable whether his loss of Gospel-Liberties, or his violent Bodily
Distemper, was the greater Affliction to him. His Riding about Six or Seven
Miles in the year 1675. rendered his pain in making Water scarce tolerable;
thus he writes: I have now this last ill fit discovered more of the cause of it
than ever before: I am very confident it is not the Stone, but Phlegm, or a Salt
Humor, or both, that stops the Urine, etc. -- It Is not properly the Strangury
(says he in another) but a Coagulation of Humors through overmuch Acidity,
that sharpens, and sometimes stops my Urine, -- Want of Health and Liberty
(believe me) are two sore evils; I hope you will particularly help me with your
Prayers for direction as to Health, but more especially as to restoration of
Liberty in my beloved work; the loss of which is a greater grief, than the want
of Health and Ease. In another Letter, dated July 15. 1676. he says: I have
endured extreme pain and torment a Month together, all which time (excepting
two or three days) I never make Water (and that I was forced to do very often)
but the last drop came out with so much difficulty, and excessive pain (about
the neck of the Bladder) that it made me roar and tremble, and had so shrunk my
Flesh, and weakened my Body, that I did apprehend Death to be approaching: The
good Lord fit and prepare me for it, and account me worthy to find Mercy in
that time of need, -- My pain was occasioned by the great heat, and preaching
that hot weather oftener and longer than I was well able, -- I am sure I have
greatest reason to submit to his holy Will, yea, and be thankful also, that
though he has afflicted me very sore, yet he has not given me over to death;
whereas I hear of many that are dead of late of my distemper (Bishop Wilkins,
Cousin John Crompton, and several hereabouts, within these two months). I beg
your prayers, that if God spare my Life, he would also give Health and Liberty
to improve it in his service, more publicly and fruitfully; or if it be death
(which will be less unwelcome, because of my restraints, pangs, and troubles in
this world, only my Wife and Children make the thoughts of it burdensome) may
God be glorified, I hope it will be my advantage, -- I wish neither you nor any
faithful Minister, that minds and loves his work, may ever know what I have
felt in the want of People and Work: Other Afflictions are light, compared to a
dumb Mouth, and silent Sabbaths, etc.

Yet notwithstanding all this Affliction, he had a wonderful great desire, once
again, if it were the Will of God, to visit his friends in Yorkshire; and God
was pleased to grant his request; for he gave him some mitigation of his Pain,
which was an encouragement to undertake that Journey; so himself, his Wife, and
his Two Sons, Traveled into Yorkshire, April 20. 1677. there he preached the
Sermons that are since Printed; and another most excellent and pathetical
Sermon upon Romans 5. 8. From thence he sent his Eldest Son to be trained up in
Academical Learning, with Mr. Frankland at Natland in Westmorland. But Oh! what
affectionate parting was there! as if they must never see one another's faces
again; (and indeed so it proved) they could not speak to each other for weeping
and sobbing; he desired another to pray, for he could not refrain: In that
Journey he was carried out beyond himself in praying, preaching, discoursing,
to the admiration and edification of all his ancient Friends in those Parts,
though he had frequent returns of his wonted Pain: He was as a man coming down
from Heaven to tell what is done there; or as one ripe for Heaven, too big for
Earth, upon the wing to take his flight into those Mansions above, as indeed it
proved.

After he had done his work in those Parts which he designed, he left Yorkshire
on May 1. 1677. but could reach that day but Ten Miles; the next morning he
went to Ratchdal; he was forcibly detained by the importunity of Christian
Friends, and preached there that evening, tho greatly to his prejudice as to
Health; the day following he reached Bolton; yet, says he, with great
difficulty and hard hewing, they got home on Friday night; and it would have
been great inconvenience to have staid one day longer, upon several necessary
accounts, which he mentions. Thus God carried him abroad in Mercy, and brought
him seasonably back to his own house in safety.

How much he was satisfied with this Journey (though his pains were extreme
several days after his return home), his Letter, May 14. 1677. does testify:
The great Mercy (says he) in my late Journey to you, comforts with you, and
safe return home (where we found all well), I hope I shall never forget: pray
help me to be thankful for them. -- I do heartily thank you for all your
Pulpit, Table, House, and Countrey-kindness, -- I am sorry and ashamed I made
no better improvement of them, not knowing that ever I shall enjoy such
opportunities again, of doing my self and others good in your parts; but an
indisposed Body and a bad heart, mar Duties and waste Mercies.

His distemper still continued and prevailed upon him all that Summer; in a
Letter dated September 20. 1677. he says: -- I am far from being well; and as
the Church once complained, she forgot prosperity; so I health, and am ready
sometimes to add (as She) my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord.
This day Five Weeks I came from the Exercise at Toxtoth-Park, where I had
preached twice, and oftener then I was well able a little before: Since that
day I never came on Horseback, nor preached but once near home; but all this
time God has been preaching to me with a terrible thundering Voice; Oh! that I
could hear the Rod, and who has appointed it! So sharp, and so long a fit of
Pain, I never had since this distemper begun. -- God alone knows what may be
the issue of it; but for my part, though I find it no easy matter to look death
in the face, and to conquer the difficulties that precede and attend it; yet I
have no great reason to love life, or to desire my long stay in this wicked
weary world; my pained days and wearisome nights, make thoughts of death and
grave less terrible, and apprehensions of Rest with Christ most welcome and
pleasant. But I feel natural inclinations working toward life, and to loving
themselves with the fair glass of doing God more and better Service in his
Church. I am best resolved, and most at Anchor, when I can (but oh! how seldom!
how coldly! do I) say, The Will of the Lord be done. Dear Brother, Pray for me,
(as I would do for my self) that to me to live may be Christ and to die gain.
Yesterday for some hours I was in extreme torment, but am much easier, I bless
God, to day; but my pain is not in the same manner as formerly, but liker an
Ulcer in the Bladder, which makes my disease more dangerous, as well as
painful, -- it is the Lord's mercy I am not utterly consumed, that I can sit
thus long to write to you, which many times, I cannot, but I am now weary with
it.

The last Letter (so far as I can find) was by him dated October. 23. 1677. which
I shall mostly transcribe:

My dear Brother, this evening I received yours, for which I thank you; it
breathes nothing but love and comfort to me; Oh! how sweet! how seasonable!
love in you, Oh! how tender! Especially I thank you for your prayers, and the
prayers of others by your means; I account them a precious treasure, and the
surest and speediest remedy in all troubles. Oh! pray again, who knows but that
may prevail when nothing else can! I have been sensibly better since that day
of your tears and groans. But who am I that any should be concerned for me? A
poor, weak, useless wretch, nothing, and less than nothing. I have been long,
in regard of work, in God's Vineyard, a withered branch, a dry stick, and now
my body is withered like the grass, my skin parched, my moisture dried up
through extremity of pain, which has continued nine or ten weeks, day and
night. About a Month ago, friends seeing death in my face and looks, they
prevailed with me to send for Dr. Grundy, who found me in a languishing
condition, yet not without some hope: He told me, my distemper was not the
Stone, nor Ulcer in the Bladder (which I feared because of my sharp pains and
soreness) but a Dysuria; my Blood was vitiated, my moisture sour, and there
wanted due separation of the Serum from the Blood; that it would require much
time and patience to bring the Body to a good state, etc. For since I have been
taking one sort or other of Physic; and am now taking a Diet-drink for the
Scurvey, which, I think, has done me most good, but still my pain continues,
though not altogether so acute, as at the first, but I have very weary restless
nights; many times I am constrained to get up and walk two or three hours, but
God supports, his word comforts in all, and over all, his ways are mercy and
truth, it is his mercy that I am not consumed; yea, it is mercy and faithfulness
that I am afflicted, I have reason to say I could not have been without; nay, I
would not have been without this trial for an earthly kingdom, if God please to
spare my life, and restore strength, I hope others will find that I have gained
considerably by this Sea-adventure, -- I am your indebted and endeared Brother,
N. Heywood.

His distempers growing thus upon him, gradually wore away and weakened his
body, and took out the pins and plucked down the stakes of his frail
tabernacle; he wore away insensibly, his friends seeing he had strength to
walk, did not apprehend his end so near, as indeed it proved On Thursday,
December. 13. 1677. they perceived him to alter, and grow something worse than he
had been, not so much in the violence of pain, as in the decay of Spirits, and
falling into drowziness and slumbering; that very day, he said, with tears
running down his face, that he could willingly die if it were the next hour, but
for the good of the Church, and his poor Wife and Children, and with them he
could be content to live, were it in Prison. That night being ready to go to
Bed, he sat down in his Chair, and looking up toward Heaven, moved his eyes
very much, his Wife asked him, How he did? but he could not answer, as she
supposed; but soon after he said he would go to Bed; being got to Bed, he fell
into the like Trance, and lay for a while speechless; being better, he looked
about him, and saw them weeping, and said, if you knew Christ better, this
carnal affection would cease, and natural would be sanctified, and run in a
spiritual channel: Oh! learn to know Christ more! for my own part, I have
preached Christ all my Life, and I bless God with good success: It Is common
with many nowadays to have base and low thoughts of Christ, and his imputed
righteousness, but if I had twenty lives to live, I would spend them all in
that work.

On Friday, a Kinsman that was come from London visited him, but he was so weak
and listless, that he was very unfit for converse; and indeed at the best he
was sparing in discourse; he used to speak little, but what he spoke was very
pithy, pertinent, and sententious.

On Saturday night, Mr. Starky, a Reverend and Godly Minister, visited him; he
asked him, Whether it was any trouble to him that he did not Conform? He
answered, No, it is a great comfort to me; this he spoke with much cheerfulness,
adding some more words to evidence his satisfaction in what he had done and
suffered: Mr. Starky asked him, What Promises he could now rely upon, or what
Scripture-passages supported him? He answered, For to me to live is Christ,
Phil. 1. 21.
and to die gain. Christ has loved me, and given himself for me. He Gal. 2. 20.
was frequently repeating those words, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, --.

About four hours before he died, being asked how he did? he answered, very
well. -- His last words that he was heard to utter, were, Come away, Lord,
come, come, -- and so he breathed out his blessed Soul; on the Lord's Day
morning, Dec. 6. 1677. about nine a Clock; so God made the day of his hard and
sore labor, the day of his entrance into his Eternal Rest.

And it is worthy observation, that God has drawn off many eminent Ministers,
and choice Christians from the stage of this World, near or upon that day: This
Holy day of heavenly Rest has commenced upon them the everlasting day of Rest
in Heaven. Christ's Resurrection-day has been their Ascension day: They parted
with this jarring Music on Earth, to be joined to that celestial Choire
above. This our Brother often made melody in his heart (though he was not very
tunable in his voice below;) now the high Praises of God are sounded by him,
and at the Great day Soul and Body shall make a melodious Consort in that
Blessed Harmony.

And now this Holy, Learned, Industrious Man of God is advanced above guilt,
corruption, temptation and persecution, pains of Body, fears of Spirit,
disturbances in God's Worship, Imprisonments, Confiscations, Banishments: Oh
what a blessed State have they above taken possession of! happy Souls, that are
safely lodged in the Arms of their Dear Redeemer! It were worth the while to
stand still and take a view of the Spirits made perfect Heb. 12. 23.
in the other World.

Let us only glance a little on their privative and positive Happiness from
Rev. 22. 3, 4, 5. 1. There shall be no more curse, [i. e. no more fruits of
God's displeasure upon man for Adam's sin, nor causeless Curse by men's unjust
Censures.] 2. But the throne of God, and the lamb shall be in it; [this is the
Beatifical Vision, that looks Souls out of sin and suffering, and who dare
presume to arrest the King's Favorites in his presence? 3. And his servants
shall serve him, [whether Devils or Men will or no, these blessed Attendants on
the King of Glory, shall never be interrupted in their cheerful Service.] 4.
And 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2.
they shall see his face; [i. e. they shall not behold him in a glass darkly,
as now they see God in Ordinances, but then face to face; yea, they shall see
him as he is, (which is a riddle to us here below) immediately, though not
comprehensively.] 5. And his name shall be in their foreheads; [i. e. They
shall openly profess whose they are, and to whom they belong, as distinguished
palpably from wicked men, and Hypocrites: They shall no more sculk in Corners,
or be thrust out of public Places, but shall openly avouch their Master.] 6
And there shall be no night there; [i. e. no works of darkness to lament, or
contest with; no Beasts of prey to creep forth and worry the Saints; no secret
Plots against them, no ignorance amongst Christian Societies to create
Differences, Jealousies and Animosities.] 7. They need no candle, neither light
of the sun; [no need of Ordinances, as here below they are used, and useful;
Preachers shall study or preach no more; People need not hear Sermons, neither
Preachers or People shall stand in need of Seals, the Substance is present,
Shadows flee away.] 8. The Lord God gives them light; [their enjoyment of God
is immediate, uninterrupted and satisfying; in his light they see light; as the
Object will be clearer to be seen, so their Eyes will be perfectly irradiated
to behold him] 9. And they shall reign for ever and ever; [though his Servants
shall serve him, yet it shall be no troublesome bondage or slavery, but a
liberty and dominion; they shall sit with Christ in his Throne as Assessors,
judge the World, and (it Rev. 3. 2.
may be) judge their Judges; approving the righteous Sentence of 1 Cor. 6. 2.
their Royal Master the Blessed Jesus, King of kings, and Lord of lords.] And
if all this be meant of some glorious state of the Church on Earth (as some
will needs have it) yet that is but a faint resemblance of this more happy State
in Heaven: And further, for the duration of it, it is added: 10. And they shall
reign for ever and ever; [Earthly Monarchs are but short-lived Kingdoms, have
their periods, but Kings are of less continuance; of Christ's Kingdom there is
no end, and his Subjects reign runs parallel with the Life of God, and Line of
Eternity.] Oh blessed Souls, oh happy Saints, that shall for ever be with the
Lord! And here we leave the Soul of our dear Brother, singing triumphantly the
Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, in the height of Zion; whilst we poor Mortals
are glad if we can sing but the Song of degrees.

As for the solemn interment of that Case and Cabinet, once the Receptacle, now
the Relict of that precious Pearl; it was judged meet that Solemnity should be
put off till Wednesday, Dec. 19. 1677. that distant Friends might have
seasonable notice; and that day Mr. Starky, a Nonconformist Minister, preached
an excellent Sermon in the Parish Church at Ormes-kirk (no man forbidding him;
nay all that were any way concerned, consenting) upon Col. 3. 4. When Christ,
who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.
There was a vast confluence of all sorts of people at his Funeral, great
lamentation, and many signal demonstrations of universal love and respect,
which he had from all the Country; his Body was laid in the Chancel, and
Burying-place, which belongs to the Ancient Family of Stanlies of Bickerstaff,
Knights and Baronets; it was with their free consent and desire. The Reverend
Minister that preached, after he had acutely, learnedly, and profitably handled
his Text, gave a short, but full Account of him, in his several Capacities, as
Minister, Husband, Father, Friend, and especially Godwards, as a Christian: And
as the Eccho's of the Hearers gave testimony to the truth of what was spoken,
so to their sad resentment of their irreparable loss. All the Town, in their
several Capacities, doing him honor in their peculiar way: Mr. Constable (the
chiefest Officer in the Town, of considerable Authority) carried the Staff
(like a Mace) before the Corpse, and the rest walked in their due and decent
order.

Now although this was insignificant to the Dead, and not edifying much to the
Living, yet decent Burials have always amongst civilized Nations been accounted
the duty of the Living, and an honor to the Dead: And there is a special
remembrance of this in Scripture; for it is said of Hezekiah, that all Judah,
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, did him honor at his death: On the contrary,
it is recorded 2 Chronicles. 32. 33.
as a perpetual Infamy of Jehoram (the bad Son of good Jehoshaphat 2 Chronicles. 21.
20.
) that he departed without being desired; and of another bad Son of a good
King, (Jehoiakin, the Son of Josiah) that they shall not lament for him,
saying, Ah my brother, -- but he shall be buried with Jer. 22. 18, 19.
the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem. But
this Good man honored God whilst living, and God honored him at his death;
and advanced his Soul to better, and Eternal Honor.

Mr. Heywood went to his Grave in peace, after all his tumultuous Tossings upon
the tempestuous Sea of this World; he dyed in the 44th year of his Age, and
about two Months above, having lived long in a little time; and I find several
choice men taken out of the world about that Age. So among the German Divines,
Strigelius dyed Vid. vit. in Metch. Ad.
44 years of Age, and 6 months; Flinschpach 44. Simlerus dyed in the 45th year;
so we find Erpenius dyed at 40 years of age; Mr. Robert Rollock dyed in the 43d
year of his age; the Famous Dr. Whitaker in his 47th. But to mention no more,
our Famous Mr. William Perkins lived but 44 years, being cut off by a violent
Fit of the Stone.

And indeed we have frequently observed, that laborious Ministers are
short-lived; some are of weak Constitutions, and spend their Lungs with
speaking; or by a sedentary life contract Diseases, or are fretted with the
untowardness of their people; or God in judgment takes them away as a
punishment to a wicked world: However, like a Candle they spend themselves to
give light to others. Many gracious young men are very zealous, and make have
with their Work, and get it quickly dispatched off their hands, and go to bed
betimes: And God is not willing to be without their company too long. Oh how
many brave promising Plants have been plucked up of late years, that were heavy
laden with choice Fruits; whilst some old withered Trees, barren and fruitless,
still stand cumbering the ground! But the Sovereign Jehovah knows what is
fittest, and does all things well.

A little while before Mr. Heywood dyed, he said to a Friend, I think this
turning out of our Licensed Places will cost Mr. Yates and me our Lives. Oh
this goes heavily! our casting out of our great Places was not so much as
casting us out of our little Places: And indeed Mr. Yates of Warrington dyed
shortly after.

Having thus nakedly given a brief account of Mr. Heywood's Birth, Life,
Employment and Death, and what is worthy a remark therein; I shall select some
few Characters of him, comfortable to, and imitable by his surviving Brethren,
Friends and Hearers; for the Memory of the Just is blessed; and possibly
Generations yet to come may reap benefit by what they find recorded of him. And
I dare appeal to the God of Truth, that searches hearts, that the description
I shall give of him is true, which I have by personal knowledge, or credible
Testimony.

1. As to his Proportion, Physiognomy, and Constitution, which is the Case,
Shell, and Outside, that was comely enough, no part lacking, crooked, or
deformed; tall, and straight, blackish curled Hair; not fat, nor very lean, yet
fatter in his Body than he seemed by his Face; of an healthful Constitution
mostly after he was past his Childhood; which might have continued long, had
not the Vessel been cracked by impetuous dashings, inflamed with the love of
God, and zeal for Souls, which haled the Carcass faster than Nature could keep
pace; and this over-driving took off the Chariot-wheels; for all agreed, that
his excessive pains laid the foundation of these Diseases, that at last wasted
his Spirits: He was an excellent Footman, and could walk both fast and far, and
in his last Distemper walked much, and found most ease therein; tho when he
went beyond his strength, it cost him dear. In his best health he was an
extraordinary Sweater, especially in his preaching; his sweat has dropped at his
Hair-ends, wet his Band all over; Letters wet in his Pocket through Linings, as
if put in water; and it may be that sweating was some advantage to him; but
when he could not take that pains to sweat, and thereby evaporate those acid
Humors, they might settle, and gather into those acute Diseases: Yet want of
leisurely cooling might prejudice him. Once old Mr. Woods and he preached an
Exercise in a Chapel in an hot Summer-day, the number of people was too many
to come within hearing; Mr. Haywood having preached first, Mr. Woods withdrew
the Army, or Assembly, from that strong-hold wherein they were coopt, into the
Champaign of a fair large Field, where that Excellent, Solid, Laborious Man of
God preached under a shady Tree; Mr. Haywood sitting in a Chair, got an extreme
Cold, which cost him dear afterward.

2. As to his natural Constitution and Disposition, he was naturally Choleric,
being of a sanguine Compexion; but such was the predominancy of Grace, that it
did very little appear in him, being regulated and rectified with that sweet
corrective of Gods Fear, which turned his natural Constitution into a Spiritual
Channel, and put a due by as into it, to move Godwards: He was much transported
in the affection of love, where Reason dictated a discovery of the loveliness
of the Object, both in Spirituals and Naturals. In his younger days he was
judged to be inclined to Melancholy, sitting sometimes silent, and poring upon
something; and so he was in his last Distemper: Yet at some times he was very
cheerful, and facetious, putting off harmless Jests with much advantage for his
own and his Friends diversion; and this, (with recreating himself with his
Children) was all the recreation that he used for many years. He was indeed
wonderful witty and ingenious, when he slacked the strings a little, and
applied himself that way, which was very rarely; his mind being ordinarily
intent upon more necessary business in his Study, or Soul concerns.

3. As to his Entrance into the Ministry, and his Judgment in Ecclesiastical
Points, he was (according to his Education) a strict Presbyterian, as they are
called, avoiding both the extremes of Prelatical Tyranny on the one hand, and
Congregational. Democracy on the other. Upon his first settling at Ormiskirk he
presently applied himself to the Ministers of that Class in that Division
where God had cast his Lot; and after probation and approbation of his
Ministerial Abilities, Learning, and fitness for that Place, consent of the
People expressed -- he was solemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, and
imposition of Hands, to the work of the Ministry, in a Public Congregation, to
the great satisfaction of all that were concerned. The Reverend grave Ministers
that laid hands on him, were Mr. Thomas Johnson, Parson of Halsal; Mr.
Thompson, Parson of Sefton; Mr. Edward Gee, Parson of Eccleston; Mr. Bell of
Highton; all Worthy, Eminent Men; and some others.

4. As to his Ministerial Labors, I shall add little to what has been said:
He willingly did spend, and was spent in the Service of his Lord and Master; he
prayed and wept, preached and sweat in public and private, in season and out
of season; he constantly preached twice a day, catechized, exhorting,
admonishing with all long-suffering: He was much in spending days in solemn
Fasting and Prayer with Christian Friends in his Parish, and elsewhere. He
loved and delighted in the Communion of Saints; so that those few Christians in
those parts lamentably bewail the loss of him as their Pastor and Leader, their
prompter to, and prop in those spiritual Exercises. His heart was set to do
good unto all, but his delight was in God's Children. He refused not to come
and visit the poorest and wickedest, that either sent for him, or that he
judged would make him welcome, or where he had any hopes of doing good. He was
diligent in visiting the sick, and took great pains with the ignorant,
procuring Catechisms for them that were willing to learn, instructing them, and
using ingenious artifices to bring them into a love of Religion, and engaging
young people to learn.

5. He was exceeding meek and patient, not only in bearing his bodily pains
with an invincible spirit; but enduring the affronts, reproaches, and various
indignities that were offered him, with an heroic cheerfulness; yea, he
gloried in them as the afflictions of Christ, notwithstanding all the
forementioned oppositions; yet his Spirit was so sweetly calmed, that none ever
heard him revile or speak evil of the Instruments, but many have heard him pity
and pray for them; it is true, his Spirit was sometimes so disturbed, that he
would dream of them, and mention them in his sleep; but still he bore a
compassionate heart toward them, and would often bewail their condition;
though some of the Townsmen, and others, thought some Prosecutions were
malicious and unreasonable, not fit to be named; yet he freely forgave all, as
an offense against himself, and affectionately prayed for their repentance and
pardon of their sin against God; often saying, If this or that be the worst they
can do, we shall shift well enough: He had in some considerable degree, learned
that hard lesson our Lord teaches, Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. This, this, is a great
height of true Christianity, to do good, and hear evil, bear our Cross, and
follow Christ with patience and self-denial.

6. He was very faithful to his Friends, and looked upon the bond of friendship
as sacred, and not to be violated, whether in the business of counselling, and
keeping secrets, or preserving, and performing the trust reposed in him, and
this was not small, nor from persons inconsiderable, and this upon several
accounts, putting himself to much cost, many troubles, and some inconveniences,
rather than seem by negligence to falsify his word, or in any respect to fail
of his duty; as many instances might manifest. It was Conscience of his duty
Godwards, that awed his spirit in those cases wherein no mortal could detect or
punish him for neglect. He was mavelous obliging in his deportment; very
taking in his discourse, with such as he could be free with; instructing the
ignorant, indulging the impotent; by words or carriage manifesting his dislike
of sin, but encouraging any that discovered any sparks of true Piety, however
they might differ from him in some things; for he was of a Catholic Spirit.

7. He was very humble and self-denying, which was the brave ornament of all
his other graces and eminent qualifications; this indeed was his Masterpiece,
he had always very mean thoughts of himself, and his own undertakings,
disgusting others commendations of him; which indeed were to him instar
fulminis, like a thunderbolt, as that German Divine said of men's praises; yea,
he would even cover his face with shame, and modestly blush when any spoke well
of him; his maxim was rather to be, than seem good; not affecting triumphs (as
Pompey did) but approving his heart to God; being more pleased with God's
gracious acceptance, and the conscience of his own integrity, than affecting
the favor of great ones, or the applause of the vulgar; tho there was scare
any had such general approbation, or flocking after them; yet his Spirit was
not elated, or lifted up therewith: In him was verified that observation, That
honor is like a shadow, which being pursued, it flies away; and the more a man
flies from it, the more it follows him. He could never be persuaded to Print
any of his labors, though he was often solicited thereto; for he judged
nothing that he did worth exposing to public view; he so far disliked the
humor of ostentation, that he abstained from doing that which might have been
profitable to the Church. Though his Sermons were elaborate and acurate, yet
very pathetical, which he desired to be conveyed only to the ears and hearts of
his hearers: Yea, his modesty locked up his lips in company, unless he had a
just call to speak; and he spoke with great judgment, and as much humility and
submission to better judgments, but always with great advantage to his hearers.
He was mild in his censure, and spoke well of others mean and well-meaning
undertakings; he commended all that in any thing were praiseworthy, and envied
them not that honor that was due to them.

8. He was much and mighty in Prayer; he had an excellent gift in confessing
sin, petitioning for mercy, and thankfulness to God for mercies received. He
did with pat and proper Scripture-expressions, wrestle with God in Prayer: Oh!
how frequently and fervently did he pour out his Soul to the Lord with sighs
and groans, strong cries and tears! He had a large measure of the Spirit of
Adoption, and was usually large, and much enlarged in that duty, especially
upon extraordinary occasions; Though he had long used to go to God alone; yet
in his last sickness he was more abundant in Closet-Prayer: His Wife and
Children coming to him, have often found him upon his knees: And the Lord gave
in many signal impressions upon his Spirit, and remarkable returns of his
prayers. Many years ago, when his Wife was dangerously sick at Godley in
Yorkshire, nigh to death, he told her she must not die at that time; she
demanded of him, Why he thought so? He answered, because my heart is much
enlarged in prayer to beg for thy life; accordingly God raised her up at that
time. And he has often taken notice of the frame of his Spirit in prayer for
several sick persons; and has taken his measures from his straitness, or his
enlargedness, and it has often proved suitable to his presages.

9. He had a great measure of Faith, both as to Soul-concerns, and temporal
affairs. As to the former, God had helped in Soul-troubles to trust God in the
way of a promise, and at last buoyed up his Faith into a Plerophery or full
Assurance. As to the latter, he was trained up in the life of Faith many years;
a Wife, and nine small Children, being turned out of all, having nothing
beforehand, and knew not in an ordinary rational way, where his subsistence
must arise; this put his Faith hard to it: yet committing his all into God's
hands, he was strangely supplied, as if he had been fed by Ravens, or as Israel
in the Wilderness: O man! great was thy faith! O Lord! great was thy bounty!
It Is true, he was often afraid of discontent and murmuring; but plucked up his
spirit, saying to his Wife, Let us pray and wait on God, he never failed us
yet, come let us trust him; this he spoke with great alacrity; and he often took
notice, that at a pinch God sent in seasonable supply by unexpected means; help
came in so strangely, that he resolved to set down punctually what he received,
and of whom. He said once to a Friend, I cannot but wonder how God sends in
Money just as I need it, he drops it into my hand by Sixpences and Shillings
most seasonably; and the review of these experiments much strengthens my Faith,
and engages me to thankfulness: This course he had taken for above twelve
years, and advised his Friend to the same course. From his multiplied
experiments he gathered great encouragements; he often wondered at the
unaccountable provision God made for him and his.

10. He was of a loving, peaceable frame, much addicted to peace, both in
Sacreds and Civils: He was not willing to fall out with any, and it was strange
if any fell out with him, for he gave not any just occasion at any time.
Testimonies and instances might be produced wherein he complied to the utmost
extent of what he judged lawful, to avoid giving any offense, and sometimes
receded from his right, for peace sake. It is true he was a man of contention,
as the Prophet Jeremiah was, but it was his grief, and made him cry, Woe is me!
and besides, it was rather passively than actively that he was so; men
contended with him, rather than he with them, and it was in the matters of his
God and Conscience; and he was resolved rather to obey and please God than men:
In this he was as a sturdy Oak, in other matters a bending Ozier. If any time
he was angry at others, yet anger did not ferment into malice, or long rest in
his bosom; he sought reconciliation with them; and if any had taken offense at
him, he sought to win them by loving means and methods of kindness; yea, he was
not only a peace-keeper, but a peacemaker to his power, reconciling Neighbors
that were at distance; not by sitting with them in the Alehouse (as the manner
of some is) but by Christian Advice, Counsel, Prayers, healing differences in
God's way. He preached an excellent Sermon upon mutual Love from Ephesians. 5. 2.
an excellent duty from an excellent pattern, excellently managed, discovering a
savoury spirit, full of gentleness, sobriety, moderation; he sought to calm
men's minds, and lay the wind of passion, that the word might take place; for
the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace. James 3.
18.

11. But tho he was of a peaceable spirit to condescend to any thing lawful for
peace sake, yet not so facile, flexible, and wire-drawn as to recede an hairs
breadth from truth, or well fixed principles; he was [Magnes and Adamas] an
attractive Loadstone, yet an inflectible Adamant in the cause of God. He well
understood his own latitude, and as he would not groundlessly withdraw by
wanton curiosity, so he would not be led aside into sin to please a friend, or
prostitute his Conscience to men's fancy: Others might perhaps judge it a
needless preciseness, perverseness, or obstinacy; but he could not turn his
sails to their wind, or dance after their pipes, though he had manifold
temptations on all hands from great and small; but he was of blessed Paul's
mind and practice, Gal. 2. 5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for
an hour; that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you. And if he died
not a Martyr for, yet a Confessor of, and Witness to, the truths that concern
Christ's Kingly Office over his Church, to appoint what Laws, Orders, Officers,
Ordinances, he pleases, as one of his last Sermons abundantly does
demonstrate: He was Faithful unto death, and now receives a Crown life. It
might be said of this man of God, as was said of Erasmus Sarcerius, [Lucebat in
hoc viro Melch Ad. Vit. Sarc. p. 326.
commemorabilis gravitas and constantia, non minas, non exilia, non ullam
ullius hominis potentiam aut vim pertimescebat: Pene dixerim, solemn facilius de
cursa dimoveri potuisse, quam Erasmum a veritatis professione].

12. He made great proficiency daily both in Learning, Grace, and Holiness;
having laid a low foundation, he built a stately visible superstructure: It
might be said of him, as the Apostle of the Thessalonians, That his faith did
grow exceeding, 2 These. 1. 3.
and his love to christians abounded. The Pearl grew too big for the shell; his
head soared above the Clouds, and his heart mounted Heavenwards. And as he grew
in Faith, Love, Meekness, Zeal for God, Endearedness to Souls; so above all, in
Humility, Self-denial, and Contempt of the World; as he traveled up and down
to do good, so he traveled in birth over poor necessitous sinners. Possibly
some may think Mr. Heywood took too much upon him, and was too sedulous in his
indefatigable pains, both in the face of danger, and to the hazard of his
health; but as to the one, Calvin's Apology was his, [Would you have me found
idle when my Lord comes?] As to the former, his Answer and Actings were
justifiable by a like instance in the life of Olevian, who asked them, Whether
he must suspend, or supercede his Preaching at that time for fear of danger?
Or, Whether they desired to hear him as formerly? The People all with hands
lifted up, and loud voices cried out [Imo hoc, imo hoc, and per Deum Melch Ad.
Vit. Olev. p. 600.
te oramus, ut pergas concionari] We beseech thee to Preach. Thus the
necessities and importunity of the People extorted work from this poor man; His
heart was upon it, and being engaged, he regarded not any carnal arguments from
flesh and blood, or self-preservation. The last Sermon he preached at a Friends
house in the Parish, was as a Swan-like Song, pithy, and sententious, ardent
and affectionate; that as before he exceeded others, so then he exceeded
himself; as if he knew before hand that it was the last. Thus his last was more
than his first; and the nearer the center, the quicker was his motion: He was
so full of matter, as if he were at a loss for time to do the remainder of his
work in, that he might dispatch it all and be at Rest.

13. He was very Charitable to the Poor, and such as were in real Necessity.
And though his small Revenue, and constant Charge, did somewhat bind his hands,
yet could not restrain his Spirit; he drew out his Soul to the Hungry. And
indeed 2 Cor. 8. 12.
true Charity is seated rather in a large heart than liberal hand; the Imprimis
of a willing mind finds acceptance, when the Items of Alms run but shallow. And
to his power, v. 3.
many will bear him record; yea, beyond his power he was willing; freely
welcoming objects of pity, stirring up his hearers to free Contributions,
especially in the behalf of Godly Poor, whereby the bowels of many were
refreshed by this Brother. And hence it was that he that sowed 2 Cor. 9. 6.
bountifully, did then (and much more does now) reap bountifully; For the
liberal soul shall be Prove. 11. 25.
made fat; and he that waters, shall be watered also himself.

14. He was a great admirer, and a profound Preacher of the glorious
Gospel-design, especially in the giving of Christ. And indeed this he made his
[(...)] the main scope of all his preaching. It Is true, he did often preach Law
and Terror to awaken men's Consciences, and drive them out of themselves to
Christ. He did often press duty in a circumspect, exact, and holy walking; and
urged a spiritual, and diligent worshipping of God: But still demonstrating,
that Christ is the end of the Law Romans 10. 4.
for righteousness to every one that believes. It was his proper genius, and
most suitable to his Evangelical Spirit to know and preach nothing but a
crucified and glorified Redeemer. He much enlarged himself 1 Cor. 2. 2.
upon the Gospel-way of the justification of a Sinner, by the imputation of
Christ's perfect Righteousness by faith: His working thoughts run still upon
this Theme, sleeping and waking; so that once (many years ago) he was heard in
his Dream to say [there are vast heaps of Free-grace]: His heart was greatly
enamored with the love of God in sending Christ; as appeared to the content,
profit, and wonder of many, by a Sermon he preached the same year he died upon
Romans 5. 8. This was the proper Element in which he moved: And few dived that
depth into that Ephesians. 3. 19.
unfathomable Ocean of this Love that passes knowledge, as he did.

15. He was a zealous Defender of Truth, and Impugner of Errors; he did
strenuously contend for the Jude 3.
faith once delivered to the saints: He much delighted in the form of wholesome
words, and loved not new-coin'd phrases, which are apt to amuse men's minds, and
instill into them poisonous Principles: He loved and used sound speech that
cannot be condemned, as well as sound and orthodox Truth; standing at an equal
distance from Arminians on one hand, and Antinomians on the other. He had a
strange sagacity in discerning Persons, Things and Doctrines, that swerved
from, or suited not the Scripture dialect. He kept close to the Analogy of
Faith; yet was not against proficiency, or a modest improvement of knowledge:
Yea, he had well studied the Arminian Controversy, and told some Friends, That
if the Lord should recover him, and lengthen out his Life, he had a design to
write something upon that Subject, which might, perhaps, have given further
light into that Controversy. For as his Genius led him that way, so he had the
advantage of many years intimate converse with that Ancient and Learned Divine
Mr. Tho. Johnson, Parson of Halsall, a man of vast Parts, and unwearied
Studies, and a non such Person in those points; but told Mr. Heywood (his
intimate Friend) that it much repented him, that he had spent so much time in
reading Books, and studying Controversies, that might have been more profitably
improved in conversing with, and instructing his ignorant and carnal
Neighbors. Let Ministers think of this, for one Soul won to God by personal
Conference, will tend more to God's Glory, and a Minister's Comfort, than a
thousand Notions got by reading: Howbeit, a due mixture of a contemplative, and
active Life, must needs be the best.

16. He was good in his Relative Condition. He was an obedient Child, an
exceeding kind Husband, an indulgent tenderhearted Father, an affectionate
Master, a faithful Friend: He maintained a Paternal awe, authority, gravity,
mixed with Fatherly Bowels of gentleness and lenity, and both with incredible
prudence, that they had not occasion either to slight him, or be discouraged by
him. He instructed them with faithfulness; admonished them with tenderness;
prayed for them with faith and fervency, and walked before them with an holy
exemplariness and sincerity. As God had made him a Nathanael, Godwards; so a
Joshuah, resolving that Josh. 24. 15.
he and his house should serve the Lord. It Is a true Maxim, That he who is not
relatively good, is not really good: But he stood square for every Duty in
every Relation: He kept his Children much at home, being very jealous lest they
should meet with temptations abroad, which occasioned many Cares and Prayers
about their disposal.

17. He had attained to a considerable measure of Assurance: Tho Isa. 50. 10.
he had walked in darkness, and saw no light in his first Convictions; yet
staying himself on the Lord, his God at last shined upon his Soul with the
light of his countenance, and he walked many days with the Candle of God
shining upon his head through much darkness. How Job 29. 3.
frequently in Prayer did he express his joy and gratitude for the everlasting
consolation and good hopes through grace of his own salvation! But the
infinitely wise God, after many sweet days he had enjoyed, thought fit to
withdraw his wonted Incomes, and left him under some doubts and
dissatisfaction. For about two months before he died, one Lord's day, as he and
his Family sat together, he told his Wife with tears in his eyes, that he had
great troubles concerning his Spiritual State, and some doubts about his
Condition, desiring her to pray for him: Yet the Lord dispelled those dark
Clouds, and in due time did sweetly shine into his Soul with the sense of his
Love. Thus God is a free Agent, and does not always intail comfort upon
sincerity; but sometimes the best of God's Children suffer Eclipses; but such
sad days tend to self-searching and deeper humiliation; and such shakings tend
to better settlement: Yea such discouragements are often attended with more
enlargement; such blots in a Christian's Evidences produce more clearing them
up: However, God hereby has more glory, and Heaven will be sweeter.

18. He had a strong persuasion of God's care of his numerous Family, both in
point of Education and Provision. As God had graciously looked after them in his
lifetime, so he had conceived great hopes of their supply after his decease.
It Is true, he had some temptations, and sad thoughts of heart concerning them;
but at last Faith got the victory over Unbelief, and having left his sad Widow
with her better Husband, and his fatherless Children with their heavenly
Father, he was quiet, and these thoughts did not hinder his hearty welcome of
his dearest Lord, when he summoned him by death. And therefore after he had by
faith and prayer devolved the care of them upon the Lord, he freely acquiesced
in his good Providence about himself and them. On Tuesday before he died,
getting into his Bed, his Wind being very short, his Wife broke out into sore
weeping; to whom he said, Be not troubled, God will provide necessaries for
thee and thy Posterity for ever: Which brings to mind the passage of Bucer, who
dying, stretched out three Fingers, with his eyes lift up to Heaven, saying,
[Ille, ille regit and moderatur omnia;] He, he alone, rules and governs all
things: And the Event has abundantly answered this good man's Prediction, and
Expectation.

19. It is very considerable that he had his desire in a leisurely lingering
death: He had often expressed his willingness (if that were God's will) that
death might come on gradually, and not surprise him; yea he prayed that he
might be long in his sickness, and also that he might be sensible till the
last; the Lord did condescend to him in both these: He had been long habitually
prepared, but he desired to be actually ready: For it is an important concern
to dye, and go into another world, a world of Spirits. This good man had
frequent warnings, and continued strong in his Intellectuals all the time of
his illness. Upon Friday night his Brother-in-law coming to him, asked him if
he had made his Will; he answered, no; he desired to have his Son Nathanael at
home, when he did that: But he perceiving that he was weakening apace, and that
his time would not be long, being urged again, he willingly consented, and sent
for a Clerk, and dispatched that worldly concern that night; then he was in
perfect composedness of mind, being but one night besides that till his death.

20. As he was highly qualified with Personal Disposition, Christian Graces,
and Ministerial Abilities, so God gave him favor in the sight of all with whom
he conversed: It Is true, he had Adversaries, but it was for the matters of his
God, wherein his Principles carried him to practices different from them; yet
even those commended him for his Parts and Preaching: Yea at death, some that
had been bitter Enemies to him, were well reconciled to him. One instance was
very remarkable; one Mr. Brownlow, an old Gentleman that lived in the Town, who
had conceived a bitter grudge against Mr. Heywood, after King Charles's Return,
because he would not read the Common Prayer; but upon his Deathbed he sent for
Mr. Heywood, entreated him to go to prayer with him; and when Mr. A. the Vicar
would have come to read Common Prayer, he would not suffer him; but would not
part with Mr. Heywood while he lived.

Thus I have given a brief Narrative of what was memorable in this holy man of
God, and imitable by us: I may say to every one, Go thou and do likewise. Let
Christians pray that God would send forth many such Laborers into his Harvest,
succeed their Labors, and learn to improve such Soul-helps, that they may give
a good account of these rich Talents at last.

A Letter sent by Mr. Nathanael Heywood to a Christian Friend, upon the death
of his godly Wife, May 1. 1675.
Dear Friend,
I Received yours of Jan. 30. long since, and had answered it much sooner, but
that I had some purposes, and was not without hopes, of doing it, not by
writing, but by coming to you at your appointed time in March last; but being
prevented of that, and now having such pains of body, through my old distemper,
as makes me very incapable of riding far, that I am not certain to see you this
Summer, though I intend and shall endeavor it; I can forbear writing no
longer, nor further delay that which I account my duty, till I come over, I
give you hearty thanks for your loving and godly Letter; whereby I was much
refreshed in those my late troubles, which indeed were many and heavy; yet in
such a Cause, and for such a Master, did I suffer, that I must needs say they
were light and easy: Oh! that God may have the glory, and others be encouraged!
As sufferings for Christ did abound, so consolations abounded by Christ. Let
the world know that suffering for Christ is the very Element wherein Christ's
Love lives and exercises it self, and his choicest Cordials are reserved for
such a time. I was in great measure a stranger to the comforts and sweetness of
Christianity, till I was singled out to bear the Cross; but am now well
satisfied that that which I suffered for, and still do suffer, is Christ's
Truth; because he was pleased to seal my sufferings with the sweet sense, and
experience of unspeakable joy and peace; and I know he will not put his seal to
a blank-paper, nor will he be a witness to a lie. Had not some great Persons
interposed by their Interest and Authority, I had certainly gone to Prison at
that time, when I was taken by Soldiers; and at the Sessions shortly after, had
not God raised up other Friends (some of them Justices) to frustrate the
purpose and design of my cruel Enemies, who would have sent me Six Months to
Prison the Sessions before, for living within Five Miles of this Town; yea,
would have Convicted me among Recusants for not coming to this Church; but it
pleased God, by a special Providence, to prevent that also. But alas! all these
troubles are nothing to that I am now Mourning under, the loss of public
Liberty; a closed Mouth, dumb and silent Sabbaths; to be cast out of the
Vineyard as a dry and withered Branch, and to be laid aside as a broken Vessel,
in whom there is no pleasure, is a sore burden, I know not how to bear; my
heart bleeds under it, as a sting and edge added to my other troubles and
afflictions. This exercise of my Ministry, next to Christ, is dearer to me than
any thing in the world: It was my Heaven, till I come home, even to spend this
life in gathering Souls to Christ: But I must lay even that down at Christ's
feet, and be dumb and silent before the Lord, because he has done it, who can
do no wrong, and whose judgments are past finding out: I am sure I have reason
to conclude with the Prophet, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because
I have sinned against him.

Dear Brother;

I hear that it has pleased God to remove from you the desire of your eyes,
and my dear Friend: I am heartily sorry for that sore breach in your Family,
and desire to suffer with you in the loss of your loving and good Wife, now
gone before (according to the method and order he has appointed, whose
Understanding is infinite) whither you are shortly to follow: He that made
yesterday to go before this day, and the former Generation in birth and life to
have been before this Generation, and has made some Flowers grow, so to die
and wither in May, and others in June, cannot be challenged in the order he
observes with us, that one must bury another. You know who said, I was dumb and
opened not my mouth, because thou, Lord, did it. All things are Ordered in
Wisdom and Judgment by your Father; at whose feet your own Soul and your Heaven
lies, and so the days of your Wife. You had her as long as your Lease lasted,
and seeing her Term was come, and your Lease run out, you can no more justly
quarrel with the great Sovereign for taking his own at his just Term-day, than
a poor Farmer can complain that his Master takes a portion of his own Land to
himself when his Lease is expired: And is not he an ill debtor who pays that
which he has borrowed with a grudg? Certainly the long loan of such a good
Wife, an Heir of Grace, and Member of Christ (as I verily believe) deserves
more thanks, at the Creditors hands, than that you should grieve and murmur
when he craveth but his own. I believe you would judge them to be but
unthankful Neighbors who would pay you a sum of Money after this manner. I
know you would be sorry either to be, or to be esteemed any thing like an
Atheist; and yet not I, but the Apostle (1 These. 4. 13.) thinks those to be
hopeless Atheists, who Mourn excessively for the Dead. But this is not a
challenge on my part; some jealousy I have, lest you be overmuch grieved for
the loss of such a meet-Help; but you have reason to rejoice, that when a part
of you is on Earth, another part of you is Glorified in Heaven, sleeping in the
Bosom of the Almighty: Fellow her, but envy her not. For indeed it is self-love
in us that makes us Mourn for them that die in the Lord; because for them we
cannot Mourn, since they are never happy till they be dead, therefore we Mourn
for our own private respect. Take heed then, that in pretending your affection
in Mourning for your Wife, you act out of self-affection; consider what the
Lord is doing in it; she is plucked out of the fire, and rests from her
Labors; and the Lord in that is trying you, and casting you into the fire,
beholding your Faith and Patience, and delighting to see you in the burning
Bush and not consumed; but sending Satan away frustrate of his design. The Lord
is laying in the two scales of the Balance, your making Conscience of
Submission to his Gracious Will; and in the other, your affection to your Wife:
Which of the two will you then choose to satisfy? I wish you may come out of the
Lord's School wiser and more experienced in the ways of God. It Is our happiness
that when Christ opens a Vein, he takes nothing but ill Blood from his sick
Patients; and when he puts them into the furnace of Affliction (and stands by
the melting of the Metal) he takes away the tin and lead, and scum that
remained in nature. But it is a sad thing when the rod is cursed, that never
fruit shall grow on it; and except Christ's dew fall down his Summer Sunshine,
and his Grace follow Afflictions, to make them to bring forth fruit unto God,
they are so bewithered to us, that our evil ground (rank and fat enough for
Briars) casts up a crop of noisome Weeds. I am persuaded your Losses, Cares,
Sicknesses, etc. are but Summer-showres that will wet your Garments for an hour
or two, and the Sun of the New Jerusalem shall quickly dry your wet Coat,
especially since the rain of affliction cannot stain the Image of God, nor
cause Grace to cast it is Color. Oh! learn heavenly Wisdom, Self-denial, and
Mortification, by this sad loss. I know it is not for nothing (except you deny
God to be Wise in all that he does) that you have lost one in the Earth: It may
be there has been too little of your heart and love in Heaven; and therefore
the jealousy of Christ has done this; it is a mercy that he contendeth with
you, and your Lovers; it may be he has either been out of his place, or in a
place inferior to his worth. O let Christ have the room of your Wife; she has
now no need of you, or your Love; she enjoys as much of the love of Christ,
as her heart can be capable of. I know it is a dear bought experience to teach
you to undervalue the Creature; yet it is not too dear if Christ think so. Let
me entreat you to consider one thing more (which has helped me in such like
cases more than once) and I have done: You are hasting after your Wife, and
shall shortly be with her; it is but a little while, a few days longer, and you
must follow her into Eternity. By her Death take occasion to love the world
less, out of which she is taken, and Heaven more, whither she is gone before
you, and where you shall for ever enjoy her, and be with Christ, which is best
of all. If the place she has left were any other but a prison of Sin, and the
home she is gone to were any other but a Palace of Glory, your Grief would be
the more rational. But, I hope, your Faith of the Resurrection of the dead in
Christ to Glory and Immortality, will lead you to dry up your Tears, and
suspend your longing for her, till the Morning of that Day, when the Archangel
shall descend with a shout to gather all his Prisoners out of their Graves up
to himself in Heaven. -- Dear love to, and fervent prayers for you and your
Children. I am,

Your most Affectionate and Sympathysing Friend, Nath. Heywood.

FINIS.

