THE CRY OF Royal Innocent Blood, Heard and Answered: Being a True and
Impartial Account of Gods extraordinary and Signal Judgments upon REGICIDES.

With an Historical Relation of the Deposing, Murdering, and Assasinating of
several Kings of England, Scotland, France, etc. for near 600 years last past.
With the Plots, Conspiracies, Means and Methods that were used to compass their
destruction.

As likewise Gods signal Vengeance immediately succeeding such Tragedies, upon
the Nations in which they were suffered to be perpetrated, as Famine, War,
Pestilence, Murraine of Cattle, Fires, Earthquakes, and Inundations.

Worthy the perusal of all, and may serve as an Antidote against Faction and
Rebellion.

Touch not my Anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm,

Psalm. 105.15. Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for Daniel Brown at the Black-Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, and Tho. Benskin in St. Brides Churchyard Fleet Street, 1683.

K Edmund the 30 Mon of the Enalishmen Assasianated.

K^ Edward ye II. Deposed and Murdered

K^ Richard ye II. Deposed and Murtherd.

K^ Henry ye VI. Deposed and Murdered

K Edward ye V. Murdered.

K^ Henry ye III of Fra Assasianated

K Henry ye IIII of Fra Assasinated

Henry Stewart K of Scotland Murdered

K^ Charles ye I. Martyred

Printed for Dan Brown and Tho. Benskin 1683



TO THE READER.
REader, what ever thou art, consider well this Treatise, in which as in a
Mirror, you may behold the Machivilian Policies of Wicked and desperate Men,
formed to bring about their Diabolical purposes, and at the same time observe
how the unerring hand of Divine Vengeance has overwhelmed them with swift
destruction; for what greater Affront can be offered the Almighty, then with
Sacralegious Hands to shed the Blood of his Anointed, even those whom himself
has Chosen from amongst all the Sons of Men, to bear his Sacred Character, and
Govern as his Vicegerents upon Earth, on whom he has doubly Stamped his
blessed Idea, and has declared that by him they Reign, and Honored them with
Titles above the ordinary rank of Men, viz. I have said ye are Gods, etc. as
indeed they are Gods upon Earth, to Execute Justice upon the Wicked, and
Cherrish the Virtuous, against whom the wise Man says there is (that is, there
ought to be) no rising up, and that we ought not to speak Evil of them, no not
in our Hearts, yet such have been the Hellish Engines raised by the Prince of
Darkness, that (not regarding their Allegiance to the King of Kings, nor his
Vicegerents) contrary to all Oaths* and strictest Ties, have not feared to
perpetrate such Villainies as in their effects have made whole Kingdoms groan,
but added Guilt to Guilt, by making Religion the Cloak of their Horrid
Impieties, or at least the Reformation of the Kingdoms wherein their Villainies
were Acted, which (as they insinuated into the unthinking Plebeans) must of
necessity be effected, or that all things would sink into inevitable Ruin, when
at the same time, these Instruments of Satan, were brooding more miseries and
dire Calamities then Pandoras-Box contained, Plagues to Afflict Mankind, and
turn all things into Confusion, though for the most part the Pit that they
dug for others, themselves have fallen into, for it has been observed, how
crafty so ever the Regicides of all Ages have been to bring about their amazing
Impieties, yet none of them sooner or later have escaped the Hand of Divine
Vengeance, either in some Signal and Exemplary Punishment, or by the wounds of
a torturing Conscience, even in this Life, as is at large discovered in this
Treatise, which contains the Tragedies of many good Kings of these latter Ages,
Deposed and Murdered by their Subjects (or rather Devils in the Shapes of Men)
especially such Kings of England, as have come to untimely Ends by such means,
for Six Hundred Years past; together with Compendious Histories of their Lives
and Reigns, and the Calamities that thereupon have befallen this and other
Nations; Worthy the perusal of all Persons, and may serve as a terrible
Memento, or Warning-Peice to those whose Consciences Start not (when either
Ambition or Profit is the Master) at the Horridest Impiety that Hell can
Dictate.

THE CRY OF ROYAL BLOOD Heard and Answered: OR, An Historical Account of the
Deposing, Murdering, etc. of several KINGS of England, etc. and of Gods severe
Vengeance on the Regicides.
AMongst the many Crimes that hasten Heavens vengeance on wretched miscreants,
there is none so vile in the sight of the Worlds Creator ( who is a God of
purer Eyes than to behold iniquity) than the loud Tongued Scarlet Crime of
shedding innocent Blood; a sin so heinous, that it seldom escapes Exemplary
punishment in this World, the better to deterr barbarous wretches from
violating the Persons, and bereeving of Life those on whom God has been pleased
to impress his Sacred Stamp, by Inspiring them with immortal Souls, and setting
before them a large prospect of Heaven and Eternal happiness; but more
immediately when Hell-born Villains dare Murder those on whom his Sacred Image
is doubly stamped, as Kings and Men, against whom they should not imagine evil,
no not in their hearts. But since History abounds with the relation of such
execrable Treasons, and villainous Assassinations, I shall make it the
subsequent discourse of this Treatise to lay open the nature and manner of
those amazing Tragedies, by what means and treasonable divices, the Regicides
of almost all Ages have accomplished their most pernicious Enterprises; and how
Heavens vengeance with a level aim, at first or last has hit them sure, and
brought them to destruction.

Passing over the Murders of Agamemnon, Darius, Alexander the Great, Hannibal,
Pompey, Caesar and diverse other Emperors, Kings and Princes, who fell by
treachery, and whose Blood was thoroughly revenged on the Murderers, even when
they supposed themselves the most secure, I shall proceed to more modern times,
and not exceeding 670. years past: And First, I shall begin with the Murder of
good King Edmund, Surnamed the Ironside, being the thirty third Monarch of the
Englishmen.

This King of the Saxon Line, succeeding his Father King Ethelred, was Crowned
at Kingstone upon Thames, by Livingus Archbishop of Canterbury, on the 16 of
April, Anno 1016. At what time the Pagan Danes, with bloody cruelties insested
this Island, destroying and burning all before them, without regard to either
Sex or Age. But such was the success of this valiant King, that he not only put
a stop to their proceedings, but gave them many fatal overthrows, and had past
all dispute forced them to have left the prey, the which so long with bloody
hands so eagerly they grasped, had it not been for the prodigious Treasons of
the Monster Edrick, a Person who by this Kings means, during the Reign of his
Father, though ill deserving such a Title, had been created a Duke, and was now
General of King Edmund's Army, and by the power of such a trust, sought by all
means the downfall of his Lord, which to his Eternal Infamy he at last effected,
as shall hereafter be related.

Long time had this treacherous Duke sought opportunity to bring the good King
to destruction, but success so waited on his Arms, that for a long time no
advantage could be proposed; for had he done it whilst the Danes were weak, his
hopes had been frustrated: Yet growing impatient of delay, he resolved to make
some attempt to bring about his wicked purpose. And therefore a fierce Battle
being begun between the English and Danes at Sherostan in Worcestershire,
which continued bloody and doubtful for two days; but in end the Danes
beginning to shrink, Edrick presently cut off the Head of one of his own
Soldiers, named Osmearus; like the King in Hair, shape of his Beard and
Countenance, held it upon his bloody Sword, still gasping, and cried to the
English Host, fly wretches, fly, get you away for your King is slain, behold
his Head, therefore seek now to save your own Lives.

The fight so daunted the courage of the English, who entirely loved their
King, that the Battle began to swerve, and wanted but little of plain flight,
which had certainly been, had not King Edmund understood the cause, and
instantly from a high place showed himself to his Soldiers, with many words of
encouragement stayed them in their Ranks, and by entering amongst the rest of
the Squadrons, given them new vigor, so that plainly perceiving the treachery,
they bent their Bows against the Traitor, and had dispatched him, had he not
sunk into the Rear: Yet they turned their fury upon the Danes and made great
slaughter, even till the Field was colored with Blood, continuing the Fight
till Night parted them. At what time the treacherous Duke came to the Kings
Tent, and after much seeming submission, excused his Treason, by alleging he
was mistaken in the Countenance of the Man, and thirsting to save English
Blood, advised them to shift for themselves: As for the former part of the
excuse, it is not doubted but he spoke true; for that day the King was disguised
in the Battle, and this wretch who sought his destruction, might in the hurry
take Osmearus for him, and for that cause slew him. But such was the goodness
of the King, that his dissimulation gained belief, and he was again received
into favor, though contrary to the mind of the Kings Council, who would have
had him banished, and well had it been for King Edmund, had their advice been
taken; for a treacherous friend is more dangerous than an open Enemy.

This stratagem failing, the Danes raised their Camp in the dead of Night, and
Marched with all speed toward London, which City continued Loyal to King
Edmund during his Life.

The King the next Morning having notice of the Danes departure followed with
all his Host to prevent the spoil, and by his swift Marches, so terrified the
Danes, that they altered the purpose they had to besiege the City, and the King
entered it in Triumph. And two days after having refreshed his Army, resolved
to follow his advantage, and thereupon Marching to Branford, where the Danes
were Encamped, he gave them a great overthrow; which Edrick perceiving, and
fearing the Danes would be forced to leave the Land, he advised King Edmund to
make a truce with them, using so many Arguments that he prevailed with the
King, even when he had them all at his Mercy, and therefore leaving London, he
retired into the West.

The Danes no sooner perceived themselves free from danger, but they fell to
plundering and burning as fearfully as ever, which caused the King again to
advance, and entering Kent with his Army, near unto Oateford, he gave them
Battle, which continued doubtful and bloody for the space of four hours. When
the Danes Vauntgard giving back, their Horse upon the Right advanced, yet fell
soon into disorder, and retiring amongst the Foot put them to the rout, so that
they were slain on all hands, leaving above four thousand dead on the place;
when of the English there died not above six hundred, and here had not the
Traitor Edrick stopped the English in pursuit of their Enemy, by laying before
them the danger of an Ambush, the Danes had never more been able to have made
Head. But by this means they had leisure to pass into Essex, and send for
recruits from beyond the Seas, and then began to tyrannize as much as ever,
which caused King Edmund to enter Essex with his Army flushed with many
Victories, and at Ashdon three Miles from Saffron-Walden, gave them Battle,
which was fiercely maintained on either side for many hours, till in the end
the Danes began to recoil, which Edrick perceiving, drew off his Party, and
fell to the Enemy, by which means they became Victorious: So that there died of
the English Nobility, Dukes, Alfred, Godwin, Athelword, Athelwin, and Earl
Urchin, together with Cadnoth Bishop of London, and Woolsey Abbot of Ramsey,
with many other of the Clergy that were come thither to pray for the success of
the Army against the Pagan Danes, the remembrance of which overthrow is
retained unto this day.

King Edmund thus betrayed was forced to retire from the Field on foot, and
with the remainder of his Army marched to Gloucester, whereupon London submitted
to the Conquerors, as likewise did all the places of strength adjacent. Yet
such was the love of the English to their King, that they from all parts
resorted to him, and earnest to regain the late dishonor, though at the utmost
hazard, soon recruited his Army, and came on to meet the Danes, who swelled
with success were advancing Northward and at Dearburs near unto the River
Severn met, where both Armies were set in Battle Array; when just as the bloody
blast was about to be sounded, A Captain stepped between the Hosts, and desired
to be heard, which being granted, he thus began.

Many Battles (said he) have been fought, and many streams of Blood already
shed for the Sovereignty of this Land between these two valiant Nations, and
the courage of the Generals, Captains and Soldiers sufficiently tried, wherein
Fortune her self seems to have been Conquered; for if at any time a Battle
was won, it was not long kept, neither the Conquered so weakened, but that he
retained both Courage and power to turn the Scale. What is the mark then you
aim at? Is it honor and fame? Titles indeed that attend on War; but seldom
long enjoyed, or rarely fall to the lot of the common Soldiers, at the price of
whose Blood they are for the most part purchased. Let him therefore that would
wear the Crown hazard himself to avoid the slaughter of many men, and by single
Combat try who is most worthy to Command, and who to Obey, or divide betwixt
them the Kingdom, which is large enough to maintain two, having heretofore
maintained seven Reigning Kings.

This Proposal was embraced by King Edmund as the best expedient to put an end
to a hazardous and doubtful War; as likewise by Canute King of the Danes, who
by mutual consent went into an Island called Alney, standing in the Severn,
adjoining unto the City of Gloucester, where both being strong of body they
fought like Lions, one to secure his Kingdom, the other to gain it. But in the
end, the Dane being wounded, he entreated a parley, which Edmund granted, and
then with a loud voice thus proceeded;

What necessity should thus move us, most Heroic King, that for the obtaining
of a Title, we should thus endanger our Lives? Is it not better to lay malice
aside, and condescend to an amicable agreement? Let us now therefore become
sworn friends, and divide the Kingdom between us, and in such a League of
friendship, that each may use the others part as his own, so shall this Land be
peaceably Governed, and we mutually assist each others necessity.

This Speech ended, both the Kings cast down their Swords, and embraced each
other, upon which great shouts arose in either Army, who before stood doubtful
of the success, and this accord being ratified, the Kingdom was divided by Lot;
and that part bordering on the Coast of France fell to King Edmund, who
howsoever enjoyed it not long, for in this Treaty the offense of Duke Edrick
was included, and upon his submission he taken into favor by the good King,
and so continued as it were glutted with the favor and princely bounty of two
Kings, till at last resolving to perfect his many Treasons begun, he watched
his opportunity as King Edmund was alone in the Draught-house evacuating, and
having placed himself beneath, with a sharp Spear he run it up into the Kings
Belly, that he there died; then coming up, he traitorously and inhumanely cut
off his Head, and escaping with it undiscovered to Canute the Danish King, and
presenting it to him with these fawning Salutations: All Hail thou now sole
Monarch of England; for here behold the Head of thy Co-partner, which for thy
sake I have adventured to cut off.

Canute though ambitious enough of the Sovereignty, yet of Princely
disposition, abashed, and sore grieved at so unworthy and disloyal an attempt,
replied with an Oath, that in reward of that Service the bringers Head should
be advanced above all the Peers of his Kingdom; which high honor whilst the
traitorous wretch greedily expected (and indeed for a time found some favor)
his Head by the Kings command was smitten off, and fixed upon a Pole on the
highest Gate of the City of London, as he most justly deserved: His Wife and
Children were banished; and great was the rejoicing throughout England at the
Death of this prodigious Regicide, and betrayer of his Country.

King Edmunds Body was buried at Glasten-bury near to his Father King Edgar; he
was of person tall, for Courage hardy, strong of Limbs, and well could endure
the inconveniences of War; for which some think he had his additional name of
Ironside; with him at that time fell the Glory of the English, he leaving but
one Son, viz. Edward, who was Sir-named the Outlaw, by reason all the Reign of
Canute he lived in Hungary, and there Married the Queens Sister, not returning
into England till the Reign of his Uncle King Edward the Confessor.

Thus fell this good King, and thus Heavens vengeance overtook the Traitor,
whose miserable end in some sort made an atonement for the innocent Blood shed
by wicked hands; as likewise for the Death of Sigefreth and Morcar, King
Edmunds Queens former Husband and Brother, who were murdered at Oxford by the
contrivance of Edrick.

CHAP. II.
The Historical relation of the deposing and barbarous Murder of Edward the
Second, commonly called Edward of Carnarvan, King of England, Lord of Ireland
and Duke of Aquitaine, and the Forty eighth Monarch of England; with the manner
of Gods vengeance upon those that were guilty of shedding his Blood.

EDward the Second of that Name since the Conquest, was Son to Edward the
First, (the terror of Syria, and dread of Scotland) and his Wife Queen Elenor,
Born on the 25 of April, 1284. at Carnarvan in North Wales, and after the Death
of Lewellin ap Griffith; in regard of the place of his Nativity, he was with
the general consent of the Welsh created Prince of Wales, which Title has ever
since devolved upon the Heir apparent to the Crown of England: This Edward
being the first who had that Dignity conferred on him, and his Father dying, he
was Crowned with great applause in the 23. Year of his Age: Then having settled
the Affairs of Scotland, he passed over to Bulloin, and there in great state
was Married to Isabel Daughter to Philip the fair, King of France, and returned
with his Bride, not passing twelve years of Age in great Triumph, when as
taking into his Favor one Pierre Gaviston (whom his Father had banished, but
himself entirely loved;) many of the Nobility were displeased, though the King
made no great account of such their displeasure: This Gaviston was a stranger
by Birth, Born in Gascoigne; but a Gentleman in all respects, being in his
younger years brought up with the King, during his being Prince of Wales, and
now made Earl of Cornwel; yet so prevailed the Enviers of his rise, that they
procured a Decree for his perpetual Banishment out of England: But the Kings
love still following him, he was made Governor of Ireland, and within a while
revoaked; and in his return met by the King at Flint-Castle in North Wales; and
there had bestowed on him to Wife Joan of Acres Countess of Gloucester, the
Kings Sisters Daughter. Yet so far prevailed the discontented Lords, that a
third time they procured his banishment, but beyond the Seas his life being
often put in hazard by the procurement of his Enemies; as some suppose by the
Kings secret sending for he returned within six Months, to the great trouble of
the Queen and her party, who by this time began to disaffect her Husband, and
join with the Lords against Gaviston. Whereupon first seeming to Petition for a
redress of grievances, they after took up Arms, of which the Earls, Lancaster,
Warwick and Hereford were chief, and within a while the Earl of Warwick at a
place called Blacklow (afterward Gavenshead) having surprised Gavinston cut
off his Head, to the high displeasure of the King; who at that time was not
capable of hindering it, yet excessive was the grief and displeasure he
conceived; so that the Lords thought it not safe to lay down their Arms till
they had reconciled themselves to the King, which was done by the mediation of
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, and several Prelates who traveled therein. Yet not
so firm but the King continued a secret displeasure against the chief Actors,
but his melancholy was diverted by the Queens being delivered of her first Son
at Windsor, who succeeded him by the name of Edward the third, as shall
hereafter be related.

The Scots upon notice of this Intestine broil grew haughty, and under the
Command of Robert their King, not only put many affronts upon the English, who
so long before had Lorded it over that Nation, but made several Inroads into
the Northern parts, which caused King Edward to draw together a great Power,
composed as well of Foreign Nations as of English, and marched against them.
But several of the disaffected Lords, under pretense that the King had not
ratified the promised Liberties and Privileges, refused to assist him; so that
for want of good conduct, though the English exceeded the Scots in number, yet
coming to a Battle at Banocksbourn near Streveling, the English were overthrown
more by stratagem than plain force, for the Scots having dug pits, and set
up sharp stakes in them, covered them over with Earth and Hurdles; so that the
English Horse charging furiously, their weight broke the Hurdles, and there
goring on the stakes became useless, being in that manner killed on all sides
by Scottish Archers, who let fly at them as thick as Hail.

Upon this discomfiture, the King was resolved to die in the Field, and much
persuasions were used to induce him to save himself by retiring. In this Battle
fell the Earl of Gloucester, and the Lord Clifford, and about 700. Knights and
Esquires, and as Modes Accountans relates, 6000. common Soldiers, though the
Scotch Historian will have it 15000.

The King being retired to York, resolved to raise a new Army to revenge this
dishonor, but such was the perverseness of his Nobility that it came to
nothing; yet the Scots heightened with this success attempting to win Ireland
were overthrown, and Edward Brother to King Robert, who had caused himself to
be Crowned King slain.

And now the King having lost his Privado or second self, to whom he might open
the Cabinet of his thoughts, to supply the Room of Gavistone, began to settle
his affections on Hugh D' Spencer Lord Chamberlain, and so doated on him, as
likewise on his Son for his sake, that all things moved by their advice, which
more enraged the discontented Lords than the actions of Gavistone had done;
especially when they perceived two to spring up in the room of one. Yet so far
the Lords prevailed, that they procured their banishment; but not long, for the
Earl of Lancaster and the Lords of his Faction taking up Arms, the King was
resolved to maintain his Regal Authority, though with the loss of his Life: And
therefore marched against them, who now upon some distaste given, were deprived
of the Queens mediation, and thereupon commandment was given for the reversion
of the Sentence against the Spencers, which was performed at London by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and his Suffragan: And now the King having increased
his Power, followed hard upon the Lords, and caused Lancaster to draw off his
Army from Burton upon Trent, and march toward Burrowbridges, when in the way
several of the Lords of his Faction left him, and threw themselves upon the
Kings Mercy, amongst whom was the Traitor Mortimer.

Lancaster with his retinue being arrived at Burrow-Bridges, was there stopped
by Andrew D' Hackerly Captain of Carlisle, and Simon Ward Captain of York, who
had gathered great forces in those parts, and there after some parley, he and
the Lords of his Faction surrendered themselves: When three days after the King
came with all his Forces, and Erected a Court of Justice, where the Earl of
Lancaster, and most of the Lords and Barons that were taken being Sentenced as
Traitors, were shortly after Executed, besides a number of the meaner sort,
though contrary to the Kings own inclination, as many suppose by his afterward
bewailing the Death of his near Kinsman the Earl of Lancaster.

Things being at this pass, the Queen began to conceive high displeasure at the
proceedings of the Spencers, who had prevailed with the King to abridge her
allowance; whereupon she complained that she was rather kept as a waiting
Woman, than a Queen or Heir of France; and at that time Charles the Fifth King
of France seeking occasion of quarrel against the English, took this advantage,
and secretly dealt with the Queen to obtain leave to come to his Court, and to
bring with her Prince Edward her Son, which she effected, and at the same time
the Lord Mortimer having corrupted his Keepers, or as some will have it, by
giving them a sleepy Potion, got out of the Tower and fled into France: Where
upon the Queens arrival, he became of her Cabinet Council, and otherwise more
familiar than either became her honor, or his duty, as in place convenient
will appear.

These things happening, and great differences arising between the two Nations,
Queen Isabel taking the advantage, solicited her Husband that she might go over
to mediate and reconcile the business, which request of hers was seconded by
the Lord Spencer, who persuaded the King from going over to secure his
possessions in Normandy in person, upon no other account then that he was
afraid to stay behind him.

Upon this intercession of the Spencers, the King consents to the Queens
desire, and all things were prepared to transport her; where indeed upon her
arrival, she so sar prevailed with her Brother, that matters of debate ceased,
upon condition that King Edward should give to his Son the Duchy of Aquitaine,
and Earldom of Pontine, which was accorded to, and the Prince sent over to do
Homage to his Uncle for them, though to the utter undoing of the King his
Father; for now the Plot began, which in the end dispossessed him of his Crown
and Life, though colored under a pretense of ruining the Spencers; which
specious pretext drew many who would otherwise have been unwilling to have
^ngaged.

The Prince having paid his Homage to Charles D' Volois King of France, was
together with Queen Isabel, his Mother, sent for back, but the conspiracy not
yet having taken root, she made many trivial excuses to delay time, which
Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter, who attended on the Prince perceiving, and
having had some knowledge of the frequent Councils that were held, and seeing
the Kings Enemies in such favor with the Queen, amongst whom Mortimer was
chief, he as in duty bound, secretly returned and advertised the King of the
imminent danger; who thereupon solicited (though to no purpose) the King of
France to send over his Wife and Son. Whereupon he unadvisedly caused them to
be proclaimed Enemies to the Kingdom, and banished them with all their
adherents: Which discovery and Sentence of Banishment so nettled the Queen and
her Accomplices, that after some feigned submission, she resolved by open force
to enter the Land, and thereupon without the consent of her Husband, or the
Peers of England, she affianced her Son Prince Edward to the Lady Philippa
Daughter to the Earl of Hanault, and with the Money of her Portion, levied
Soldiers in Germany and other places.

Upon notice of these proceedings, the King thought it time to strengthen
himself, and therefore set forth his Navy, which scouring the narrow Seas,
brought in a Hundred and twenty French Prizes; as likewise he fortified the
Seaports, and put Garrisons into the places that stood most advantageous to
hinder the landing of a foreign Army. Yet the Queen and her Confederates put to
Sea, her whole Power not exceeding 3000 of all Nations, and two days before St.
Michaels day, landed at Orwel in Suffolk, the force being commanded by the Lord
John, Brother to the Earl of Hanault.

The news of their arrival coming to the Kings Ear, he seemed like one amazed,
and at first would not credit the report; but upon his being further certified,
he sent to the Citizens of London for Aid, who answered that they would honor
with all submission the King, Queen and Prince, but resolved to shut their
Gates against strangers, and to withstand them to their power; this answer
bearing no favorable Construction to the King, he committed the charge of the
Tower, and in it his other Son commonly called John of Eltham, in the Custody
of Sir John D' Weston, and retired with his favorites the Spencers, Baldock,
and others into the West, to gather forces against the Queen and her
Accomplices, having first Proclaimed them Traitors, and offered the reward of
1000 pounds to any that could take the young Lord Mortimer dead or alive: And
by this his unadvised abandoning his chief strengths, he gave the Queens party
opportunity to strengthen themselves, several Lords and others daily coming to
their assistance, and the better to terrify the Kings partakers, and to color
the Treason, it was rumored that the French King had sent with his Sister so
many Dukes, Earls and Lords, that England would not suffice to feed them, and
that the Pope had sent to Excommunicate all the Kings partakers; for which
purpose two Cardinals had been sent over, and credibly reported to have been
seen in the Queens Camp, though all was but fictitious; and further to
ingratiate with the People, she caused it to be Proclaimed, that her coming was
only to remove evil Councillors from the King (the same pretenses that were
used by our late forty one Parliament) though Roger Lord Mortimer was the man
that chiefly Councilled all the mischief; then were the Kings favorites branded
with the names of Traitors and Enemies to the Nation, and 1000 pounds bid to
any that could bring the younger Spencers Head. And thereupon the Londoners
rise in a tumultuous manner, and commit many outrages, cutting off the Bishop
of Exceters Head, as likewise the Head of John Le Marchel, whom the King had
appointed to Govern, the City. They likewise broke open the Prisons, and set
all Prisoners at liberty, got into their possession the Tower, and taking
thence the Lord John of Eltham, proclaimed him Custos or chief Governor of the
City; and the Queen likewise to strengthen her Faction, caused most of the
Prisons in England to be set open, and repealed such as had been banished; so
that thereby her power greatly increasing, She, or rather the Lord Mortimer,
followed the King, who destitute of friends still fled before his pursuers, who
besieged Bristol, and therein took the Elder Spencer, whom without any form of
Trial they cut up alive, having first exposed him to the fury of the People,
upon notice of which the King entered on Shipboard, and intended to fly for
Ireland, but upon further consideration came ashore in Wales, and there for the
love the Welshmen bore him, was concealed for many days in the Abbey of Neath;
but the Queen and her Accomplices coming to Hereford, after Prince Edward was
Proclaimed High Keeper of England, Henry Earl of Lancaster, Brother to the late
Earl of Lancaster, Sir William Delazouch, and others who had Lands in those
parts where the King absconded, were sent in quest of him, with sums of Money
to facilitate the discovery; who in the end surprised him, together with the
young Lord Spencer, Robert Baldock Lord Chancellor, and Simon de Reading, whom
without any respect to the Person of the King, they conveyed to Monmouth, and
from thence was the King carried to Kenelworth Castle, and there committed to
the keeping of the Earl of Leicester, but the rest to Hereford; where without
any form of Trial was put to death the Lord Spencer, being hanged on a Gallows
fifty foot high, and Robert Baldock committed to the keeping of the Bishop of
Hereford, who sent him up to London, and exposed him to the fury of the Rabble,
who though a Bishop, was used by them in such a barbarous manner, only for
being true to his Sovereign, that within a short time after he died; the Earl
of Arundel and two other Gentlemen of note were put to death to pleasure
Mortimer, and now the mournful King divested of all his friends, being at
Kenelworth, there repaired to him the Bishops of Winchester, Hereford and
Lincoln, two Earls, two Abbots, four Barons and three Knights from every
County, with two of the Judges as from the Parliament, which the Queen had
called at London to persuade him to a Resignation of his Crown to his Son
Edward, and so many devices they had heaped together, that in the end having
first given private notice to the King of their approach, and the cause, they
came to Kenelworth, and presented themselves before the King, who clad in black
suitable to his mournful condition, came out of an inward Chamber, when in the
head of the company set in order according to their qualities, the Earl of
Leicester and Bishop of Hereford began to declare the Message with which they
were charged by the Body of the Kingdom, as they termed the then sitting
Parliament, alleging that the Commonwealth of England was weary of his
Government, and conceived such irreconcilable dislike of his management of
Kingly affairs, that they would by no means permit him longer to Reign over
them, but were contented that his Eldest Son Prince Edward should succeed him
in his Throne, if he would make a voluntary Resignation; if not they would
proceed to Elect another not of his Blood, etc.

The sound of this mournful Message struck so to the Kings Heart, that e're any
could prevent it he fell to the ground, and lay stretched in a swoon a
considerable time e're life could be perceived, or he recovered to his Senses:
But in the end recovering, he with many heavy Sighs bewailed his Unfortunate
condition, and began to parley with his Vassals, but found them inflexible,
persisting in threatening sort, to tell him, that unless he would freely resign
his Diadem to his Son, and disclaim all Right-to the Crown, they would return
his Answer, and that immediately thereupon the Parliament would proceed to the
Election of another, not of his Race.

These Menaces made the distressed King (who now was fallen low in the Opinion
of his Subjects through the false insinuation of the factious Lords) to consent
to their hard proposals, confessing that for his many sins God had permitted
these Calamities to fall upon him, but seeing they had not rejected his Race,
he was content to submit. Whereupon they proceeded to the new invented and
never before practiced Ceremony of dekinging their Sovereign, which in this
manner was performed by Sir William Trussel, one of the Judges, who found out a
Law Quirk to color the detestable Treason as follows.

I William Trussel, In the name of all Men of the Land of England, and of all
the Parliament, Procurator, resign to thee Edward, the Homage that was made to
thee some time, and from this time forward, I defy thee, and deprive thee of
all Royal Dignity, and I shall never be Tendant to thee as for King hereafter.
This Ceremony or rather compact of Treason being uttered, Sir Thomas Blunt
Steward of the Household broke his Staff, and Proclaimed the Kings Household
discharged from any further Service; and then leaving the King divested of
Regal Authority, and under strong confinement, they posted to London to tell
the news, which was joyfully received, especially by Roger Lord Mortimer of
Wigmore; though the Queen the better to color the Treason, seemed much
disturbed at the relation of the Kings deposing.

Now the next business was to set the Crown upon young Edwards Head, whom by
reason of his Minority they thought to Rule as themselves thought fit; who
notwithstanding his being but fifteen years of Age, utterly refused to admit of
the Ceremony, till he was assured it was with his Fathers free consent: But at
last submitting to the persuasions of the Queen and Mortimer, he was Crowned,
and Proclamation put out in his name, to satisfy the minds of people, touching
the free Concession of his Father.

Things being at this pass, the Queen began to think of securing her self a
Dowry, which she did so large, that it amounted to two parts of the Revenues of
the Crown, which she delivered to the disposal of Mortimer, at whose command
she solely was, even as Fame reported, both at Bed and Board; but their
security being interrupted by the pity many seemed to have for the miseries of
the Deposed King, they well knowing if he were again restored to his Dignity,
it would prove their confusion; therefore laying aside all remorse, they
entered into a conspiracy to make sure of him for ever by Murder. Whereupon
removing him from Kenelworth, and out of the Custody of the Earl of Lancaster,
who they thought too much favored him; he was delivered into the Custody of Sir
Thomas De Gournay, and Sir John Mattravers, two bloody Sycophants, who conveyed
him to Corfe Castle, from thence to Bristol, and then to Berkly Castle, where
after many barbarous and vile usages, they Murdered him; the manner according
to Holinshead thus:

The Kings Death being resolved on, Mortimer procured Adam De Forleton to write
this doubtful but most wicked Sophism, and to be Sealed with the Queens Seal.
Edvardum occidere nolite timere Bonum est.
To shed King Edward's Blood
Refuse to fear I count it good.


Where the Comma being put after Nolite, bids them not to make him away, but
placed after Timere expressly commands it; in performing which execrable Villainy
these Monsters were not slow, and the better to color the Regicide, lest any
outward appearance of violence should be observed they by force bind the good
King, and (O barbarous inhumanity) putting a Horn into his Fundament to keep
the outward part from seering, they thrust a hot Iron through it, and therewith
twisted his Bowels to pieces, not once only, but often repeated the cruel
torture, the which how painful may be guessed by the pitiful outcries the
King made whilst they were putting him to death, which cries were heard by
many, but none durst venture to relieve him.

After this foul and barbarous Murder committed, it was blazed abroad that he
died of grief, and thereupon they publicly exposed his Body to the Prelates,
and others for several days; but in a short time the Murder, which is seldom
hid came to light, and the Actors known, though the Queen and Mortimer deeply
dissembled the matter, and to outward appearance seemed greatly afflicted.

Upon the discovery Gorney and Mattravers fled, the former of which was taken
at Massels in France, where he produced the Queen and Mortimers Seals for what
he had done; whereupon secret Orders were sent for Beheading him on Shipboard
in his way for England, lest had he come to a Trial, he should have made a full
discovery of the chief Conspirator; as for the latter he wandered about
miserably in foreign Countries, and at last died miserably in Italy, being eat
up with Ulcers: And Gods vengeance found out these Monsters of men, nor was it
slow in punishing most deservedly Roger Lord Mortimer, the chief Contriver of
the wicked Parricide, who having attained to the height of his ambition; for he
together with the Queen being at his Castle of Nottingham one Evening (upon a
brute that his Mother was with Child by Mortimer) the King with a well
affected Company having entered a Vault that went into the Castle, passed on
till he came into the Chamber where the Queen was in Bed, and Mortimer
undressing himself to go to her, and so secure they were, that they had left
open the Chamber door, whereupon the King caused him to be seized, which was
not so easily done, but two or three were killed in the attempt; for Mortimer
had at that time a Retinue of fourscore Knights and Gentlemen attending him;
but in spite of resistance he was carried off: And within a while after
condemned (in Parliament) for being accessory to the Murder of the late King,
betraying the Nation, and wasting the Coin; as also for committing adultery
with the Queen: Whereupon he was soon after drawn to Tiburn then called the
Elms, and there hanged, where by the commandment of the King, he continued
hanging for two days, being pitied of none; nor did he fall alone, for with
him were Executed Sir Simon De Bedford, and John Deverel Esquire both concerned in
King Edwards Murder, and thus Heavens vengeance aimed sure and overwhelmed in
the height of their pride and security, these Monsters of men that durst by
cruel tortures, shed the Blood of their Anointed Sovereign.

CHAP. III.
The Birth, remarkable passages, deposing and murdering of Richard the Second,
King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland, the fiftieth Monarch of England;
with the manner of the Conspiracies against, and Vengeance that overtook many
of the Regicides.

RIchard the Second was Son to the black Prince, and Grandson to King Edward
the Third, being Crowned in the Eleventh year of his Age, at the first entry
upon his Kingdom all things promised him a peaceable and prosperous Reign; but
it continued not long so, for by reason of the ill conduct of affairs in his
Minority, John Duke of Lancaster ruling all, who was in hatred with the
Commons, great numbers of the Rabble rose in many Counties under the Conduct of
their factious Leaders, upon pretense of Redressing grievances, the common
Cloak of Rebellion; the principal Commanders being Wat Tyler and Jack Straw,
two Mechanics, who committed many outrages, as burning, plundering and
murdering in most places where they came, and were so far sided with by the
City of London, that they entered it without opposition, and took the Tower
wherein the King was, and were designed to murder him, had not providence
prevented it, by his condescending to what they demanded, though never so
unreasonable, and granting a pardon to all for what offenses soever had been
committed, upon which a great part acknowledged the Kings Concessions
satisfactory, and so returned home; yet their grand Captains keep their Armies
on foot, and still drew up unreasonable Petitions, such as they knew the King
could not with honor grant; and hereupon they took a pretense of doing more
mischief, intending to have divided the Kingdom amongst Mechanics, every
County to have had a King of the Commons, as they termed it: But e're they
could bring their rebellious purpose to perfection it it was prevented, for Sir
William Walworth then Lord Mayor of London being with the King at a Treaty with
Wat Tyler, and hearing the Traitor speak irreverently of his Sovereign, and
offering to murder one of the Kings Knights, for not showing him such respect
as he required, he with his drawn Sword Arrested him as a Traitor in
West-Smithfield, and he refusing to yield, some Lords coming in he was killed,
and had his head cut off and carried on a Spear out of the mouth of which he
had before impiously protested that all the Laws of England should proceed.

At the fall of their grand Captain the Rebels were much grieved, and being
near twenty thousand strong, resolved upon revenge; but the young King spurring
forward, told them, that he was, and would be their Captain, and that
whatsoever they desired, if it were lawful, they should have, which appeased
and caused many of them to throw down their Arms; and in the mean space the
Lord Mayor having raised 1000 Citizens, and brought them to confront the Rebels
under his own Conduct, that of Sir Robert Knowles and others, whereupon the
Rebels totally submitted to the King upon promise of pardon. Whereupon the King
sent to all his loving Subjects throughout England, who were able to provide
Horse and Arms to attend him on Black Heath, where they were mustered to the
number of 40000 all on Horseback, and well appointed, and now the Rebels in
Kent, Essex, and other Counties beginning again to raise tumults, were
dispersed by force, and many of the principal Incendiaries put to death, so
that the Nation was reduced to its former obedience and quiet; so that the King
began to think of Marriage, which Anno 1382. In the Month of January, he
effected with the Lady Anne, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the Fourth, and
Sister to Winceslaus King of Bohemia, and she Crowned by William Courtney Son
to the Earl of Devonshire, and Bishop of Canterbury: Upon which through the
Negotiation of the Duke of Lancaster, a Truce was concluded between the French
and English from Christmas till Midsummer; and the said Duke upon his return
dispatched with an Army to revenge the injuries the Scots had put upon the
English during the intestine broils, but returned without effecting any thing
memorable, and upon his return he was accused by a Carmelite Friar, and by
Birth an Irishman to have conspired the Kings Death; to the truth of which,
the Friar Swore upon the Sacrament, but the Dukes Interest in the King and his
Council, so overpowered the testimony of the Friar, that it was not believed;
but on the contrary the Evidencer delivered over to the Lord John Holland, who
caused him cruelly to be put to death without Trial or Form of Law, and
afterward dragged through the streets; when at the same time the Lord Thomas
of Woodstock afterward made Duke of Gloucester, rushed into the presence
Chamber, swearing that he would kill any man alive, the King not excepted, that
durst lay Treason to his Brothers charge; which rash words were afterward
excused upon pretense of his Zeal to his Brothers honor, though at the same
time his duty to his Sovereign ought to have overballanced the other; but the
Duke of Lancaster's credit growing great with the Court Lords, the King was
forced to oblige him, not knowing how to help it; and therefore seeing him grow
obstinate, he the rather wished to be rid of him, which he thought he could no
better do than by furnishing him a Navy, and an Army to Invade Castile, which
Kingdom he claimed in the Right of his Wife Constance, Daughter to the late
King: where arriving, he obtained several places of strength, worsting the
Spaniards every where: When in the mean while the French under their young
King, resolving to revenge old injuries, prepared an Army of 100000. Men to
Invade England, supposing it weakened by the remoteness of the Duke of
Lancaster's Army; but such was Gods providence, that although they were
imbarqued, and several times attempted to put to Sea, yet were they still
driven back, and detained by contrary winds, even at such a time when the
discontents amongst the Nobility made way for their Conquest; for the King
supposing himself rid at least for a time of his Uncle, the turbulent Duke of
Lancaster, found his second Uncle Thomas Duke of Gloucester no less troublesome,
who with the Lords of his Faction continually opposed the Kings proceedings,
even to the weakening the Kingdom, denying in Parliament to grant him either Men
or Money, even when the French Army was daily expected to Land, upon pretense
that he had undeservedly created Michael Del^ Pole, Lord Chancellor, Duke of
Suffolk, and Robert D' Vere Duke of Dublin in Ireland, not being willing any
should be advanced, but of his own Faction, which caused a Poet, both learnedly
and fellingly to Sing, or rather Weep his Countries misery in the doleful
strains. I Sing the Civil Wars, tumultuous Broils,
And Bloody Factions of a mighty Land;
Whose People haughty; proud with foreign spoils,
Upon themselves now turn their Conquering Hand;
Whilst Kin their Kin, Brother his Brother foils,
Like Ensigns all against like Ensigns band;
Bows against Bows, a Crown against a Crown,
Whilst all pretending Right, all Right threw down.


The Nation which had been formerly troubled with the Insurrection of the
Plebeans, was again troubled by the Faction of the Peers, who stuck not to
demand the removal and banishment of all such as were near and dear unto the
King, under pretense of evil Councillours: When indeed their distaste for the
most part was founded upon private Animosities, which when they perceived they
could not effect by fair means, they retired into the several Counties where
their Lands were, and where they were most popular, and there raised such
forces as they could get; which in a short time in conjunction, made an Army of
Forty thousand men, though in time of eminent danger, they pretended no Forces
considerable could be levied.

With these forces they march toward London, with an intent to force the King
to accord to what they should propose, although at that time Dela Pole, the
Duke of Ireland, and Archbishop of York, the Persons against whom they chiefly
objected, were banished the Kings presence: The Lords that raised these stirs
were Thomas Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Warwick, Derby, Nottingham and
Arundel; yet upon the mediation of some Prelates the matter was so ordered,
that the Lords were content to present themselves to the King sitting in State
at Westminster, but so far from trusting his Royal word, that they came
strongly guarded, and coming into his presence fell on their Knees; yet after
the former strain, repeated their former demands, throwing down their Gloves,
protesting to prove them Traitors by Combat, whom they had so named; yet the
King in a sharp reply made them sensible how little he feared their Braves, but
in the end referred the further determination of matters to the next
Parliament, which shortly after held at Westminster: And in the mean while bid
them be content and mindful of their Allegiance, yet they refused to separate
themselves, but withdrawing into the West near Burford, set upon a party of
Cheshire and Welshmen, Commanded by Sir Thomas Molenaux and others, and by the
Kings special Order raised to conduct safe to Court the Duke of Ireland, whom
the King had secretly recalled from Banishment, and after a hot dispute slew
Sir Thomas and most of his Men, the Duke hardly escaping; then increasing their
number they marched toward London, whose approach caused the King to betake
himself to the Tower, and the Citizens through fear to open their Gates, so
that the Lords and the greatest part of their Host entered as it were in
triumph, and after some Messengers had passed between the King and them, they
found means to come to his presence, and there boldly taxed him of secretly
practicing to fly with the Duke of Ireland into France, and to deliver up
Calais and other places in Normandy to the French King, with many other
unbeseeming expressions, which, either through real grief, or a Noble disdain
to be so used by his Subjects, caused the King to shed Tears even in their
sight, and at last it was agreed, that the King should the next day come to
Westminster; but the next day the King deferring his repair longer than the
time appointed, the Lords contrary to their Allegiance sent him word, that if
he came not speedily according to appointment, they would choose them another
King, who both would and should obey the Council of his Peers, they having him
present whom they intended to have Invested with the Diadem, viz. Henry Earl of
Derby, Son to the Duke of Lancaster, who afterward Dethroned him, as shall be
related.

The King having received this threatening message, though much against his
Inclination, went to Westminster where the Lords were Assembled, where they
forced him not only to disclaim the Duke of Ireland, divest the Lord
Chancellor, but likewise turn out of favor Alexander Nevil Archbishop of
York, the Bishops of Durham and Chichester, the Lord Souches and Beaumont, with
many more of smaller account; so that having stripped him of his friends, they
thought the easier to rule him, and afterward committed as many of them as they
could lay hands on Prisoners to the Tower, to answer such Accusations as should
be objected against them in the next Parliament, which beginning the Candlemas
following: The first day of the Sessions, most of the Judges were Arrested as
they were sitting upon the Bench, and committed to the Tower; the Crime
alleged against them was, that at Nottingham they having given Council to the
Lords, which they assured them was according to Law, had afterward assured the
King that it was not according to Law, but only they had been obliged to give
such Opinions for their own security: But Trisillian escaped for a while by
flight, being taken in the Morning was brought before the Parliament, and
having no longer respite than till the afternoon, was carried to Tyburn, and
there according to Sentence had his Throat cut; an unmanly death to be
inflicted on a Lord Chief Justice: There were likewise Executed almost all the
Judges, and about five Knights and Esquires, most of the Kings especial
favorites, nor could the King stay this Execution; but e're this mischief
spread further, 'twas allayed by the arrival of the Duke of Lancaster, who had
obtained a great Sum of Money, and a yearly Revenue of the King of Spain, to
quit his claim to the Crown of Castile and Leon, and that the Lord Henry his
Son Marrying the Lady Catharine that Kings Daughter, should have the Title of
Prince of Austria with several other advantageous matters, and upon his arrival
King Richard, whether again to buy his absence is uncertain, bestowed upon him
the Duchy of Aquitain confirming it in Parliament, and putting into his
Possession the Cap of Maintenance and Ducal Rod, at which time his Son Henry
Earl of Derby, went for Prussia, and there engaged himself in the War against
the Lithuanian, where he Achieved many noble deeds in Chivalry; but soon after
died the Duchess of Lancaster, Duchess of York, Duchess of Derby, and what
was more grievous to the King, his Queen whom he entirely loved, all dying
almost in a years space; whereupon the Duke of Lancaster went over to take
possession of his Duchy, and then upon complaint of the Outcries committed by
the Wild Irish, passed into Ireland with an Army to suppress them, and upon his
return into France, he was Married to the Lady Isabel that Kings Daughter, and
thereupon a peace concluded between the two Nations for the space of thirty
years: And now the Duke of Ireland being dead, the discontents of the Lords
seemed somewhat abated, yet not long, for the restless Duke of Gloucester still
contriving to secure his steerage at Helm by overawing the King, put so many
affronts upon him, that he often complained thereof to his Uncles the Dukes of
Lancaster and York, who persuaded the King of his good intent, though his words
might seem harsh, but within a while after a Combination of the said Duke, with
the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, the Lords Cobham and Chevy, being discovered
by Thomas Mobray Earl of Nottingham, wherein they had conspired to Imprison the
King and his Uncles Lancaster and York; as likewise to put to death many of his
Councillors; upon which they were Arrested, and the Duke sent Prisoner to
Calais, where afterward he was smothered with a Pillow, and here only the Earl
of Arundel Beheaded.

These Executions wrought some alteration in the minds of the People, whose
Darling the Duke of Gloucester was, so that they greatly maligned his
Prosecutors, and some vowed secretly to revenge; but to salve up these
discontents, especially amongst the great ones, the King in the next Parliament
took upon himself the Title of Prince of Chester, created his Cousin Henry Earl
of Derby Duke of Hereford, the Earl of Nottingham Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Rutland Duke of Amaurle, the Earl of Kent Duke of Surry, the Earl of Huntington
Duke of Exceter, the Earl of Sommerset Marquess of Dorset, the Lord Spencer
Duke of Gloucester, etc. and added to his Escutcheons the Armories of St. Edward
the Confessor, sometime King of England.

These proceedings for a time made fair weather, but not long; for a Feud
arising between Henry Duke of Hereford and Thomas Duke of Gloucester, the latter
accused the former of speaking several words to the dishonor of the King, that
King Richard held the Peers of England in no esteem, but as much as in him lay,
sought to destroy them by banishing some, and putting others to death: That he
never troubled his mind with considering how his Dominions were diminished
through his carelessness, and lastly, that all things went to wrack as well in
Peace as War.

Upon this it was ordered that the Accuser and the Accused should try the
matter by Combat, the latter stoutly denying he ever said any such words as
were objected against him, so that gages being delivered on both sides, they
entered the Lists, but e're they encountered, the King threw down his Warder,
and upon further consideration banished Norfolk for his Life, and Hereford at
first for ten years, which after he reduced to six, which some alleged was a
just Judgment on the former, for being instrumental in putting the Duke of
Gloucester to death, he being then Captain of Calais.

But now ruin and desolation being at hand, Portents forerun it, all the
Bay-trees in England suddenly withered, and within a while sprung out again
fresh, near Bedford, the River between the Villages of Harleswood and Swelston
where it is deepest, drove back on either hand, and for three Miles left its
Channel dry, with sundry other remarkable presages of what after happened.

To give way to which the King upon notice of his Cousin the Lord Mortimer's
being slain by the Irish of Leinster, who were up in Arms under their Leader
Obrian, he resolved to pass over in person to revenge his death; and therefore
to furnish his expedition, he raised many of all hands, and at the same time
his Uncle the Duke of Lancaster dying, he seized on his Inheritance without
regard to his Son the Duke of Hereford who remained in Exile, which the said
Duke hearing, was so thoroughly netled, that not resolving to wait the
expiration of his Banishment, he taking the advantage of King Richard's absence
resolves for England, having upon notice of his Fathers decease taken upon him
the Title of Duke of Lancaster, and only accompanied with the banished Bishop
of Canterbury and about twenty others, when having taken Ship, he for some time
lay hovering on the Coast, to understand how the People stood affected to him,
and the better to give his agents on shore time to work them to his purpose;
but upon notice that his Faction was strong, he Landed only under pretense of
recovering his Rightful Inheritance, when as there repaired to him the Earl of
Northumberland, and his Son the Lord Henry, his Son the Lord Nevil Earl of
Westmorland and others, as likewise a great number of the Country People
offering him their Service, so that within a short time he had formed a
Puissant Army, the news of which soon alarumed Edmund Duke of York the Kings
Uncle, who calling to his assistance Edmund Stafford Bishop of Chichester, Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Bagot, Green, Russel,
and other Knights of the Kings Council to consult about raising forces to
impeach the Dukes passage; but their consultation came to nothing, the Dukes
Faction having so dealt with the common people, that they every where refused
to take up Arms against him: Whereupon Sir John Bushy Lord Treasurer, and Sir
Henry Green betake themselves to Bristol Castle, but it being stormed by the
Lancastrians, their Heads became a Sacrifice to popular fury, but Bagot taking
ship, Sailed over to Ireland to acquaint the King with what had happened, who
thereupon making such peace as he could with the Irish he hastens over; but
before his arrival, the Dukes Faction was swelled to such a torrent, that there
was no opposing it. Whereupon the King having Cashiered his Army, or they for
the most part deserting him, he retired to the Castle of Conway in North Wales,
whither upon notice of his being there resorted to him, the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Earl of Northumberland, where after a long Parley the King
perceiving no other conditions could be gained, required that he and eight more
whom he would name might have honorable allowance with the assurance of a
quiet private Life; that he in consideration thereof would make a resignation
of his Crown; which demand Northumberland swore should be observed, and
thereupon the King accompanied them to the Castle of Flint, whither the Duke
was come with a part of his Army, and from thence after a short conference they
removed to Chester, where the King in consideration of many fair promises never
performed, put himself into the Dukes hands, who conveyed him to London, and
there made sure of him in the Tower, whither several of the Lancastrian Faction
daily resorted to him to parley about the surrender of his Crown, which at last
he consented to do (seeing no other Remedy) to his Cousin the Duke of
Lancaster, and at the same time taking off his Signet, he put it on the Dukes
Finger; and at the same time there being a Parliament called in King Richard's
name, the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Hereford were appointed his
Procurators to declare what he had done, nor was this sufficient for to make
him odious to the People, they exhibited thirty two Articles against him very
scandalous and reproachful: Whereupon Commissioners were nominated by the
consent of the Houses to pronounce the Sentence of Deposition, who were the
Bishop of Asaph, the Abbot of Glastenbury, the Duke of Gloucester, the Lord
Berkly, and William Thyrring Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Form thus.

In the Name of God, We John Bishop of St. Asaph, John Abbot of Glastenbury,
etc. Commissioners specially chosen by the Lords Spiritual of the Realm of
England, and Commons of the said Realm representing all the states of the said
Realm, sitting in place of Judgment, do renounce all fealty to Richard of
Bordeaux, and him Depose from all Kingly Dignity, etc.

Upon which the Duke of Lancaster rising from his Seat, Crossed himself, and
then laid claim to the Crown, in these words:

In the Name of God Amen, I Henry of Lancaster, claim the Realm of England and
Crown, with all the appurtenances, as coming by the Blood Royal from King
Henry, and by that Justice, which God of his Grace has sent me by the help of
my Kinsfolks and Friends for the Recovery of the said Realm, which was in point
of perdition, through default of Government and breach of Laws.

This said, he was conducted by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York to the
Royal Throne, and there Seated, and from thenceforth all Writs and Process
Issued out in his Name, Richard In the mean space remaining a Prisoner in the
Tower, and every day in danger of his Life, which was often aimed at, the more
firmly, to establish his Successor in his Throne, who sat uneasy whilst
deposed Majesty was breathing, who though in an abject condition, yet wanted
not those who were contriving to readvance him to his Throne; yet he to render
a better Construction of his actions than indeed they would bear, not only
published several Proclamations, excusing what was done, but sent his
Ambassadors to the Courts of neighboring Princes to give his reasons for
taking upon him the Crown of England, during the Life of the Rightful Heir, and
in Parliament the better to ingratiate himself, passed an Act for restoring the
Blood and Estates of such as had either suffered, or were disinherited as
Traitors during the Reign of King Richard, yet gained he not so much love, but
that a conspiracy, if so it may be termed, in so rightful a cause, was formed
for restoring Richard to his Regal Dignity: The chief contrivers of which were
the Dukes of Exceter, Surry and Amaurle, the Earls of Huntington, Kent,
Rutland, Salisbury, and the Lord Spencer late Earl of Gloucester, the Bishop of
Carlisle, Sir Bernard Broukas, Sir John Shevele, the Abbot of Westminster, and
John Maudlin, the counterfeit King Richard, a person who had been his Chaplain,
and much resembled him both in Features and Lineaments with several others, so
that undertaking grew strong, but how to seize upon Henry and his Son they knew
not, unless with a multitude, and that not to be raised without suspicion; so
that it was concluded that it should be performed in Christmas Holydays then at
hand, under pretense of shows and pastime, but the Morning before the Evening
it should have been put in practice, it was discovered to the King by the Duke
of Amaurle as some report, yet so narrowly the King escaped, that he had scarce
reached London before the Earls of Kent and Salisbury not knowing their design
was discovered entered the Kings Lodging at Windsor with four hundred Armed
Men, supposing to have surprised him there: But when they found the Bird was
flown, they were much grieved; yet having dared thus far, they resolved to
proceed yet further; and thereupon to increase their number, gave out that King
Richard was at liberty, and in the midst of an Army of 100000 Men at Pomfret,
and that Henry and his Son were fled; and then the better to confirm the belief
of the People, Maudlin the Chaplain personated Richard, but the device answered
not their expectation* for in the end most of the Lords were taken and put to
death, as likewise Maudlin the counterfeit Richard, the whole number that at
that time fell a Sacrifice to Richard's cause, were 19.

Thus his friends being put to death, his turn came next, for jealous Henry
could not imagine himself safe whilst Richard remained still in the Hearts of
his Subjects; therefore many Councils were held how to be rid of him, so that
at last it was concluded that he should be conveyed from the Tower to Pomfret
Castle, and committed to the hands of Bloody Ruffians, who that he might die a
death the least discernable, as our Historians of most credit relate, was there
starved to death with cold and hunger, being kept with insufferable torments
fifteen days e're he died; and as some say, the more to aggravate his torments,
he had Victuals daily set before him, but was not suffered to touch it, or at
most but so small a quantity, as rathe^ lingered out his misery than was any
ways advantageous, a death so cruel, that even the barbarous Nations detest to
inflict upon the worst of Malefactors, and much more on a King Anointed, and
Viceroy of Heaven, for no other fault than what he was prompted to by others,
who worked upon his tender nature, being a King in himself disposed to mercy.

After he was dead, his Body was brought up to London, and in St. Paul's exposed
to the view of the people, and the better to color so great an iniquity, it
was caused to be rumoured, that upon notice of the execution of his friends he
had pined away with grief, but that he was starved to death, agree Stow,
Walsingham, Harding and other Historians of account, though some there be that
affirm he was slain by Sir Piers Exton after he had in resisting slain several
of his Knights, but if he had been brained, or mortally wounded, certain it is
that he would never have been exposed to the view of the people, nor could he
have been put to death without Henry's consent, but inquiry would have been
made into the cause of his death. Therefore O Henry, if thou were Author, or at
least but privy to so Execrable a Murder, though for thine own pretended
safety, and for that errors cause, which is erroneously miscalled a reason of
state thou art altogether inexcusable, and surely he is not a man that hears of
the Infamishment of this King, and feels not a chilling horror, and conceives
not detestation of such a bloody barbarity; but Heaven was not slow in
revenging the fall of this King, for what was the Reign of his Successor but a
continual trouble what Insurrections, Rebellions, Losses at Sea, Plagues,
Tempests, fearful Prodigies, and all that can make a Nation miserable Famine
excepted did not happen? how many Plots and Conspiracies were laid against his
Life by those that had advanced him to the Regal Dignity? What fears and
jealousies stuck as Thorns in his Crown, and made ever uneasy, what executions
of the Nobility happened during his Reign, even of those especially who had
been instrumental in deposing Richard, and no doubt counselling his death? so
that the English Earth never drank more noble Blood in so short a time, he
Reigning but 13. y. 6. m. 3. d. and left Issue Prince Henry afterward King,
Thomas Duke of Clarence slain at Beaufort without Issue, John Duke of Bedford
who died without Issue, and Humfry Duke of Gloucester who was murdered in his
Bed at Bury, and two Daughters Blaunch and Philip: Now as for his Eldest Son
Henry the Fifth, after his glorious Achievements in France, he died in the
Flower of his Age, not without suspicion of Poison, and Henry the Sixth, Son to
King Henry the Fifth, and Grandson to Henry the Fourth, and Prince Edward his
Son, and great Grandchild to the Fourth Henry, were Murdered by that Monster
of Mankind the Duke of Gloucester, afterward Reigning by the name of Richard
the Third: And thus we may see how Sacred Kings Lives ought to be held, when
such Tragedies revenge their fall.

King Richard after he had been exposed to view for several days, (and the
rueful spectacle moved many to compassionate his death) was conveyed to Langly
in Hartfordshire, and there obscurely buried, though King Henry the Fifth
caused those Royal remains to be removed to Westminster, and there Interred
amongst his Ancestors.

Thus fell this unhappy King without Issue, and thus his fall was revenged, and
now leaving him to slumber in his Grave; we shall proceed to the next Tragedy,
which as it falls next in course, is that of pious King Henry the Sixth.

CHAP. IV.
The Barbarous Murder of Henry the Sixth, King of England, France, and Lord of
Ireland, the three and fiftieth Monarch of England, with the particular Marks
of Gods vengeance upon the shedders of Innocent Royal Blood; together with the
Policies and Contrivances that were used to bring about the Barbarous Regicide.

HEnry the Sixth was Son to Henry the Fifth, and Grandchild to Henry the
Fourth, his Mother was Katharine Daughter to King Charles the Sixth of France,
upon him the Crown devolved in his Infancy, his Father dying when he was about
Seven Months old, and he Crowned at Eight; yet his Warlike Father having time
in his sickness, made his last Will and Testament, constituting his Brother the
Duke of Gloucester Protector of England during his Sons Minority, and his other
Brother the Earl of Bedford Regent, and to the Duke of Exceter committed he the
care of young Henry, though to be nurtured and brought up by the Queen.

Matters being thus settled, the King dies of a burning Fever at Bois D'
Vincenois in France, and for a time all things were calm, especially in
England, though they continued not long so, for although no diligence was
wanting in the Dukes Regents, yet the Kings Minority gave way to many
Exorbitancies as well amongst the Vulgar as the Nobility, and France desirous
of gaining her former liberty, continually struggled with the Conqueror, the
active Dauphin still assailing the strengths of the English, as he found
advantage offer, so that many places were lost by being taken, or by revolt,
yet the courageous Duke of Bedford the Kings Uncle, having received a supply of
fresh forces out of England, recovered many of them, but he in the heat of
those troubles dying at Roan, the English but weakly maintained their footing
in France, and within a while after, the Faction amongst the Nobles increasing,
the Duke of Gloucester Protector of England, and the Kings other Uncle, through
the procurement of Queen Margaret Wife to King Henry, was Arrested in
Parliament by John Lord Beaumont High Constable of England, and committed to
the custody of the Dukes of Buckingham, Somerset and others, when within a
while after he was found dead, as they pretended of an Apoplexy, though those
who enquired more diligently into the matter, found by apparent Symptoms that
he was made away, yet the death of so great a Prince was hushed, though it
proved fatal to the King and Kingdom: For in the death of these two Brothers,
the two strongest twisted Cords in the Cable of Government were snapped in
sunder; whereupon it proved too weak to Anchor the Ship riding in so fierce a
torrent; for now the ambitious Duke of York Cousin to the King, having made
strong his Faction, began to show himself openly, laying claim to the Crown
whilst the King was yet alive, drawing to his part a number of the discontented
Nobility, who envied the Duke of Somerset, a man true and just to his Country,
and one whom the King highly favored, but that not being like to bring his
designs to perfection, taking example by King Henry the Fourth, he resolves to
make himself popular, and within a while so dealt by his Agents with the Mobile
that they rose in many Counties in great numbers, threatening like a Deluge all
before them with ruin and desolation, and from the Counties adjacent under the
Leading of Jack Cade that audacious Rebel, they Mustered about London; and
Quartered in the Suburbs, ruining and plundering many stately Houses, nor did
Churches escape their Sacrilegious hands.

The chief of these Rebels were drawn out of Kent, and their Petition, or
rather Peremptory demand after they had made incredible spoil was,

1. That Richard Duke of York then in Ireland, as likewise several others of
his Faction, whom they named should be called home, and be admitted chief
Councillours, and have power to manage the principal Affairs of the Kingdom.

2. That the Duke of Gloucester was falsely Proclaimed a Traitor, and therefore
they demanded that the Authors might be punished.

By this we may see who encouraged them to those unnatural Insurrections; they
had likewise a third Article, but it only contained scandalous reflections on
the Duke of Suffolk, but these Traitorous demands being denied, and their
Articles rejected, they raged worse than before: Whereupon Sir Humfry Stafford
drawing together such forces as he could get, Incountered them at Seven-Oaks,
whither they were retired, but was unfortunately slain, and his party routed by
Cade the principal Rebel who disarmed him, and put on his Armor, which ill
became such a Villain.

After this they again advanced toward London, and some of the factious
Citizens, though contrary to the Will of the Magistrates favoring them, they
enter the City and make great spoil on the Houses of such as they imagined to
favor the Duke of Suffolk, or indeed the King, which caused the Lord Mayor to
Assemble the Loyal Citizens, and consult what was best to be done, who agreed
that when Cade was withdrawn, as soon after happened, they should shut the
Gates against him, and defend the City for the King, which they effected, and
kept him out, though not without the effusion of Blood on either side, but he
being put to the foil, his Companions grew faint hearted, so that upon the
coming forth of the Kings Proclamation to assure them of pardon, upon condition
they would deposite their Arms, they deserted him, and then a thousand Marks
being offered to any that could take Cade dead or alive; he within a short time
was killed at Hothfield by one Alexander Eden a Kentish Gentleman, and his Head
being brought up to London, was set upon London Bridge; as likewise twenty six
more of his Accomplices who had been excluded the Charter of pardon, being
taken, received the reward of their Treason.

The news of these intestine tumults flying into Ireland, and coming to the
Dukes Ear, who meant nothing less than the deposing of innocent Henry, lest his
Faction should be weakened by his absence, he posts over, leaving the Affairs of
the Kingdom with which he had been entrusted in a tottering condition, and upon
his arrival without the Kings leave or liking committed Prisoners to the Castle
of Ludlow, John Sutton, Lord Dudly, Reynold Abbot of St. Peter's at Glastenbury,
all of them the Kings friends, and afterward (having resolved upon deposing
the King) he takes up Arms under pretense of removing evil Councillors from
about the Kings person almost the original pretense of every Rebellion, though
the undertakers aim at nothing less then the King himself, and the chief person
he objects against the only man that kept him from his wicked purposes was
Edmund Duke of Somerset, and many grievous Accusations the better to color the
business, are made against him, but the chief insisted on was the loss of
Normandy during his Regency, though it evidently appeared that the Duke of York
himself by fomenting a division amongst the great ones, had given the French
opportunity to recover it.

The King seeing himself in danger, resolves to oppose the torrent, and
therefore Arms, and with a strong power marches toward Wales, in whose
Marches the Duke resided with his forces, of which the Duke having notice, and
understanding the Kings power was such, that he was no ways able to oppose
them, upon his feigned submission he so wrought upon the good nature of this
pious and peaceful King that a peace was concluded; and after some heats and
accusations had passed between the Dukes of York and Somerset; the former was
swore to be true to the King, and never more take up Arms, but regarded his
Oath no longer than it served for his purpose, for joining with the Earls of
Warwick, Salisbury, and others of the Faction, he again takes Arms, and marches
toward London, and to oppose him the King does the like, both Armies meeting
at St. Albans a dreadful fight began, which for a long time lasted doubtful,
but at last the Earl of Warwick with his Battalian breaking through a Garden,
fell in so furiously, that the Kings party were put to the rout, six hundred
slain, and amongst them the Duke of Somerset, Earl of Northumberland, Stafford,
Lord Clifford, and others of Note. Here the King received a slight wound in the
Neck with an Arrow, and was taken Prisoner, though at the same time the Lords
of the Faction pretended abundance of respect, leading him to London, and there
procured a Parliament to be called in his name, where they caused an Act of
Indemnity to be passed, and all things to be so ordered, that they render their
Faction pleasing to the multitude, and now nothing remained but to depose the
King, and deprive him of Life, but this they feared to do till their
insinuations had spread wider, and that they had got Prince Edward his Son into
their hands, for the King notwithstanding this adversity, was extremely beloved
for his singular Piety and meekness; nor did this suffice, for in this
Parliament the Duke of York got himself made Protector of England, and its
appurtenances, (a thing never heard of before, unless in the Nonage of a King)
but his insolences were such, by Imprisoning and deposing the Kings best
friends, that he was soon divested of that power at the instance of the Queen,
and several Noble Lords well-wishers to the King.

These Intestine broils Incited the French and Scots to molest the Seaport
Towns and ways, the remote parts of England, upon news of which the King the
better to revenge those injuries, called an Assembly of the Peers at London,
whither the Duke of York, Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, were Summoned under
the Kings Privy Seal, and accordingly came, but finding things not for their
purpose, they feigned a Plot against their Lives, and so retired to their
several Castles, and places of strength without leave taken, and there
gathering forces upon a second Summons came in Hostile manner; yet the good
natured King so labored that a reconciliation, or at least a seeming one on the
part of the Yorkists, was the result of that meeting; but it continued not so
long, for upon a Quarrel between one of the Kings Servants, and one of the Earl
of Warwicks, all was again in a combustion; for the Earl of Warwick upon that
occasion being Assaulted, flies to Calais, and there maintains himself by
Piracy, utterly disowning the King Supreme Lord of that Place, but being not
long satisfied there, he Sails over to the Assistance of the Duke of York, and
Earl of Salisbury, who again had taken up Arms, and Encamped near Ludlow,
bringing with him one Captain Andrew Trolop, and a stout Band of Calesians,
whom all along he had persuaded that they were to fight in the Kings Quarrel,
but they finding it otherwise upon the Kings approach, expressed their Loyalty
by forsaking the Yorkists, and coming over to the King, who good natured
Prince, received them with all convenient expressions of kindness and Royal
favor; and Trolop their Captain being privy to all the Plots and Designs of
the Yorkists Faction; the Kings Enemies disperse, the Duke of York, with the
Earl of Rutland his youngest Son into Ireland, the Earl of March his Eldest Son
and Heir, together with the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, with much
difficulty escape to Calais, which place had King Henry timely fortified, he
had driven them all to great extremity; yet the Parliament proceeded to
Proclaim them and their Abetters, Traitors, and to attaint them of high
Treason, disabling them or their Heirs of ever inheriting their Titles or
Possessions, which made them again prepare to Invade England by stealth in
their wonted Hypocrisy (the better to win the multitude to side with them) with
deepest Oaths, protesting they only sought the good and welfare of King Henry,
and the removal of evil Councillors sending many Writings abroad freight with
dissimulations to that purpose, which wrought them much favor, so that Landing
in Kent, and swearing to be true to King Henry, especially the Earl of Warwick
who swore it upon the Cross of the Cathedral of Canterbury, they came forward
to London still increasing in number, which caused the King and Queen being no
ways confident of the Citizens, to remove to Northampton, whither the Earls of
March and Warwick hasted, and notwithstanding their many fair pretenses gave
the King Battle, overthrew his Army, and taking him Prisoner, brought him as it
were in Triumph to London, and although they held him Prisoner, yet continued
their dissembled kindness toward him, with many feigned expressions of
Obedience and Loyalty.

Upon news of this success, the Duke of York hasts from Dublin in Ireland, and
pulling off the Mask he had so long veiled his design with, laid claim in the
Parliament then sitting to the Crown, breaking open the Kings Lodgings, and
possessing himself thereof; but the Parliament not approving his rashness, he
drew up his Pedigree, in which he proposed himself to be the rightful Heir,
which was likewise opposed with many forcible Arguments, yet so powerful was
his Faction, that he prevailed to be Proclaimed Heir apparent, and again to
enjoy the Title of Protector of England, with a grant that Henry the Sixth
should Reign only during his natural Life, and that then the Crown should
devolve on him and his Heirs, as descended of the Masculine Line from Edward
the Third; but at this time the Queen being in the North, gathering forces to
release her Husband, would by no means consent to this agreement, which caused
York to advance in order to oppose her, but her forces consisting of near
18000, and his a far less number, he contrary to the advice of his Council,
resolving to give Battle before his Son the Earl of March could join him, the
Battle was fought at Wakefield, and therein himself, the Lord Harington, Sir
Thomas Nevil Son to the Earl of Salisbury, and almost all his Soldiers were
slain; so severe is the Almighty in punishing perjury, and disloyalty to him
and his Vicegerents, Kings Anointed; the Earl of Salisbury was taken Prisoner
and Beheaded, and his head with the Dukes fixed upon York Gates; upon this the
Queen and her Army came to London, and released the King by the overthrow of
Warwick at St. Albans, restoring him to his Power and Majesty, but rested not
long e're the Earl of March, Eldest Son to the Duke of York advanced with a
Puissant Army, and the Earl of Warwick having escaped the fight joined with
him, which news made the King and Queen retire into the North, to provide
against the threatening storm, whereupon Edward Earl of M^rch, without any
control advanced and entered London, fearful of a Sack, and there by threats
and persuasions prevailed with the unstable multitude to give their Assents for
his being Crowned King, which Ceremony ended, though against all Law and Right
he drew forth his Army, and advanced against the King, who had gathered great
forces which were in chief by the Duke of Somerset, Earl of Northumberland, and
Lord Clifford, both Armies consisting of 112000. the greatest Army of English
that ever England saw, who upon the charge being sounded, began the Fight with
great fury near Ferry-Bridge, which continued ten hours, and was lost on the
Kings side by the overhastiness of the Northern Archers, who spent all their
Arrows at a distance, as not being able to discern the Enemy; by reason the
Snow that then fell was driven full in their Eyes: The Nobility that died on
the Kings side, were the Lords Scales, Willowby, Beaumont, Wells, Gray, Dacres,
Fitz Hugh Buckingham and Clifford, the two Bastards of Exceter, of Knights and
Esquires a great number, and in all on both parts the slain were computed
35091. a slaughter* the like not known in England since the Conquest.

Upon this fatal overthrow King Henry hs Son the Prince, and several great
Lords escaped into Scotland, where they were kindly received, and a Marriage
proposed between the young Prince, and the Lady Margaret the Scotch King's
Daughter, upon which Queen Margaret passed into France, to negotiate her
Husbands affairs with the French King for new supplies.

In the mean while Edward is Crowned at Westminster, and a Parliament called,
wherein King Henry, and Prince Edward his Son are disinherited of the Crown and
all Regal Authority, upon news of which Queen Margaret returns to Scotland,
having obtained a considerable supply of men from her Father Duke Reynold, Duke
of Anjoy, King of Naples, Jerusalem and Sicily; having suffered much by storm
from Scotland, she passed into England, together with her Husband and such
Scotch forces, as that King assisted her with, and took several Castles in
Northumberland, several Loyal English daily resorting to the Royal Standard,
which proceeding greatly alarumed Edward, so that constituting the Lord
Montacute his Lieutenant General, he furnished him with an Army, with which he
gave Battle to King Henry's forces near unto Hexham where the Yorkists
prevailed, and King Henry is obliged again to fly into Scotland, from whence
some time after coming into England in disguise, he was taken Prisoner by
Thomas Talbot in Cletherworth in Lancashire, and from thence brought to*
London, with his Legs bound under the Horses Belly, (so little respect had
those Varlets, into whose hands he fell to afflicted Majesty) and upon his
arrival committed Prisoner to the Tower.

Edward having King Henry in safe custody, began to give himself over to sports
and Daliances, and above all to bethink himself of a Wife, upon which several
were proposed, as the Lady Margaret, Sister to King James of Scotland, the Lady
Elizabeth Sister and Heir Apparent to Henry King of Castile, the Lady Bona
Daughter to the Duke of Savoy, and Sister to the French Queen, of which the
latter being thought the fittest Match; the Earl of Warwick was sent over to
negotiate the affair, and proceeded so well, that he procured a free consent of
the French King, Queen, and the Lady her self; when in the mean while Edward
had cast his Eyes upon Elizabeth Gray Widow to Sir John Gray slain in the
Quarrel of King Henry at St. Albans, and notwithstanding all the persuasions of
the Duchess of York his Mother, Married her, and made her Queen, which Warwick
taking as a grievous affront put upon him, from that moment Alienated his
Affections from Edward, and consulted how to restore King Henry to his Crown
and Dignity, in order to which, he first consults his two Brothers, George
Nevil Archbishop of York, and John Nevil Marquess of Montacute, the former of
which soon consented, but the latter proposed many delays, whereupon the
politic Earl the better to bring his designs about, resolves to bring to his
Lurd George Duke of Clarence, Edwards Second Brother (whom he knew to be
discontented with his Brothers Rule) and so effectually wrought with
Soliciting, that he soon found him pliable, and ready to espouse his Interest;
whereupon the more to secure him, he proposed to him his Eldest Daughter in
Marriage, with the one half of his Wives Inheritance, which was afterward
consummated at Calais, and in the mean while by the countenance of the Earl,
many Commotions were raised in England to countenance which, and to dispossess
Edward of his Usurped Crown, (to say no worse) the Duke and Earl prepared for
England, having first espoused his second Daughter to Prince Edward, Son to
King Henry, and then arriving a great conflux of People, hasted to his Banner,
so well known and dreaded in England, being the White Bear and Ragged Staff, to
oppose which torrent e're it grew greater Edward hastened, and at Woolvy four
Miles from Warwick, where the Duke and the Earls Host lay, pitched his Tents,
and bid the Earl Battle, who undaunted Spirit brooked no such Bravado advance
and both Armies stood Imbattled expecting the dreadful blast, but it so
happened, that the Fight was delayed, and both Armies retire, as if a Peace
would undoubtedly ensue, but crafty Warwick had other designs on foot; for
within a while after he surprised Edward in the midst of his Army, and took him
Prisoner, committing him to the custody of the Archbishop of York, from whom he
soon after escaped, which greatly perplexed the Earl; yet he so ordered the
matter, as not to seem in the least to regard it.

Edward upon his escape fled to London, and the Duke and Earl continuing in
their station, levied great forces, but upon the Mediation of the Nobility, it
was so ordered that the Duke and Earl came to Edward upon his Letters of safe
conduct, but Edward taxing them with Disloyalty, and they him with ingratitude,
nothing was done but both departed, Edward to Canterbury, and the other
returned to Warwick, and from thence sent their Agents into Lincolnshire, where
they dealt with the Commons to take up Arms under the Leading of Sir Robert
Wells, Son to the Lord Wells; but he in revenge of his Fathers Death (whom
Edward had basely Beheaded contrary to his promise) rashly engaged Edwards
power before Warwick could come to his Aid, and by that means lost the day and
his own Life; upon notice of which overthrow, the Duke and Earl betook
themselves again to Calais, of which place the latter was Captain, but were
denied entrance by Vawclere his Lieutenant, and thereupon went to the French
Court, where they were kindly received, and within a while returning into
England, gathered so huge an Army, that Edward was forced to fly the Land, and
his Queen to take Sanctuary; whereupon King Henry was again restored to his
Regal Dignity, and Edward with all his adherents Proclaimed Traitors, and in
Parliament disinabled from Inheriting the Crown, and it again Intailed on King
Henry, upon which Heartbreaking news, Edward procures forces from the Duke of
Burgundia, who had Married his Sister, and under pretense of Friendship enters
England, pretending to no more than his Duchy of York, framing Letters for his
safe conduct under the Seal of the Earl of Northumberland; but he no sooner
entered but surprised that City; whereupon Warwick and Clarence prepare to
drive him thence, but the latter was so wrought with under hand, that he
revolted to Edward, and endeavored to persuade Warwick to do the like, who
generously answered to the Messenger, go tell your Duke that I had rather be an
Earl, and always like my self, than a false and perjured Duke, and that e're my
Oath shall be falsified (as his apparently is) I will lay down my Life at my
Enemies Foot, which I doubt not but shall be bought very dear, and thereupon
Marched toward London, when at St. Albans he considered what was best to be
done, and finding that the Sword must decide it, he advanced, and at Barnet
both Armies approached each other, where in the spacious Field, the Battle
joined on Easter day with such fury, that the like had not been known, and
continued doubtful for a long time, when as the day being overcast with mist
hindering the Soldiers sight, Warwicks Battalian took the Stars Imbroidered
upon the Earl of Oxford's Men's Coats for his Son Edwards Body, whereupon they
let fly upon their friends, which mistake caused the Earl to leave the fight,
his Men crying Treason, Treason, we are all betrayed, which Warwick perceiving,
charged with fury upon the Enemy, but entering too far was beaten down and
slain, though not without performing wonders suitable to his great Soul, who had
been Englands Make-King for many years before, with him perished his Brother
the Marquess of Montacute, and a great number of smaller note, as likewise the
loss of the Battle on the side of the Lancastrians.

Son after this overthrow, Queen Margaret and Prince Edward arrive at Weymouth,
and understanding the loss of the Battle of Barnet Field, she went to Ceerue
Abbey, whither the Lancastrian Nobility that escaped the slaughter came to her,
and with comfortable words, put her in hopes of better success, and immediately
raised such forces as they could, and joined them to those they Queen had
brought over from France, but loath she was that the Prince her Son should
hazard himself in the Battle, and urged sundry persons, but was over persuaded
by the Lords, whose preparations alarumed Edward, so that gathering an Army, he
advanced toward them, resolving to hinder the increase of the Queens power,
having first committed King Henry, and the Archbishop of York to the Tower, and
at Teuxbury both Armies met, where after a hot Encounter, by the Treachery of
the Lord Wenlock the Battle went with Edward, which Treachery was rewarded with
death, the Duke of Somerset the Queens General beating his Brains out with his
Battle-Ax.

In this Battle of the Lancastrian Nobility, were slain John Lord Summert, John
Coventry Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Wenlock in manner aforesaid, several
Knights, and three thousand common Soldiers, and on the other side not fewer.

Upon this defeat Proclamation was made for the Apprehending Prince Edward, who
was soon taken by that unworthy Knight Sir Robert Crofts, and delivered to his
most Capital Enemy, the Duke of Somerset, and others of Quality having taken
Sanctuary, were haled thence and beheaded.

Prince Edward not passing fourteen years of Age, being brought before Edward
had assumed the Sovereignty, he beheld him with a stern Countenance, and
demanded how he durst with Banners displayed enter his Realm? to which the
young Prince with an undaunted Courage replied, to recover my Fathers Kingdoms,
and most Rightful Inheritance possessed by his Father and Grandfather, and
immediately from him descending to me; how dare thou then that art but his
Subject, take up Arms against thy King?

This Brave and Generous Answer, so touched King Edward to the quick, that he
unmanly with his Gauntlet, smote him on the Mouth, when at the same instant the
more villainous Duke of Gloucester, afterward Usurper of the Crown by the name
of Richard the Third, together with his wicked Accomplices, stabbed the Prince
to death in Edwards presence, Monsters unworthy of the name of Men, but Heavens
vengeance for this and other black crimes overtook the Actors.

The Prince after his being murdered, was Buried in the Grey-Fryars at
Tewksbury without any Ceremony, and now Queen Margaret having taken Sanctuary,
was discovered and brought Prisoner to the Tower, where she continued till her
Father with a great Ransom (to raise which he was forced to sell most of his
Signeouries to the French King) he redeemed her, and now King Henry being
Prisoner, likewise, and the Thorn that made Edwards Crown sit uneasy, he
resolves to be rid of him, and therefore sent his Brother, that Crook-backed
Monster in the shape of a Man, to dispatch him, who pretending to discourse
about his releasment, stabbed the pious King to the Heart, and eased him of
this troublesome Life, though perpetual horror haunted the Actor of this black
deed to his Grave.

After this cruel murder committed on the pious King, his Body was for many
days exposed to the view of the People ever bleeding afresh, which raised at
once pity and detestation in the Spectators, and then carried by Water to
Chersie in Surry.

And thus fell this good King, though not unrevenged, for he lived to see the
miserable ends of all such as had first broached the mutual War against him,
viz. Richard Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, and afterward
God was not slow to revenge his Royal Blood, for within a while the Duke of
Clarence King Edwards Brother was attainted of Treason, and privately put to
death in the Tower, as some say drowned in a Butt of Malmsey, King Edward
himself continually infested with troubles, through his unquiet Reign, and
People every where suffering through storms, pestilence, and Losses by Sea and
Land, after his Decease his two Sons murdered by their unnatural Uncle the
Duke of Gloucester, and that Monster himself after a short Usurpation slain in
Bosworth Field, as in the sequel shall more at large be shown, and thus I shall
end with the death of this pious, though unfortunate King, who left no Issue,
his only Son being murdered as is before recited.

CHAP. V.
The Murder of Edward the Fifth, and his Brother Richard Duke of York, by the
means of their Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, his Usurpation and Death, with
various Examples of Gods vengeance upon those that were his Assistants in the
Regicide.

Edward the Fourth having (though for the most part) reigned twenty two years,
one Month and five days, deceased, leaving his Nobility at variance, though at
his death they were seemingly reconciled, and his two Sons both young, and
Gloucester Protector of the Realm, during Edward the Elders Minority; but he
having before Plotted the Acquirement of the Sovereignty, resolved to work the
destruction of his Nephews to his way to the Throne, and therefore
confederating with the Duke of Buckingham, and other Lords of his Faction,
which with gifts and large promises he won to his Lure: Whereupon his first
attempt was to accuse the Lords of the Queens Blood, with many things thereby
to render them odious in the Eyes of the People, and therewith a strong Guard
went to meet the young King, who at his Fathers death was at Ludlow, under
pretense of bringing him up to London to his Coronation, when indeed he never
intended he should wear the Diadem, they having politickly persuaded the Queen
from setting any guard about her Son, that so they might the easier work their
purposes, and coming to Northampton where the Lord Rivers, the Queens Brother,
and the Lord Richard her Son by Sir John Gray, lay, they with all seeming
kindness received and embraced them, and seemed to study nothing more than the
advancement of the King, but Gloucester, Buckingham and others of the Faction
having held a close Consult most part of the Night, the next Morning they
locked up the Inn, setting a guard of their Servants, whom they had privately
sent for to secure it, and others to secure the way from Northampton to Stony
Stratford where the King lay, that none should pass to bear the news of what
had happened, under a pretense only that they designed to be the first that
would wait upon the King from that Town, but Earl Rivers perceiving himself as
it were a Prisoner, and mistrusting some design against his Person, went boldly
to the Dukes, who were in the same Inn, and demanded the reason of such their
proceedings, upon which they began to pick a quarrel with him, saying that he
endeavored to sow discord between the King and them to their utter confusion,
should it take effect, but as he was about to excuse the false Accusation they
committed him to Ward, and taking Horse Rode to Stony Stratford, where in the
presence of the young King, they after a feigned salutation and submission,
picked a quarrel with the Lord Gray, the Kings other Brother by the Mothers
side, saying that he the Lord Rivers and Lord Marquess had Conspired their
ruin, and that the Marquess had taken the Kings Treasure out of the Tower, and
fitted out Ships to Sea (which though they alleged as a crime against him, yet
themselves knew it was done for the good of the Nation, and with the consent of
the Council.

These Accusations the King excused, saying, as for his Uncle and his Brother
present, he durst engage they had done nor meant no ill, though the Marquess
being absent, he could not as yet tell what he might have done, but this
availed not, for in the Kings presence they Arrested the Lord Richard, Sir
Thomas Vaughan, and Sir Richard Hawit, and brought the King and all his Train
back to Northampton, which unexpected news coming to the Queens Ear, she
immediately with her second Son the Duke of York took Sanctuary in Westminster,
and there in great heaviness attended the sequel, and there had the great Seal
delivered to her by the Archbishop of York, which he afterward repenting, sent
privately for it again.

In the mean while Gloucester used many Arguments to persuade the King and
those about him, that all should be well, and sent a dish of meat from his own
Table to Earl Rivers with comfortable, though dissembling words, but in the
end, the Lord Rivers, the Lord Richard, Sir Thomas Vaughan were sent to diverse
Prisons, and in conclusion all Beheaded at Pomfret by the command of
Gloucester, without Process of Law.

The next thing was to scandalize the Queen, and to insinuate with the people,
that the Lord aforesaid intended to kill all of the Blood Royal, to which
purpose they showed several pieces of Armor found in their Carriages, saying
it was designed for their destruction, which many of the more easy sort
believed, though wise men knew, that if they had so intended, they would have
had it on their backs, but at last the King was brought to London, and joyfully
received by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and chief Citizens, and
thereupon a Council was called to consult of his Coronation, in which
Gloucester so cunningly dissembled his Intentions, that he was made Protector
of the Kings Person and Realm, and so the Lamb was committed to the keeping of
the Woolf, and thus having got the King safe in the Tower, nothing remained but
possessing himself of the young Duke of York who was with the Queen in
Sanctuary, the which (though much contrary to the will of the Queen) he at last
obtained, and upon first sight took him in his Arms, and gave him a Judas kiss.

Thus having secured himself of the Male Line of the House of York, he began to
pull off the Vizard that he so long had worn, and began to place and displace
the Kings attendants as he thought most advantageous for the carrying on of his
design, to all which Buckingham was privy, and it was resolved between them,
that the Protector should be King, and Buckingham upon these following
considerations, to assist him to grasp the Crown to his utmost power, viz. That
Gloucesters only Son should Marry his Daughter, and that when he had attained
his desire, he should have quiet possession of the Earldome of Hereford with
other Immunities, and the better to carry on the design, two Counsels were
appointed, one in the Tower, and the other in Bishopsgate-street, the latter of
which was composed of the Protectors own Creatures, amongst whom was one
Catesby a Lawyer, in whom the Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlain put such
c^nfidence, that he doubted not but from him to have frequent Intelligence of
all that passed, but he deceived his expectation, and instead of standing by
him, gave Council against his Life, by incensing the Protector, that whilst he
lived he could not accomplish his design, which so netled the Protector, that
though he loved the Lord Chamberlain, yet rather than to be baulked in his
purpose, he resolved, and the next day in Counsel he found occasion to pick a
Quarrel with him upon pretense that the Queen and Shores Wife (the late Kings
Concubine) had bewitched him, the latter of which the Lord Chamberlain for the
great Love he bore her, seeming to excuse, as indeed she was no ways Guilty,
the Protector with a Sign given, in a great Rage gave notice to his men in
Harness that he had planted in the next Room, who rushing in in great number,
one struck at the Lord Stanley with a Battle-Axe, that had he not swiftly
stooped under the Table, had split his Scull, but as it was, it grievously
wounded him, then was the Lord Hastings Arrested, and within an hour after
Beheaded on a Logg in the Tower, and all the other Lords disposed of in safe
Custody for a time, and to excuse the Fact, a Proclamation was put forth,
intimating that the Lord Stanley and Lord Hastings intended to have Murdered
the Protector and Duke of Buckingham in Counsel, but few or none believed it,
and the better to color his pretense of being bewitched by Jane Shore, he
caused her house to be rifled, and her to do open Penance* and the same day
the Lord Chamberlain was beheaded, the Lords of the Queens Blood were Beheaded
at Pomfret, not without his Counsel and advice, little suspecting his Life was
of equal date with theirs.

The Protector having thus far proceeded, and resolving to go through stitch,
procures Edmund Shore Knight Lord Mayor of London to be of the Counsel, that
being privy to his design, he might work the City to his purpose; as likewise
procured the said Shores Brother a Doctor in Divinity, and one Friar Pinker to
Preach his Title, and insinuate him in their Sermons into the hearts of the
People, in which the former by such prodigious Flattery and Dissimulation
proceeded, that being reviled and hated of all men, for very shame and anguish
he shortly after died, the latter in the midst of his Sermon so lost his Voice,
that he was forced to break off in the middle; but this way not prevailing,
(though Gloucester had ordered them to Proclaim his Mother an Adulteress, and
that his Brother Edward was unlawfully begotten.) Buckingham, together with tho
Mayor, Recorder, and some of the Aldermen, repaired to Guild Hall, where the
Duke made a long harangue in praise of the Protector, to all the Citizens
assembled, laying open the Cruelties, Lusts, and Tyranny of King Edward,
vilifying his offspring, and alleging them unlawful, by arguing him lawfully
Married to the Lady Elizabeth Lucy, though upon Trial no such thing appeared,
the Lady denying and disowning any such Marriage. His tedious Speech ended, he
expected the loud applause of the people, that they should have cried, King
Richard, King Richard, but they rather stood amazed in deep silence, not so
much as the murmur of a voice being heard, at which the Duke was much
perplexed, and signified as much to the Mayor, who told him, he believed the
people did not understand him aright, whereupon he again began to repeat what
he had before declared, with additions more plain than what he had before
delivered, which ended, some of his own men and of Gloucesters retinue, as
likewise several Apprentices and loose Fellows, who had thrust in amongst the
Citizens, cried, King Richard, King Richard, and threw up their Caps, whilst
the Citizens looked back as amazed at what they meant, but the Duke taking hold
of this opportunity, said, It was a joyful Acclamation, and he rejoiced to see
that all as one man had consented that the Protector should be King, and
therefore desired them that the next day they would accompany him to wait upon
the Protector to see if his Grace would accept of the Regal Diadem, and in the
mean while he would acquaint him with their good will toward him.

In the Morning the Mayor, some of the Aldermen, and several Citizens, but more
Apprentices and Serving-men, accompanied the Duke to Baynards Castle, where the
Protector resided, and being entered the outward Court, they sent in a Message
to the Protector, to acquaint him that there were many Eminent persons, as well
Nobility as Citizens, had an Important Suit to his Grace, and could impart it
to no other, upon which he dissembles fear and unwillingness to speak with
them, but after many earnest Entreaties, he came into a Gallery where they
might behold him, and from whence he might speak to them, and then the Duke of
Buckingham in the name of the rest, addressed himself in a speech, intimating,
that it was the desire of all the Nobility and Commons of England, that he
should take upon him the Sovereignty of the Kingdom of England and its
Apurtenances, which he made strange at, as if he had never known of any such
design, and vehemently (though with much dissimulation) argued against it, till
the Duke of Buckingham told him, that the Nation was resolved to reject the
Line of Edward, and therefore offered the Crown first to him as Right Heir, and
should be sorry his Grace should refuse it, but if he did, they were resolutely
bent to Elect some Nobleman King without his consent.

To this the Protector after some recollecting himself, as if he had been to
study what to answer, said, He was sorry they should reject his Brothers
Children, and not suffer them to Rule, but since it was their pleasure, it was
not in his power to oppose it, and therefore as next Rightful Heir he accepted
of their kind offer, and would study to deserve their kindness, etc. After he
had spoken what he thought convenient, the people shouted, King Richard, King
Richard, (that is the Rabble) but the Graver Citizens stood Mute, and had
various discourses amongst themselves what might be the sequel, yet we may well
say here ended the young King Edwards Reign, which was rather an Inter Regnum
which from his Fathers Death continued only two Months and 16 days, and in that
space he not Crowned.

Richard by Tyranny and Usurpation having snatched the Diadem, was Crowned with
all Splendour, and caused a Parliament to be called in his name (such was the
partial flattery of that Age) many Acts were made which confirmed him rightful
Heir, and to justify his proceedings, but he siting uneasy in his Usurped
Throne, whilst his Nephews were alive, soon plotted the destruction of the
Royal Infants, which Heaven past doubt suffered, for the many unjust
blood-sheads committed by their Father; nor was he long in finding a fit
Instrument for his Hellish purpose, for having in vain tempted Sir Robert
Brakenbury to Murder the Innocents, he in his Progress to Gloucester,
complained to one of his Pages, saying, Ah* whom shall a Man Trust, those whom
I have brought up my self? those that I had thought most surely to serve me,
even those fail me at my commandment, and will do nothing, to which his Page
(well understanding his meaning) replied that there was one without that he
durst Engage his Life would perform his commands (meaning one Sir James Terril)
which much rejoiced the Usurper, who going into the Palace Chamber, found Sir
James and Sir Thomas Terril (both Brothers, though unlike in conditions) in bed
together, when calling up Sir James, (a Varlet unworthy of Knighthood) he
Imparted the matter to him, who never bogled at the horrid Villainy, but in
hopes of Favor and advancement, consented to the Impiety, and thereupon
obtained the Usurpers Letter, to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to have all the
Keys delivered to him for one Night, to perform his pleasure, which he
accordingly received.

But before I proceed to the Tragedy, one thing is worthy of Note in the Young
King, who hearing his Uncle had taken upon him the Regency, with a Feeling
grief, said to him that gave him notice thereof, Alas, I would my Uncle would
let me Enjoy my Life yet, though I loose my Kingdom and Crown.

But to return, this Monster having got the Power, displaced all the young
Kings Servants, and left none about them but one Black Will, a Bloody Villain,
and when the Night of Murder came, he appointed one Miles Forest and John
Dighton, both fleshed in Murders from their Youth, the latter of them his
Horsekeeper, to dispatch the King and his Brother the Duke of York, who coming
in at Midnight, smoothered them to Death with Pillows, laying upon them, till
they felt by their stillness they were dead, and then laying their Naked bodies
upon the Bed, called their wicked Master to behold the dismal Spectacle, who
caused the Bodies to be buried under the Stairs, and a heap of Stones to be
laid on them, and then posted to tell the Usurper what he had done, who
rejoiced at the most Execrable Tragedy, yet ordered their Bodies to be removed
thence, which as the Writers of most credit say, were wrapped up in Lead, and
put in a Coffin full of holes, and thrown into the Tower Ditch; others affirm,
that they were thrown into a black deep in the Mouth of the River of Thames,
but certain it is, they were never afterward found, but low the just Vengeance
of Heaven on their Murderers, and those that contributed to it; First, the
Duke of Buckingham taking up Arms against the Usurper whom he had raised, was
discomfited, and flying to one Banister who was his Tennant, and had been his
Servant, a man whom himself had raised from nothing to high esteem, continued
with him for a while in the disguise of a Gardener, but Proclamation coming
forth, promising the reward of 1000 Marks to any that could apprehend him, the
false Wretch (though Gods Judgment was signal therein) delivered him up, and
within a few days after he was beheaded: Forest rotted piecemeal, and died in
great Torment: Dighton lived miserably at Calais dying in the Streets; and
Terril after he had confessed the Murder, was beheaded for Treason on
Tower Hill, in the Reign of Henry the Seventh, the Usurper during his short
Reign, which lasted but three years, was continually terrified with frightful
Visions of Devils, that seemed to tear and hale him in pieces, his evil Genius
still haunting him, till at last he was slain in the Battle of Bosworth-field,
and his Body carried naked before a Horseman, being made a sport and scoffing
to all that beheld it, and lay to public view in Leicester, and then obscurely
Buried; and to conclude, his name grew so odious, that the White Bore which was
his device, was every where torn down, the Executions during his Reign were
many; the Afflictions of the Land by Dearths and Inundations Excessive, so that
few or none lamented his Fall, who had Murdered two Kings, and two Princes of
the Blood Royal, their immediate Heirs and Successors.

Nor died King Edward the Sixth, that pious Prince and Phaenix of the World,
without great suspicion of being Poisoned, for the Earl of Northumberland by
his Stratagems, and the assistance of the Lords of his Faction, having procured
the Death of the Kings two Uncles, the Lord Admiral, and Lord Protector, for
the Death of the last of which the King falling into a deep Melancholy, and
then sickening, he so dealt with him, as to disinherit his Sisters, the Lady
Mary and Lady Elizabeth, and to settle the Crown by Will upon his Cousen the
Lady Jane Gray, Daughter to the Earl of Suffolk, whom he had caused to be
Married to his 4 th Son the Lord Guilford Dudley, thereby to Entail the Crown
to his Posterity, and then (as he thought) to Seal what he had done, he removed
the Kings Physicians, and set a Woman who undertook to Cure him, who either
through Ignorance, or rather as many imagine, to complete the Hellish purpose,
brought him to that pass, that his Physicians being again called to him, durst
not give their Advice, but went away shaking their heads, with Tears in their
Eyes, and shortly after that Pattern of true Piety and Virtue left this Life,
when after his Death his Body was found swelled at a Monstrous rate, and so
diversely colored, that most whispered it, that he was Poisoned, as did many
Learned Physicians, but durst not speak their minds freely, yet Northumberlands
project lasted not, for himself, his Son, and the Pious and Innocent Lady Jane,
as likewise the Duke of Suffolk her Father, all lost their Heads in the Reign
of Queen Mary.

Nor did Heavens Justice seem slow upon the heads of those Scotch Monsters who
slew their King, viz. James the Fifth, stiling themselves the Ministry of
Scotland, for the chief Actor was Burnt, together with all or most part of his
Family, by his House accidentally firing in the Night, and others his wicked
accomplices, who durst stretch out their hands against Majesty, were forced to
fly and die miserable Exiles, whilst the Land Groaned under civil Dissentions,
Famine, Mortal Sickness, and the like.

But having proceeded thus far, I shall make a step over into France, and there
take a view of the untimely Ends, and Barbarous Murder of two of their late
Kings.

CHAP. VI.
A Relation of the Murder of Henry the Third, the French King, by James
Clement a Jacobin, and how Gods Vengeance overtook the Murderer; as likewise
fell heavy upon the whole Kingdom.

KING Henry the Third of France, Third Son to Henry the Second, after the Death
of his Father and two Brothers, Francis and Charles, (in the latter of whose
Reign, by his special Command, happened the Bloody Massacree of the Protestants
all over France) succeeded to the Crown of France, and was Crowned with great
Solemnity, but sat not long in his Throne e're the Guises Faction began to
give him disturbance, and under combination of League against him, take up
Arms, whereupon many Battles were Fought, and what they most alleged, was
his favoring the Protestants, and to such a height the Duke of Guise pushed
the Discontent, for the hate he bore to the Hugonets, (as the Protestants were
termed) himself having been the Perswader to the former Massacres, that the
King was forced in secret wise to fly Paris, and for refuge, betake himself to
his Army, whereupon he sent for the King of Navarre, (afterward King of
France, whose Tragedy we shall next relate) to his assistance, who joining
Forces, fought many Battles with the Leaguers, but finding them the more
obstinate, and that the Duke of Guise sought to deprive him of his Crown, it
was so resented by some of the Kings Servants, that they set upon the Duke in
the Castle of Chartres, and forcing their Entrance, killed him and his Brother
the Cardinal, which was no doubt a signal Judgment for the many Thousand
Innocents that by his advice were Massacred.

Upon this the Leaguers prevailed with Pope Sixtus the fifth (willing enough of
himself) to excommunicate the King, and every where excite his Ruffians to
Assassinate him, promising for their encouragement great Rewards on Earth, and
greater in Heaven, but the King was still Environed with such Trusty Friends,
that the Popes Hellish design was for a while Frustrated, though no way that
carried the Face of a Probabillity was lest unattempted.

The Leaguers growing still more Furious having made the Duke of Main, the
Duke of Guise and others their head, therefore to nip them in the bud, the two
Kings advanced with their Armies, and sat down before the great City of Paris,
the chief Seat of the Leaguers, and made Sundry Assaults, in order to win it,
but did not so soon prevail, but that one of the Popes Hellish Instruments,
prevailed against the Kings Life, the manner thus. One James Clement a Jacob in
Monk, having been tampered withal and molded in private, to Enterprise so
great a wickedness, he in the Assembly of his Convent, declares his Resolution
to kill the King, for which resolution he is carressed, called, Savior of his
Country, applauded and promised Mountains in this World, if he overlived the
Act, and if he miscarry to be assured of Saintship to pass immediately to
Heaven, without calling at Purgatory, to have shrines and Altars erected in
memorial of the (as they wickedly and falsely termed it) Pious, Religious and
Holy undertaking, which so Transported the Novice, that he thought himself
already capering above the Clouds, and thought every moment a day till he had
put his wicked design in practice, wherefore, either to make him the more
venterous, or that themselves did think it more expedient, they carried him to
the High-Altar, prayed over him, (O wickedness beyond Degree) that God would
Strengthen his Arm to give a sure Blow, and thereupon delivered him a Dagger,
wrapped up in the Relict of a Saint, as they called it, and the better to
complete the Impostor, added to all their wickedness, by dipping the point of
it in consecrated Wine of the Sacrament, and then dismissed him with what they
called Blessings, but indeed such monstrous Impiety, that to the everlasting
Infamy of the Romish-church let it stand Recorded.

This deceived wretch full Fraught as he imagined with Honor in this World,
and happiness in the other, Arrives at the Kings Camp at St. Clou, and
pretended an Embassy from the Leaguers to the King, which he was charged to
deliver to no Person but himself, and so by Feigned pretenses, had admittance,
when putting his hand into his Sleeve, as though he would draw out a Letter,
with the before mentioned Dagger smote him in the Belly; the King wrested the
Dagger from him wounded him on the Head, which Struggling, made such a noise,
that the Guards coming hastily in, and seeing the King wounded, stayed not to
Inquire into the manner, but with their Swords cut the miserable wretch to
pieces, and sent him by that means to his propper place, from whence not all
the Papal Authority, nor Masses of a Thousand years can deliver him.

The next Morning the King Died of his Wounds, leaving the King of Navarr his
Kingdom and Army, who succeeded him by the name of Henry the fourth, and soon
after avenged the Death of his Predecessor, by Beseiging Paris the chief
residence of the Leaguers, who greatly rejoiced for the Death of the King,
reduced it to such extremity by Famine, no filthy thing was left uneaten, and
yet 6 or 7000 Dyed with Hunger and Pestilence.

The Pope hearing of the Kings Death, much Applauded the Murderer, caused his
Statute to be set up, and gave him a red Letter in the Callender, saying, he
was worthy of praise, for he Stabbed not the Picture of a King, but the King of
France, in the midst of his Army, and the best word he could afford the King
was a Favourer of Heretics, and an unfortunate Prince, but his joy lasted not
long, for he soon after Died miserably, and thus much for the fall of this
great King.

CHAP. VII.
The Relation of the Murder of King Henry the Fourth of France, commonly
called Henry the Great, by Francis Ravillack, what Prodigies Fore-run it, and
the Vniversallity of the Conspiracy, with Gods vengeance on the Barbarous
Actors and Contrivers, etc.

HEnry the IV. Son to Anthony of Burb^on, by his Wife the only Daughter, and
Heir of Henry D' Albert, King of Navarr, after his Grandfather, Father and
Mothers Decease, Enjoyed that Kingdom, and as you have heard, being next Prince
of the blood, he was rightful King of France, after the Decease of Henry the
III. and carried on the War against the Leaguers, till he had obtained the
absolute Sovereignty, joining both Kingdoms.

Many were the Plots laid against his Life, as that Massacre in Paris, whither
he resorted to Solemnize his Marriage with Margaret Sister to King Charles the
IX. where amongst other Slaughters of his dearest Friends, it was debated
whither he and the Young Prince of Conde should be Murdered, and carried on
the contrary, only by the persuasions of one Duke, yet the next Morning they
were brought forth into an outward Court, where whole Piles of Dead lay, and
put to their choice by the King, either to choose Death or the Mass, (they being
both Protestants) of which at that time they thought it convenient to choose the
latter, but soon found means to escape, and Renounce those Errors; another
attempt was made against his Life after the reduction of Paris at Melun, by one
Peter Barrier a Soldier, who was hired to have Stabbed him, at the advantage
of his passing a Corner, but being detected, had his hand first burnt, holding
the Knife with which the Execution was intended in it, the mean while and
afterward had his Flesh pulled off with hot Pincers; A third open attempt was
by one John Castle a Merchants Son in Paris, and a pupil of the Jesuits own
bringing up, and past doubt Instructing, he not being above 18 years of Age,
thrust himself into the Kings presence, and being about to strike him into the
Belly was prevented by the Kings Stooping to return a Salute to one of his
Nobles, yet it struck him through the Lip and struck one of his Teeth out,
whereupon the party was apprehended, and confessed the Fact, glorying in what
he had done, and maintained he ought to do it, and that he should offer up a
Sacrifice acceptable to God, by taking out of the World a Prince Relapsed; and
Excommunicated, not did he seem much to Regard his Torments, when his Hand was
Burnt, his Flesh plucked off with hot pincers, and lastly as he justly deserved
had his Limbs torn off with Wild Horses, which making it plainly appear that
his Patrons the Jesuits had persuaded him to that wickedness, and promised him
Salvation for his Reward, whereupon his Father was Banished, his House
demollished, and a Piramid set in his place; and secondly by a Decree of
Parliament the whole Society of Jesuits were expelled out of France, but by
their shows of Piety and Sincerity, so Wrought with the Kings Favorites, and
they with him on their behalf, that that Decree was repealed, and they again
restored to the Destruction of the Kings Life, as most imagine.

The next that attempted his Life was one that was or at least pretended
himself a Natural, who finding opportunity run at him with a Knife, whereupon
the Guard would have Killed him, but the King forbid it, and he (being asked
the reason) said, He was King of all the World, and that Henry kept France from
him, whereupon the King out of mere compassion ordered him to be released.

And now France Flourishing under this great and Glorious Prince, whose good
Conduct had Reduced it to so happy an Estate, that the like for some Ages past
had not been, he thought to have rested, but such was the Implacable Malice of
his Adversaries, that they watched all opportunities to deprive him of Life, to
whom next Heaven they owed their happyness, nor did they desist till they had
brought about their wicked purposes, the manner and opportunity given thus.

The King having Married Mary D' Medicis Daughter to Frances, and Neice to
Fardinand Dukes of Florence, upon the Divorce of Margaret, Sister to the three
late Kings of France, She was Impatient till she was Installed, and although
the King had other purposes of more urgency which required his leaving of
Paris, yet was he prevailed with to stay, though many things Prognosticated ill
events, as the Raining Blood in diverse places, Monsters-Born, Earthquakes, and
Airy Fantoms happening and appearing, and several Predictions that the King
should not outlive that Year, that he should Dye in Paris, a sudden and
violent Death, and in his Coach, the which he (though he was not over credulous
on such occasions) began to hearken to it, and was heard to say that he must be
gone from that City or his Enemies would Kill him; nay, so sure were they of
his Destruction, that a Month before his being Assassinated Papers were found
Printed in Spain and Italy that he was Dead, and eight days before a Courrier
passed through Liege, saying, He went to give the Princes of Germany notice of
his Death.

The Villain Incited to be the Executioner, (with large promises of Earthly
Treasure and Joys Everlasting) hardens himself to perpetrate the Execrable
wickedness, having Lingered about Paris a long time for that purpose, he being
an Ill down looked Rascal who had formerly quitted his Order, and became a
Solicitor of Ecclesiastical affairs, the day after the Instalment, the King
Intending to leave Paris, the next day the King going in his Coach from the
Louvre to the Arsenal, and to see all things provided for the Queens Entrance,
having in the Coach with him the Dukes of Espernon and Monthason, the Marshals
of Lavardine, Rocquelavar, La Force, Mirebeau, and Lian Cour chief Esquires,
when Entering Iron-Mongers Street, through the narrow passage by St. Innocents
Church, a Cart Laden with Wine was overthrown, as most imagine, for the
purpose, which caused the Coach to stop, and whilst his Guard of Partisans
passed through the Churchyard, this Villain (who had all the while followed
the Coach) set one Foot against the Stall and the other upon the spoke of the
Wheel, and with a long Knife struck the King into the Breast beneath the Heart,
at which the King cried I am Wounded, yet the Hellhound redoubled his force
with a second Blow, which struck him to the Heart, of which he Dyed, without
fetching so much as a Sigh, and again a third stroke which the Duke D'
Monthazon received on his Sleeve, and although it was supposed the Murderer
might have escaped, yet so heightened was he in his wickedness, that he never
Stirred from the place, neither hid his Bloody Knife, but rather Gloried in
what he had done, and being taken; he was adjudged by the Chamber of the
Assemblies to be drawn to the Grave with four Horses, and to have the Flesh
pulled off from his Arms, Breasts, and Thighs with Burning Pincers, and then
Torn to pieces, which Sentence was put in Execution, without his Testifying the
least Emotion of Grief or Fear, for such strange Torments, so that it was
Evident that he had been made believe that Paricid was Merritorious, and that
if he Dyed, he Dye a Martyr, being Enchanted with a false assurance of great
things, though for his Horrid Treason and Barbarous Assassination he met with
his just Reward.

All France at the Death of this King were amazed and in Tears, unless his
Enemies who secretly rejoiced, thinking to gain their purposes, but were
deceived most of them, being wasted and destroyed in the Wars that were in the
Minority of his Children; and thus fell this great King, yet e're I conclude,
one thing is Remarkable, when he was opened, the Jesuits got his Heart, which
they so long had desired, and carried it to their Church De La Fleck, under
pretense of Burying it there, his Body was Buried in St. Dennis, whither a
little before the Body of his Prodecessor Henry the III. had been brought from
the Church of St. Cornillie. And leaving France, I shall Return to England,
there to give the Reader a Sight of one of the blackest Trajedies that ever the
World has known, a Murder without President or Parrallel, even the Murder of
the Sacred Martyr Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory, which take as
follows, to the Eternal Infamy of the Regicids.

CHAP. VIII.
The Dismal Relation of the most Inhuman and Barbarous Murder of CHARLES the
First, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and of Gods extraordinary
Judgments, and speedy Vengeance on the Monsterous Regicides and principal
Agents and Abettors in his most deplorable Death.

KING CHARLES the First of ever Blessed Memory, Son to the Renowned King James,
first sole Monarch of Great Britains Empire, and his Virtuous Consort Anne,
Sister to Christianus King of Denmark, was Born at Dunfermel in Scotland on the
19 of November 1600, and when Englands bright Star, the Glorious Queen
Elizabeth Set, he with his Royal Father, the undoubted Heir of these Dominions,
came to London, and continued with great Applause, attracting in his Infancy
the Eyes and Hearts of the Nation to gaze upon his comely person, and much
admire his Virtues, promising such a Blessing to England that indeed it was not
worthy of, he being sole Heir to the Crown by the Death of Prince Henry, who
died at St. James's, Anno 1625, succeeded to the Crown, having before his
Fathers Death contracted Marriage with the Virtuous and most Renowned Princess
Henrietta Maria, Daughter to Henry the IV. of France, and Sister to Lewis the
then Reigning King, and at first such was the Universal Joy, that not a Cloud
of Discontent appeared upon the Brow of any, but such is the Malice of the
Powers of Darkness to hinder the progress of the Gospel (which in his Pious
Reign, whilst he absolutely weiled the Sword of Justice, spread so wide, that
the like no Age had paralleled) was not wanting to raise such Pestilential
Whirlwinds of Discontent, or rather Treasonable Intentions, as overturned all
order and Government, bedewing Albions Surface with Blood; and lastly, with
that more valuable then Ten thousand vulgar lives, and to accomplish it, the
Monsters his Agents a while sought by underhand means, but at last finding the
Rabble molded for their purpose they appeared bare faced, and inveighed
against his Favorites, and first of all the Duke of Buckingham, who at length
was Murdered by one Felton basely and treacherously at Portsmouth, for which
the Murderer was deservedly hanged in Chains: The next thing was to object
against the Legality of Ship Money, though Twelve of the Judges were of opinion
that the Land being in danger of an Invasion, the King at any time (with the
advice of his Counsel) might leavy Money to defend it without intrenching upon
Privilege of Parliament, for indeed if such a thing might not be, the Nation
might be overrun with a Foreign Enemy before money in a Parliamentary way
could be raised to defend it, yet these were but slight Cavels for what
happened afterward, for they openly encouraged the Scots to Rebel, and act such
Insolences, that the like happened not in that Kingdom before in the age of
Man, Sacrilege and Murder being counted Trifles, and although they in
Parliament denied the King any supply for his urgent occasions, yet for their
dear Rebel Brethren of Scotland in recompense for the mischief they had done
in Church and State, they voated them 100000 pounds, and to show themselves
better than their words, soon after added 200000 more, and then fell to Impeach
the noble Earl of Strafford of High Treason, as many believed upon no other
account then that he was the Kings Favorite, and so far proceeded in their
pernicious Designs, by raising Tumults with Clubs and Stalves to assault the
Kings Palace, crying out, Justice against the Earl, and no Bishops, that the
King (though not without the Earls consent) thinking to appease those Blood
thirsty Wretches, after his Attaindure, Signed a Bill for his Execution, which
on the 12 of May 1841, was Executed on Tower Hill, his Majesty being greatly
averse to that Fatal Trajedy, and at the same time (O the Indulgence of this
Blessed Prince) Signed another Bill for the Houses siting, till they should
consent to be dissolved, which they turned to his destruction, for having got
the Millitia into their Hands, they Armed against him, and to them joined such
Rake-Hells as they could scrape together, of all Religions, as Anabaptists,
Independants, Quakers, Presbyters, Brownists, Ranters, Advanities, Socinians,
and what not, all fit Instruments of Hells, to hew down the Ceeder of Monarchy,
and Imbrew the Earth with Blood of her Sons.

Upon this and many other affronts, the King sets up his Standard at
Nottingham, after his having been denied entrance into Hull by the disloyal
Knight Sir John Hotham, who had a Reward for his Treason, the just Judgment of
God soon overtook him, for both he and his Son were soon after Beheaded, by
their Rebellious Masters Command, viz. The Parliament, for to please whom, he
had manifestly broken his Oath to his Prince.

And now all being in a Combustion, and no likelihood of deciding matters, but
by the Sword, (though nothing was wanting on his Majesty's part that might
conduce to a Peace and happy Reconcilliation) many dreadful Battles were
Fought, wherein the success was various till most of the Flower of the English
Nobillity were Lost, and the King left destitute of Money, and other such
necessaries, as are Rightfully termed the Sins of War, Fortune, who rightfully
is painted Blind, turned the Scale of Victory and success, till no considerable
place of Strength but Oxford was left him, where finding no concessions, would
mollify the Flinty temper of his implacable Enemies; he after some
consultation with his Council, resolved (rather than to hazard being obliged to
such hard conditions as a close Seige might extort) to Fly to the Scotch Army
who were in the Parliaments pay, and from some of whose perfidious chief he had
received several kind Invitations, which he effected in the disguise of a
Serving-Man, and found it Encamped at South-well, where he was first kindly
entertained with promise of Protection, but Treacherous Villains as they were
(and be it a Brand to their Posterity for ever) rather then loose their Arrears
due from the Parliament, they delivered up their lawful Sovereign the best of
Kings to the dispose of his merciless Enemies, but Heavens vengeance delayed
not to such perfidious dealing, for soon after all Scotland was put into a
Bloody Sweat by the Usurper.

The King being in the Hands of his Enemies was Imprisoned at Holmby, where
having stayed some time, he was taken thence by Colonel Joyce and carried to
Childersly, thence to Newark, and so by several Stages till he came to
Hampton Court, where a Treaty was proposed though nothing less intended, for at
that very time the Tub-thumpers, fearing if the King should be restored, they
should loose their canting Trade, bauled out nothing but Death and desolation,
saying, Not words, but the Sword, shall end the Controversy; and placing a
hundred Bugbears before the Peoples Eyes to render them averse to any
compliance, but there cant availed not, for such was the Gracious concessions
of this good King, that they were highly approved of by many, and therefore
Cromwell and his Faction fearing it should come to perfection, laid a Plot to
fright the King from Hampton Court, by possessing him under pretense of
Friendship that there was a design against his Life, which was so
Hypocritically demonstrated to him by Colonel Whaly, that the King leaving
Letters behind him to signify the cause of his departure, he in the Company
and by the advice of Mr. Ashburnham and others, departed about midnight, none
endeavoring to Impeach his passage, the Plot being before hand so laid, and
in the end came into the Isle of Wight, of which Colonel Hammond was made
Governor, who being Brother to his Majesty's Chaplain, he thought he might the
better confide in him, but as disloyal as he was he proved perfidious to his
distressed Majesty, for upon the Parliaments publishing their Order, to make it
Treason for any that concealed his Person, he secured him, and sent them notice
thereof.

Upon this the King Writes to the Parliament, giving them more fully to
understand the reasons of his departure, and that he was still desirous that
the Treaty of Peace might be continued, and that he would consent to any thing
that in Honor and conscience he might do, so that after many messages had
passed, the Treaty was renewed, wherein the Kings extraordinary Wisdom
appeared, and his Princely Goodness so far condescending for the sake of Peace,
that his concessions were by the Rebels themselves Voted satisfactory, which
the Arch-Traytor Cromwell, perceiving and finding that such a conclusion would
hinder him from aspiring, he Plotted with the Factious Army Officers to mar
the whole proceedings, by new modelling the Parliament, and turning out such as
were Inclinable to accord with his Majesty, whereupon placing Guards about the
Parliament House, after some conference with the Speaker, Pride and Hewson sent
in a Paper to the House of Commons, Requiring the Impeached Members and
Major General Brown (as Guilty of calling in Hammilton, a Forged pretense to
pick a Quarrel) might be secured and brought to Justice, and that the ninety
and odd Members that refused to Vote against the Scotch Engagement, and all
that Voted for recalling the four Votes of non Addresses to his Majesty, and
for a Personal Treaty, and acquiescing Votes in his Majesty's answer should be
immediately suspended the House, and that those that had done no such things
should draw up their Protestations in Writing, etc. a brave way of making and
unmaking Parliaments, but the Paper being thrown out of the House with
detestation, whereupon all the Guards advanced, and a strong Guard set at the
House Door, where Sir Hardress Waller and the Colonels, Pride and Hewson,
lying purdue violently seized upon several Knights and Burgesses as they came
out; others they decoyed out under Sleeveless pretenses, and in the end seized
upon, debarred of Entrance, and caused to decline coming no less then 200 forty
one, all which number were secured and kept Prisoners, Hugh Peter's being their
Keeper, who protesting against this force and Insolency, done upon and against
the Houses and privileges of Parliament were released (all except
Major General Brown, who was kept Prisoner at St. James's) Ireton bidding them
at their departure look to it, and see they Acted nothing against the present
Parliament or Army.

Thus all things being brought and fitted to their purpose, the King is taken
from the Isle of Wight and carried to Hurst Castle, a place very incommodious
both for health and necessaries it standing in the Sea, and no fresh water
being to be had within three Miles, from whence Harrison conveyed him to
Winchester, and so by several Journies to St. James's, that insolent Traitor
riding in the Coach with him, and giving order to his Soldiers to beat such as
pressed near, either to see him, or compassionate his Sufferings.

And now these Monsters resolving the Kings Death, to make way for their
greatness, the offalls or fragments of a Parliament make an Ordinance, whereby
they took away and disanulled the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and at the
same time the Council of War forbid any State to be used toward his Majesty,
whose attendants were for the most part discharged, and to complete their
Villainies, and to appear in their proper colors, an Ordinance was brought into
the Commons House by Scot for the Trial of the King, so monsterous and wicked a
proposal that no Age e're paralleled, which after some debate was approved of,
and sent to the Lords House, who cast it out with detestation, which so metled
them, that they presently passed a Vote, asserting the Supreme power to lie in
the Commons, and that whatsoever is Enacted or declared for Law by the House of
Commons in Parliament, has the force of Law, which passed without a Negative
Voice, so that it plainly appeared at whose beck they were.

And upon these Votes they made the Nest, wherein they hatched the Monster,
called An Act for the Trial the King, etc. which the 9 th of January 1648 was
Proclaimed in Westminster Hall by Sergeant Danby, by the Beat of Drum, and
sound of Trumpet, and notice given that the Commissioners of the pretended
High-Court of Justice, were to sit the next day, and that all those that had
any thing to say against Charles Stuart King of England, might be heard; The
like was done in Cheapside and at the Royal Exchange.

And thus they Proclaimed their Wickedness aloud, the which however Masqued
with specious pretenses, and was then heard by most with Horror and amazement.
The Bloody Villains that durst sit to Judge their Lawful King, were as
follows, whose Name and Memory are hateful to all Mankind.

Oliver Cromwell, that Monster in Nature, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw President
and scandal to the Long-Robe, who a little before had taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, but such Monsters no Oaths can bind, Thomas Harrison
a Butchers Son at New Castle Underline in Staffordshire, John Carew, John Cook
Solicitor to the Court, Hugh Peter's, that Scandal to the Clergy, and Factious
Bell-weather, Thomas Scot a Brewers Clark, Gregory Clement a broken Merchant,
Adrian Scroop, the Stain of his Family, John Jones a Serving-man, Frances
Hacker, Daniel Axtil a mean Shopkeeper in Bedford-shire, Colonel Okey once a
Stoaker in a Brew House, Miles Corbet; John Bark stoad, a sorry Goldsmith in
the Strand, Thom^s Pride sometimes a Dray-man* Isaac Ewer, Thomas Lord Gray of
Grooby (O Scandal and Shame of his Family) Sir John Danvers, Brother to the
Loyal Earl of Danby, Sir Thomas Maleverrer, Sir John Bourcher a troublesome
Independent, Colonel Purefoy Governor of Coventry, John Black stone a
Shopkeeper in Newcastle, Sir William Constable Governor of Gloucester, Richard
Dean General at Sea, Francis Allen a Broken Goldsmith, Peregrine Pelham
Governor of Hull, John Moor, John Allured, not long before a private Soldier,
but to fit him for this Villainy, made a Colonel, Humphry Edwards a Member of
the long Parliament, Sir Gregory Norton, a Pensioner to the King, but now
bought off to make one in the Execrable Villainy, John Ven a broaken Silk-man,
Thomas Andrews a Linnen-Draper, Anthony Stapely Governor of Chichester, Thomas
Horton of mean and obscure Birth, John Fry a Country Farmer, and an Arian
Heretic, Thomas Hammond Prince Henry's Physicians Son, Isaac Pennington, twice
Lord Mayor of London, twice Broke, and a lasting Dishonor to the City, Simon
Meyen a recruit to the Long Parliament, Sir Hardress Waller a poor Knight,
though after Enriched by the Spoils of his Majesty, William Heveningham, Henry
Martin a Lude and vicious Person, and consequently the fitter for so wicked a
purpose, Owen Row a Silkman, Augustine Garland a petty Fogger, Henry Smith one
of the Six Clarks in Chancery, Robert Tichbourn a Linnen-Draper, also
Lord Mayor of London, George, Fleetwood, James Temple, Thomas Wait of obscure
Birth, Peter Temple a Linnen-Draper, Robert Lilburn Brother to John Lilburn the
troubler of Israel, Gilbert Millington Chairman to the Committee for Plundering
the Clergy, Vincent Potter of obscure Birth, John Downs, Thomas Wogan, John
Lisby, William Say, Valentine Walton, Brother in Law to Cromwell, Edward Whaly,
a Woollen-Draper, Edmund Ludlow Son of a Traitor, Sir Michael Livesey, a poor
Knight of Kent, John Hewson, first a Cobbler, then a Shoemaker, William Goff a
Salters Apprentice, who run away from his Master, and betook him to the Army,
Cornelius Holland a Serving-man, Thomas Challenor by some Reputed a Jesuit,
William Cawley a Brewer, Nicholas Love, Son to Doctor Love of Winchester, John
Dixwel a Recruit to the Long Parliament, Daniel Blagrave, Daniel Broughton,
Edward Denby John Hutchison, Francis Lossely, Lord Munson, James Challenor, Sir
Henry Mildmay, Robert Wallop, James Harrington, and John Philips.

These were the pack of Hellhounds that were thought most fit to hunt after
Royal-Blood, as Indeed they were, for such Monsters never Breathed before on
Brittish-Soil.

Matters being brought to this pass, on the 20 of January 1648. Bradshaw the
President with about 70 of the aforesaid pack, Guarded by Partisans, came into
Westminster Hall, and sat down in the Court, whither the King was brought by
Colonel Thomlinson, and placed at the Bar by the Sergeant at Arms, where a
Crimson-Chair was set, in which he sat down without moving his Hat, or
Regarding the Monsters, yet the President stood up and declared why he was
brought thither, laying many Notorious Falsities to his charge, and was
seconded by Solicitor Cook, but the King not to Impair his Kingly Character,
absolutely denied the Jurisdiction of the Court, and so Learnedly opposed the
Illiterate Rout, with Stupendous Arguments, that they were beaten from all
Defenses, and nothing to say but that they were well satisfied in their Power,
and that it was not for him to dispute their Jurisdiction, (as indeed it
availed not, for past doubt they Right or wrong had beforehand determined his
Destruction) and yet they convened his Majesty before them the day following,
and the next day, as also on the 23 and still pressed him to answer the charge
and own the Jurisdiction of the Court, without permitting him (though he
earnestly desired it) to give his reasons why he refused it, nor to plead for
the Liberty of his Subjects, which most of all he insisted on; but Adjourned
the Court to the 27 when notwithstanding the Kings Learned Arguments and
persuasions, which they impatiently heard, they passed Judgment upon him, which
after a long repetition of what had passed, during the Trial, concluded in the
words.

For all which Treasons and Crimes this Court does adjudge that he (meaning the
King) as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer and Publick-Enemy, shall be put to Death
by severing his Head from his Body, after which Bradshaw declared, It was the
Act and Resolution of the whole Court.

And thus they laid to his charge things that he knew not, nor could be
possible Guilty of, for Kings are accountable to none but God, nor can any man
of Sense Imagine that Treason can be committed against a Subject, by his
Prince, no Law allowing that it can descend, but it must ever ascend.

Yet to the amazement of all Nations, having carried on their Villainy to this
height, they proceeded further, for on the 29 of January a Warrant was directed
under the Hands of John Bradshaw, Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby and Oliver
Cromwell, to Francis Hacker, Colonel Hunks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, for
the Execution of their wicked Sentence, the place appointed for the Tragedy
being before White Hall; and the next day between the hours of ten in the
Morning and five in the Afternoon, to complete the great wickedness, But to
amuse the People that every where detested against their Diabollical
proceedings, and to prevent any attempt that might be made, to rescue his
Majesty, they caused it to be Rumoured that they would respite the Execution;
yet on the Fatal 30 of January in the Year aforesaid, the Commissioners met,
and ordered four or five of their Canting Tub-Preachers to attend upon his
Majesty at St. James's, but he refused to have any conference with those
Varlets.

In the Morning before his Majesty was brought thence, Dr. Juxon Bishop of
London, officiated, and read Divine Service, when as the Second Lesson
appointed to be Read for that day, by the Church Calender, happened to be the
27 Chap. of St. Matthew, being the History of our Saviors passion, which
caused his Majesty to Thank the Doctor, for choosing so fit a place of
Scripture, but being given to understand that it fell in course, he was highly
Animated, then his Majesty received the Sacrament, after which and some other
Devotions ended, he was conveyed to Whitehall through the Park, by a Regiment
of Foot, but about his Person were a private Guard of Partisans, the Bishop on
the one hand and Colonel Thomlinson on the other, when with a cheerful voice,
he bid the Guard march faster, saying, That now he went before them to strive
for a Heavenly Crown, with less Solicitude then he had often Encouraged his
Soldiers to Fight for an Earthly Diadem.

Being come to the Stairs of the long Gallery he passed through, and coming in
to an appartment appointed for him, continued in fervent Prayer, wondering at
the delay, but the reason was because the Scaffold was not Finished, here he
received a Letter from the Prince, brought by Mr. Seymour, and Dinner time
came, he refused to Dine, only Eat a bit of Bread and Drank a Glass of Clarret.

About one of the Clock Colonel Hacker came with his Guard of Officers and
brought his Majesty, accompanied with the Bishop and Colonel Thomlinson,
through the Banqueting House, and from thence upon the Scaffold, a Bridge being
made from one of the Windows to it, round about which stood a Guard of 7
Regiments of Horse and Foot there placed to keep off his weeping Subjects from
approaching to commiserate their dying Sovereign, the Scaffold was hung with
mourning, and so Villanously were they bent on their wicked purpose, that
fearing his Majesty would not willingly submit to the Axe, they had driven in
Iron staples to force him to the Block with Cords, O monstrous Barbarity of
these Inhumane monsters.

His Majesty looking upon the Blcok, and having asked Hacker whither there were
none higher, turned to Thomlinson, and began his Speech, wherein he declared,
His Innocence, the unjust Encroachments of the Parliament upon his Perogative
Royal, and their beginning the unnatural War against him, yet Prays to God to
forgive them all, and all that had a hand in his Death, advises them to restore
the Church and Liberties of the People and the Crown to his Successor, laying
down the particular means and methods that would unavoidably conduce to the
Nations happiness, declaring till they were effectually observed, the Nation
would be miserable; and Lastly, that his Blood was causelessly shed, and that he
Dyed the Martyr of the People, and then at the motion of Dr. Juxon, declared
his Religion, saying, That he Dyed a good Christian according to the Profession
of the Church of England, as he found it left to him by his Father, of which
this good man can bear me witness, (meaning Dr. Juxon) then turning to the
Officers, said, Sirs, Excuse me for I have a good Cause, and I have a Gracious
God, then turning to Hacker, he said, Take care they do not put me to pain,
after which he said to the Executioner, I shall say but very short Prayers, and
when I thrust out my Hands -- then he called to Dr. Juxon for his Nightcap,
which he having put on, said to the Doctor, I have a Gracious God and a Good
cause on my Side, to which the Doctor answered, There is but one Stage more,
this Stage is Turbulent and Troublesome, it is a short one, but you may
consider it will soon carry you a very great way, it will carry you from Earth
to Heaven, and there you will find a great deal of Cordial Joy and Comfort, To
which his Majesty replied, I go from a Corruptible to an Incorruptible Crown,
where no disturbance can be, no disturbance in the World, when as the Doctor
again answered, You are to Ex^hange a Temporary for an Eternal Crown, a good
Exchange.

After this, they asked if his Hair was well, then he taking off his Cloak and
George, gave to the Doctor, saying, Remember -- which as many suppose was to
give his George to the Prince, then he put off his Doublet, and bid the
Executioner set the Block, and bid him when he stretched out his Hands (showing
him the manner) to strike.

After that, having said several Prayers and bidding the Executioner (who was
disguised with a Vizard-masque) stay for the sign, he meekly laid down his
head, and after a short space giving the Sign, (O horror and Eternal Infamy to
his Murderers) had it struck off at one blow, which (bloody as it was) was
taken up and showed to the People, who in Groans and tears expressed their
unfeigned Sorrow.

The Tragedy Finished, his Body and Head were put into a Coffin covered with
mourning Velvet, and carried to his House at St. James's, where it was Embalmed
and laid in a Leaden Coffin, to be seen of such as resorted thither, and after
a Fortnights exposing, delivered to four of his Servants, who in a Hearse
conveyed it to Windsor themselves, in mourning accompanying the Corpse, and
placed it in the Danes-Hall, all hung with mourning, and Lights stuck round,
whither resorted the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hartford, the Earl of
Lindsey, and the Marquess of Dorchester, to pay their last Duty, to their
Royal-Master, having received orders of Parliament for his Interment, but were
denied by Whitchcot to Bury him in St. Georges Chapel by the form of the
Common Prayer Book of the Church of England, though they pleaded the consent of
the Parliament thereto, he alleging that the Parliament would not permit the
use of what they had so solemnly abolished, and so destroy their own Acts, the
Lords replied, that there was a difference between destroying their own Act and
dispencing with it, and that no power so binds its own hands as to disable it
self in some cases, but the rigid Fanatic would not hearken to their reasons,
so that they were obliged to seek a place, and at last found King Henry the
Eight his Vault, where it is conjectured his Body and that of his Wife the Lady
Jane Seymore lies in Leaden Coffins, there being Room for one more, they
Interred the King, and upon his Coffin fixed in large Characters King Charles,
1648, bedewing the Earth with Tears and Sighs, but especially the Bishop, for
that he was not permitted to do his last Duty to his Royal Master.

Thus by Murdering hands fell this blessed Martyr, but Heavens Vengeance was
not slow in making it manifest, how Sacred Kings lives ought to be held; First
it is observed that the first raisers of the Rebellion most of them died
miserable, some by Grievous Diseases, some Beheaded and Hanged by their own
Rebel Party, and others lived miserably in Exile; Oliver that Monster, during
his greatness, was nightly terrified with dreadful Visions, and in the day time
continually in fear of his Life, seldom Lying twice in a Room, and ever haunted
with an Evil Conscience, till he was cut off in the Strength of his days, and
Transported to his proper place in a Whirlwind, and after his Majesty's
Restoration had his odious Corpse together with Bradshaws and his Son Iretons
taken out of their Graves, and Hanged upon Tyburn, their Heads set up at
Westminster Hall. Pride, Ewer, Lord Gray of Grooby, Danvers, Malleverer,
Bourcher, Purefoy, Blackstone, Constable, Dean, (killed by a Shot) Allen,
Peham, Moor, Allured, Edwards, Norton, Venn, Andrews, Stapeley, Horton, Fry,
Hammond, Pennington and Meyen, all of them the Kings Judges, Dyed miserably,
before his present Majesty's Restoration, Olivers Daughter Dyed Madd, his Son
Richard tumbled down as soon as set up, and beset with Bailiffs for Debt, these
of the Kings Judges were condemned and Executed as Traitors, since his Majestys
Restoration, viz. Harrison, Carew, Cook, Peter's, Scot, Clement, S^roop, Jones,
Hacker, Axtel, Okey, Corbet, and Berkstead, being Excluded the Act of
Indemnity, these following of the Kings Judges, were Sentenced to Death as
Traitors, and kept in Prison to be Executed at the pleasure of the King, viz.
Wallen, Heningham, Martin, Row, Garland, Smith, Tichburn, Fleetwood, James
Temple, Peter Temple, Wait, Lilburn, Millington, Potter and Downs, most of
which since Dyed miserably in Prison, those that Fled and came to miserable
ends for the most part in Exile were these, Wagan, Lisle, Say, Walton, VVhaly,
Ludlow, Linsey, Hewson, Goffe, Holland, Challenor, Cawlice, Love, Dixwell,
Braughton and Danby, the following were such as upon humble submission, and
Recantation found mercy and only Fined. Hutchison, Lassels both Fined, but
William Lord Munson, James Challenor, Sir Henry Mildmay, Robert Wallop, Sir
James Harrington, and John Philips, were deprived of their Estates; and
Sentenced to be drawn on Sledges to Tyburn, with Ropes about their Necks like
Traitors, and then returned to the Tower, where they were to continue Prisoners
during their Natural Lives.

And thus Heavens Vengeance overtook the Regicides, and brought those monsters
to their deserved Punnishents, who durst stretch out their Bloody and
Traiterous hands to the sheding Innocent Blood of the Lords Anointed, and that
such or worse may be the Portion of all that shall hereafter dare to imagine,
the like is the hearty wish of the Author.

FINIS.
Books sold by Daniel Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, and
Thomas Benskin in St. Brides Churchyard.
A Prospect of Government in Europe, and Civil Policy, showing the Antiquity,
Power, Decay of Parliaments, with other Historical and Political Observations
relating thereunto. By T. R. 8 vo price 1s.

No Protestant but Dissenters Plot discovered and defeated; being an Answer to
the late Writings of several Eminent Dissenters, wherein their Designs against
the Established Church of England, and the unreasonableness of Separation are
more fully manifested. By the Author of the second Part of the History of
Separation, 8 vo.

The Forfeitures of Londons Charter, or an Impartial Account of the several
Seisures of the City Charter, together with the means and methods that were
used for the Recovery of the same; with the causes by which it came Forfeited,
etc. Price 6d.

The Third Edition of the Life, Bloody Reign and Daath of Queen MARY. In this
Edition is added an Account of the most Remarkable Judgments of God on many of
the Persecuters. Price Bound 1s.

There is now Published the newest Collection of the choicest Songs, as they
are Sung at Court Theater, Musick-Schools, Balls, etc. With Musick-Notes, Price
Bound 1s.

The Cause and Cure of Offenses, in a discourse on Matthew. 18. verse. 7. By R.
Kingston Prebendary of Soll. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. 8 vo.

Seldens Janus Anglorum.

The Mystery and Method of his Majesty's Happy Restoration laid open to
public View, by John Price Doctor of Divinity, one of the late Duke of
Albemarles Chaplains, and privy to all the secret passages and particularities
of that Glorious Revolution. 8 vo price 1s. 6d.

The Impostor Exposed, in a Dissection of a Villainous Libel (here Printed at
large) Entitled a Letter to a Person of Honor concerning the Black-Box. 8 vo.
price 1s. 6d.

Some Historical Memoires of the Life and Actions of his Royal Highness, the
Renowned and most Illustrious Prince, James Duke of York and Albany, etc. (only
Brother to his most Sacred Majesty King Charles the II.) from his Birth 1633,
to this present Year 1682. price 1s.

PLAYS.
The Young King, or the Mistake: Written by Mrs. Behn.

Romulus and Hersilia, or the Sabine War.

The City Heieess, or Sir Timothy Treatall.

The Roundheads, or the Good Old Cause.

Three Farces Acted before the King and Court at Newmarket, The Merry
Milk-Maids of Islington, or the Rambling Gallants defeated

Love lost in the Dark, or the Drunken Couple

The Politic Whore, or the Conceited Cuckhold


