THE WHOLE ART OF CONVERSE: CONTAINING Necessary instructions for all Persons,
of what Quality, and Condition soever.

WITH The Characters of the four Humors, of the English and French, as to
their way of Conversing.

By D. A. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His Royal Highness, at the
Sign of the Black-Bull in Cornhil, near the Exchange. 1683.

THE Most material CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
ARTICLE. I.
1. WHat this Art is, and its different Branches. 2. In what Sense a civil
Converse is taken here. 3. That Pride is destructive to Civility. 4. That it is
rudeness to speak ill of our Neighbors in Conversation. 5. It Is rudeness to be
too talkative in Conversation. 6. That anger is against the Laws of a civil
Converse. 7. Obstinacy is contrary to the Laws of Civility. 8. It Is
inconsistent with Civility to force Drink on a Stranger, or any other in the
Company. 9. To speak too high is against the Laws of a civil Converse. 10. That
frequent Oaths are inconsistent with Civility. 11. When Railery is consistent,
and when inconsistent with Civility. 12. That excessive Flattery is a great
rudeness. 13. How we may shun Flattery, and Criticism. 14. That we ought to
Conform our Discourse to the Inclination, and Capacity of those we Converse.
15. That it is a duty of Civility, to Converse sometimes with our Friends by
Letters. 16. That all Jest or Earnest tending to Impiety, is an extreme
rudeness. 17. That it is an extreme rudeness to speak to the disadvantage of any
Nation in presence of the Natives.
ARTICIE. II.
1. OF the familiar Conversation. 2. Of the Learned Coversation. 3. Of the
Interess'd Conversation. 4. The Character of the Sanguine Humor. 5. The
Character of the Choleric. 6. The Character of the Melancholy Humor. 7. The
Character of the Phlegmatic. 8. The Character of the English, as to their way
of Conversing. 9. The Character of the French, as to their way of Conversing.
ERRATA,
Page 33. last line, read inbred. Page 38. last line, read Immoral.

THE Whole ART of CONVERSE.
SECTION. I. What this ART is.
A Moderate care of a good Repute is laudable, as being commended to us by the
Holy Writings, and a certain ambition to conquer the Hearts of such as we are
ordinarily conversant with, is a rational, and lawful sort of Self-love; but
neither of these we shall ever attain to, unless we understand perfectly the
Art of Converse, and how to practice exactly its Precepts in every particular
conjuncture. Hence we may easily conjecture the Nature, or the Essence and End
of this Art; for if you mind to play the Logician, and give an accurate
definition thereof, you may call it a habit, teaching us how to demean our
selves with our Neighbors, in order to gain their Love and Eeem, which two
things have such a dependency the one of the other, that they go commonly
together: whether it be, that Esteem is the source of Love, or Love, which I am
more apt to believe, causes us to contemplate the beloved Object in such a
bias as we magnify in our corrupted judgments, its least perfections.

SECT. II. In what sense a civil Converse is taken here.
A Civil Conversation may be taken either as related to our Actions, or to our
Discourse; in the first sense it is a certain accurateness and decency in all
our Actions, or in our outward Behavior. I intend to speak little or nothing
of this kind of Civility. 1. Because there is a French Treatise Englished on
the same Subject, accurate and particular enough; which, though it regards more
especially the French customs, may easily be adapted to the English Humor and
Civility, now not much different from the French. 2. Because I ^hought it
always superfluous, or at ^east of little use, to prescribe Rules or
Ceremonies, that change not on^^ every Age, but almost every Year. It Is then
best for every one as to this part, to observe and follow the customs of his
own Country, provided they be not entirely barbarous, and repugnant to the
known practices of Civility of these Nations that are commonly accounted Civil;
as France and Italy ever were, and all Great Britain, England I mean, and
Scotland, undoubtedly now are.

If we take a civil Conversation, as related not to Men's Actions, but to their
Discourse, by the general Notion given above of the Art of Conversing; we shall
say it is a certain exactness in all our words and expressions, in order to
gain, conserve, or increase the esteem and friendship of those we Converse
with: The Rules then we must square our Actions by in a civil Converse, are
unchangeable, and neithe^ confined to time nor place, but ar^ all of all Ages,
and of a good relis^ with all Nations, as being grounde^ on common Sense, not
on Men's changeable Fancies. These are but two, and easy to be retained: The
first is, to say nothing that may diminish the Esteem and Love Men have for us:
The second is, to speak such things as may contribute toward the increase of
both: how, and with what accuracy we are to observe these Precepts, the ensuing
Section shall declare.

SECT. III. That Pride is destructive to Civility.
A Civil Converse, as I have said above, is a certain exactness in all our
words and expressions, in order to gain, conserve, or increase the Esteem and
Friendship of those we converse withal; that nothing is more destructive to it
than Pride, every one understands, that knows contraries to be inconsistent
together, and that Civility is nothing else, if well reflected on, but a
respectuous Humility.

I mean not here that inward Pride which we are neither concerned with nor to
judge of, but that outward and proud Behavior, either in Gests or Speech,
whereby those we speak to, understand we are wise in ou^ own conceit, though
perhaps simple and vain Fools in their thoughts Persons of Quality betray
themselves to a secret contempt of those they speak to, if they presume too
much upon their Nobility, or seem to slight others on this account only that
they are (as they speak sometimes in Scotland) but bare Gentlemen.

It Is a rudeness scarce pardonable especially before persons we are not
acquainted with, to run out in the praise of our Ancestors, for that would be
too visible a vanity, and a too affected desire of Honor. Some are so
extravagant in this Point, as to entertain Strangers with nothing else but long
Descriptions of their own Pedigree, and Grandeur of their Forerunners, true or
false. I say true or false, because I have known several in Foreign Countries,
and I wish none of my own Countrymen may be guilty of this insufferable
vanity; who, though they were in extreme misery, pretended to be Cousin
Germans, or near Relations to the greatest Noblemen of Scotland, upon this
account only, That they were either Hamiltons, Douglasses, Gordons, Seatons,
Maxuelles, etc.

Persons of Quality wrong themselves more than they are aware of, when they
rail so violently against disproportionate Alliances; wherein, though I grant
they may have reason when the disproportion is too great, or the quality not
recompensed by the quantity, yet, nevertheless they are guilty of an extreme
rudeness, by discovering thus in a familiar Converse, what they call a Noble
Spirit, and others of as sound Sense, think and call an Antichristian Pride;
which is as yet more insufferable in such, as by their Birth can pretend no
advantage above their Neighbors. If such make appear this passion to be their
predominant amongst their equals, or before their superiors, they lose without
doubt the Esteem of those, and the Love of these, and are wholly incapable of
all civil Converse: whose limits we still out-go, to speak generally whenever
we say any thing tending directly or indirectly, to the discovery of our Secret
Pride; as those do, who boast perpetually of their Warlike Exploits, with as
great confidence, as if the Hearers judged them not to be Liars: and if they
were put to it, extraordinary Cowards.

Others do out-weary your Patience with a number of innumerable idle
Circumstances of their Affairs, or their Suits in Law: How they have put a
trick upon this Man, by what means they have engaged that other in their
Interest: and if they had not been very active in the business, all had been
gone, etc. And when they have spent half an Hour, and all your Patience, in
saying the same thing, with these idle Repetitions of quoth he, and quoth she,
they shall begin immediately the same Story to the first that comes in, without
giving them so much time as to edge in a word.

Others will trouble the whole company with a long Panegyric of their good
conduct in the guidance of their Domestic Affairs: they will give you an exact
Account of the splendor of their Table, of their ordinary and extraordinary
Expenses, of their Alms and Liberalities, and of their least Concerns, if they
hope by such petty Narratives, either your Esteem or Applause. It Is odds to be
in the company of some Women, but they will run out in the praise of their
Children, and lull you asleep with the petty Dialogues they have daily
together. I was acquainted with a Gentlewoman in the South of Scotland, who was
a burden to the whole Country she lived in upon this account: Her first
Complement in her visits to her Friends, was always, If they had not seen her
fine, her lovely, her unparallelable Boy? She was so Complaisant, as never to
change this discourse, whatever bias ye had taken to be rid of it; If she had
been interrupted for a moment, that she might fetch her breath, she would
instantly commence again her first unpleasant Tune, and inform you of all the
motions of her fine Boy; How he weep'd, how he laughed, how he moved his feet,
his eyes, and his hands, how he uttered to her in half words, his young and
tender Affections.

Some again will force you Will ye Nill ye, to make an undeserved Elogium of
their Children by their own good example: They are not (say they) like others,
God be blessed, they are Father-like, sharp, witty, and pretty, hopeful, and
what not? as if you did take as much pleasure in hearing these little Tales, as
they to tell them. Let these, and the like defects, true Offsprings of Pride,
be diligently shunned, by all such as pretend to be accounted civil Conversants.

SECT. IV. That it is rudeness to speak ill of our Neighbors in Conversation.
SOme have so little judgment, as to imagine they cannot Establish their own
Repute upon a surer ground, than on the Ruin of their Neighbors good-Name;
they call all the World (themselves only excepted) Fools, and on this account,
they would be looked upon as Wits, or Stars of the first Magnitude. Such Men are
most of all uncivil; they may be perhaps admired, and believed by the
undiscerning sort, and such as are as unprovided of sound Sense, and true Wit,
as themselves: but they shall never please solid judgments, and such as have
both Science to discern what is praiseworthy, and Conscience, not to undervalue
through envy, the Endowments either of Art, or Nature, they see in others, and
cannot attain to If you say to Men of this temper, such a one is a complete
Gentleman, they will presently, if Nature has bestowed upon them any fluency of
Language, make an Anatomy of him with their sharp Tongues, in aim to Ruin, if
they can, his Repute, as over-shaddowing theirs. They will tell you, if you
call him a Scholar, he is a Pedant, if Eloquent, he speaks much Nonsense, if
he be a Judge, he is Partial: if you say he is an Author, and distinguishes
himself by his Learning, from the common sort, he will then undoubtedly be a
mark for envy to aim at, especially if Native of the same Country, few being
Prophets at home. They shall assure you his Works are not worth your while,
though perhaps they never read what they condemn, and are not capable to write
so well. We should on this account, abstain from censuring others, and not
judge of Arts, till we be Artists. But such is the malice of some, that what
they cannot reach to, they blame through jealousy in others: If you encourage
such by approving of, or adding to these Affronts, they put upon the Dead
sometimes, as well as the Living, you ought to be accounted illbred as they
are, and uncivil. Detraction so inconsistent, as we may gather out of the
foregoing Lines, with the Rules of true Civility, is yet more ordinary amongst
Women, than among Men, because they are generally an unthinking sort of
Creatures, and scarce reflecsive on what they say, being easily overruled by
their passions, and commonly not capable to revenge themselves otherwise than
with their Tongues.

When they meet together in a familiar Converse, after their ordinary
Ceremonies, and mutual Inquiries of the price of every thing they wear: it is
odds, but some of the company will take occasion to say, Such a Lady, or such a
Gentlewoman, goes too fine, and far above her quality; she is talked of on that
account all the City over, as if she had not all this for nothing, she
nevertheless will judge no body: but such a thing is discoursed of in every
Corner. The Ice being thus broken, another will utter her mind on the same
matter more flatly, and call her base, infamous, and what not? as if she were
Innocence it self, and not a Subject of discourse to the World on the same
account. For it is observable, the most debauched Women are pronest to condemn
others for Crimes they know themselves guilty of.

If they imagine they are injured by any person whatsomever, they will make (I
may so say) an exact dissection both of his Body and Soul, omitting nothing
that rage can invent to black his Repute. Before they conceived this Immortal
hatred against him, they spoke to his advantage on all occasions; but now,
since it is his misfortune to displease them, he has lost both his Wit and
Judgment, he is silly, simple, etc. But this is only the defect of ordinary
Women, seldom to, be met with in Ladies of a Noble Education, and Great
Quality; whose Circles I conceive to be the best Schools of Civility, because
of an extraordinary complacency we are then resolved to, in compliance to their
Imperious Humors: There you shall hear them excuse ingeniously the
imperfections though never so real, of such as are ill spoken of in their
presence, because they are fully persuaded to demean themselves otherways in
such Conjunctures, would prove a breach both of Charity and Civility.

SECT. V. It Is rudeness to be too talkative in Conversation.
TO be too talkative in Conversing with our Friends, is a mark of a weak
judgment, and proper to those, who by an overthrow of that Order Nature has
Established, speak before they think, as many, yea, most Women do, especially
those of a Choleric Complexion; such are commonly most eloquent, or rather (if
I may say so) most loquent, about trifles and small matters, whereon a
judicious Man, because of the elevation of his Genius, finds nothing to say.
What will they not say about a Hood, a Scarf, a Point de Venice? and how many
words will they not spend to express but little or no Sense?

You may observe them in Conversation, little reflecsive on what is said, but
infinitely desirous you put quickly an end to your Discourse that they may
commence their endless Tale, and often senseless too. If they happen to be
silenced by another, whose Devil is more talkative than theirs, they become on
a sudden ill humored, because their Tongue is tied up: but the company once
dismissed, if they can have Patience till then, they let it furiously loose again
against their Servants, or whatever presents it self first to their sight.

Men are no less guilty of this Sin against the Laws of a civil Converse,
especially those of an advanced Age, who because of their experience of things
past, think it not lawful for greener years to speak in their presence. Their
gray hairs I confess, exact of us a particular respect, and on this account
it is civil to applaud sometimes, through an Innocent complacency to what they
say, though we be of a contrary Opinion; yet on the other side, Discretion
requires they should consider they cannot be but importune to us, by their long
and languishing Narratives, tending always to the blame of present times, and
praise of the past.

Laudator temporis acti --
Se puero, censor castigororque minorum.
Others will take not indeed the bit, but which is no less uncivil, the word
out of your Mouth, and prevent the end of your discourse sometimes by an
insufferable rudeness, telling you to make haste, to put an end: or more
Rustic like yet, to be silent, and let them speak; which is never lawful to
do, unless those we treat thus familiarly, be our Servants of the lowest rank.

We must then in our Speech, as in our Actions, make choice of what is judged
to be a middle between the two vicious extremes: for if Loquacity be forbidden
us by the Rules of Civility, I am of Opinion, too much Taciturnity is no less
contrary to it For if it be not the product of a Natural Stupidity, it is
always an evident mark, we esteem little those we Converse withal, which above
all things we must shun, if we desire to be accounted Civil. An obstinate
silence is affected prudently by some in Conversation; either to hide their
little Talent of Elocution, or to gain more esteem amongst Men, who commonly
admire most what they are least acquainted with.

SECT. VI. That anger is against the Laws of a civil Converse.
AS moderation in our words and expressions, is the best disposition can be
imagined to a civil Behavior in Conversation, so nothing more destructive to
it than an undaunted passion, and a sudden anger, upon all Occurrencies: Some
are as changeable as weather-Cocks in their humors, they know not what they
would be at, and you can hardly say any thing that pleases them. If you offer
them your service, and profess your zeal for their Concerns, they shall either
return you no answer at all, or which is worse, a disobliging one, not
reflecting what you have done for their Interest, but on some inconsiderable
failures, you have perhaps admitted in the performance of that duty you are
owing them.

Such people are the pests of all civil Converse, and on this account, if in
Civility we can, are to be shunned. They are (I may so say) the incen^ives of
Quarrels, and restless Distur^ers of all those they Converse with; the Standers
by, look as amazed at one another, whilst a Hellish fury vomits out a part of
her ill humor against either the Dead, or the absent, or which is yet a
greater rudeness, against some of those which are present: such are little
beholding to their Parents for their Education, they have never been curbed in
their Youth, and their being always used to do their own will makes them now
insufferably wilful.

They often forget so far the respect they owe to Strangers though of an
inferior quality, that in their presence upon all contingencies, they will
rage and froth against their servants, with most uncharitable exaggerations of
their least, or fancied misdemeanors: You shall hear them the whole time of a
Dinner, whosoever's at their Table, murmuring, repining, frowning at whom they
know not, nor at what: nothing rellisheth according to their taste, none can
serve them to satisfaction; the fall of a Spoon, of a Glass, or some like
accident, puts them in, or rather quite out of humor again. What judgment can
we frame of those, in whom we observe such continual Distempers? This
discomposure of their passions, hinders us to conceive either a great Opinion
of their Virtue, or to love tenderly their Persons.

There is then a certain calm we must endeavor to attain to in Conversation, a
certain peaceable temper we must needs be possessed of, if we will neither be
troublesome to our selves, nor others. By this moderation we shall gain
Authority over those we speak to, and regain their esteem, if perhaps by our
former indiscretion we had lost it; to demean our selves otherwise it is
weakness, and holds too much of a Childish, or Womanish humor: though we
cannot pull our passions out by the root, it is in our power to hold them down
for a time at least, whilst we Converse with our Friends, or Strangers: and
who is not able to dissemble thus far, is unfit for all command, and not very
apt neither to obey.

SECT. VII. Obstinacy in our proper sentiments, is contrary to Civility.
SOme are so possessed with the Spirit of Contradiction, that they are ready to
oppose whatever you shall advance, whether they think i^ true or false; They
are falsely persuaded they can take no better Method, to convince you of the
sharpness of their Wit, which sometime I confess they do show, but on the other
side they lose all the esteem we had formerly conceived of their judgment. This
is the ordinary defect of young and unexperienced Scholars, when they come
first from the University, or as they say commonly, fresh off the Irons, they
will undertake to prove every thing by a Sillogism in form, or an Argument in
mode and figure. A little experience of the World, and some months Converse
with the judicious sort, will soon rid them of this Pedantick Air, so opposite
to Civility, and common Sense.

I pretend not nevertheless to banish all disputes, and discrepancy of
Opinions, from a civil Converse: for that were neither rational, nor possible,
since Yes and No, are the very Soul and Life thereof. My design only here, is
to Advertise you, we must submit sometimes our judgment to others, and shun
upon all emergencies Obstinacy, the product either of great Pride, or little
Insight: We may expose our Reasons with modesty, which, if our Friends yield
not to, we must Acquiesce, and let every Man abound in his own sense.

But to prevent prudently certain necessary engagements, to stand stiffly to our
own sentiments, we must shun all debates in matters, not understood by those we
converse with; for they being not perhaps humble enough to submit to our
judgment, will immediately oppose our sentiments; and if superior to us in
quality, pretend to the advantage by Authority, when reason serves not their
turn. With these, I say, for rests sake, let us have no debates, if we can
avoid them, least we betray either them, or our selves, to an uncivility.

Conformably to this Rule, it is always safer to submit to the sentiments of
such as we depend on, though perhaps not so well grounded on reason, as our own;
at least if our familiarity with them permits us to oppose sometimes what they
say, we must do it so, that without giving the least advantage, we may still
seem to yield to them the debate: alleging for instance, his Lordship takes
the disputed Point in such or such a sense, in which we shall say, and show
it is a pure Truth: You, and his Grace, or his Lordship, being by this industry,
of the same Opinion, you shall draw the whole company to a consent without
opposition.

If we be at variance with our equals upon any disputable Point, we may dispute
it freely, shunning all rude and disdainful expressions; that it may appear we
pretend only to a clear discovery of the Truth, not to a Victory, or Triumph
over our Friend, as our Enemy. If we debate, which we should not easily do,
with our inferiors, one thing particularly we must be aware of, not so much to
overawe them by a contemptful expression, as by a convincing reason; which, if
we cannot perform, let us not discover by a sudden fit of anger, our ridicule
Ambition, to appear in all we either say, or do, Infallible.

SECT. VIII. It Is inconsistent with Civility to force Drink on a Stranger, or
any other in the company.
I Say, to force, for a kindly invitation once, or twice, is so far from being
a rudeness, that it is a necessary duty of Civility; I confess, this sort of
importunity is commonly the product of a noble, and generous Heart, desirous to
welcome Strangers and Friends, at any rate: But if we reflect seriously on the
undecency of the action in it self, and the inconveniences we expose our
Friends to, by such a cruel kindness, we shall instantly blush, and be ashamed
at our pretended Civility, which, though your Friend cannot but take well, and
as a kindness, because of the Principle it comes from: yet, he cannot but be
extremely offended thereat, because you endanger by this violence, his Health,
Life, and Repute: though this abomination is become now so general, that some
glory in it, as if it were a honorable thing, and praiseworthy: which
rudeness I observed no where so frequent, as in Great Britain, and is I may
say, without exaggeration, the vilest and most absurd can be imagined.

I cannot compare this barbarous custom of forcing Drink upon Men, to a thing
it resembles more, than Treason: for under a colorable pretense of Love,
Kindness, and Esteem, you betray your Friend. First, to Sin, Secondly, to
Contempt, Thirdly, to a Thousand irregularities; which a Man, if he deserves
that Name, being now rather a Beast, will be apt to commit in the heat of such
immoderate Riots. Yea, I say more, you are so far guilty of betraying your
Friend, that you are (though perhaps not designedly) the cause of his being
either Robbed, or Murdered: at least you expose him to such mischiefs, or which
is all one, and no less to be feared, to a violent and sudden Death, by
falling either in Fire or Water. The French are to be commended on this
account, they Repute it, and with all reason, an unparallelable rudeness, to
force a cup upon any Man, beyond that measure he judges sufficient for his
Health, and present Necessity: amongst them you have your freedom, all
constraint in a civil Converse being judged intolerable, every Man behaves
himself in this case as he thinks fittest, he is not reflected on, whether he
takes less or more: and being left to his own discretion, if he exceed, he can
blame none, but himself.

I wish the English, who are so far above the French, in other things, would
but equal them in this one, I mean in their moderation and behavior, toward
Strangers and Friends: who, sometimes through a duty of good Neighborhood, and
Civility, must repair to their Houses. The same rudeness is but too ordinary in
Scotland, amongst the Gentry, though otherwise exactly civil, and well bred. If
you pay there a visit to a Gentleman, or Nobleman, in his own House, he will
have in readiness, or at a call, if he thinks not himself able to do your turn,
two or three stout Drinkers, pitched upon designedly, to hold to your head:
This Commission they will perform with all diligence by a general Conspiracy,
to your utter ruin, you are without delay assaulted on all sides. First, with
the strongest Ale, then with Brandy, at last with Wine, till at length
overcome, you are forced to retreat, and leave them victorious on the wet
Fields, where they will triumph a while, till one after another, they be either
led or carried off, to vent the fumes of these heady Liquors.

Now, if there be any thing in this procedure looking like humanity, we must
extinguish in us, the unbred light of reason, and confess against all common
sense, the greatest Civility is only to be met with in the practice of the most
brutish and extravagant Debauchery.

SECT. IX. To speak too high is against the Maxims of a civil Converse.
THe reason of this is obvious, because by crying aloud, or speaking with an
elevated Tone, we discover our ambition to be considered, and harken'd to,
according to that of the Poet, Vult digito monstrari and dicier hic est. Now
Pride, as I made appear, elsewhere is the source of all our misdemeanors, and
most of all destructive to Civility; such a rudeness as this we are now
speaking of, is more insufferable in Churches, and those places, where we
should speak either little or none at all: as likewise in presence of Princes,
and our other Superiors, we ought rather to reverence by a respectuous
silence, than disquiet by our boisterous clamours.

The deformity of this sort of immodesty, is represented to Life, by the ruder
sort of people, gathered together in an Alehouse, or any other Assembly: there
you shall hear them speaking all together, and with such a confusion, that you
shall hear none of them distinctly. They call aloud one another by their Names
or Nicknames, in a rustic and homely manner, and make commonly such a noise,
that those who pass by, stand to listen if they quarrel not: as such people
were ever, and are still Reputed most rude, we must with a watchful
circumspection over our own behavior, shun this barbarous way of Conversing;
to which we may reduce all noise whatsomever in presence of our Friends,
whether it be with our hands, feet, or otherwise: As also, a certain immodest
sort of laughter, whereby we either discover our own inconsiderateness, or that
we are regardless of the company. The Precept of the ancient Philosopher must
be followed in this case, Risus nec sit multus, nec ob multa nec effusus. To
laugh too much is the Character of a childish and foolish Humor, to laugh on
every slight Occurrency, betrayeth us to be light and silly: but to laugh as
Women do sometimes, with our hands on both sides, and with a lascivious
agitation of our whole Body, is the height of rudeness and immodesty; remember
then, and practice that Golden Sentence, Risus non sit multus, nec ob multa nec
ess^sus.

SECT. X. That frequent Oaths are inconsistent with Civility.
I Can conceive nothing more rude, than this barbarous or rather Heathenish
custom so general in this Age, of taking the Name of God in vain, or calling
him as a Witness to every insignificant and impertinent proposition, we rashly
advance. I have observed three great abuses in this matter, point blanck
contrary not only to Godliness, but also to good manners: some with great
precipitancy, attest every Truth they say, by solemn Oaths, as if they could
not otherwise gain trust. Others again, and these are worse than the first,
swear with all imaginaginable confidence, what to their certain Science and
Conscience is most false, which is a Crime amounting to such a high measure of
malice, that in Charity, I shall suppose no rational Man to be ever guilty of
it. There is a third sort that fills, or rather fouls the Ears of those that
hear them, with a perpetual cursed Nonsense of God Damning, Sinking,
Confounding, or such like Unchristian and Nonsensical expressions.

That such Immortal practices are the mere products of rudeness or uncivility;
it is so evident, that I need not be at the pains to prove it, since every one
is taught this Truth by the light of Nature, as incapable to deceive us, as the
Author of Nature himself: for amongst whom, I pray ye, are Oaths most usual?
amongst those only we look upon as the very scum of the World? and if I may so
say, the very excrementitious part of Mankind? If then others considerable,
either for their Birth, Riches, or Learning, be subject sometimes to this
disorder, as I confess, but too many of them are; they are deservedly
undervalued by the understanding sort, and all such as are naturally averse
from rudeness.

After a serious enquiry into the causes of this disorder, I can imagine, none
that looks like a rational inducement to such an abominable custom. For, 1. I
am sure there is less pleasure in it than in any other Sin whatsoever. 2. No
Man in his Wits, can pretend to be more trusted, the more he swears, since it is
an undoubted of Truth, that the greatest Swearers are commonly the greatest
Liars. 3. The Repute of Wit, can methinks allure no Man, to put on such an ill
and vile habit: is not Stupidity it self as capable thereof, as the sharpest
Wit of the World? 4. A show perhaps of courage and resolution, is the end some
propose to themselves by these Imprecations, and threatening Oaths: But how far
they fall short of their aim, judge by this, that Men commonly make small
account of these great Boasters, and think them destitute of true courage, yea,
and great Cowards.

SECT. XI. When Railery is consistent, and when inconsistent with Civility.
It Is always the greatest rudeness imaginable, to play upon sacred things, as
Church Ceremonies, our dreadful Mysteries, and Divine Scriptures: this is the
true Character of a Man, that neither loves God, nor Godliness, neither is
Railery decent or lawful, if it reflect upon the natural defects of our
Neighbors, or to be suffered in presence of Princes, unless by their great
intimacy with us, they make us an overture of a not ordinary familiarity.

It Is as yet more insufferable, when we converse with Ladies, especially in
matters relating to that Virtue they should look upon as the chief, if not the
only Ornament of their Sex: yet, this is a common rudeness, and covers
sometimes smister designs, under the Names of Complacency, and Gallantry: in
which familiar way of Conversing, some go such a length, as to pass beyond all
the limits of modesty, by their rough and flat expressions of these
undecencies, you hear but too often, and modesty causes me to conceal.

If Railery then must be made use of, it is with those that are either our
equals, or have made us such by their privacy, or intimate friendship; yet,
least we fail, we are to reflect seriously upon three things: we are concerned
in the first, in the second, the persons we speak with, and the third, regards
the fittest season for this innocent Mirth. We must first consider if Nature
has allowed us these qualities, without which, we cannot pretend to a good
success in this way of Conversing; which may, methinks, be reduced to these
three; A faculty easily reflexive upon every contingency, a quick imagination,
and a sharpness of wit not ordinary. If Nature has used us so kindly, as to
have imparted to us these her favors in any considerable measure, we would
disoblige her to hide our Talent, or deprive our Friends of that innocent joy,
we are capable to procure 'em: but if we find no such dispositions in us, or no
ray of that extemporary subtilty, necessary for a sudden attack, surprise,
repartee; let us abstain from Railery, least to our shame and confusion, it
return by reflex upon our selves. The second thing we are to take notice of,
is, the person or persons we are in converse with: if we judge them not sharp
enough to conceive at the first, a point d'lesprit, a senseful and witty word,
we must deal plainly and seriously with such men, waving all in promptu's and
subtilties, they could not understand without a commentary. The third thing to
be considered is, the season fittest for Railery, we must make choice of those
hours our Friends are freest from cares, and best disposed to mirth: for
otherwise you would be thought extremely rude, to say no more, if in lieu of a
Complement of condoleance to your Friend, upon the Death of his Wife, or his
Child, you would undertake to dissipate his just melancholy by an unseasonable
Railery.

SECT. XII. That excessive Flattery is a great rudeness.
THere are two dangerous extremes, to either of which we incline through
vanity, rather than judgment; The first is Flattery, the other is Criticism, or
a censorious humor, condemning indifferently every thing, that we may appear
witty, by undervaluing that which is above the reach of our limited Capacity.
These two extremes we must by all means avoid, and search a middle, which I
take to be a rational complacency; I say designedly rational, for if it want
this Character, it will cause us to put on a resolution to be complaisant at
any rate in all Occurrencies, with all perons, to what is bad, as well as to
what is good, which could amount to nothing else but a vile, base, and fervile
Flattery: whereby we lose our Credit, and are laughed at by the judicious sort,
and sometimes undervalued by those we intend most to gain, by these flat, and
officious Lies.

Yet, because Men are enchanted with what ever contributes toward the increase
of their Honor, we must withal respect pay to them upon fit occasions the
Homage of praise, but only upon the account of their real merits, as their
natural, and acquired Talents, their great actions in Peace and War, at home
and abroad, their useful Writings and Enterprises, for the common good, etc.
Such deserved praises are not to be blamed, as making up a part of the civil
Man, but these only we are pressed to by an unreasonable desire, to please at
any rate those we are conversant with, of which end nevertheless, we fall
commonly short; for, though our Friends seem to countenance our discourse with
a smile or two, perhaps they rank us in their Hearts amongst the simple, airy,
and light ballast sort of Men.

Women above all others, are subject to be imposed upon by Flattery, whether it
be that they have a great conceit of their natural Endowments in what measure
soever they have received them from God, or whether it comes from an innocent
pleasure they take, to hear their young airy Gallants display a World of
Nonsense in polite terms, or whether some of them are so simple, as to trust
the exaggerations of a passionate Lover: who, because of this persuasion, that
he either is believed or pleases, thinks he has said little to the
commendation of his Mistress, unless he put the Lillies, Sun, Moon, and Stars,
out of countenance in her presence. Such Affections, and specious Nonsense,
ought never to be made use of by such as pretend to be a part of the civil
World, nor listened to by modest, and virtuous Ladies. Yet, because they
delight exceedingly in hearing their own praises, we may withal moderation, and
proportionably to their merits, rather than quality, perform without great
expense, this part of our duty toward that weaker Sex: I have as yet one thing
to say worth your reflection, That Flattery, provided it be not excessive, is
more sufferable, and sometimes to be allowed of in Servants toward their
Masters, and in Children toward their Parents: because the Kindness of a
Master, is ordinarily gained, and the tender Affection of a a Father or Mother,
increased by these Testimonies of Love from their Servants and Children.

Before I conclude this Section, I shall say one word of Criticism the other
extreme. Those that are of a too Critical humor, are not reckoned up with the
Civil sort, because they usurp an insufferable Empire, and an absolute
Authority, over the whole World, their superiors as well as their equals; they
approve of nothing, and of none but themselves, they are always ready to make
comments, and malignant reflections on what ever is said, and will have nothing
to pass as conformable to common Sense and Reason, what they judge not so. If
they have any superficial tincture of Litterature, I pity the best of Authors,
they shall censure and sentence them, though perhaps they are no more
acquainted with them, than with those they had never seen; If any thing that
gets a Name appear in Print, they shall strike at it through envy in all
occasions, and pretend, because they can say what an Old Wife may say too, it is
no great matter, to have as great capacity, and insight in the subject, as the
Author himself.

SECT. XIII. How we may shun the two forementioned extremes, Flattery and
Criticism.
FLattery we shall easily shun, by observing the following Precepts. 1. To say
nothing to any Man's advantage but what is true. 2. To abstain from all affected
exaggerations. 3. To pay the Homage of our praises in convenient time and
place. Some have so weak a discerning faculty, that they never take notice by
what bias Men's Hearts are sooner conquered: they commonly fancy the Art of
pleasing consists in flat and officious lies, not reflecting that judicious Men
are sometimes no less offended by false and undeserved praises, than by
contumelies and calumniatory Imputations, and certainly with all reason: For,
since none but Fools delight in flat untruths spoken to their advantage, how
can they take it patiently to be thought of this number, though called infinite
in Scripture? Such must be your Opinion of a Man you extol highly to his face
for great things he never dreamed on: by this Childish procedure, you either
betray your own folly, or his, if you believe him in his Wits: for than you may
expect to be punished rather than rewarded, his folly, by causing the
Bystanders to suspect he takes pleasure in such Notorious Lies: which would be
a mortal blow to his Repute.

You must avoid with no less care, these two ordinary and childish
exaggerations of the Truth, which in reality amount to nothing else but to as
many magnificent Untruths: cannot ye praise for instance, a Lady, upon the
account of her Beauty, unless ye call her a Deity; A Philosopher, unless ye say
he is an Aristotle, a Poet, an Orator, unless they be Virgils, Ovids, Cicero's,
and beyond them too: may we not speak before a great Captain, and to his
advantage; though we tell him not pompously. The past Ages furnish us with no
example of Warlike Exploits considerable in compare to his, that we are fully
persuaded he shall be a scope to Envy in all future times. This you see is too
much, and therefore nothing at all: let your Elogium's in your Converse, be
always within the circumference of common Sense and Reason, that those ye
praise may be persuaded you think what you say. Some again fall into another
inconveniency, no less to be shunned, than the foregoing; They affect to run out
in praise of their Friends upon all occasions, without regard to several
circumstances, wherein silence would be thought more seasonable. This I
confess, may be Laudable and Arbitrary in their absence, but when they are
present, you must observe two things; 1. Remember not to touch always upon the
same string, I mean not to weary your Friend with an idle Repetition of his
merits, great actions, capacity, talents, for that would create a disgust of
your Converse, because of such a visible affectation. 2. To be sparing of your
Complements before his Rivals, or declared Enemies, because the former would
conceive against you, a not ordinary hatred, as favoring those they love not,
and the latter would defame you every where, as an interess'd Flatterer.

As to Criticism, you need do no other thing to avoid it, but only put on a
firm Resolution to resist in all occasions your censuring Genius; or if you be
a Misanthrop in such a measure, that you can praise nothing that is praise
worthy, you may at least Command your unruly Tongue to be silent, unless your
silence, as it happens frequently, prove an evident mark of your disdain; for
in this juncture you are obliged by the Law of Civility to commend, what in
reason you cannot blame.

Remember, your censorious humor will cause every one to shun your company,
least as ye talk at random of others, you Treat them after the same manner in
their absence: If you had but two Ounces of common Sense, you would easily be
wrought into some feeling of your folly in this Point; for as you censure
others, so likewise shall you be censured by turn, as you disprove what others
do or say, they, through a just revenge, shall observe with a piercing Eye, and
discover the least of your failures. As you mis-interpret their best
intentions, your sinister designs shall at length be laid open, or if good,
misconstrued. Forget not then that most just command, and inbred Principle:
Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris, do as you would be done to.

SECT. XIV. That we ought to conform our Discourse to the inclinations of those
we Converse.
IF we desire to be agreeable to those we Converse, we must study with all
diligence their humors, sound their inclinations, and not regard what we but
what they take most pleasure in; for otherwise we deceive often our selves,
conceiving sometimes we are acceptable to all, while we are troublesome, and
please none but our selves: and this always happens, when like talkative
Women, we lull people asleep with our long and tedious Discourses, scarce
fetching sensibly our breath, so fast we run, and never giving time to any of
the company to edg in a word. When this happens in France, they will offer you
Money in a jest, to let them have a while to speak at their turn.

We are often of Opinion after a long Narrative, which a solid judgment had
concluded in three or four words, that all the Bystanders admire us, and take
us to be the fittest humors for Converse they could meet with; but how far we
are imposed upon by our own credulous simplicity, we may judge by our proper
experience, if ever we have suffered, as no doubt sometimes we have a sort of
long Martyrdom, by the Tyranny of of these Domestic Enemies, who are wont to
put an end to our Patience with their endless and fabulous Tales. Purposed we
not then to be upon our guards another time, least we should be redacted into
the same straits again; and if we are put to the same torture in a conjuncture,
we cannot Civilly fhun. By a profitable foresight, we give a Secret Commission
to some of our Friends or Servants, to come to our relief, with some colorable
pretense of a Friend, or an urgent Affair calling us other where.

Let us here reflect that what we suffer in this case, we cause others to
suffer, and more too by that perpetual movement of our unruly Tongue: consider
always the condition of the persons you converse withal, and fit dexterously
your Discourse to their capacity and strongest inclinations: as for instance,
If you are to entertain a General of an Army, Battles, Sieges, Stratagems,
Cannoning, Mining, Retrenching, Fortifying, etc. will open unto you a vast
Field to run out upon, and a subject charmingly pleasant to him you speak to,
whom you shall leave satisfied, and desirous to meet with you again; but
remember not to play the Master in an Art, wherein (as I suppose) he is
experienced, and which you have but a mere speculative knowledge of, you must
then Discourse of all this as desirous to learn, not to teach.

If you converse with a Man of a Noble and Ancient Family, mind him of his
Ancestors, of their great Alliances, Glory, and Actions, show your self well
versed in his Lineage, and well read in the History of his Family; for this
has somewhat of bewitching, and pleases infinitely.

I had great intimacy with a French Gentleman, who had this Talent, and no
other in a Sovereign Degree: when he came to settle any time in a City, his
study was to search into the particular Pedegrees of every considerable Family,
and in Conversation, made use of this knowledge with such dexterity, as to show
to all their concernments still by the fairest side, giving an accurate account
of their respective Predecessors, of their decay, or increase; which caused him
to be exceedingly loved by all, and looked upon as the only capable Judge of
their debates about precedencies, and such like Punctilo's of Honor.

We must not imagine all is well, when we have contented our selves; but though
we be unsatisfied, when we have procured the satisfaction of others, by
discoursing of things they can easily, and delight most to discourse of: for we
would be Reputed rude and impertinent, if we entertained for instance, a Lady,
with Phylosophical Problems, Precisions of our Reason, and Metaphysical Beings;
the very Names of such things, and all barbarous School Terms, are to be shunned
by the polite sort, who would take pleasure to hear a Man exorcising in a
manner, those he speaks to, with these harsh words: Categonimatice,
Sincategonematice, ut quo, ut quod, materialiter, formaliter, and other such
like pedantick expressions.

Out of all this we may gather these five things, ensuing to be indispensibly
necessary in a perfect Artist of the Civil Mode. 1. A knowledge of no less
extent than that of an Orator. 2. A quick and clear imaginative faculty to
conceive things in an instant, and without confusion. 3. A solid judgment to
discern the truth from the mere appearance thereof. 4. A mortified will, and a
desire to learn rather than to teach, to speak conformably to the relish of
others more than our own: which is not so to be understood, but if we are
required to instruct, we must do it Cum specimine ingenii and modestiae
moderately, and modestly, yet with a show of our Capacity and Insight in the
matter.

SECT. XV. That it is a Duty of Civility to converse sometimes with our Friends
by Letters.
THat it is a part of our Duty to Write sometimes to our Friends, every one may
clearly understand by the constant practice of all such as are accounted in
every Nation the Models of Civility; we convince them by this Officiousness of
our sincere Love, which could seem interess'd or ceremonial when they were
present. Besides, since Friends cannot be always together, their absence is
supplied by Letters, without which, the strongest Friendship will at length
decay; for nothing more true than what is now become Proverbial, Out of sight,
out of mind.

But in what manner we must acquit ourselves of this so necessary a Duty
toward our Friends, it is not easy to declare: yet generally we may say,
whether our Letters be merely Complemental, or of Affairs, they must always
bear a certain proportion. First, To the matter we Writ of: Secondly, To the
persons we Writ to: and Thirdly, To our own condition. This Rule comprehends
all other particulars, which cannot be usefully set down, but are to be left to
each Man's particular judgment; I say, nevertheless we must shun the defects
above mentioned, in our ordinary converse with our Friends present, since we
are apt to fall into several of the same in our Letters. First, We ought to
avoid scrupulously whatever tends to our own Praise directly or indirectly, as
certain expressions whereby we may appear too desirous of esteem, which defect
is observable in Cicero and most of the Ancients, but in this they are not to
be followed. Secondly, Let us take care our Letters contain nothing Satirical,
or tending to the stain of our Neighbors good Name. Thirdly, As in our
Discourses, so in our Letters, Prolixity is never allowed of, idle Digressions,
superfluous Repetitions, and such like Exorbitancies, ought to be retrenched,
especially if we write to those that have but few spare moments from their own
Affairs or public Employments. Fourthly, Though a Letter blush not, we must be
ashamed to discover therein our weakness, by wrathful Expressions, bitter
Invectives, Oaths and Curses. Fifthly, A too excessive Flattery is far from the
Character of an exact and judicious Letter, we may nevertheless be more
prodigal of our praises when we write, than when we speak in presence. Sixthly,
As to the style and manner of writing it is always irregular, unless it be
Conformable; 1. To the subject we write of; 2. To our present condition; 3. To
the quality of those we write to; If the Matter require a serious deliberation,
all intermixture of Jest will be unseasonable: If the person we write to is
much above our quality, we must pay to him exactly, yet without Affectation,
the Homage of a due Respect. If our present and pressant exigencies oblige us
to implore the help of such as may supply our wants, let our Letter contain
true and forcing motives; but to say all in one word, for particular Precepts
are numberless, we must reflect upon all the Circumstances that engage us to
this Duty, and from them take our measures Conformably to the Rules of
Civility, and our own particular Designs.

SECT. XVI. That all Jest or Earnest tending to Impiety, is an extreme rudeness.
It Is not now as of Old, when the Wicked said only in his Heart, There is no
God; some, yea and too many, dare defend it openly in public Assemblies,
pretending on this account to be looked upon as Wits capable to Dispute
Principles; Of all those you converse with, you shall meet with none more void,
both of Christian and Civil Nurture, than this sort of Men.

Such Extravagants, for I know not what other Name to give them, betray
themselves to the hatred and contempt of the Godly and understanding sort, they
are looked upon, and with all reason, as destitute of all true Wit and Virtue,
because they neither acknowledge a Rewarder of Virtues, nor a Punisher of
Crimes; they are not come this length in an Instant, Nemo deripente fit
pessimus, but by Degrees, adding Sin to Sin. And lastly, Atheism to the heap,
the greatest of all Sins, as being destructive to Divine Faith, the only
Ground-Stone of our Spiritual Building; whenever any Man forgets himself so
far as to say any thing, whether it be in Jest or Earnest, in opposition to
this Fundamental Article of our Faith, There is a God, all complacency laid
aside, you ought to reprove him generously as rude and impious, I say as rude
or uncivil in a Sovereign Degree; for reflecting on it, you shall observe, that
all such as either in Jest or Earnest, deny a God, demean themselves in a
manner, point blanck contrary to the Maxims above mentioned, of a Civil
converse. For 1. Their Discourse is nothing else but Self-praise; 2. They speak
ill of all, God himself not excepted; 3. They are talkative beyond measure,
though they say just nothing; 4. They are prone to anger, and at the first attack
fall into a fury; 5. Their ordinary converse is like the roaring of a raging
Sea, unquiet and tumultuous; 6. It Is a loss of time to oppose their
unseasonable sentiments, they neither yield to common Sense nor Reason, how
evident soever; 7. They Will force you if they can into their sentiments, and the
same Debaucheries; 8. They are not content with ordinary Oaths, they invent new
ones, and never as yet heard of, nor thought on perhaps by the Devil himself;
9. Because they cannot wholly extinguish the inbred knowledge of a Deity, they
endeavor to be rid of all fear of his Justice in the other, World by ranking
themselves in the order of Beasts, as to the State of their Souls after Death;
they will tell you flatly, they believe no such thing as an Immortal Soul,
whereby they discover their desires rather than their sentiments: because if
nothing of 'em had a Being capable of feeling after Death, they would thereby
shun the punishment they deserve for their Sins.

If then there can be any rudeness parallelable to that of these abominable
Atheists, I appeal to all Men of a sound Judgment, if you will not endanger,
yea, undoubtedly lose your Repute, and which is much more to be valued, your
Soul; you must fly swiftly from such Monsters, tanquam a facie celubri, as if
they were Venomous Serpents and Basilicks, killing with their very sight.

SECT. XVII. That it is an extreme rudeness to speak to the disadvantage of any
Nation, in presence of the Natives.
I Can imagine no rudeness more insufferable, than to fall foul upon any
Nation, whether it be in Jest or Earnest, in presence of the very Natives,
because, besides that every Man is extremely concerned in the Honor of his own
Country, nescio qua natale solemn dulcedine cunctos allicit, Men are apt to look
upon such reproaches as returning by reflex upon themselves; we are then
indispensibly obliged by all the Laws of Civility, to give Forraigners all
imaginable encouragements to love us, and trust to us, not only by saying
nothing derogatory to the Honor of their Nation, which we must always be
aware of, but affecting rather to praise it upon the account of these
advantages that every Country pretends to, above another. This is the Practice
of all noble Spirits and true Gentlemen, they do in this case as they would be
done to, and love Wit and Virtue wherever they see it; who behave themselves
otherwise, are either ill bred at home, or have never been abroad.

It Is an Infallible mark of a base and barbarous Education, to undervalue a Man
only upon the account he is a Stranger, since this Character, if we have not
put off all sentiments of humanity, should rather induce us to love him, and
prompt us to serve him upon all occasions; let us reflect how we would be dealt
with, if we were in Foreign Nations, and we shall instantly know what we have
to do in this case; would we not be touched to the very quick, if any Man were
so incivil, as to reproach to us the defects true or false, of our Native Soil?
it is odd, but we would retaliate in the Instant. You mind than to quarrel, and
not to behave your self civilly, when ye reproach to Strangers the defaults of
their Country they are not guilty of: but because it is ordinary to speak to the
disadvantage of our Neighbors, not that we believe what we say, but through a
particular prejudice one Nation has always had against another, if we find any
such Disposition, or Aversion in us, we must do what lies in our power to
stifle it before Strangers, least we give them just reason to complain of our
incivility, and ascribe to the whole Nation our particular imperfections.

To this we may add, it is a great rudeness, after we have Traveled through
Foreign Kingdoms, to make up our Memoirs only with fancied Indecorums,
ridiculing for diversion of the company, all their particular Customs; By such
Satirical Reflections we may give some proof of our Wit, but at the same time
we discover our little Judgment, and much of a Childish Passion.

Some Nations I confess are more complete than others; and more considerable
for their Antiquity, Riches, Warlike Exploits, Sharpness, Policy, and Polity,
yet if we weigh all things on each side impartialy, we shall not have so great
reason as we fancy, to prefer our selves before our Neighbors, for commonly if
we surpass them in one thing, we do not in all, but are often surpassed by them
in others again, no less, if not more considerable. This Reflection should
force us to use all kindly, especial Strangers, on whose love and esteem our
Repute, and that of our Nation depends.

ARTICLE. III.
SECTION. I. Of the familiar Conversation.
IT seems there is no Art to be made use of in a familiar Conversation, that
here we are to observe no Precepts, but only to behave our selves with all
freedom, and do whatever Nature inclines us most too; nevertheless if we call
to mind what I have said elsewhere, that we must still endeavor to gain the
love and esteem of those we converse with, we shall easily be persuaded that in
this homely way of conversing, we must be no less cautious, yea, more exact
than in any other, to observe such Precepts as have been judged necessary in
all Ages to the entertaining of a real Friendship. The first is, That
whatsoever love we have for our Friends, or they for us, we never trust to it
so far as to betray our selves to their Contempt, by too great familiarity; If
they be our Masters and Princes, what ever Friendship they make show of to us,
let us always behave our selves, as if we could not be persuaded of their
Affection upon the account of our unworthyness; yet if they will have us to
leave the Ceremonial Method of a respectuous Friendship, we may then speak with
more freedom our sentiments, observing first to give them always the
advantage, whether it be on their side or not. 2. To concur with them in
nothing, as if we pretended to be their Rivals: This Ambition, or rather
Indiscretion, has been the Ruin of many Courtiers in all Ages, who presuming
too much upon their Princes Friendship, would share with him in every thing,
yea, in his very Amors.

The Second Rule we are to observe in a familiar Conversation, whether it be
with our Equals or Superiors, is, never to speak of such things as we ought to
be ashamed of before Men, and repent for in the sight of God: Such are your
Bypast Debaucheries, Pleasures, and Riots. This is nevertheless a general and
too ordinary defect, amongst Persons of Quality, if they be in any degree
familiar; you shall hear them boasting of things I abhor to think on, and dare
not name, as if they pretended to the Repute of honesty, by such infamous and
effeminate Exploits. They are falsely persuaded you are in a high conceit of
their Valor, when they have told you how many Victories they have got, not in
the Fields of Mars, but in the Cellars of their only God Bacchus; one would
think they pretend to as much Honor for drinking a Man out of his Wits, as if
they had forced an Enemy out of his Hold.

The Third Rule we must square our familiar converse by is, not to make our
intimacy with either Man or Woman what-some-ever, an occasion of calumny or
detraction, which nevertheless is but too usual when we are come from an
ordinary friendship, to a certain degree of familiarity; we open then our
Hearts and keep nothing close, yea, not the very Secrets of others trusted to
us, which sometimes we discover to all we can meet with under a tie of a
Secret; For this reason we must discover nothing to the Wife, what we would
have unknown to her Husband, nor to to the Husband, what we would not have his
Wife acquainted with, because (as we may say) they are two Bodies in one Flesh,
so they are two Souls in one Spirit, by a certain transfusion of their Hearts.

It happens then but too often, that an excessive and irregular familiarity
induces us to the discovery of things that should be kept most Secret; from
whence it is that we spare none in our familiar converse, yea, not those whom
dissemblingly we admire whilst we are in their presence.

The Fourth Rule we ought to observe exactly, is, to keep inviolably the Secret
our Friend has trusted us with, unless it be inconsistent with the safety of
either our Prince, or Country we live in, for in this case no tie of friendship
can oblige us to their prejudice; but in all other Conjunctures we are
Traitors, if we betray our Friends, or their Secrets; And this is not only to
be understood of these things they desire us earnestly to keep to our selves,
but of several others they commend not to our Secrecy, which common Sense
teaches us never to discover. If you converse familiarly with a Woman, keep
close from her what you would not have known to the whole World: for though
some of them may, and do keep a Secret, yet few of them are capable to conceal
their thoughts a considerable time and in all occasions, because they speak
commonly, especially the more fiery sort, before they think, or at least in the
very instant; so they either utter their mind without reflection, or reflect
only on what they say in the very moment of their utterance, when but too late
they would fain hold in what is now by half a word sufficiently understood.

The Fifth Rule is, not to presume so much on our Friends good Nature, as to
think we cannot anger him whatever we do, and so play upon his Natural defects,
or disprove whatever he says or does. If we will suffer nothing in others our
importunity will be troublesome to them, and may perhaps occasion a wide breach
of friendship; let us not then imagine that familiarity in what degree soever
it be, gives us a full permission to use and abuse our Friend at pleasure.

SECT. II. Of the Learned Conversation.
THe Learned Converse is either designed, as when Scholars meet together to
dispute some Scholastic Point, or it is accidental when occasionally we join in
company with such as are well grounded in all sort of Literature: In both these
Occurrences, we must behave our selves, cum specimine ingenii and modestiae, in
such a manner as may discover in some measure our Capacity, but withal
endeavoring to gain the Hearts of those we speak to, by modesty and moderation
in our advantage.

If we are to meet designedly in any Assembly, for the discussion of some
Doctrinal Point, it is expedient we come not unprepared, because if our thoughts
be confused, our utterance shall neither be easy nor exact, which could prove
some disadvantage to us.

We must take a special care all the while of our debate to keep our selves in
a middle temper, because if we be too cold, our imagination shall not furnish
us quickly enough with such expressions as may be fittest in the present
juncture, and if we are in the other extreme, we shall utter our sentiments
confusedly, and say many things superfluous; yea, it happens commonly when we
are distempered by the immoderate heat of our imagination, that we either
understand not, or mistake what is said in opposition to what we advance, and
so lose a considerable advantage over our Adversary by not reflecting where the
weak of his discourse lies; we think only on it when the shoke is past, that we
could have easily returned this or that answer, and pressed our Antagonist with
such and such Arguments: Those fiery Disputants cause the Bystanders to
believe they either mistrust their Cause or their Wit; as if what they cannot
gain by reason, they pretended to by a clamorous passion.

Here we are to observe, if the persons we dispute against be of greater renown
in the World, for their Learning, than we are; we wrong our selves, if through
mere envy, we oppose their Sentiments: We must then be sure we are in the
right, before we undertake to contradict such men, and then do it rather as
proposing our doubts, than in an insulting manner. Yea, my advice to you in
this case is, If you judge they will be more credited than you, because of
their great Authority and Esteem, to yield seemingly to their Opinion, though
you be sure they are mistaken in what they assert: For it is prudence in such
conjunctures, to proportion our behavior to that repute we have got hitherto
in the World, without respect to these, not ordinary Gifts God has, perhaps,
favored us with.

There is as yet, a delicate point my Subject engages me to speak of, if we
must debate about matters of Religion, and in what manner. I say, then
generally such disputes are to be shunned, because they end always foul and in
quarrels, unless those we speak to be willing to hear the truth from us, and
dispute rather for Esclaircisment than Victory: but no man is to be admitted to
dispute Christian Truths, as the Existency of God, his Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, etc. because this would be an occasion of scandal to the Hearers,
and a weakening of their Faith: On this account the Romanist Divines are worthy
of blame, who put all our Mysteries to a hard Trial at the Bench, I may so say,
of Humane Reason: One Instance will convince you, I wrong them not, they
dispute in their Schools, if there can be any true demonstration of God's
Existency every one pretends to find it out: But I desire you to observe, that
what ever one says on this Point is refuted by another: What is then the
conclusion of their Debates? a most execrable Blasphemy, that Atheism is a
probable Doctrine: This Inference I heard raised in a familiar Conference
against four learned Jesuits, who amazed at the first hearing of it, stood
stock-still and answered but little to the purpose, because the Opponent argued
thus, ad Hominem: You grant there is no demonstration of God's Existency which
is not probably refuted by some of your Doctors: If then you will speak
consequentially to your selves you must of necessity confess you have no
certainty of his Being, but only a mere probable Opinion, which by your
Principles you are not obliged to hold, since you teach either part of
Probables may be securely embraced.

You see what Extremes Men may sometimes thrust themselves into through a too
disputative humor: Let us take this general Rule when we are engaged to speak
of Matters relating to Religion, to argue always in confirmation of Christian
Truths; In order to resolve these groundless doubts, our weak reason may
suggest to us in opposition to them.

As for the manner of disputing in Matters concerning Religion, we must take
our measures by the quality of our Opponents, and force them always to point
out to us the Ground they build on: For instance, press a Romanist to tell you
in what part of Scripture the General Councils are declared infallible Judges
of Controversies; where they read that the particular Church of Rome is the
Universal Church; that it is lawful to worship the Cross, cultu latrie, with
that Sovereign Cult due to God only; that there is any other Mediator we ought
to invocate besides our only Mediator Christ, etc.

SECT. III. Of the Interess'd Conversation.
I Mean by the Interess'd Conversation, that sort of converse wherein we treat
of our own, or our Neighbors Concerns: we must here take our measures from the
Nature of the business we undertake, and change the means we had resolved at
first upon for a good success according to the variance of emergencies, that
may render them unfit for the end we intended them for: I need not instruct
here Statesmen or Ambassadors how to behave themselves in their respective
Functions, they are commonly Men of eminent parts, and understand perfectly how
to manage their Masters concern; their common practice is in Conferences
relating to their Princes Interest, to follow scrupulously their instructions,
supplying nevertheless some things in Occurrencies by their own Prudence, to be
approved, or disapproved of by the Prince as he shall think fit. The interess'd
converse I speak of here, is that which is most ordinary between private
persons, wherein we must aim not so much at a vain Repute of Wit, but rather of
Christian Wisdom, as showing our selves ready to give every one his due: let us
then be real in our intentions, and sincere in our expressions, shunning all
intermixture of Amphibologies, or Ambiguous Speech, for we are out of fancy for
naked Truth, if once we fall in conceit with Equivocations, and mental
Reservations, which if you are Guilty of, you deserve to be banished all Civil
converse, as designing to deceive those you deal with. This Illusory practice
of Equivocating is so customary to some Romanists, that you can neither tie
them by Promise, nor by Oath; for if they Promise or Swear, it is with a mental
Precision, taking the thing in this sense, not in that you intended, in this
respect, not in that other, which would put upon them an Obligation of
performance: then which the Devil himself could invent nothing more destructive
to all the good we may reap by humane Society. If this subtle way of Cheating
were allowed of, vere homo homini esset Lupus, one Man would be worse than a
Woolf to another, and our condition would be safer if we lived like Wild Beasts
separated one from another, than it is now, if by living together we may fall a
Prey to those who assure us most of their kindness and friendship. Come not
then to treat with your Friend as a Serpent caressing with the Tail, and
killing with a double Tongue: which if once he discover, as it is easy, you
make an irrecoverable loss of his friendship, and your own interest.

Whatever I have said hitherto is to be practiced, if you have undertaken to
treat with others for your Friends Concerns, look upon his Affairs as your own,
and go about them with a careful diligence, but still without any design of
imposing upon those you deal withal: If you are to ask any favor for him or
your self, from a person that may help your present exigencies, remember of two
things. 1. To choose a fit season to make your Address, for Men are not apt to
be spoken to at all hours, and are now in humor to grant what in another time
they will refuse; it is then a part of your Prudence to lay hold on the fittest
occasion, captare molles aditus and mollia fandi tempora, because it is bald,
and if you let it slip, you shall not easily catch it again. 2. Think well
before you make your Application, for instance, to a Prince on the true
motives, which may more movingly persuade him, to propose them distinctly, and
in few words, and then withdraw without importuning him any more; Though
sometimes importunity may be made use of when all other means fail us, because
Men will often do what they are not inclined to, to be rid of our troublesome
assiduities.

As to the seasonable time of speaking, either in our own or our Friends
behalf, it is as yet advisable, and grounded both on reason and experience, that
the Morning is not so fit a time as the Afternoon, because the good temper of
our Souls depending wholly on that of our Bodies, we are not so well disposed
before meat, as after, as the Proverb insinuates, when I am hungry I am angry,
but our Spirit being revived by a substantial and plentiful food, we are more
cheerful and readier to give audience, and favors to such as make use of this
good Interval, to require them of us.

SECT. IV. The Character of the Sanguine Humor.
THose we call Sanguine in whom the Blood domineers, they are the fittest of
all Men for humane Society; so as the Body is Dead without Blood, una eademque
via fugiunt sanguisque animusque; we may likewise say our Conversation
languisheth, and dies, if there be no Sanguine present to revive it: Their
Gests are frequent, but decent, and becoming them well; their looks and their
whole Countenance inspire nothing but joy. In the posture of their Bodies,
whether they sit or stand, they use their own freedom, and hate extremely
whatever is uneasy; they are commonly eloquent, and discourse (if they have
any tincture of Learning) of every thing with great falicity; they distinguish
themselves in Conversation by a certain extemporary quickness, which surprizeth
the duller sort; an Innocent Railery is their greatest delight, in which
sometimes they exceed. Hence it is they content themselves more sometimes, than
those they converse withal, who being perhaps, incapable of an answer to a
witty word, repine to see themselves become a Subject of Sport to the Company;
nevertheless their complacency is so exact, that they will put on in an instant
a serious humor, if they think you in the least offended with their mirth,
they are pleased in appearance with whatever you say, how great Nonsense soever
it be. If they laugh you sometimes out of your Patience, by reason of some
rudeness of yours, they are to be pardoned, because this is an effect of their
moveable, and lively Spirits, which they can hardly command; yet they contain
sometimes themselves so far as to dissemble their resentment, when they are
touched to the quick, or turn Wittily into a Jest, what you have rudely said in
sad Earnest; they have a special Talent to add pleasant Circumstances to
whatever they have heard; as also to invent in the instant, things that never
were with such an air of probability, that they are easily believed by the
simple sort, as to all the Circumstances of their Tales, and by the most
knowing, as to the Substance. We must nevertheless pardon them this fault,
their aim being no other but to please which they attain to sometimes better by
an ingenious fiction, than a naked exposition of the Truth; they are talkative
beyond measure, because they think that whatsoever they say pleases others as
much as themselves; they are Naturally inclined to Flattery, and the aptest
people of the World to Inchaunt Women; they are extremely Complemental, and
upon this account most agreeable to Ladies who commonly delight to hear their
own praises, true or false; they never continue any considerable time upon the
same Subject, but pass on a sudden from one thing to another, because they
know somewhat of every thing, and few things wholly; they cause others often to
suffer what they are most impatient of themselves, I mean their tedious and
endless Tales; but because of their easy humor, they may be interrupted
without offense, but not without incivility; they speak often to their own
praise, yet with such modest Apologies, and delicacy of expression, that ye
would not judge them much concerned in what they say; they are not suspicious,
but ready to think and speak good of every one; they love excessively their
Pleasures, and discourse willingly of their past Debaucheries and new Projects,
either of lawful or unlawful diversions; upon the account of their greater
ease, they choose often rather to yield than to dispute, they become easily
familiar, and make a full acquaintance at the very first meeting, discovering
to a Stranger as to a concerned Friend, their Designs and Affairs; Trust them
with few Secrets of moment, the Mobility of their Spirits, and the Volubility
of their Tongues, make them incapable of a Secret, unless they resist
powerfully; for sapiens dominabitur astris, that violent Inclination of theirs,
to bring forth instantly whatsoever they have conceived.

SECT. V. The Character of the Choleric.
THe Choleric are not averse from Humane Society, but their unruly and
domineering humor is almost insufferable, they seem always to be unsatisfied
with whatever you either say or do to humor them. If you contradict their
sentiments they will rise in a fury, and whenever you assert any thing they
think not so, because they like it not, they shall tell you very civilly, you
are grossly mistaken; or more smoothly thus, Devil a word you say, is true: If
such persons be the Governors of Families, their Houses resemble Hell, where
there is no order, but a perpetual confusion. You shall meet with none that
have a greater conceit of themselves, and speak more in conversing to their own
advantage, they detract generally of all Mankind; if they cannot blame your
action, they will censure your intention, they shall force upon you if they can
their sentiments, and if by reason they Master you not, they will affright you
into their side, by Contumelies and flat Injuries; Yet they have some good
moments, and will make a show of an extraordinary complaisance to all they
converse with; but trust not too much to this Calm, it is like that of the Sea,
it will be changed on a sudden into a Stormy Passion; they think they speak
not like Men, unless they Swear and Curse like Devils; and this they will do in
cold blood, their custom being now changed into Nature; they shall discourse so
long as you seem to Credit them of their great Actions, their Noble Pedigree,
their Children, and of whatever may contribute toward the increase of that
esteem they are easily persuaded you have for them; in debates of Learning they
are commonly overcome by their own fury, which makes them incapable of
reflecting on what is said against them, and their thoughts cro^^^ing forth
altogether, their ^^^^rance is embarass'd, and unea^^^^ they are not fit for
Embassies, a^^ management of great Affairs, which require a certain moderation,
they are not capable of; they are rude in their Converse with Ladies, they are
nevertheless Complemental enough, but after a Martial manner, and far from the
smoothness of the Sanguine Temper: the roughness of their humor will hinder
them to comply with a Ladies sentiments, not only when they have reason on
their side, in which case also Civility would require our deference to the Sex,
but likewise when evidently they have it not. Of all Men they are commonly the
greatest Liars, and less to be trusted too, because their passion only
prompting them to speak, they are little reflexive on what they say; and either
promise things they are not able to perform, or will not when a more sober
temper has taken place of their former fit. In Disputes relating to Religion
be upon your Guards, least on a sudden they draw upon you, for this way of
arguing is more ordinary to them, than by reason; so they never influence the
understanding to conviction, because they manage not the will by a civil way of
debating; as in such conjunctures they speak much, they stagger often from the
Center to the Circumference, from Truth to Falsehood, giving a great advantage
by their rudeness, and precipitation, to a moderate and modest Adversary.
Nevertheless when they are once sensible by experience of their own weakness,
they will counterfeit a Phlegmatic temper by an affected moderation, which as
being forced, they put off again at the least occasion.

SECT. VI. The Character of the Melancholy Humor.
WE esteem those of a Melancholy Temper judicious and witty, though not so
ready, nor so sharp as the Sanguine. They speak little, but think much and
twice, before they speak once: their chief study is to pronounce Sentences, and
comprehend great Sense in few words: by their very jests, slighting smiles,
fierce looks, they discover their Secret Pride: they generally speak ill of
all, themselves only excepted, and if Nature has bestowed upon them any not
ordinary Talent, their own Self-conceit as a Magnifying Glass, will raise it to
a huge bulk: they think it a Point of Honor not to yield to any Man's
sentiments: they stand to their own fancies how groundless soever, with an
Obstinacy equal to that of Heresy: they mis-interpret often what is said
without design, as being beyond expression suspicious to their own perpetual
disturbance: they answer sometimes no otherwise than by a disdainful smile,
whether it be that they undervalue what others say, or think it securer for
their Repute to be silent: but this affected silence is a too visible mark of a
groundless Pride: they are sometimes troublesome, because of their heavy and
sleepy humor, yet they take often such fits of Mirth, that you would think
they have changed their Nature: they are not very Complemental, yet Civil
enough: they dissemble Naturally their sentiments, and are capable of a Secret:
they are complaisant when they judge their complacency is subservient to their
Interest: otherwise expect scarce Justice at their hands far, less a favor,
though they could do it at the easiest Rate: they speak harshly to their
Servants, to their Equals disdainfully, with an uneasy and forced respect to
their Superiors: they pretend to have a foresight of what is to come, and to
judge better of every thing than their Neighbors: they desire to be harken'd
to when they discourse, as Oracles, and when they are silent, they would have
you to think they are meditating on great things: their utterance is slow and
uneasy, till their imagination be exalted to that degree of heat, without
which we never express our thoughts fluently: they speak sometimes out of
purpose, either because they reflect not on what is said, or because they
intend to change the Subject, as not agreeable to their present Temper: their
Discourse is commonly senceful enough, but their affected silence is often
nothing else but a prudent coverture of their weakness.

SECT. VII. The Character of the Phlegmatic Humor.
THe Phlegmaticks are those the French call properly, Des Apathicks, without
passion, or insensible not through knowledge or design, but because of their
dull Spirits: they are extremely unconcerned in Conversation, and speak no
otherwise than Machines, by your moving first all sort of Wheels: I mean by
using all imaginable Industry to engage them once to make the Ceremony of
opening their Mouths, which they do at length with such an Indetermination,
that you must determine them again before their lips fall together: they seem
to spell in speaking, so slowly they go on; so I may say, they both draw and
quarter their words. When you have heard the first word, you may look about to
your Neighbors, or re-collect your self a while, the Gentleman must caugh, and
spit three or four times, e're he utters the second: and then infallibly to
gain time, he shall solicit your Attention, with an often repeated, Understand
ye Sir, Ye take me Sir: to make use of what we call Point d'esprit, before such
men, is a loss of time, they shall stand amazed at what you mean, without
either applause or answer: they are not capable of an extemporary dispute,
because their imagination is ever cold, and furnishes them not with a reply
when they are attacked: Nature has not been entirely a Stepmother to 'em, if
after a long Meditation, they are capable to speak, or write good Sense:
whatever they advance they stand to through wilfulness, not throw judgment: if
you ask them a reason for what they do, they have so much Wit as to tell you
it is their will, and nothing else: they love not Conversation, not that they
pass their time when alone, in Meditation, as the thinking sort of Men do, but
merely because they are so more at their ease, as thinking on just nothing:
because they delight so much in the solitude, they are to the Philosopher,
either Gods, or which I am more apt to believe, downright Beasts: yet they
appear Men again, and speak pertinently for their own Concerns, and can inform
you of Twenty Arts how to gain and spare a Penny: for as they are ordinarily in
a furious conceit of that shining Earth we call Gold and Silver, so they love
to speak of it: you need neither show your anger against this sort of people,
nor use them at the Complemental Mode, you shall find them as unconcerned with
your Wrath, as insensible to your Civility: yet they are rather not civil, than
positively incivil: they spend a considerable time and many words, to say but
little, they speak to Ladies rather with little respect, than a true
disrespect: they kill their Inferiors and Equals, with old and endless Stories,
but say nothing in presence of their Superiors, unless a mere yes Sir, or no
Madam, their longest Answers to every Question: they endeavor sometimes to
rouse up their Spirits with a higher tone, rather than a true anger, which
falls immediately with the fall of their voice: if they have a true love for
their Children, it is like that of irrational Creatures, they never tell them of
it, though they make them sensible enough of the reality of their Affections,
by procuring them all Necessaries.

SECT. VIII. The Character of the English, as to their way of conversing.
Though the English have been accounted from all times, one of the most polite
Nations of Europe, yet I am fully persuaded they have so far improved
themselves in the Art of all civil Converse, since His Majesty's Happy
restoration, that if we compare them now, to what formerly they were, we shall
have reason to wonder how so a great change to the better could happen in so
short a time: their former stiff form of conversing, is now changed into a
free, brisk, and lively air, which is the very Life of Conversation; And as in
their Method of Divine Worship, they have shunned the extremes, neither
rejecting all Ceremonies, as some of their Neighbors do, nor admitting too
many, as those of the Romish persuasion: so likewise in their way of
conversing, they hold a just middle between an excessive Gayete, and too
affected Gravity: their discourse because of this good temper, is commonly to
the purpose, and senseful enough: they are not so familiar at first with
Strangers, as the Scotch or the French; yet you shall find no where so real,
and more generous Friends, if once you are possessed of their Friendship: they
stand to their sentiments if opposed, yet without Obstinacy, choosing rather to
yield to reason, than overcome by Authority: they keep great measures with
their very Friends, and are scarce ever guilty of too great familiarity: they
discover their Secrets to few, hardly to those of their greatest intimacy: they
commend highly, and I confess deservedly too, their own Nation, but they
undervalue sometimes without reason, some Neighboring Nations, yet this is the
defect but of a little number, and of those particularly who have never
conversed Strangers, nor stirred from home: they express themselves upon any
Subject with a greater show of Natural Eloquence, than any other Nation of
Europe, though commonly they are reputed better Writers, than Orators, perhaps
because of the want of that great Action in their Pulpits, which we observe in
the Preachers of all other Nations: they can digest a Railery from a Friend,
but hardly if it come from a Stranger: as they are hardy and resolute in all
their undertakings, so they are in their words, discovering their Contempt of
their Adversary, rather than fear: they are exactly Complaisant to the weaker
Sex, and with greater deference in every particular, than any other Nation of
the World: On this account I suppose it is become Proverbial, That England is
the Hell of Horses, and the Paradise of Women, which is most true, if Liberty
and Freedom to do what they list, be the true Prerogatives of Paradise:
Strangers must not judge of this Nation by some of the common sort, whose
rudeness they complain of at their first arrival: the Commons in England
generally as well as the Gentlemen, are both Civil, Judicious, and Witty,
beyond those of other Nations; the English speak commonly to their Superiors
of what degree so ever, or Character, with a respectuous freedom, to few
familiarly, to their Equals and Friends too, unconcernedly readier to serve
them when need requires, than to feed their hopes with large promises; yet they
are of late become as Complemental, as any other Neighboring Nation, which
whether it be a Vice or a Virtue, I shall not determine. Their converse with
those they are unacquainted with, is somewhat cold and serious, mistrusting
Prudently whom they know not: they will discourse a Point of Natural
Philosophy, with such Eloquence and Sharpness, with such an air of probability,
that you cannot oppose their sentiments upon the account of any visible untruth
they advance: they have improved, and improve daily themselves in this noble
Science to that degree of perfection, no other Nation had reached to in the
foregoing Ages. The Right Honorable Rob. Boil, is Renowned all Europe over,
upon the account of his Experimental Philosophy, he is a Gentleman of
extraordinary parts, and deserves well the Repute, he has got now every where,
both abroad and at home, of an Eminent Philosopher. I shall say nothing here of
the Scotch, because their way of converse is not much different from that of
the French, their humors meeting with somewhat of Sympathy; I add only their
Nobility and Gentry may compare, to say no more, with any Nation of Europe, as
to Courage, Wit, Sharpness, and Civility.

SECT. IX. The Character of the French, as to their way of Conversing.
THe French are Naturally Civil, and Complaisant indifferently to all: they are
talkative beyond measure in Conversation, and sometimes after a long discourse
they have said but little, their easy utterance, and the quickness of their,
imagination engaging them often in Tautologies, so much hated by the English,
that they scarce ever make use of Synonima's, or idle Repetitions, they love
Railery, and understand it better than any other Nation of Europe, their Mirth
is innocent, and their Jests without offense: they Honor Men of great parts
whatever Nation they be of: they are extremely kind to Strangers, and on this
account will favor them in all occasions, they hate no Neighboring Nation;
but whom they fear most, as the English they most esteem: they were so far from
being jealous of the Honor the English obtained by these incomparable Actions
of Valor they did in their late Wars against the Germans, that they
contributed not a little to the increase thereof, by publishing them in their
Gazettes with due Elogiums, and the most material Circumstances: If they talk
too much to the commendation of their own Nation, you may easily pardon them on
this account, That they speak but little to the disadvantage of other Nations,
and seem to admire whatever comes from abroad; You may observe in their Speech,
and all their Actions, a certain confidence so nessary to all Gentlemen, that
whatever may be their other Endowments, without this they cannot be accounted
wellbred: they speak to their Equals almost with the same respect they do to
their Superiors: it is observable the persons of quality every where, but in
France particularly, are far beyond the rest in Civility: the French in their
familiar converse, will sometimes talk at random against their own Prince, and
his Government, but if a Stranger whispers any thing to his disadvantage, they
shall oppose him vigorously, as loving still (how rudely soever dealt withal)
their Prince, and glorying in his greatness.

I know no People in Europe sharper in their Repartees than the French, yet
they play often upon words, and delight in Childish Allusions. Their Language
is polite enough, but not so copious as the English; they will spare no pains
to teach a Stranger their pronounciation, but you must give them leave to sport
and laugh, if you pronounce amiss: this is the only reward they pretend to for
the trouble they are at: they are extremely Complemental, not so much by Art as
by Nature, and those amongst them that have no tincture of Learning, know yet
so much of Humanity, as to pay you the Homage of their hearty thanks for a good
turn done in good and senceful Terms. As extraordinary Caresses cover either a
Cheat, or a design to Cheat, trust not too much to their Complements, they turn
still by some reflex or another to their own interest: the French Ladies are
commonly well-bred, and behave themselves in a familiar converse with a certain
Bone-Grace, holding more of Nature than Art, their expressions are graceful,
neat, and smooth, their Countenance enlightened with the Beams of joy and
contentedness, their Air, their Gests, and the whole posture of their Body,
natural and easy, their Cercles are the best Schools of the French Politess:
the French generally discourse fluently upon any Subject whatsoever, with an
accuracy sufficient in a familiar converse, as knowing a little of every thing,
and few things to the bottom, or entirely: they affect in this Age, a certain
cold temper, and moderation in all their words, and Actions, and think they
give no small praise to a Man when they have said, C'est un home qui a beaucoup
de sang froid, He is a Man that has much cold Blood: you have all freedom to
oppose their sentiments in Conversation, but because they take it for no less
dishonor to be overpowered by Reason than by the Sword, you may expect a
vigorous resistance, they will oppose Reason, to Reason, and if they find
themselves worsted, they know how to ridicule the Matter and turn it into a
Jest, that so they may divert the Bystanders from reflecting on their
weakness, and your advantage.

FINIS.

