An ACCOUNT OF THE TRIALS OF SEVERAL Notorious MALEFACTORS. For Murders,
Fellonies, Burglaries, HELD AT THE Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY, For the
City of London and County of Middlesex.
Which began on the 23. of this Instant February, and ended the 25.

With the other most Remarkable PROCEEDINGS.

Together with the Names of the Persons that are Condemned to Dye, Burnt in the
Hand, Transported and to be Whipped.

Giving an Account of the Remarkable Trial of George Pie, for Killing the
Butcher in the Strand.

As also a full Relation how John Price was Orderod to be pressed to Death, for
his Obstinacy in not Pleading.

John Clark took his Trial for Robbing of Margaret Wing's House, in the Parish
of St. Mary Matt-Peller, alias White Chapel, of two Silver Tankards on the 19
of January, the Commitment of the Robbery being thus, he and two more of his
Fellow Thieves, coming in and calling for a Room, were showed up Stairs into a
Chamber, where a Cubbord stood in which the Tankards were, which they
perceiving, Picked the Lock in the Servants absence, and departed with their
Prize, as appeared by the Oath of the Maid who said there was no other persons
in the Room, from the time the Tankards were there, till such time as they were
missing, but she not being able to charge him possitively, he was Acquitted of
the Felony.

A second Indictment was preferred against him, for breaking open the House of
one Mrs. Danfield, and taking from her in Rings, Broad Pieces of Gold and
Pieces of Plate to a great Value, which things upon search being found in his
House, he fled, and could not be heard of till about two Sessions since: to
this Indictment he pleaded not Guilty, and endeavored to lay the Crime upon a
Kinsman of his, That was hanged some time since, but his Plea was in Vain, for
upon the whole matter the Jury found him Guilty.

John Smith took his Trial, for that he becoming a Servant to an Alehouse
keeper in St. Bartholomews about the 12 of Jan. last, Robbed his said Master of
30 l. in Money, several silver Seals, Rings and other things, as appeared in
his Indictment, some of which being taken upon him, the Jury thought fit to
bring him in Guilty.

John Butter, a Broaker in Drury lane, was brought into Court, and there put
upon the Jury, which done, the Court proceeded to Try him: His Indictment was
for stealing silver Spoons, one having been found as the VVitnesses gave
Evidence where he had sold it, but several people appearing to give Testimony
of his Life and Conversation was Acquitted.

George Pie, the person who killed the Butcher in the Strand, on the 11. of this
Instant, had a Bill preferred against him, by the Widow of the party killed,
for the Death of her Husband; whereupon several VVitnesses were called for the
King who gave Testimony, that the person now Tried, being a Bailiffs Assistance
or Follower, came up to him, telling him, he had a Writ against him for three
pounds, or some such sum, and bid him yield obedience to the same; but he on
the contrary taking up his Carver, bid them stand off; when, upon some offers
to seize him, he struck at them, and taking the Bailiff (who was Father to the
Prisoner) a stroke over the VVrist, whilst he strove to guard himself, he Cut
the Bone in two upon which he fell down, and then pursuing the Prisoner wounded
him, who drawing his Rapier, run him into the Body, of which VVound he then and
there instantly dyed, but the Court giving the Charge, the Jury brought it in,
se defendendo.

John Price being Indicted for a Felony and Burglary for stealing a Brass
Frying pan and other things to the value of 5 s. from one James Bennit, he
refused to plead, and notwithstanding all endeavors were used by the Court, in
which there were at least two hours spent, to persuade him to plead Guilty or
not Guilty, he obstinately refused it unless he might see his Accusers: so that
Sentence was passed upon him to be pressed by ten of the clock on Saturday,
unless he confirm to the Law, and recant his former stubborn obstinacy.

John Belzer was put to his Trial for stealing three Bever Hats from a
Haberdasher in Holborn, on the 18. of this Instant Jan. with which he was taken
going out of the shop, but the man that took him being a Quaker, and refusing
to swear, the Prisoner was acquitted. The Quakers Recognizance for prosecution
estreated.

Thomas Stockdale was prosecuted for stealing a Box and 20 s. in it, was from
Mary Rhods in St. Giles's Cripplegate, and upon prooff of the Fact, Convicted
of the Felony:

Jane Bunt, a famed shop-Lifter, was put to her Trial for stealing silks,
Ribboning and stuffs, out of a shop in Fleet Street, and upon part of the
things being taken upon her, she was found Guilty.

Thomas Mardelve an Outlandish man, who at first pretended to be ignorant in
the English Tongue, was brought into Court, and then put to his Trial for
stealing Plate, to the value of 4 l. which being made plain by the Evidence he
was Convicted.

Edmund Markham was Tried for a Felony and Burglary, committed on the House of
John Alost, living at Paddington in the County of Middlesex, and taking Goods
to the value of five pounds; the House being left alone, the Theives cut a
Ladder that lay in the Yard, and setting it up to the Window, entered the
House, and breaking open 12 doors, took Table Linen and other things:
Whereupon suspecting the Prisoner, who was a Tenant to the Party Robbed; his
House was Searched, and some Goods found, which were pretended to be lost; but
upon the Prisoners proving he bought them, the Jury found him not Guilty.

James Clark was Tried, for stealing a Silver Tankard out of a Victualing House
in St. Martins in the Feilds, which he afterward Sold to a Usurer in
Cloth-fair; the Tankard upon Trial was found to be taken by him, and especially
upon his own Confession, so that he was brought in Guilty.

Alexander Younger, the Person who Swore Treason against Mr. Harvy, and was the
last Sessions Fined for his unwarrantable taking away Goods, under the pretense
of their being Uncustomed or prohibited. Was this Sessions Indicted for a
Trespass, for taking away Stone-Buttons, Diamonds, and Buckles, from a French
Merchant, and was found Guilty of the same.

John Williamson took his Trial, for that he on the 18 of January last, going
into a Victualling House in Westminster, stole thence a silver Tankard, prized
at three pounds. Whereupon he was pursued, but for that time making his escape,
he not long after was taken by the Watch, and carried to the Round-house; where
the Party Robbed found him; upon his Examination he denied that he knew any
thing of the matter, and said much in Justification of his Innocence, insomuch
that no positive proof appearing to charge him home with the matter, he was
Acquitted.

This Sessions Mr. St. John, Pleaded his Majesty's most Gracious Pardon, for
Killing Esquire Styles in Chancery Lane.

Jane Robinson was likewise Tried for having two Husbands, but only one
Marriage which was the former, being able to be proved, she was Acquitted.

John Plat being Indicted for a Robbery Committed in White Chapel, he Pleaded
Guilty to that, and all under the benefit of the Clergy; it being an ancient
Plea, usual to such as are old proficients in Newgate.

Richard Tretbarfoot was Tried for stealing a silver Tankard in Cornhill, under
pretense of Drinking and making Love to the Maid of the House, who had formerly
been his Acquaintance, by reason of going to School with him: But the Tankard
being afterward found where he had disposed of it, he was found Guilty.

Two persons were likewise Tried for Robbing a House in Holbourn, but no exact
Proof being made against them, they were Acquitted.

William James, Thomas Andrews and Bryan White was Tried for Robbing one James
Watkins on the 6 of Auzust last, upon the Kings Highway, which upon Evidence
proved to be thus: The Persons Indicted having a Writ, with which they had
taken him into Custody, and somewhat roughly used him, swore Felony against
him, but the Evidence being but weak, and thought to be done out of Malice,
they acquitted him.

William Ship was Indicted for stealing a silver Salt, to the value of 7 s.
which being proved to be taken in his custody, he was found Guilty.

James Turner, was Tried for Robbing Sir Jonathan Raymond, on the 24. of Feb.
and taking from thence five pieces of Gold, and 40 s. in silver: His Indictment
was for Felony and Burglary, but the latter not appearing, he confessed the
former.

John Price, the person Condemned to the Press yesterday, was this morning
brought to the Bar, at his earnest request, and after some denials pleaded not
Guilty to two Indictments, one for Robbing James Rennet of a Frying Pan, to the
worth of 5 s. and another for stealing a Copper, which he sold for 16 s. both
which Indictments being proved, he was found Guilty.

An Indictment was brought against Not. Thompson, for publishing a Scandalous
report about the Murder of Thomas Thin, Esquire which together with the Pamphlet,
being presented to the Jury they brought it in Billa vera.

The French Doctor, who was Tried last Sessions for Poisoning one Morgan a
Lifeguard Man, appearing upon his Reculicence, was by reason of his Threatening
such, as appeared against him, bound to find good security, etc.

At this Sessions John Maiden, and John Clark, received Sentence of Death. Nine
persons were Burnt in the Hand, one Repreived before Judgment, upon Promise to
make Discovery. Two to be Transported. Four to be Whipped. Andd so it Concluded.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss. 1682.


