An Account OF THE TRAVELS Sufferings and Persecutions OF Barbara Blaugdone.

Given forth as a Testimony to the Lord's Power, and for the Encouragement of
Friends.

Printed, and Sold by T. S. at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-Lane, Shoreditch,
1691.

An Account of the Travels, Sufferings and Persecutions of B. B. etc.
IN my Youth and Tender Years, I feared the Lord, and was afraid to offend him;
and was zealous and diligent in the Profession I was in, and sought the Lord
earnestly, although I knew not where to find him, until I was directed by
Friends that came from the North, John Audland and John Camm by Name, whose
Behavior and Deportments were such, that it preached before ever they opened
their Mouths; and it was then revealed to me, That they had the Everlasting
Gospel to Preach in this City: And when they did open their Mouths, I was made
to bless God that I had lived to hear the everlasting Gospel preached; and they
directed my Mind unto the Light of Christ, therein to wait, which I was
diligent to do, and found the Virtue of it; and as the Evil was made manifest,
I departed from it, and willingly took up the Cross, and yielded Obedience unto
it, in plainness of Speech and in my Habit: and the People were so offended
with it, when I went into their Public Places and Steeple Houses to speak,
that they took away their Children from me, so that I lost almost all my
Employment; and they kept me in Prison a quarter of a Year at a time: And great
was my Sufferings in that Day* but the Lord so filled me with his Power, that I
was preserved through it all: And the Diligent and Faithful did prosper then,
and so they do now.

And therefore my Counsel to Friends, is, that they keep in God's Power; for
there is no other way to be preserved, nor to receive Life and Salvation; its
my Testimony for God: For whosoever shuns the Cross, and goes out of the Power,
they lose their way, and dishonor God; but whosoever keep in the Faith, and
abide in the Power, they are in Safety: I have had living Experience of it,
therefore I mention it, and it has been with me a pretty while to publish it,
for the benefit of those that are passing through, and are yet to pass through
the Sufferings, and therefore do I declare my Experience.

And so, dear Friends, the Cross is the Way to the Crown of Life, and to the
Crown of Glory; and they that continue Faithful and Obedient, they obtain the
Eternal Crown, which they that are disobedient, lose. I speak my Experience of
the Dealings of the Lord with me, in my Travels and passings through my
Spiritual Journey, for the benefit of those that Travel rightly after. And I
can speak it to the glory of God, he never moved me to any thing, but that he
gave me Power to perform it, and made it effectual, although I past through
much Exercise in the performance of it. And the Power of God wrought in me long
before I knew what it was; and when Friends came, that my understanding was
opened, I soon took up the Cross and came into the Obedience, and the Lord
cleansed me by his Power, and made me a fit Vessel for his Use.

And when I had labored pretty much at home, he called me forth to labor
abroad, and I stood so in the dread, awe and fear of the Lord, that his Spirit
strove much with me, before I could open my Mouth; and the Word of the Lord
came unto me in a Meeting, That the Lord would have War with Amalek from
Generation to Generation: And the Power and Spirit of the Lord was so strong in
me, that it set me upon my Feet, and constrained me to speak the words; for I
was never hasty nor forward.

And then the Lord caused me to abstain from all Flesh, Wine and Beer
whatsoever, and I drank only Water for the space of a whole Year; and in that
time the Lord caused me to grow and to prosper in the Truth: And then I was
made to go and to call the People forth from among the dumb Idols, and suffered
much Imprisonment for it; but yet I was made to go till the Lord gave me
dominion, so that I could go into their Places, and say what I had to say, and
come forth again quietly. And as Mary Prince and I was coming Arm in Arm from a
Meeting, that was at George Bishop's House, there was a Rude Man came and
abused us, and struck off Mary Prince her Hat, and run some sharp Knife or
Instrument through all my Clothes, into the side of my Belly, which if it had
gone but a little farther, it might have killed me; but my Soul was so in love
with the Truth, that I could have given up my Life for it at that day.

And then I was moved to go to Marlborough, to the Marketplace and
Steeple-house, where I had pretty much Service, where they put me in Prison for
six Weeks, where I Fasted six Days and six Nights, and neither eat Bread nor
drank Water, nor no earthly thing; then I came to a feeding upon the Word, and
had experience that man does not live by Bread alone, but by every Word that
proceeds out of the Mouth of the Lord. And when I was released, I went to
Isaac Burges, the man that committed me, and discoursed with him; and he was
really Convinced of the Truth, but could not take up the Cross; but was
afterward very loving to Friends, and stood by them upon all occasions, and
never Persecuted a Friend any more: and when he came unto this City, he came
unto my House to see me, and confessed, That he could not take up the Cross,
although he knew it was the Truth.

And a while after I was made to go into Devonshire, to Molton, and Bastable,
and Bediford, where I had a Prison in all those Places: and I went to the Earl
of Bathes, where I had formerly spent much time in Vanity, to call unto them to
come out of their Vanity; and I asked to speak with the Countess, and they
refused to let me in, but one of the Servants that knew me, bid me go to the
Backdoor, and their Lady would come forth that way to go into the Garden; and
they sent forth a great Wolf-Dog upon me, which came fiercely at me to devour
me, and just as he came unto me, the Power of the Lord smote the Dog, so that
he whined, and ran in crying, and very Lame; so that I saw clearly the Hand of
the Lord in it for my preservation, blessed be his Name: and then the Lady came
forth, and stood still and heard me all that I had to say unto her; and when I
had done she gave me Thanks, but never asked me to go into her House, although
I had eat and drank at her Table and lodged there many a time.

And then I was moved to go to Great-Torrington in Devonshire, unto the
Steeple-house there, where was a very bad Priest indeed, though I had little to
him, but to the People; and when I had spoken in the Morning, I went to my
Lodging, and what I had not room to clear my self of, I went to Writing, and
the Constables came and took away my Writing, and commanded me to go along with
them to their Worship; and I answered them, That they would not suffer me to
speak there, and that I knew no Law would compel me to go twice in a day, and
they all knew that I was there in the Morning; and so I would not go. So the
next day the Mayor sent for me, and when I came the Priest was there, and the
Mayor was moderate, and loath to send me to Prison, but the Priest. was very
eager, and said, I ought to be Whipped for a Vagabond. And I bid him prove where
ever I asked any one for a bit of Bread; but he said, I had broken the Law by
speaking in their Church. So he was so eager with the Mayor, that he made him
make a Mittimus, and send me to Exeter-Prison, which was Twenty Miles distant,
where I remained for some time, and was commanded of the Lord to Fast fourteen
Days and fourteen Nights, without tasting Bread or Water, or any earthly thing,
which I performed for a Witness against that dark professing People; and there
I was until the Assizes, and was not called forth to a Trial: but after the
Assizes was over, a petty Fellow sent for me forth, and read a Law, which was
quite wrong, and did not belong to me at all, and put me to lodge one Night
among a great company of Gypsies that were then in the Prison; and the next day
the Sheriff came with a Beadle, and had me into a Room, and Whipped me till the
Blood ran down my Back, and I never startled at a blow; but the Lord made me to
rejoice, that I was counted Worthy to Suffer for his Name's sake, and I Sung
aloud; and the Beadle said, Do ye Sing; I shall make ye Cry by and by: and with
that he laid more Stripes, and laid them on very hard. I shall never forget the
large Experience of the Love and Power of God which I had in my Travels, and
therefore I can speak to his Praise, and glorify his Name: for if he had Whipped
me to Death in that state which then I was in, I should not have been terrified
or dismayed at it; Ann Speed was an Eye Witness of it, and she stood and looked
in at the Window, and wept bitterly. And then the Sheriff, when he saw that the
envy of the man could not move me, he bid him forbear, for he had gone beyond
his Orders already. So when he had left me, Ann Speed came in and dressed my
Wounds; and the next day they turned me out with all the Gypsies, and the
Beadle followed us two Miles out of the City; and as soon as he left us, I
returned back again, and went up into the Prison to see my Friends that were
Prisoners there at the same time: So I took my leave of them, and went to
Topsom, where there was a fine Meeting of Friends, among whom I was sweetly
refreshed, and staid there one Night, and then I came home to Bristoll; and in
my Travels I went several Miles upon long Downs, and knew nothing of the way,
but as the Lord was with me, and did direct me; and in all this I have
experience of the Love and Power of the Lord to me wards, blessed be his Name
for ever: I cannot forget his Loving Kindness to me in my Distress.

And in my Travels near Bridgewater, I went to speak to a Priest that I had
formerly known, one Edward Piggot; and when I came back to the Inn, where I had
bespoke my Lodging, they would not let me come in; so I looked about for shelter
to keep me from the fierceness of the Frost, and I found the Pig-stye swept
very clean, and the Trough turned up, and never a Pig in it, and I sat me down
on the Trough, and that was my Lodging all that Night: and the next Night I
could get no lodging, but was fain to lodge in a Barn: and in all this the Lord
exercised me in the Patience.

Then I went to Bediford, and there I was put into the Town Hall and they
searched me to see whether I had Knife or Scissers about me; and the next day
they brought me before the Mayor for speaking in a private Meeting, and he
discoursed much with me, and had a sense of what I said unto him, and received
it; and at last he set open two Doors, one right against the other, and said,
He would give me my choice which I would go forth at? whether I would go to
Prison again, or go home? And I told him, that I should choose Liberty rather
than Bonds: So I went homeward, and then he took his Horse and came and
followed me, for there was some tenderness in him; and he would have had me Rid
behind him, but I found that when any Body which he knew did meet us, then he
would draw back and lag behind, and as soon as they were gone, he would come up
to me again; so therefore I would not ride behind him, but he rode three or
four Miles with me, and discoursed me all the way; and when we parted, I was
made to kneel down and pray for him, in which time he was very serious; and
afterward he grew very solid and sober, and in a little time he dyed, but I
writ to him once before he dyed, a little after I came home.

And then I was moved of the Lord to go to Bazing-stoke, to endeavor the
Liberty of two Friends, (viz.) Thomas Robison and Ambrose Riggs, which were
taken up at the first Meeting that Friends had there; and when I came, they
would not let me come in to them; and I having a Letter from John Camm unto
them, put it in at a Chink of the Door to them; and then I went to the Mayor to
desire their Liberty, and he told me, That if he should see the Letter which I
brought them, they should have their Liberty; and I told him he should, so I
went and fetched it to him, and he read it, and could fee no hurt in it: So he
told me, I should have my Brethren out, but he would not let them out
presently. Nevertheless we had a fine Meeting the next day, being First Day,
and coming from the Meeting, I met with the Priest, and told him his portion,
and in a few days the Friends had their Liberty: and thus the Lord made my
Journey prosperous.

And then the Lord moved me to go for Ireland, and I went in a Vessel bound for
Cork, and the Lord so ordered it, that the Ship was carried about to Dublin,
and we had much foul Weather, so that the Seamen said, That I was the cause of
it, because I was a Quaker; and they conspired to fling me overboard; but it
being made known to me, I went to the Master and told him what his Men had
designed to do, and told him, that if he did suffer them to do it, my Blood
would be required at his Hands. So he charged them not to meddle with me: And
afterward we were in a Storm upon a First Day, and I was moved to go upon
Deck, and speak among them, and Pray for them; and they were all made very
quiet, and said, They were more beholding to me then they were to their Priest,
because I did Pray for them, and he could not open his Mouth to say any thing
amongst them. We were six Days and six Nights at Sea, and the Master himself
did not know where he was, nor which way he was going, until we were put into
the Harbor at Dublin; and although we had abundance of very Stormy Weather,
yet we sustained no manner of loss nor damage; so that the Master said, He
could never say before that he was in so much foul Weather, and received no
hurt: And we were put into Dublin the very same day that Francis Howgill and
Edward Borough were Banished from thence. And then I saw my Service there, and
was moved to go to the Deputy, and when I came there, the People said, their
was no speaking with him for me; for did I not know that he had Banished two of
our Friends out of the Nation but yesterday. But in the Faith I went, and the
Power of the Lord had great weight upon me, and I met with the Secretary, and I
desired him to help me to the Speech of the Deputy. And he answered me, That he
did think he could not. And I told him, if he would be so civil, as to go up
and tell the Deputy, that there was a Woman below that would speak with him;
and then if he refused, I was answered. So he went up, and their came a Man to
fetch me up into the withdrawing Room; and after I had been there a while,
their came a Man out of the Deputy's Chamber, and they all stood bare-headed
before him, because they knew I never saw the Deputy; but I had a sense it was
a Priest; and there was almost a whole Room full of People, and they asked me,
Why did not I do my Message to their Lord. And I answered, When I do see your
Lord, then I shall do my Message to him. So in a little while he came forth,
and sat down on a Couch, and I stood up and spoke to him that which the Lord
did give me to speak, and bid him beware, that he was not found fighting
against God, in opposing the Truth, and Persecuting the Innocent, but be like
Wise Gamaliel, To let it alone, and if it be of God, it will stand; but if it
be of Man, it will fall; and the Enmity did not lie so much in himself, as he
was stirred up to it by Evil Magistrates and bad Priests; and that God's People
are as dear to him now as ever, and they that touched them, touched the Apple of
his Eye. But in his Name, and by his Power their was much hurt done to the
People of God all the Nation over, and it would lie heavy upon him at the last;
and that the Teachers of the People did cause them to Err, and he knew the
Priests portion; and when I touched upon that, he would say, There Is for you Mr
Harrison, to the Priest that stood there. And the Power and Presence of the
Lord was so with me, that it made the Man to be much concerned. And when I had
done, he asked the Priest, What he had to say to that which I spoke: And the
Priest said, It was all very true and very good, and he had nothing to say
against it, if we did speak as we meant. Then I told the Priest, that the
Spirit of God was true, and did speak as it meant, and meant as it spoke; but
men of Corrupt Minds did pervert the Scriptures, by putting their own
Imaginations, and Conceivings, and Apprehensions upon it, and so did deceive
the People: but holy men of God spoke the Scriptures, and gave them forth as
they were Inspired by the Holy Ghost, and they are of no private
Interpretation; but none understood them, but those that read them by the same
Spirit that gave them forth. So I returned to my Lodging, which was at one
Captain Rich his House, and he came home, and said, That the Deputy was so Sad
and Melancholy, after I had beed with him, that he would not come forth to
Bowls nor no Pastime at all.

This my Service for God was great, and he made it to prosper; And then I went
to Cork, where my Motion was at first, and great were my Sufferings there, for
I had a Prison almost wherever I came; and I was made to call to my Relations
and Acquaintance, by the Word of the Lord, and was made to follow them into
several Steeple Houses; and great were my Sufferings amongst them, but
wherever the Lord opened my Mouth, there were some that received me, and
would plead my Cause against my Persecutors; and I was in Jeopardy of my Life
several times, but the Lord prevented it. And I was made to speak in a
Marketplace, and there was a Butcher swore he would cleave my Head in twain;
and had his Cleaver up ready to do it, but their came a Woman behind him and
caught back his Arms, and staid them till the Soldiers came and rescued me.
And those that were my former Acquaintance, with whom I had formerly been very
conversant, and spent much time, and lodged at their Houses several times, even
those now were afraid of me, and would not come near me, but the dread of God
was upon me, and it made some of them to Tremble; and some said, I was a Witch:
and when I would go to their Houses to reprove them, they were so mad that they
would run away, and then their Servants would come and hale me out; and when I
would go to sit down, they would drag me along upon the Stones, and hale me out
and shut the Doors: So I came to witness that a Prophet is not without Honor,
save in his own Country. So when I found my self pretty clear there, I returned
home to Bristoll.

And in a while after I was moved to go for Ireland again, and then I was in
great Perils by Sea, where I saw the Wonders of the Lord in the Deep; and there
was one man Friend, and one woman Friend then in the Ship besides me, and the
Ship was broken near Dungarvan, and it foundred in the Sea, something near the
Shore, and we were all like to be cast away; and I was ordered of the Lord to
stay in the Ship, until they were all gone out of her, and the Master and the
Passengers got into the Boat, (all save one Man and one Woman, which were cast
away) and they got to Shore, and stood there to see what would become of me,
who was still in the Cabin, and the Waves beat in upon me in abundance, almost
ready to stifle me: And so when I found freedom I went and stood upon a piece
of the Deck that was left, and then the Master of the Vessel and the Man Friend
called to me, and told me, If I would venture to leap down, they would venture
to come into the Water to save me: So they came into the Water up so far as
their Necks, and I leaped down to them, and they caught hold of me, but I being
entangled in the Ropes in leaping down, was drawn from them again; but as the
Lord ordered it, a Wave came and beat the Ship out, whereas if it had beat in,
it would have killed us all three, but beating out, they recovered me again,
and drew me to Shore: So the Lord's Power and Mercy was wonderfully shown at
that time for my preservation; I cannot but bless his Name for it.

So then I went to Dublin, where I spoke in the High-Court of Justice amongst
the Judges; and then they put me in Prison, where I lay upon Straw, on the
Ground, and when it Rained, the Wet and Filth of the House-of-Office ran in
under my Back: And they Arraigned me at the Bar, and bid me plead Guilty, or
Not Guilty: And I answered, that there was no guilt upon any ones Conscience
for what they did in Obedience unto the Lord God: And the Judge could not speak
to me, but spoke to another Man that stood by him, to speak to me. So I could
not say as they bid me, and they returned me to Prison again, where I had very
hard Exercise. And there was a Man that could not enjoy some Land, except he
could prove that his Brother was dead; and he brought a Man into Prison, that
said, he would prove that he was killed at such an Inn, and buried under a
Wall. He accused the Innkeeper and his Wife, and their Man, and Maid, and a
Smith, to be guilty of this Murder. So I went to him, and sat down by him,
and spoke a few Words to him, and asked him, how he could conceal this Murder
so long, when he was as guilty of it as either of them, if it were true. He
trembled, and shook exceedingly, and his Knees smote one against another, and
he confessed, That he never saw the People with his Eyes, nor never was at the
place in his Life, nor knew nothing of it, but only he was drawn in by the Man
that was to have the Land, and was persuaded to Witness it. And the Prisoners
heard this his Confession to me; so I sent to the Deputy, to send down his
Priest, that he might hear his Confession: So he came, and he confessed the same
to him as he had done to me: and the five Persons which he accused was then in
Prison, but only the Maid in the Prison with me; and the Man confessed the same
once before the Judge: But the Man that brought him in, came to him every day,
and filled his Head with Drink, and caused the Jailer to lock me up, that I
might not come at him: So I writ to the Innkeeper and his Wife, and the
Coachman; and I writ to the Judge also, and told him the Day of his Death did
draw nigh, wherein he must give an Account of his Actions; and bid him take
heed how he did condemn so many Innocent People, having but one Witness, in
whose Mouth their were so many Lies found; (and they all said they were
Innocent.) They called him Judge Pepes who Condemned them all. Then a Priest
came to speak with the Maid that was Condemned, which was with me in the
Prison; but she would not see him, but said, Nay, he can do me no good; I have
done with Man for ever: But God, thou know that I am Innocent of what they
lay to my Charge. So they were all Hanged, and the Man that accused them was
hanged up first, for fear he should confess when he saw the rest hanged: And a
heavy day it was, and I bore and suffered much that day. Then there were some
Friends of mine, namely Sr. William King, Colonel Fare, and the Lady Brown,
these hearing I was in Prison, came to see me, and they would needs go to this
Judge, to get me released; so when they came, he told them, that he was afraid
of his Life. And they laughed, and told him, they had known me from a Child,
and there was no harm in me at all. And they were all very earnest to get my
Liberty, and at last they did obtain it. And then I was moved to go to the
Steeple-house, where this Judge was, and the Lord was with me, and I Cleared my
self of him; and he went to Bed and Died that Night: And one of the Prisoners
had writ the Letter which I sent to him, and when they heard he was dead, they
all said, that I was a true Prophetess unto him.

And thus as an Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, to do his Work, I was
faithful and obedient unto his Power, and he caused me to grow and prosper
through my great Sufferings; blessed be his Name for ever, that I had great
experience of his love and power. Elizabeth Gardener, and Rebecca Rich, and
Samuel Clareges Wife knew all this to be true.

And then I went to Limrick, where I had some Service, and they put me in
Prison. So in a while I was released, and then I took Shipping for England
again, and then there was a great Storm took us at Sea, and the Lord moved me
to go to Prayer; and I went to Prayer, and in a little time the Storm ceased,
and we were preserved; And coming toward Mineyard, we met a Pirate, which had
abundance of men on board, and I began to consider, whether there was any
Service for me to do among those Rude People, but I found little to them: so
they came on Board us, and took away all that I had, and one of my Coats from
off my Back; but they were not suffered to do me any further harm. So they took
away the Master with them, until he should pay them a sum of Money for the Ship
and Goods. And so we came home to England.

But in all my Travels, I Traveled still on my own Purse, and was never
chargeable to any, but paid for what I had. And much more could I declare of my
Sufferings which I passed through, which I forbear to mention, being not
willing to be over-tedious.

And I have written these Things that Friends may be encouraged, and go on in
the Faith, in the Work of the Lord: For many have been the Trials, Tribulations
and Afflictions the which I have passed through, but the Lord has delivered me
out of them all; Glory be given to him, and blessed be his Name for ever, and
evermore. Barbara Blaugdone.

THE END.

