TEN SERMONS Preached before Her Royal Highness THE Princess ANN of Denmark, AT
THE Chapel at St. James's.

BY LEWIS ATTERBVRY, LL. D. And one of the Six Preachers to Her Royal Highness.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1699.

MVNIFKE^TLA REGIA 1715 GEO^^VI D. G. MAG H^VRET ^^^XXXPD
J. Pu^^ sulp
woodcut, royal seal

TO Her Royal Highness THE Princess ANN of DENMARK.
May it please your Royal Highness,
TO permit me to Shelter these Sermons under your Protection, which were at
first Preached in your Presence. The Design of them is to draw in little, that
lovely Picture, and amiable Idea of Virtue and Holiness, which if well
considered would captivate the Affections of all Men; and to lay down the most
necessary Rules, and prevailing Motives, for the Attainment of them: And
therefore, I have been the more Ambitious to prefix your Name; since by your
Authority you can Command, as well as by your Example allure, to the Practice
of them.

Your steady adherence to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England,
your constant Attendance on the Public Offices of Religion, your devout
Deportment during the time of Divine Service, your Justice in giving to every
one their due, your Charity to the distressed and miserable, the Innocence and
Exemplariness of your Life; are so well known to the World, so much admired,
and reverenced, that whatsoever has your favorable Look, needs no other
Recommendation.

God grant that you may long continue what you now are, an Illustrious Example
of Virtue and Piety, that you may enjoy all the good things this World can
afford you; and at last be Crowned with a late Immortality; which is the daily
Prayer of

Your Royal Highness's, Most Humble, and Most obedient Servant, Lewis Atterbury.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. 1 TIMOTHY 4. The latter part of the 8th. Verse. For Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the Promises of the Life that now is, and
that which is to come, Page 1 SERMON II. Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my Ways,
and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies, p. 33 SERMON III. 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a
form of Godliness, but denying the Power; from such turn away, p. 62 SERMON IV.
Prove. 19.25. Smite a Scorner, and the Simple will beware; and reprove one that
has Understanding, and he will understand knowledge, p. 81 SERMON V. Psalm.
96.9. O Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, Page 104 SERMON VI. 1 These.
5.22. Abstain from all appearance of Evil, p. 127 SERMON VII. Eccl. 5.1. Keep
thy foot when thou go into the House of God, and be more ready to hear than
to give the Sacrifice of Fools: for they consider not that they do Evil, p. 156
SERMON VIII. 2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee,
p. 182 SERMON IX. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy Heart with all Diligence: For out of it
are the Issues of Life, p. 205 SERMON X. Matthew. 7.12. Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye so unto them, for this
is the Law and the Prophets, p. 234
SERMON I.
1 TIMOTHY IV. The latter part of the 8th. Verse. For Godliness is profitable unto
all things, having the Promises of the Life that now is, and that which is to
come.


AMONGST the many Artifices which the Devil makes use of to deprive Men of
Heaven and eternal Happiness, there has none been more fatally successful, than
the prepossessing their Minds with a false Notion, That the way that leads
thither is so narrow, that it is unpassable; the Gate so straight, that there is
no entering through it, and the Difficulties of a good Life so great, that they
are altogether insuperable. It Is commonly thought that when Men enter upon a
Religious Course of Life, they must bid adieu to the World, and all its
Pleasures and Enjoyments, and deny themselves the most innocent Gratifications
of Sense: They must give themselves up to a thoughtful, melancholy, and morose
way of living, and retire from all good Company, and agreeable Conversation;
that their whole time must be spent in the Practice of those uneasy Duties of
Mortification, Self-denial, and taking up the Cross; and in short, that it is
impossible for them to live religiously, and to live pleasantly. And therefore
since they have not any sensible Demonstration of the Happiness of the other
World, they are resolved to enjoy as much as they can in this, and to make sure
of their Portion here, whatsoever becomes of them hereafter. Whereas could they
be persuaded to make Trial for some time of a virtuous and religious Life,
would they but give themselves up for some considerable space to the Practice
of Piety and Devotion; they must needs be convinced, that the most likely way
to lead a comfortable, cheerful, and pleasant Life, is, to fear God, Eccles.
12.13.
and obey his commandments; and that our Happiness does consist in the
performance of our Duty. Psalm. 19.11.
For even in keeping his commandments there is great reward, and Godliness has
the Promises of the Life that now is, as well as that which is to come.

As will appear by considering,

First, That a religious Life promotes our Happiness in this World.

Secondly, It fits and prepares us for the Enjoyment of everlasting Happiness,
in the Life to come.

First, A religious Life promotes our Happiness in this World. And this it
performs,

1. By promoting the Interest of Mankind in general, and, 2. Of every private
and particular Person.

I. Obedience to the Precepts of Religion, promotes the Interest of Mankind in
General. The design of the great Creator and Governor of the world, is to make
all his Creatures as happy as their Capacities will admit of, and therefore he
has suited his Laws to the Nature of those Beings, which are to be governed by
them; that by the observance of his Commands, they may not only pay him that
Homage which he requires of them, but promote their own Happiness also. For the
same end he sent his Son into the world, viz. to be a public Blessing to all
the Nations of the Earth: And therefore all those Articles of Faith, and
Precepts of Morality which he taught his followers, were equally for the
Interest of all Men to believe and practice; nay, they are made more or less
necessary, in proportion to their Tendency to promote the good of Societies,
and the well being of Mankind. Hence Self-love (when exclusive of the love of
our Neighbor) is branded with so odious a Character in the Holy Writ; and on
the contrary, the Duties of Charity, Love, Peaceableness, Meekness, Temperance,
and Justice; are so frequently inculcated and recommended to us in the Gospel:
Because where those are duly and conscientiously practiced, Princes will be
secure in their Prerogatives, and the People in their Liberties; the Church
will support the State, and the State protect the Church; Parents will be
tenderly affected toward their Offspring, and Children dutiful toward their
Parents; Masters will be faithfully served, and Servants well used; all degrees
of Men will serve God and their Country, in their several Places and Stations,
and hereby promote the Weal and flourishing Condition of those Kingdoms in
which they live; Neighbor Nations will forget their mutual Quarrels and
Animosities, Isa. 2.4.
beat their swords into plow shares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and
willingly concur to proclaim an Universal Jubilee of Peace through the Universe.

II. It Is the Interest of every private and particular Person, to lead a Godly
and religious Life. Which will plainly appear from these following
Considerations.

First, That there is very little true Pleasure to be found in a debauched and
wicked Course of Life.

Secondly, That the way to lead a comfortable Life even in this world, is to be
virtuous and religious.

Thirdly, That the worst Circumstances a good Man can fall into, are to be
preferred before the most prosperous Condition of the Wicked: And if so, then
certainly it is the true Interest of every one, to lead a Holy and religious
Life.

First, It Is evident, that there is very little true Pleasure to be found in a
debauched and wicked Course of Life; because

1. A wicked Course of Life is contrary to the Dictates of a Man's own Reason:
For since Man is a reasonable Being, God has enjoined him a reasonable Service;
and therefore he who disobeys the Laws of God, must do violence to himself, and
Act contrary to the Dictates of his own mind. God has indulged Mankind in all
the reasonable Gratifications of his sensual Appetites; he has furnished this
World like a plentiful Storehouse, with all things necessary for his
Subsistence and Delight; and permitted and allowed him to taste of every Sweet,
every thing which his Soul desires, provided he keeps within the Bounds of
Reason and Justice, Temperance and Sobriety; that his Affections are not too
much set upon them, or his precious time too long taken up, in the pursuit of
them. God is not so hard a Master as to create Mankind with strong Propensions
and Appetites, and then to tie him up from the Gratification of them; to show
him Pleasures and agreeable Objects, and to deny him the Satisfaction of
enjoying them: No, the great Father and Benefactor of Mankind sincerely
desires, and has provided for our Happiness in this World, as well as the next;
and restrains us only from the abuse of his Creatures, and an inordinate and
excessive Love and Affection toward them. He delights to see Men live sutably
to their Natures, and please themselves with the rational Enjoyments of a
harmless and innocent Life: And it is our own Sin and Folly which makes us
miserable, fastens us to the Oar, Genesis 3.19.
and obliges us to that hard Condition, of getting our bread with the Sweat of
our brows. In the State of Innocence, Man's Reason gave bounds to his Desires;
his Will was sufficient to govern his Actions, and to conduct him to Happiness:
But when he fell from his Integrity, the Faculties of his Soul, were weakened
and disordered; his Passions grew so headstrong, that he was not able to
restrain them within their due Bounds, without the assistance of a supernatural
Power. And from this rage and disorder of our Passions, all our irregular
Desires after unlawful Pleasure do proceed; which must needs disturb the
Happiness of that Soul wherein they reside. For every sinful Lust we entertain
in our Souls, is a deflection from the Laws of right Reason; every sin that we
commit, is a base, a foolish, and unmanly Act; it is below the Dignity of our
Nature, and by consequence contrary to our true Interest.

2. The Pleasures of a wicked Life are precarious and uncertain; either we may
be snatched away from them, or those Delights may leave and forsake us. 'Twas
the observation of the Philosopher long ago; that nothing can make us Happy
which is not in our own Power: For it is the next step to Misery to consider,
that for ought we know, the very next moment this may be our Condition. Every
Age, and every Kingdom will furnish us with Instances more than enough, of the
inconstancy of worldly Pleasure: The revenge of Saul was frustrated when he had
got David into his Net; and Herod's Divinity vanished in the midst of his
Adorers, and the Worms became the Executioners of God's just Indignation
against him. The rich Man in the Gospel had no sooner sung a Requiem to his
Soul, but he had this Sentence pronounced against him, Luk 12.20.
Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Nay, frequently a
vain and causeless Fear strips us of all these Enjoyments; and they are so
truly the Creatures of Fancy, that upon the least alteration of our fickle and
unstable Minds, they vanish and disappear.

3. The Pleasures of a sinful Life are but short at the best. Though nothing
should interrupt them, yet they fade of themselves, and pass away like a Tale
that is told: They yield us some little Amusement for the present, and divert
our Thoughts from more serious and profitable Employments; but are of no longer
Duration than the present moment. We our selves cannot continue long in the
World; and if we could, yet we should either lose the relish of Pleasure; or,
what is worse, it would grow nauseous and burdensome to us.

Lastly, Sinful Pleasures are attended with perpetual Fears and misgivings of
Conscience. And here let me appeal to every ones Experience, whether Shame and
Confusion do not seize upon him, and Horror strike through his Soul, whilst he
is in the Commission of any wicked Action? Does he not (like his first Father
Adam) run away from the Presence of his God, as ashamed of his own Nakedness;
or sew Fig Leaves together, make some poor Excuses to cover it? Thus it is at
first, till Conscience is either lulled asleep or seared, and Custom in sinning
has, in some measure, taken off the dread of that Punishment which is due to
it; and because Vengeance seems to slumber, the hardened Sinner is the less
apprehensive of it: And yet for all this his Conscience sometimes awakes, lays
before him the things he had done, Arraigns and Condemns him for them. When he
lies on a Sickbed, or some grievous Affliction or Calamity befalls him, this
recalls his wandering Thoughts, brings to his Mind the Actions of his past Life,
and shows them to him in a true Light, and in their proper Colors.

This calms the Rage and hurry of his Passions, dispels the Fumes of
Sensuality, and gives him a true Prospect of his Condition: And then he begins
naturally thus to Reason with himself; What if there should at last be a God,
whom I have made it my business all my Life long to affront? What if there
should be a day of Account, and a State of everlasting Bliss or Misery? What a
miserable Condition am I in; lost and undone to all Eternity? I have indeed
lived a Life of Pleasure and Sensuality; I have indulged my self in every thing
which my Heart could wish: But alas! all those Delights are now fled away;
there now remains nothing of them, but the uneasy remembrance: I have nothing
to expect from a Just and offended God, but eternal Misery and everlasting
Torments. Such Reflections as these do frequently break in upon the vicious
Liver, these misgivings of Mind, do haunt and pursue him; and will not suffer
him to go on quietly in his wicked Courses; but render him uneasy here, as
well as miserable hereafter. And therefore,

Secondly, The way to lead a comfortable Life, even in this World; is to be
virtuous and religious. This is evident,

I. Because the leading of a Virtuous and religious Life, is the most likely
means to obtain the good things of this World.

II. Because it heightens and improves the Enjoyment of them.

1. The leading of a Virtuous and religious Life, is the most likely means to
obtain the good things of this World. Now the Goods of this World may be
reduced to these three Heads. 1. Health and long Life. 2. Riches. 3. Honor and
Reputation.

1. An honest, virtuous, and religious Life, is the most proper Course to
preserve our Health and prolong our Lives. For Religion teaches us to be sober,
chaste, and temperate; to avoid all excess in Meat, Drink or Sleep, which lays
the Foundation of most Diseases, and breaks off the thread of our Lives: It
teaches us to govern our Passions, and to keep them within their due Bounds;
and hereby procures such an even and steady temper of Mind, as contains the
Blood in its due Ferment, the Humors in their proper Channels, and promotes
Health, and a vigorous Constitution. Blessed are the meek, Matthew. 5.5.
for they shall inherit the Earth. Says our Blessed Savior (i.e.) a quiet,
meek, and humble frame of Spirit will conduce very much to prolong our days in
this World, and prevent those Broils and Quarrels (occasioned by exorbitant
Passion) which bring so many Men to untimely ends. And Lastly, It teaches us to
serve God, and to live up to the end for which we were created; whereby we
obtain such inward Comfort and Satisfaction of mind, The Feast of a good
Conscience, as renders us of a pleasant Humor, and cheerful Disposition;
which, as the wise Man observes, Prove: 17.22.
does good like a Medicine.

2. A virtuous and religious Life, is the most likely means to make us rich: By
encouraging us to be industrious in our several Callings, honest in our
Dealings, frugal in our Expenses (which are the most proper means of getting
and keeping Riches) and diverting us from all those expensive Vices; of Gaming,
Intemperance, and Lasciviousness, which have consumed so many Estates, and
brought many a Man to a Morsel of bread. But above all, it brings the Blessing
of God along with it, and gives Success to our honest Endeavors; so that we
have reason to stand amazed at our own Plenty, as being hardly able to
reconcile our Income with our Expenses.

3. For Honor and Reputation: These are scarce ever known to be obtained, but
by a Life led according to the Rules of Virtue and Honesty. For though a wicked
Man may have Titles heaped upon him, and derive his Pedigree from a long
Succession of illustrious Ancestors; though he may be followed by a numerous
Train of Servants and Dependants, and have the Shouts and Acclamations of the
Rabble, and be adored by his servile Flatterers as a God; though they may applaud
every word he speaks as if it were an Oracle; yet it is plain, that they despise
and contemn the Man, whilst they adore his Fortune: It Is not the Ass but the
golden Image he bears, they fall down to; for whenever the Scale of Fortune
turns, and this great wicked Man falls into Poverty and Disgrace, he becomes
the Scorn and Laughing-stook of his most suppliant Admirers; and those very
Persons who strove who should caress and tickle him with the most fulsome
Flattery, will then as earnestly contend, who shall treat him with the most
remarkable Ignominy and Contempt. Thus the great Sejanus, whilst he was the
Favorite of his Prince, was the Idol of the People also: But when he fell into
Disgrace with Tiberius Caesar, then no Indignity was omitted, which their Rage
and Madness could invent; and the most infamous Death was thought too good for
him: Then one might have heard the Crowd giving vent, to the just resentments
of their Minds, which before fear made them suppress. Says one, I always had an
ill Opinion of that Man; I thought he climbed too high to stand long, and that
his indirect and wicked Courses, would one time or other meet with a just
Reward. Says another, I was of the same Opinion; and though my dependence on
him obliged me to give him some external Homage, and to worship him for the
same reason, it is said the Indians do the Devil; yet I could never endure him
in my Heart: I always hated the Man and his Vices. But on the contrary, that
Honor and Reputation which is obtained by a Virtuous and religious Life, is of
a more durable stamp, and rather increased than diminished by Adversity. A time
of Trial makes the good Man's Virtues more remarkable, exercises his Graces,
and the Furnace of Affliction purifies and refines them. A true Sterling Virtue
will be honored and admired in all Conditions, in all places, and at all
times. Good Men naturally love and speak well of that which is Praiseworthy and
commendable, all Love being founded in likeness and similitude of Nature; and
even wicked Men cannot but reverence that Virtue and Integrity, which they will
not be at the Pains to Practice. And now for a conclusion of this Point, let me
appeal to your Experience; whether in the ordinary Course of the World, Health,
Riches, and Reputation are not for the most part the Rewards of leading a good
and virtuous Life. And as Religion furnishes us with the good things of this
World: So,

2. It heightens and improves the Enjoyment of them: It enables us to take the
Comfort of those good things we enjoy, Prove. 16.8.
and makes a little better with Righteousness, than great revenues without
right. And this it performs,

1. By making us content with our Lot and Portion in this World, and freeing
our Minds from all those anxious and sollicitous thoughts, which render the
Lives of many Men uneasy to them, who abound with every good thing which their
Heart can wish. For the good Man believes, that all things are governed by a
wise and gracious God, who best knows the Workmanship of his own hands, and
what Station is most proper for every Man; and has furnished him with suitable
Qualifications and Endowments, and entrusted him with such a Portion of this
worlds Goods, as it is convenient for him to manage: He is also well assured,
that God is a Being of infinite Love and Kindness to Mankind, Romans 8.28.
Truth and Faithfulness; and will make all things work together for the good of
those that serve him: So that though his Condition is not so high or great, so
gay and splendid as other Men's; nay, though he meets with many Crosses and
Afflictions; yet he rests very well contented and satisfied with it; because he
knows, upon the whole, it is that which is best for him.

2. By giving us an Heart to take the Comfort of those good things we enjoy;
and laying down the wisest and most prudent Rules and Directions how we may do
so; and teaching us that Golden Rule of Moderation in the Enjoyment of them,
which renders the good things of this world, Blessings indeed. For it is the
general Unhappiness of Mankind, that they know not how to keep a Mean; either
their Desires are too profuse and lavish, or else too narrow and bound up. How
many Men in the world are there to whom God has indulged Health, Riches, and
Honor, and all that their Hearts can wish; and yet has not given them the
Power to eat thereof: So that they reap no other benefit by all those good
things, saving the beholding of them with their eyes; and whilst they abound in
Wealth and Plenty, labor under all the Misery, and Inconveniences which
attend the extremest Want and Poverty? Nay, they are the poorer for God's
Liberality toward them; and as their Riches increase, so their Desires
increase with them. On the other side, how common is it to see Men drown their
Parts as well as Fortunes, and render themselves so stupid and sottish, that
even their Vices grow nauseous to them? Now Religion by directing us to the end
for which these things were given us, teaches us to use the World, so as not to
abuse it; to extract the Sweets out of all sublunary Enjoyments, without
incurring the danger of that Sting, which Excess and Debauchery leave behind
them: It makes our Pleasures durable and lasting, by teaching us the rational
Enjoyment of the good things of this World, and denies us nothing which is
pleasing and diverting, but what is also extravagant and brutish. It also,

3. Frees us from all those things which sour the Enjoyments of Life; rooting
out all irregular Passions, such as Envy, Hatred, Malice, and Revenge; and
composing our Minds to a calm and even Temper; diverting our Affections from
things below, and setting them on things above: It stifles the first rising of
our inordinate Desires, and teaches us to lead our Lives peaceably, soberly,
and moderately, considering that we live under the Eye of a Holy and All-seeing
God. The fear of God will restrain the violence, and impetuousness of our
Passions, and establish us in a just Empire over our selves, and bring our
inferior Faculties under the Dominion of Reason: the Love of God will produce
in us a Love to all Mankind, as well Enemies as Friends, and from hence will
proceed the most generous and comprehensive Charity: the Sense of our own
Vileness and Sinfulness, will keep us meek and humble, and inclinable to
forgive others, Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us. Whereas a wicked
Man is like the troubled Sea which cannot rest, but by reason of its being
tossed to and fro, Isa. 57, 20.
is continually casting up mire and dirt; Nay, he is frequently racked with
contrary Passions at the same time, and what was the Description of Catiline,
Alieni appetens, sui profusus, may be the Character of many a wicked Man: he is
covetous, but yet a lover of expensive Vices; ambitious and Vainglorious, and
yet too proud to court popular Applause; quarrelsome and revengeful, but
fearful and cowardly withal. Thus different Passions render his Life uneasy to
him, and contrary Vices (like the Poets Description of the four Winds blowing
in a Storm) rage all at once, and Shipwreck the Comfort and Happiness of his
Soul. And as the Passions of the good Man are calm, so is his Conscience clear:
He has none of those Lashes and Girds, which disturb the Quiet and Repose of
every wicked Man: He has already accounted with the great Lord and Judge of the
world, for his Sins and Imperfections; and since his Mind cannot charge him
with any thing he has not repented of, he must needs have Confidence toward
God. And by consequence he is free from the dread of Death, and a future
Judgment: Which take away the Comfort of the most prosperous Condition; for
when Men live in a state of Guilt, the dread of Punishment will follow them;
tantum metuunt, quantum nocent (says Seneca) and the fear of Death and future
Torments, will make them all their Lifetime subject unto Bondage. It made the
knees of a Belshazar smite together, when he saw the Handwriting upon the Wall;
and 'twould damp the Mirth of the most Atheistical Epicure, if he knew a naked
Sword hung over his Head, ready to drop down upon him. Men may talk big when
their Blood is hot, and in the height of a debauch Laugh at those
superstitious Fools, who are scared with the Bug-bears of Hell Torments; but
this is seldom the Subject of a morning thought: Do but use them as you do
other Madmen, and keep them for some time in the dark, and they will soon
regain the use of their Reason. It Is the peculiar Privilege of a good Man to be
void of Fear: The wicked flee when no man pursues, Prove. 28.1.
but the righteous is as bold as a Lion; he only is prepared against the fears
of Death, and terrors of an Eternity, and cheerfully resigns up his Breath into
the hands of him who gave it: He looks upon Death (that King of Terrors to the
wicked) as a Messenger of Peace, who delivers him from the Prison of his Body,
and opens the Gate for him into Bliss and Immortality. Of this happy and easy
departure out of this World, we have many Instances in the Holy Scripture, in
whom we may consider the Power and Virtue of a good Conscience; which enabled
them to lie down in their Graves, with the same quiet and composedness of Mind,
they used to lie down in their Beds. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.8.
I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness (says S Paul.) 1 Samuel ^.2.^.
Whose Ox, or whose Ass have I taken, (says Samuel) whom have I defrauded, or
at whose hands have I received a bribe? Nay, even wicked Men covet that
Happiness which they will not take the Pains to obtain. O let me die the Death
of the righteous, Numb. 23.10.
and let my latter end be like his! was Balaam's Wish.

But here I expect it will be objected, that I have concealed the Difficulties
which attend a Holy and religious Course of Life; that it is a State directly
opposite to our vicious Appetites and Inclinations, and therefore very uneasy
to Flesh and Blood; that it enjoins the unwelcome Duties of Mortification,
Self-denial, and taking up the Cross; that the Ordinances of Religion are
tiresome and a weariness to the Flesh; that the Holy Scripture tells us, Acts
14.22. Heb. 12.6.
That through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God; That those
whom God loves he chastneth, and That straight is the Gate, Matthew. 7.4.
and narrow is the way that leads to Heaven and eternal Happiness. And if so,
then certainly it cannot be so happy and pleasant a State of Life as I have
represented it. To which I shall briefly Answer,

That many of those Texts of Scripture, which speak of the Difficulties
attending a religious Course of Life are to be understood of those times, when
the Christian Religion was persecuted by the Heathen Emperors of Rome; and the
Professors of it in danger of losing their Lives for the Testimony of the
Gospel. It must be confessed, That even in our Times (when Kings are become the
nursing Fathers of the Church) those Persons who have been long habituated to a
sinful and wicked Course of Life, will find it a very difficult matter to
forsake it, and to give themselves entirely up to obey the Commands of God, and
the Duties of the Christian Religion: But yet it may be a mighty Encouragement
to consider, That it is only the first Entrance on a religious Course of Life,
which is attended with so great Difficulty; that it will become every day more
and more easy, and at last pleasant and delightful to them. When they have for
some time accustomed themselves to it, the Comforts of a well-spent Life will
flow in upon them, and nothing will yield them greater Satisfaction, than to be
allowed the Privilege of pouring out the Desires of their Souls before God, and
begging Supplies from him, and returning him thanks for his Blessings bestowed
upon them. They will earnedly desire to come and appear before God, and as the
Heart pants after the water Brooks: Psalm. 42.1.
so will their Soul pant after their God and their Redeemer. But yet supposing,
that there should be some Difficulty in the leading of a good Life, that God
should see fit to make the Profession of his Truth hazardous, and the Practice
of their Duty chargeable: Yet what generous and Praise worthy undertaking can
be performed without Pains and Diligence? All that is excellent and noble
requires Labor and Industry, and the Pains Men take makes the dear-bought
Blessing more acceptable to them. Do they not undergo much greater Difficulties
for things of lesser moment, though their Success is seldom answerable to their
Expectations? Do they not compass Sea and Land, leave their best Friends, and
nearest Relations, and dig even into the very Bowels of the Earth in quest of
Wealth; though for the most part they find a Grave, where they seek their
Treasure? Do they not toil and sweat, and wade through a Sea of Blood in pursuit
of Honor; though they expect no other recompense for their Pains, but a
Lawrel-Wreath, or the Applause of the People? And shall not Heaven and eternal
Happiness deserve our Care? Shall we not take as much Pains for a never fading
Crown, as we do for a withering Garland? But let us suppose the greatest
Difficulties we can possibly imagine, in the Practice of a good and Holy Life.
Suppose (as we are apt to fancy) that there are Lions in our way to Heaven,
Mountains which cannot be removed by our natural Strength and Ability; yet even
the most formidable Evils will not fright us from the Practice of Virtue and
Holiness, if we consider,

Thirdly, That the worst Circumstances a good Man can be reduced to, are to be
preferred before the prosperous Condition of the wicked; as will appear from
these following Considerations.

1. That in the lowest and most afflicted Condition the good Man enjoys the
Comfort of a quiet Mind, and the Peace of a good Conscience, which is a
sufficient Compensation for all the Evils he can possibly endure in this Life.
All other Evils are supportable, and may be undergone by a stable and well
resolved Mind; The spirit of a man may bear his Infirmities, Prove. 18.14.
but a wounded spirit who can bear? This is the only Load which is
insupportable, and is for the most part the Lot of the prosperous wicked Man.

2. The good Man is furnished with never-failing Remedies, against all the
Evils of this present Life: He is assured that all Afflictions shall be for the
good of those that serve God, and that God disposes all things with the Wisdom
and Love of an indulgent Father; that the Wheels of God's Providence have an
Eye within them, which always guides them to some wise end or other; 2 Cor.
12.9.
That Gods grace will be sufficient for him, and that he will proportion his
Assistance to his Wants; so that if he should call him out to give his Body to
be burned, and to lay down his Life for his sake; he will also give him
strength to undergo the fiery Trial; and cheerfully to praise him in the
Flames. And,

3. The good Man is assured, that the Evils he suffers will soon be at an end;
that the time draws on apace when he shall be eased of all his Troubles, Rev.
7.17.
Have all tears wiped away from his Eyes, and receive a Hundred fold for all
those momentary Afflictions, he has undergone in this Life. Whilst he endures
the Cross, his Faith shows him the Crown of Glory hanging over his head; and
the lively Hopes of it, make him not only patient, but thankful for, and
cheerful under Affliction. And I am persuaded that St. Paul when in Chains, and
under all his Calamities and Persecutions, was infinitely more contented than
Caesar or Seneca, than any of the most fortunate Princes, or wisest
Philosophers amongst the Heathens.

From these and such like Considerations I think it is sufficiently evident.

1. That there is very little true Pleasure to be found in a debauched and
wicked Course of Life.

2. That the way to lead a comfortable Life even in this World, is to be
virtuous and religious.

3. That the worst Circumstances a good Man can fall into, are to be preferred
before the most prosperous Condition of the wicked.

And if so, then from hence we may reasonably conclude: That Godliness has the
Promises of the Life, that now is, (i.e.) That our Happiness in this World is
best secured, by leading a Holy and religious Life. It only remains; that I
show,

Secondly, That a Holy and religious Life fits and prepares us for everlasting
Happiness in the world to come. And this is evident, because a State of Grace,
and a State of Glory only differ in degree; Grace is Glory begun; and Glory is
Grace perfected and consummated: So that every good Action and religious Duty
that we perform, is a step toward our everlasting Happiness, it both qualifies
us for it, and leads us nearer to it; for by a Holy and religious Life, we Copy
out the Perfections of the Divine Nature, and become more like God, and the
nearer we resemble him, the more we shall enjoy of him; in which the Happiness
of our future State does consist. It Is a State of perfect Purity and Holiness,
and consists in repeated Acts of Love, and Zeal, and Devotion; and therefore
the better fitted, and prepared we are in this World, by furnishing our Souls
with virtuous Habits, and those Divine Qualities of Humility, Meekness,
Charity, etc. the more capable we shall be of partaking of those heavenly
Pleasures, Psalm. 16.11.
Which are at Gods right hand for evermore. Our time in this World was given us
for this very Purpose, that we might furnish our selves with such Virtues and
Graces (those wedding Garments) which will render us fit Guests for the
Marriage of the Lamb.

'Twas easy for me to demonstrate that every Virtue has an influence upon our
future Happiness, and is a necessary Qualification, which we must obtain before
we are capable of enjoying it: but this would take up too much time at present,
Dr. Scot in his Christian Life. Part. 1.
and has been already largely treated on by an excellent hand. I shall
therefore only remark, That nothing can be more absurd than to frame a Notion
of our future State, from the Pleasures and Delights of our present Condition:
Or, to take those figurative Descriptions of it, which we meet with in the Holy
Scripture in a literal Sense. Our Savior Christ has plainly told us, That in
Heaven we shall neither eat nor drink, Mark 12.25.
nor marry, nor be given in marriage: A sensual Paradise might reasonably be
expected by a Turk or Pagan; but not by a Christian; whose Religion teaches him
to Crucify the Flesh with the sinful Lusts and Desires of the same. It permits
him indeed the moderate use of the good things of this World, to render his
Pilgrimage more easy, and his Journey to Heaven more comfortable: But yet it
teaches him, that his chief Happiness ought not to be placed in transitory
Delights; that they are Joys of a more Sublime Nature, Such as neither eye has
seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to understand,
which God has prepared for those who love and serve him; such Blessings as are
agreeable to our immortal part, such as the blessed Society of Saints and
Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect, the Vision of God; in which,
our Souls (being transformed into his Image) will be continually delighted and
transported, in admiring and adoring the Perfections of their Creator.

If therefore we hope to be Happy hereafter, Heb. 12.14.
we must practice Holiness in this Life, For without Holiness no man can see
God. We must make it the business of our Lives, to keep our Passions within
their due Bounds, and under the Government of our Reason; to mortify our
immoderate Appetites, and exercise our Graces; such as Faith, Hope, Patience
and Charity: This is that Godliness which has the Promises of the Life that now
is, and that which is to come.

And now what remains, but that every one who hears me this day be persuaded,
to embrace this pleasant Course of Life. And methinks there should need no more
Arguments, to prevail with you presently to enter upon it; since I have already
proved, that it is unquestionably both for your temporal and eternal Interest.
For what does God require of you, which is not highly just and reasonable? What
does he command you? But to do Justice, to love Mercy, Micah 6.8.
and to walk humbly with your God, (i. e.) to live up to the Dignity of your
Natures, and to Act as becomes reasonable and dependent Beings. Consider what
can you wish for, which is not to be obtained by observing the Precepts of
Religion. Length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor, she shall give thy head an ornament of Grace, Pror. 3.16.
and a Crown of Glory. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, and bring thee to
Honor, it shall be an Ornament of Grace to thy head, and as a Chain about thy
neck. What Allurement can there be in the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a
Season, and perish even in the Enjoyment; that you should prefer them before
those which flow from a virtuous and religious Life?

And now, may not God justly expostulate with us, as he did with the People of
Israel and Judah? Isa. 5.4.
What could I have done to my Vineyard, which I have not done unto it? What
more probable, and more rational Methods could God have taken to persuade us to
be Good, and by consequence Happy, than he has made use of? He has addressed
himself both to our Hopes and Fears, he has placed eternal Happiness on one
hand, and eternal Misery on the other: And moreover has strow'd our way to
Heaven with the good things of this Life. And now if notwithstanding all that
God has done for us we resolve to be miserable, and to take even Hell by force;
we have nothing to blame, but our own stupendous Folly. We cannot sure be so
silly as to imagine, that God reaps any benefit by our Service; or that our
Praises make any addition to his Glory, Job 35.6.
for as Elihu very well argues. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him, or
if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? if thou be
righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he at thy hand? thy
wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the son
of man. And therefore it is evident, that it is only our Welfare God seeks, it is
our Good he is so sollicitous for; and as he made us at first, with a Design to
communicate Happiness unto us, so he still retains the same gracious Intentions
toward us. And shall not we be wise for our selves? Shall we wilfully and
obstinately go on to defeat all the gracious Purposes of his Mercy and
Goodness, to trample under feet the Blood of his dear Son, and grieve his Holy
Spirits? Shall not these Cords of a Man be able to move us? Shall neither our
eternal, nor our temporal Interest have any influence upon us? This would
certainly be such unaccountable Folly, and monstrous Ingratitude, as no
considering Person can be Guilty of.

Let me therefore beseech you by the Mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
that you present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is but your reasonable Service: Let me beg and entreat of you, in the
name, and for the sake, of your blessed Lord and Redeemer, that you would so
far consult your own Interest, as to lead a pure, holy, and devout Life; which
is the only way to pass your time cheerfully, and comfortably in this World:
And to make sure of everlasting Happiness in the world to come.

SERMON II.
PSALM CXIX. 59. I thought on my Ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies.


THERE is nothing which with greater Reason has excited the Admiration of
considerate Men, than the ill Entertainment which Religion and its Professors
have found in the World: For its Precepts are so rational, so easy, so much
for the good of Mankind in the general, and the Contentment, and Satisfaction
of every particular Person, even in this World, that they would be every wise
Man's Choice, were they not his Duty. And yet, besides the internal goodness
and convenience of those Commands, God has been pleased to lay upon us, he has
enforced them with many powerful Motives; he has denounced many dreadful
Punishments against those Persons who disobey them; Punishments so intolerable,
that they are not to be conceived, even by those who must undergo them: He has
proposed many excellent Rewards to those who comply with them; such as neither
eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to
understand. These things being duly weighed and considered, one would think the
Christian Religion could not miss of a candid Reception; but that all Men to
whom these joyful Tidings came would soon become its Proselytes; and that it
was impossible for us to be Men, ( i. e. reasonable and thoughtful Beings) and
not be Christians.

And yet our Experience convinces us to the contrary; it is visible to every
inquisitive Observer, that Piety decays, Devotion grows cold in our Age, and
those who live under the best Laws, are most tainted with Vice, and most
dissolute in their Manners. There are many indeed who are entered into the
Church of Christ by Baptism, who wear his Badge, and make profession of his
Religion; but there are few, very few, who obey his Commands, and live by those
Rules he has laid down in his Holy Gospel.

Now amongst the many Causes which concur to produce this strange Effect, there
is none which is assigned with more appearance of Reason, than the want of
Consideration, that general Stupidity, and careless Temper which has seized the
generality of Mankind. Most Men are so taken up with the earnest pursuit after
Riches, Honors, or Pleasures; with the Business of their Callings, and the
Cares of this Life; that they seldom think of a Life to come, or consider what
their Condition will be hereafter: Nay, the very thoughts of their Mortality,
and Consideration that they must shortly leave this World, seem as unwelcome to
them, as Death it self; for did we but frequently and seriously think on our
ways, we should turn our feet unto God's Testimonies.

From which words I shall endeavor to show,

First, What is meant by thinking on our Ways.

Secondly, What the Consequences would be of a due performance of this Duty: We
should turn our feet unto God's Testimonies.

First, What is meant by thinking on our Ways. Way is a Metaphor very often
made use of in the Holy Scripture, to signify the whole Course of a Man's Life:
The time of our continuance in this World, is very fitly set out by a Journey
or Pilgrimage; it is begun at our Birth, and every moment which passes
afterward, is as it were a step which brings us nearer our Long-home.

By Thinking on our ways may be meant, Either, 1. A comparing a virtuous and
religious Course of Life, with a vicious and debauched one; a considering what
Pleasures and Conveniences each of them affords, what Effects they produce,
and a determining within our selves, whether it is best and most for our
Interest, to take up with the Pleasures and Advantages, the Pomps and Vanities
of the world; or to live an honest, sober, and devout Life, though attended with
many Troubles and Afflictions, and exposed to many Sufferings; but this has
been the Subject of a former Discourse: Sermon the First.
Or else, 2. The Thinking on our Ways may denote, a Reflection on our own
particular Actions, a Calling our selves to a strict Account, and examining our
Consciences; whether we have lived up to the Rule of God's word, and from
thence concluding, what the present State of our Soul is, and what Expectations
we may reasonably entertain, of being Happy hereafter.

And if we take these Words of my Text, I thought on my Ways, in this last
Sense, then they imply these three things.

First, A setting apart some time to recollect our selves, and to consider what
the past Actions of our Lives have been.

Secondly, A comparing our Actions with the Rule of God's word.

Thirdly, A serious Resolution to persevere in that which is good, and to
reform what is amiss.

And that we may be prevailed with to put these things in Practice, and perform
them with the better Success, I shall show,

I. How necessary it is for every one, who designs to lead a Holy and Religious
Life, thus to consider his ways.

II. I shall show, after what manner we ought to perform this Duty.

III. What excellent Effects a due performance of it would have upon our Lives
and Conversations. We should turn our feet unto God's Testimonies.

First, How necessary it is for every one, who designs to lead a Holy and
Religious Life, to consider his Ways.

And this is evident, 1. Because it is so frequently enjoined us in the Holy
Scripture. The God who made us, and is best acquainted with our Frame and
Dispositions, and what means will be most useful to enable us to walk in the
way of his Commandments; frequently exhorts us, to look back into our past
Lives, to consider the Nature and Quality of our Actions, by comparing them
with his Holy Word, and from thence to pass a Judgment upon them; and if we
find we have done amiss, to repent and do so no more. In the 4th. Psalm, Verse
the 4th. the Psalmist advises us, Commune with your own heart upon your Bed,
and be still. Upon which words St. Chrysostom thus Dictates; (...), etc. That
is, before you compose your self to Sleep, Summon a Court of Judicature in your
own Conscience, and exact a severe Account of your self: Consider what wicked
Purposes and Designs you have harbored, and how many of these have taken
Effect: Arraign and condemn your self for those Sins, and resolve that you will
never be Guilty of them any more. St. 1 Cor. 11.31. (...) if we would discern
or distinguish our selves.
Paul tells us, That if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, i.
e. we should avoid those Sins, which bring the Divine Judgments upon us: And
the same Advice is couched in those Parables, Luke 14.28, 29. and the following
Verses; For which of you intending to build a Tower sits not down first, and
computeth the cost, whether he has sufficient to finish it? Least happily
after he have laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that
behold him begin to mock him saying, This man began to build, and was not able
to finish. Or, What King going to make War against another King, sits not
down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him,
that comes against him with twenty thousand; or else whilst the other is yet a
great way off, he sends an Embassage, and desires Conditions of Peace. So
likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot
be my Disciple. The meaning of both these Parables is this: That every one who
intends to be Christ's Disciple, must first sit down and consider with himself,
what it is to be a Christian, what Difficulties he is like to meet with in his
Christian Race, what Temptations he must encounter withal: And if he does not
sincerely Purpose to forego every thing which stands in Competition with Christ
and his Gospel, if he does not resolve to part with all that he has, rather
than deny his Savior, he can never be Christ's true Disciple.

And as we ought to make such Reflections as these, before we enter on a
Christian Course of Life; so when we have made some Progress in it, it will be
necessary to examine and try our selves, how well we have put these good
Resolutions into Execution: Whether we have acquitted our selves like Christ's
faithful Soldiers and Servants, or else cowardly left the Field, and deserted
his Colors. And therefore we are so often commanded to examine our selves
whether we be in the Faith, 1 Cor. 3.13. (...). Gal. 6.4. (...).
and to prove our own selves. And St. Paul advises the Galatians, Let every man
prove his own work. The word used in both places in the Original, signifies so
to prove or to try, as that a Man's Actions may be thoroughly known and
approved, fifted and made evident: And that such an Examination as this will be
of great use to promote our spiritual Well-being, is evident.

2. From Reason. Common Sense and Reason will inform us, that if we design to
direct our Lives by the word of God, we must frequently compare them with this
Rule: We must reflect upon our Actions, and consider, when we have done our
Duty and acted as becomes us, and when we have transgressed the Commands of
God. For in the first place, the best Men in the world are subject to many
sinful Passions; and though they make never so strong Resolutions, though they
could set the Faculties of their Souls in the most exact Order, yet when they
go abroad into the World, they will meet with something or other which will
ruffle and discompose them, and betray them into disorderly Affections, and
sinful Practices. There is no Man in the world so good and perfect, but he has
his Failings, his Weaknesses, and Infirmities: And the Devil will be sure to
assault him on that side, where he lies most open to Temptation, and will
sometimes prevail against him: And therefore the wisest Course a good Man can
take, is frequently to recollect himself, to consider, when and where he has
done amiss, what was the occasion of it, what betrayed him into that sinful and
foolish Action: and having discovered this, heartily to repent of his Sin, to
fence and guard himself against it for the time to come, and to resolve
steadfastly, never to suffer himself to be imposed on and deluded again, in the
like manner.

In the next place there are many Actions, which at first sight appear to us,
good and Praiseworthy; which when more narrowly considered, and tried by the
Rule of God's word, are found to be crooked and deformed, such as we have just
cause to repent of. We place them at first in a wrong Light, we behold them
through a false Medium: Our Kindness and Affection toward them, makes them seem
of a different Complexion than they are really of: But when we come to consider
them without Passion or Prejudice, to weigh every Circumstance; Then it is
plainly evident, that we admire our selves for Qualities which are not in us,
and applaud our selves for Actions which are nothing worth: We performed them
either out of a wrong End, or they proceeded from a false Principle, or we were
deficient in the Manner of transacting them: So necessary is it to consider our
Ways, and to bring our Actions, to the Touchstone of God's word; even those
Actions which we esteem most Holy and Perfect. For our Righteousnesses, the
most regular Acts of our Lives, our most Affectionate and fervent Devotions,
are stained with Sin; and want that Purity and Integrity, which God requires in
them; they are derived either from Self-love, or Pride, or desire of Honor, or
love of Gain, from fear of Damage, or discredit in the World; rather than out
of Love and Reverence, and Gratitude toward God; Charity and Good Will toward
our Neighbor; or a sober regard to our own true Welfare and Happiness. And
though God has Promised to pardon those Sins, and to pass by that Obliquity of
our Actions, which proceeds from the frailty and infirmity of our Natures; yet
he expects that we should repent of them, (i. e.) That we should confess and
forsake them, express our Sorrow for what we have done, and resolve to Act
better for the future, which can never be performed without a severe
Examination of our Hearts, and calling our selves to a particular Account; how
and wherein we have offended.

But farther; the absolute necessity of Examining our selves, will appear from
this Consideration; That the greatest part of our time is spent amidst the
noise and hurry of the World; our Thoughts are taken up chiefly in the business
of our Callings, in providing for our Families which is so far from being a
Fault, that it is highly commendable and Praiseworthy (for God is better
pleased with a Man, who is diligent and industrious in that Calling and Station
he has placed him in, than he would be, if he were continually upon his knees,
performing one uninterrupted Act of Devotion; and this I am induced to believe,
for this one plain Reason, because all the Devotional parts of our Religion
were chiefly intended, to help and assist us, in the Practice of those Duties
which God requires of us in our several Relations.) But yet, seeing so much of
our time is spent in the business of this Life, so many of our thoughts taken
up with our worldly Affairs, we must needs judge it highly reasonable that we
should set apart some time to retire into the Closet of our Breast, and
frequently consider what State and Condition our better and more Spiritual part
is in; what Sins we have been guilty of; and whether we go forward or backward
in the Ways of Virtue and Religion. Every prudent Man, and good Husband, does
this in his secular Concerns, he that designs either to keep or increase his
Estate, makes it his first and chiefest Care, to be exact in keeping his
Accounts, to Balance them often, and to inform himself what proportion his
Incomes bear with his Expenses: And thus careful and diligent we should be in
our spiritual Affairs, if we had but the same Value for our immortal Souls,
which we have for the fading Goods of this World; this would supersede my
Labor of proving to you, the absolute and indispensable necessity, which lies
upon every one to continue in the Practice of this Duty.

And in truth, this has been the usage of good and virtuous Men in all Ages of
the world; not only of those whose Examples are recommended to our Imitation in
the Holy Scripture; but also of those Heathens, who have been eminent for
Virtue and Morality. The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 77.6.
That he used constantly to call himself to an Account. I call to remembrance
my song in the night, I commune with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search. Amongst the Fathers of the Primitive Church, we find all those who
wrote upon practical Subjects pressing this Duty of Self-examination: The time
would fail me, should I instance in the Precepts of St. Chrysostom, Basil,
Gregory and the rest. Neither were the Heathen Moralists wanting in the
recommendation of it, both by Precept and their own Examples: That Precept of
Pythagoras in his golden Verses is generally known.

(...). Ask thy self (says he) every Night, What Sin have I committed this day?
What Good have I done? What Good have I left undone, which I ought to have
done? Seneca tells us, Quotidie apud me causam dico, I every day pass Judgment
upon my own Actions: when I am in Bed, and the Light is taken away, I run over
all my Words and Deeds, I consider how I have spent that day, I omit nothing
which I can recollect; for why should I be afraid to reflect on my own
Failings, when I can say to my self, this was not well done, but do so no more?
He also tells us of his Friend Sixtus the Philosopher, who duly thus examined
himself, before he went to rest: What Disease of thy Soul, or what Vice have
thou cured this day? What Sin have thou subdued? Art thou a better Man to day,
than thou wast yesterday? If so, thou have lived to some Purpose; but if not,
thou have but consumed and lost thy time. And to name no more, the Divine
Plato, when he saw any Man do a wicked or unbecoming Action, used to ask
himself this Question, (...); have I never been guilty of this Crime? If this
Sin looks so ill in that Man, is it not worse in me? If I have never been
guilty of it, let me be sure to avoid it for the time to come.

I might easily heap up many like Instances, for this has been the Practice of
good and virtuous Men in all Ages; and in truth it is hardly possible for a Man
to be good and virtuous, who omits or neglects the Performance of it. And
therefore, I shall take this for granted: And proceed,

Secondly, To lay down some Directions, how we may perform this Duty to the
best advantage. And,

1. When we design to perform this Duty of Self-examination, let us first free
our Minds from all the Cares and Business of Life, from every thing which will
take up our Thoughts; and apply our selves to this Task with seriousness and
attention: For since the Interests of this World, and the next are widely
different, it will be impossible to attend on the one, whilst our Thoughts are
taken up about the other: And we may as well fix our Eye upon two opposite
Objects at the same time, as keep our apprehensive Faculty intent both on
Things temporal, and Things spiritual.

When we have cleans'd and purged our Souls, from all carnal and worldly
Thoughts, and Affections; let us beseech God, from whom are the Preparations of
the heart, that he will enable us impartially to examine and search into our own
Souls; enlighten our Understandings, assist our Memories, and discover to us
those Sins which lie hid in our Consciences, and teach us those things we know
not; which either we never took notice of, or which we have forgot: That we may
have the same apprehensions of them at present, we shall hereafter be affected
with, when we come to lie upon a Sickbed, and to have a Prospect of the other
World.

Having thus fitted and prepared our selves, let us consider how, and after
what manner we must Examine our selves: And,

I. The time when we ought to employ our selves about this Duty.

II. What ought to be the Subject of our Examination. And,

1. As to the time when this Duty will be most seasonably performed, I have
already made it appear, That it has been the Practice of good Men in all Ages,
to examine themselves daily; and this with very good Reason: For since
Confession of Sin is one Condition, which God requires of us, before he will
Seal the pardon of our Sins, it is impossible we should make a full and
particular Confession of them, unless we examine our selves daily. The number
of our Sins is so great, that should we defer it till a farther time, many of
them would slip out of our Memories; and then God has revealed to us, no other
Condition of Pardon, but that general Confession of them, Psalm. 19.12.
cleanse thou me from my secret Sins; and how can we call those Sins secret,
which are concealed from us, only because we will not take the Pains to
discover them?

What time of the day is most proper for this Employment, every Man's Prudence
must determine, this must be directed by the Exigency of his Affairs: but for
the most part it will be requisite even in this Case, Eccles. 11.6.
to follow the Advice of the wise Man, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the
evening withold not thy hand. To consider in the Morning, what Temptations we
are like to meet with that day, what opportunities of doing good, and making
the most strong and firm Resolutions, that we will resist the one, and embrace
the other: And to call our selves to account in the Evening, how well we have
put these Resolutions into Execution, whether we have performed our vows unto
God, or else shamefully given up his Cause, and yielded to the importunity of a
prevailing Temptation.

But besides this daily Examination of our selves, there are other times when
we ought to call our selves to an Account: It Is the great Duty of the Lord's
Day; A Day set apart on purpose, that those Persons who all the week long are
cumber'd with the Cares of this world, employed in the Business of their
Callings, and in making provision for their Bodies, might have some time to
recollect themselves, and to secure the eternal Welfare of their Souls. And how
can Men employ this day better? (I mean that part of it, when they are not
called upon to join in the public Offices of Religion) than in recollecting
themselves, how they have spent the week past, what Sins they have been guilty
of, what good Actions they have performed, what Progress they have made in a
holy and virtuous Life; and in considering what Temptations they are like to be
exposed to the following Week, and in taking up Resolutions of walking more
strictly and more circumspectly; and that by the assistance of God's Grace,
they will yield a more exact obedience to his Commands. This ought to be the
Business of every Lord's Day, and every Day hallowed and set apart for the
Worship of God; but more particularly of those times, when we intend to prepare
our selves for the receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: Then it
behooves us to make a more diligent search into our Lives and Conversations,
that we retain no Leaven of Malice and Hypocrisy, no evil thing unrepented of,
which may deprive us of the Benefits of this blessed Ordinance. Next to the
time, let us consider:

2. The Subject of our Examination. And here let us make an exact Scrutiny into
all the thoughts and intents of our Hearts, the words of our Lips, and the
Actions of our Lives. Concerning our thoughts, let us ask our selves such
Questions as these. What is it that I most think upon? Are my Thoughts serious,
seasonable, and pure? Are my Inclinations compliant with God's Law? What does
most easily stir me, and how is my heart moved? Are my Affections calm, and
orderly, and well placed? What Plots do I contrive? What Projects am I driving
on? Are my Designs good? Are my Intentions upright and sincere? Concerning our
Words, let us demand thus. Psalm. 39.1.
Have I learned to keep my tongue as it were with a bridle, to refrain from all
manner of evil Speeches, and to employ it to that use for which it was
designed, viz. to glorify God, and to communicate the Thoughts of our hearts
one to another? As to our Actions; let us first enquire, whether they are good
and agreeable to the Rule of God's Word; and then let us reason thus with our
selves: This Action was indeed well done, but might I not have done better?
might I not have brought more Glory to God, and procured more good for my
Neighbor? Was not this good Action imperfect as to some Particulars? Was I not
too blame as to some Circumstances? And if so, let us resolve, That if ever God
puts another opportunity into our hands of performing the same Action again, we
will mend these Defects, and be wiser and better for the future: But on the
other hand, if upon comparing our Actions, with the Rule of God's word, we find
they have been evil and disagreeable to it; then let us say thus to our selves,
I have done this wicked Act, and hereby offended my good God; but what benefit
or advantage have I got for my self? Does not that trouble and remorse of
Conscience which I feel for the Commission of this sin, much exceed the
Pleasure I took in it? Is it not a very foolish thing to purchase so little, so
momentary a Pleasure, at the expense of the Quiet and Repose of my Mind, a good
Conscience here, and eternal Happiness hereafter.

And that we may have a true and lasting Sense of the evil Nature of our Sins,
let us consider the several aggravating Circumstances which attend them:
Perhaps the Crime which we committed was done with Deliberation; perhaps in
despite to the Checks of our Conscience, and the blessed Motions of God's holy
Spirit; perhaps it has been frequently repeated, and we still continue to go on
in it, notwithstanding the many Calls to Repentance, and the many Vows and
Resolutions we have made of leaving and forsaking it. These and many more are
the aggravating Circumstances, whereby our Sins are rendered more heinous, and
more exceeding sinful. Thus the Treason of Judas was a Sin of the deeper die,
because he was one of Christ's familiar Friends and Disciples, who conversed
with him, and did eat of his Bread: And Solomon's Idolatry did offend God the
more, because his heart was turned from the Lord, 1 Kin. 11.9.
who appeared unto him twice, and had commanded him concerning this very thing,
that he should not go astray after other Gods.

These are the steps by which we ought to proceed in the Examination of our
selves: Which when we have performed, that we may make a right Judgment of the
State of our Souls; let us take a review of what we have done, and compare our
present Condition, with our former Course of Life; and then let us consider
with our selves, whether we grow in Grace, whether our virtuous Habits and
Resolutions are more rooted and confirmed, 2 Pet 1.8
or else whether we lose ground, and become barren and unfruitful in every good
work.

And here that we may not be mistaken, I shall interpose one Caution; that the
Standard of our improvement in holy Living, and growth in Grace, is not to be
taken from the Affections: These for the most part are most vigorous and
lively, when we first enter upon a religious Course of Life; we are then
soonest warmed and raised up into Ecstasies, and Raptures of Devotion;
especially in our tender years, when our Passions bear the greatest sway in us,
and captivate our Reason: but as we grow in years, these heats languish and
decay, and as our Reason and Judgment improve, we are less Subject to these
Transports of our Assections; and proceed in a steady and regular Course of
Piety and Virtue: And therefore the best way to make a right Judgment of our
spiritual Improvements, is to consider; whether we live up more exactly to the
Rules of our Duty? Whether we yield a more ready Obedience to the Laws of the
Gospel, than we have formerly done? whether we have left off any of our evil
Practices, and bid adieu to our beloved Sins? whether we have brought our
selves to suffer Affliction patiently, to resign up our Wills to the Divine
Will more contentedly? These are the most certain Signs by which we may best
judge of our Improvements in Grace.

And if we find that we do indeed grow better and better, then in the next
place; let us endeavor to call to mind, by what means we have made these
Improvements: What Motives and Inducements most wrought upon us: What Rules and
Directions were most useful: What Company and examples were most alluring:
Phil. 3.16.
And then let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same things. But if on
the other hand we find that we decline in Virtue and Piety, that our Sins
(those Sons of Anak) have been too hard for us, and that we have been guilty of
many heinous and presumptuous Crimes; then let us carefully weigh and consider,
what it was which betrayed us into these Sins; how we came to be prevailed
with, to do such foolish and unreasonable Actions; Actions which are both
displeasing to God, and unbecoming the Dignity of our Natures, and that rank of
Being which we hold in the world; by what means and methods did the Devil (that
old Serpent) wind himself into our Souls? with what bait did he allure us?
under what specious shows did he represent his Temptations? which was our weak
side that first yielded to the Assault? what were the occasions and inducements
of our falling into Sin? And when we have found out these, let us make solemn
Vows and Resolutions, that for the time to come we will be more vigilant and
watchful, that we will resist the Devil, and then he will flee from us, and
never again return to folly: Jam. 4.7. Ephesians. 6.11.
But that we will take to our selves the whole Armor of a Christian, wherewith
we shall be enabled to stand in the day of Trial, and remain Christ's faithful
Soldiers and Servants to our Lives end.

And to conclude all, let us beg of God, to give us his Grace and Assistance,
that we may do so. And if we thus pray, and thus do; then we shall certainly
reap those blessed Fruits and Effects, which will naturally flow from a due
performance of this Duty; We shall turn our feet unto God's Testimonies.

To show what these Fruits and Effects are, is the Third and last Head I
propose to Discourse upon.

1. A due Examination of our selves would keep our Consciences tender. It Is
morally impossible for a Man to go on in the habitual Practice of any known
Sin, who daily calls himself to Account for his Actions; who distinctly and
seriously considers in what Particulars he has offended God, and what has been
the Effect and Consequence of doing so: For Vice is in it self so ugly and
deformed, so destructive to our true Interest, even in this Life; and Virtue so
lovely and amiable, that no Man who sees them both barefaced, but must needs
hate and detest the first, and close with, and embrace the latter. It Is want of
Consideration which betrays Men into sinful and foolish Practices: When the
Mind is blinded either with Passion or Sensuality, then it becomes a Prey to
every vile Lust: And therefore God is said to come unto Men in a still voice, 1
Kin. 19.12. Genesis 3.8.
and in the cool of the day, when they are capable of hearkening to the
Dictates of Reason, and to weigh and consider things: But the Devil appears in
Storms and Tempests, and hurries Men on into Ruin. When he has once engaged
them in any evil Practice, he will not suffer them to take any rest, to sit
down and look back upon what they have done, but carries them on, from one
degree of wickedness to another, till at last they have neither Will nor Power
to repent. For the Sinner at first is timorous and bashful; his Conscience is
seized with Fears and Doubts, mis-givings and relentings, it accuses, condemns
and punishes him for his Crimes, and performs the part of God's Vicegerent in
his Soul, whilst he is attentive to it, and continues to live under its
Government, and submits himself to its Discipline: But when he turns a deaf ear
to its Admonitions, and withdraws himself from its Obedience, when he is so
much taken up with the specious shows and appearances of sensual Pleasure from
without, that he has no leisure to hearken to the Voice of this heavenly
Monitor from within: Then Sin that strong Man takes possession of his Heart,
Rules and Domineers there, and he is given up by degrees to hardness of Heart,
and a reprobate Mind. Whereas were but this one Rule, Of a daily Examination of
our selves, conscientiously practiced, Men might have some struglings and
fightings within them, their depraved Nature might sometimes prevail against
them, but they would never become habitually debauched; St. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 4.
(...), says the Father: That is, the Consideration what smart Men have
formerly endured for their Sins, will make them fearful of committing the same
again: And the Thoughts that they must give a speedy account of their Actions,
not only to God in the other world, but to their own Consciences in this, would
engage them so to govern their Actions, that they may have no reason to blush
at, or repent of them. The Pleasure of reflecting on their good Deeds, would be
a most powerful allurement to persevere in well-doing; and the farther they
walk in the Paths of Virtue, they will take the greater Pleasure and Delight in
them.

2. From a daily Examination of our selves would flow Peace of Mind, and a
comfortable persuasion and assurance, that we are in God's Favor, and under
his Protection; 1 John 3.21.
for if our Minds condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. If we
have repented of our Sins, and made our Peace with God, we need not fear what
Men or Devils can do unto us. Fear is generally the effect of Guilt, and a
Consciousness that we deserve Punishment for our evil Deeds: But when by a due
Examination of our selves, we have set Accounts right between God and our
Souls; when we have found out those accursed things which make God our Enemy, 1 Samuel 15.33.
and hewn these Amalakites in pieces before the Lord; then have we good grounds
to trust in the Lord, Isay 50.10.
and to stay our selves upon our God. And God has promised, Isa. 26.3.
that he will keep that Man's Mind in perfect Peace, whose Soul is stayed on
him.

3. A daily Examination of our selves will increase our Charity, and incline us
to entertain the most favorable Opinions of other Men. We shall espy so many,
and so great Faults in our selves, that we shall have neither a Desire nor
leisure to pore upon those of our Neighbor; and the Consideration how much
need we have of Forgiveness, will render us more willing to overlook or pardon
those Offenses which are committed against us; and will teach us to forgive
others, Mark 11.25.
even as we hope, that God for Christ's sake will forgive us.

4. Self-Examination would make us truly sensible of God's Patience and
Longsuffering, who still extends his Mercy and Forgiveness toward us,
notwithstanding our manifold and daily Provocations: He is more ready to Pardon
than we are to Repent, and kindly meets and receives all such as return unto
him.

The time would fail me, should I recapitulate all the Benefits and blessed
Effects, which would flow from a conscientious discharge of this Duty. It would
be of use to us at all times, and in all Conditions. It would keep us humble in
Prosperity, support us in Adversity; it would enable us to subdue our Passions,
and moderate our Appetites; it would take away the sting of Death, and make our
Departure out of this World easy and comfortable.

In short, it would be of excellent use to sweeten the Comforts of Life to us,
and help us to obtain everlasting Happiness in the world to come.

And now I think it is plain, That a frequent Examining our Lives and
Conversations, is a Duty enjoined us by God; practiced by Men eminent for Piety
and Virtue, both Christians and Heathens; agreeable to Reason; and of admirable
use in all the various Exigences of Life; and that most of the Mis-carriages,
Sins, and Follies, which we are guilty of, do proceed from the Neglect and
Omission of it.

What then remains, but that we go and put this plain and easy Rule in
Practice; and so think on our Ways, as to turn our feet unto God's Testimonies.
Which God of his Mercy grant for the sake of our blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ
our Lord.

SERMON III.
2 TIMOTHY III. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power; from such
turn away.


THIS know (says St. Paul Ver. 1.) That in the last days, periolous times
shall come because of the wickedness of Men; (as he goes on in the second
Verse) for Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, boasters,
blasphemers, and all which he comprehends under one Character in the words of
the Text, Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power. And this is the
chief Reason why the times would be so perilous, because the greatest part of
these wicked Persons, should conceal their Crimes under a Form and show of
Godliness. Were they professedly and openly wicked, there were some Ingenuity
even in their Impudence, because they could not be taxed or upbraided with
Hypocrisy: Were they covetous, proud, blasphemers, without a show of Zeal, and
pretense of Religion, then all Men might plainly discern and detect them; Psalm.
55.12.
and from an open Enemy, I would have hid my self (says David.) Shelves and
Quicksands that have Lights always burning to discover them by, are the more
easily avoided, and we are forewarned against the Dog that barks first: But
these Deceivers of whom St. Paul speaks, have a fair and glorious outside, though
they are foul within: These workers of Iniquity cry, Lord, Lord, and are great
Professors of Religion: They put on the Form of Godliness, though they deny the
Power thereof; and therefore they have the greater Sin. From hence it is, that
they are the more dangerous Company, and we have the greater Reason to observe
the Caution laid down in the Text; from such turn away. Having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the Power; from such turn away.

From these words I shall show,

I. What is here meant by Godliness, what by a Form, and what by the Power of
it.

II. That we may have a Form without the Power of Godliness.

III. How we may discover, whether we have the Power of Godliness, or else only
the Form of it.

IV. And Lastly, how far we must turn away from such as have only the Form, but
not the Power of Godliness.

1. What is here meant by Godliness, what by a Form, and what by the Power of
it.

Godliness in the Original (...), is a devout and sincere Worship of the only
true God, in Spirit and in Truth, both inwardly and outwardly, according to his
Word: Or to describe it more fully and expressly, 1 Timothy 1.5.
It Is an earnest Love of God, out of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and
Faith unfeigned, whereby we are incited to glorify God, and to do good toward
Men: So that in this one word is implied our whole Duty toward God and Man.
This is expressed by St. 1 Timothy 2.2.
Paul, by leading a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. 1 Timothy 4.8.
This is that Godliness which is profitable unto all things, and has the
Promises of the Life that now is, and that which is to come. By a Form of
Godliness is meant an outward Resemblance, a colorable show, or likely
appearance of Godliness, when a Man puts on the Face and outside of Religion,
Acts and Mimicks it so well, as to deceive and impose upon those, who converse
with him; who judging according to the outward appearance believe him to be an
honest, holy, and religious Man, though in truth he is nothing less: He may not
only deceive others, but delude himself also, and be confidently persuaded,
that he is the Child of God, and one of the chief Favorites of Heaven, when
indeed he is a Servant of the Devil, and a Firebrand of Hell. And in truth, the
Form must be like the Pattern, or else it is no Form at all; for we do not say
a Picture or Statue, is such a Man's Picture or Statue, unless it bears a
lively Resemblance of his Looks and Person. Thus a Form of Godliness must be
such a show and outside of Religion, as is of the same hew and complexion with
true Religion, and a lively Portraicture of it; though in many Respects it falls
short of the Power of Godliness; which implies that Force and Efficacy, that
internal Principle and Spring of Action, which is well expressed by the Greek
word (...), whereby a Man is made (as St. 1 Ti^^ 41 8.12.
Paul says) An example of Believers, in word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity; and has the Grace of God which brings Salvation,
teaching him to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world. If a Man has Charity in
Conversation, Faith and Purity in Spirit, so as to deny all worldly Lusts, and
to live soberly in himself, and righteously toward others, and godly toward
his Maker and Redeemer: Then is his Soul and Body entirely subject to the Cross
of Christ; then his Form of Godliness proceeds from the Power of it: And this
is that Power of Godliness which works mightily unto Salvation. And this Power
of God is most evidently seen, in reducing the most Stiffneck'd and
Hard-hearted Sinners; in prevailing with them to leave their beloved Sins and
bosom Vices; and in beating down, and subduing the most stubborn and unruly
Passions, such as Pride, Envy, Malice, and Revenge, those Sins our corrupt
Nature is most subject to, and in making so great a Change in us, that we do
not seem to be the same Men. The Lion becomes a Lamb, and the Serpent a Dove, a
natural Man, a Man wholly Spiritual, and a Servant of the Devil, a Child of
God. He aims at new ends, Acts by new Principles, and is ready to expose his
Life, by giving his Testimony to those Truths, which before were foolishness
unto him: And therefore the Gospel is called, Romans 1.16.
the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes. This is that
Power of Godliness which those Hypocrites mentioned by St. Paul in the Text are
without, here it is they are defective; which brings me to show,

2. That the Form of Godliness may be without the Power of it: And this is
confirmed by many other Texts of Scripture. We are forewarned that we do not
look to the outward appearance, 2 Cor. 11.14.
for the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of Light; and then it is no
wonder, that his Servants can put on the guise and appearance of the Children
of God. There are numerous instances set down in the Holy Scripture, sufficient
to convince us of this Truth. We are told that a Man may pretend to be sent
from Heaven, and yet Preach another Gospel, than that which our Savior
revealed to the World, and hereby deserve an Anathema: Nay, he may Preach the
true Gospel with such force of Reason, and wonderful Efficacy, 1 Cor. 9.27.
so as to save others, and yet he himself numbered amongst the cast aways. I
shall add no more Instances, because this Proposition is plainly affirmed in
the Text, not only that there are some that have the Form, but not the the
Power of Godliness: But that many shall deny the Power of Godliness; (...) (i.
e.) they do not only fail in observing it, through frailty and infirmity: But
they wilfully and presumptuously, in despite of God's word, and their own
Consciences, Act quite contrary, and go directly against it; like Herod they
are convinced of the Evil of their ways, and perhaps in part reform their
Lives, and do many good Deeds; but still they are resolved to keep their
Herodias, their beloved Sin, and darling Vice; and this they will by no means
forego, even for Heaven it self: They say with Naaman the Syrian; 2 Kin. 5.18.
in this one thing pardon thy Servant. And if there are so many, who have a
Form, but not the Power of Godliness, then certainly, it ought to be our great
Care in the

3. Place, To make a diligent Search, and seriously to consider with our
selves, whether we have the Power of Godliness or no. And this may be
discovered by the following Marks and Characters, set down by St. Paul in this
Chapter immediately before the Text, Verse 2, 3, 4. They are (says he) lovers
of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural Affection; Truce Breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those who are good; Traitors, heady,
high-minded; lovers of Pleasure more than lovers of God. On the other hand, if
we would know who they are, that have not only the Form of Godliness, but also
the Power and Spirit of it, we are told, That the fruits of the Spirit are
Love, Joy, Peace, Gal. 5.22, 23.
Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. But because
a wicked and bad Man may counterfeit these Graces so exactly, as to deceive not
only other Men, but himself also; I shall therefore lay down four Rules by
which any Man, who will but honestly and conscientiously examine his own Heart,
may certainly know, whether he has the Power of Godliness, or the Form only.
And they are these,

1. Such who have the Power of Godliness, will Act out of religious Motives,
and Principles: (i. e.) They will be Religious, because God has made Religion
their Duty, and has annexed the Rewards of eternal Happiness, to the due
Obedience of his Laws: Their Religion is not taken up from the Mode and Custom
of the place in which they live; and only for this Reason, because they think
it will suit best with their Interest; nor do they make it an Engine to carry
on their worldly Projects and Designs; but they search the Scriptures to find
out what is the Will of God, and then they readily comport their Obedience to
his Commands, they look upon serving God as the great Business of their Lives,
and make all other things truckle and subservient to it: Their first and
principal Care, is to make sure of the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness,
Matthew. 6.33.
and then they are not very sollicitous for those other things which will be
added thereunto: They prefer a good Conscience before all other Comforts this
world can afford them, and had rather part with Father, Mother, Wife and
Children, Mark 10.29.
nay their own Lives, than deny their great Lord and Master.

2. Such as have the Power of Godliness, are religious in Private, as well as
in Public. They who have the true Fear of God, and retain awful Apprehensions
of his Majesty, consider that his All-seeing Eye is every where, and beholds
the very intents and purposes of the heart. He therefore who is truly
Religious, is as devout in his Closet, as he is in the Church; as conscientious
in performing his private Devotions, as in frequenting the public Worship of
God: He is as careful to avoid all unjust Actions (though he is assured they will
never be discovered) as he is to prevent open Violence: He will not defame,
back-bite, or so much as speak an evil word against his Neighbor (though he is
Morally assured it will never come to his ears:) Nay, he will not harbor the
least wicked Thought against God, or injurious Intent against his Brother;
because he believes that God, who takes notice of all his Thoughts, Words, and
Actions, will one day call him to an Account for them, Matthew. 16.27.
and either reward or punish him according to his Deeds.

3. That Man who has the Power of Godliness, yields an uniform and universal
Obedience to all God's Laws; he has the same Reason for obeying one Precept,
which he has for observing the rest; and therefore does not think, that his
performance of any one part of his Duty, will atone for the neglect of the
other. He does not take up with the more easy Duties of Religion, or avoid
only such Vices, as are burdensome, and unacceptable to him, but he performs
whatsoever God has Commanded him, how contrary soever to his temporal
Interests, and corrupt Inclinations: Heb. 12.1.
He forsakes every evil way, and lays aside every weight, and has respect unto
all God's Commandments. Luke 1.6.
He does not endeavor to reconcile God with Mammon, or by being nice and exact
in performing some of God's Commands, to make amends, for the breach of the
rest; but he gives himself up to obey God, without any manner of Exception or
Reserve, and endeavors to serve him with all his Soul, with all his Heart, and
with all his Strength. It Is true, a good Man may be guilty of some Sins: The
weakness of our Nature is such, Prove. 24.16.
That the most just Man falls seven times a day: But though he falls, yet he
quickly rises again, by a sincere and hearty Repentance: He sets a Watch over
himself and resolves to be more careful for the future: He does not wilfully
and obstinately go on in his Sins; but he is sorry for them, he Prays and
strives against them, and by degrees he gets the Victory over them.

4. He who has the Power of Godliness is Religious through the whole Course of
his Life, he does not only repent of his Sins, and obey the Law of God at some
certain Times and Seasons, but his whole Life is regular and uniform, and he
maintains the same steady Course of Piety and Devotion. Many there are who are
very Religious and Devout at some times, but then they let the Reins loose at
others, and think by a strict Observation of some Duties to make amends for
those gross Miscarriages, they allow themselves in all the rest of their Lives:
But the truly Religious Man perseveres to the end, in Practice of Piety and
Holiness: He is not indeed always equally zealous and fervent, he does not
always worship God with the same Ardency of Affections, nor is he always
wrought up to the same pitch of Devotion: But when he is at the lowest Ebb; he
endeavors to quicken and raise his Affections, he begs of God to inflame his
Heart with a Coal from the Altar, and cannot rest satisfied till the Light of
God's Countenance shines in upon his Soul, and he is in some measure assured of
God's Favor and Good Will toward him.

These are the four Marks by which we may certainly discover (if we will but
bring our selves to the Trial) whether we have the Power of Godliness, or the
Form only. I come now

Fourthly, To show, How far we must turn away from such Persons, as have only
the Form, but not the Power of Godliness. And, I. We must Examine their
Doctrine. II. Detest their evil Examples. III. Avoid their Company.


I. We must Examine their Doctrine and the Ends of it; St. Paul gives us a hint
of both; Now I beseech you, Brethren, Romans 16.17, 18.
mark them, which cause Divisions and Offenses (there is their Doctrine)
contrary to what they have heard, and avoid them: for they that are such, serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ (here are their Ends and Designs) but their own
Bellies; and by good Words and fair Speeches, deceive the hearts of the Simple.
Whatever Doctrines have a show of seeming Holiness and Piety, and yet by
probable Consequence tend to promote any evil and wicked Designs, ought not to
be received, till tried by the Touchstone of God's word, and are found exactly
conformable to the Holy Scripture.

II. We must detest their evil Examples; for this is an absolute and certain
Rule; that unless we dislike their evil Practices, and alienate our Affections
from them; we shall write after the same Copy: Our Life will be according to
our liking, and therefore we must hate and detest their Hypocrisy, though we
love the Men; we must abhor the Uglyness of their Vice, though we bear no ill
will to their Persons. In this sense we must hate them right sore, and with a
perfect hatred, Psalm. 139.22.
even as though they were our Enemies.

III. We must avoid their Company, and this is the literal meaning of the Text.
From such turn away. It was a subtle, though a wicked Policy of Jeroboam, to
set up two golden Calves, the one at Dan, the other at Beth^el, that he might
detain his People at home; least going up to Jerusalem, and conversing with the
Subjects of Rehoboam, they should contract a Friendship and Familiarity with
them, and be persuaded to return to their Obedience. He knew how much Company,
and Conversation wins upon Men's Affections; and that Society and Familiarity
has by degrees wrought out, what the most persuasive Rhetoric, could never
accomplish. Be ye not therefore unequally yoked (says the Apostle) for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, etc. 2 Cor. 6.14, 16.
Wherefore come ye out from among them, and be ye separate (says the Lord) and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. But this is the Rock upon
which too many split; they first look upon all other Men, as common and unclean
(who in Truth are much better than themselves) and then not only avoid their
Conversation, but conclude that they are not to be treated by the Rules of
common Honesty: And thus by straining the String too high, make it Jar, and
spoil all the Harmony and Consort.

And therefore I shall more particularly set out the Bounds, and Limitations of
this Precept, and consider how far we must turn away from such Men; as have the
Form, but not the Power of Godliness. And first, We are not hereby engaged to
quit our particular Engagements; or to separate our selves from our Friends,
and near Relations: For the Servant is tied to his Master, the Child to his
Parent, the Husband and Wife to each other; and no Pretense of greater Sanctity
and Purity is sufficient to excuse them from the performance of their Duty.
Nay, we must not so turn away from any Man, as to refuse doing good and
charitable Offices, either to his Soul or Body: But rather imitate the Example
of our Heavenly Father, Matthew. 5.45.
Who makes his sun to shine, and his rain to descend on the just and the
unjust.T^^ more wicked any Man is, and the more infected with the Leprosy of
Sin, the more need he has of a Physician. If therefore we see a Man, who has
the Form, but not the Power of Godliness; let us omit no opportunity of
reclaiming him, from the Evil of his ways, let us assist him with seasonable
Counsel and Advice, and do him all the good Turns that lie in our way,
remembering that excellent Saying of a Heathen Homo sum, humani nihil a me
alienum puto; I my self am but a Man, and therefore no Affliction can happen to
any one, but I bear my part in it: But let us not contract a Familiarity with a
vicious or heretical Person, let us not lay such an one in our Bosoms, or make
him our particular Friend, but keep such a strict Guard over our selves, and be
so cautious in our Dealings with him, that we may receive no Prejudice by his
evil Example. We must treat him as we usually do those, who are sick of an
infectious Disease; furnish him with those things he wants, Administer to all
his pressing Necessities: But we are not obliged to converse frequently with
him, or to expose our selves to the Danger, of catching that Distemper under
which he labors, such a Familiarity as this it is our Duty to avoid. Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is the man (says David) that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful. And in another place. I have not dwelt with vain persons: Psalm. 43.4.
neither will I have fellowship with the deceitful. I have hated the
Congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the ungodly. I will wash my
hands in innocence O Lord, and so will I compass thine Altar. And when ever the
Duties of our Callings oblige us to frequent their Company; we must say (with
the Psalmist) Woe is me that I dwell in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5.
and take up my Habitation in the tents of Kedar.

In short let us observe these three Rules,

1. Let us imitate them in good things. The Form of Godliness, the outward
Profession of Religion, is highly necessary and Praiseworthy. Let us therefore
imitate them in this. Nay, Let us go beyond them in a constant attendance on
the public Duties of Religion, in the Devotion of our Prayers, the Solemnity
of our Fasts, the becoming Decency of our Worship; and in avoiding all such
Sins, as are not only heinous Offenses against God, but scandalous amongst Men,
and uneasy to modest and virtuous Conversation. Let that Face and outside of
Religion which they put on, incite in us a Holy Emulation, to outdo them in
their own Art: For good is still the same in whatsoever Subject it is found; we
have no Reason to refrain from good Works, because a Papist hopes to merit by
them: I Will learn from a Turk to die for my Religion, and to search the
Scriptures from a Jew. Our Savior makes the unjust Steward's Wisdom a Pattern
for his Disciples. The Ox and the Ass are made use of to teach Men Gratitude,
and the Pismire Wisdom. Nay, we may learn Diligence, and Care of our eternal
Salvation from the Devil himself, Who compasses the whole Earth, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and walks about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

2. Let us bear with them in things indifferent, following after those things
which make for Peace, and where we lawfully and with a good Conscience may,
becoming all things to all men, Zech. 8.19.
that we may save some. In short, we must love both Truth and Peace, (i. e.)
both of them in Conjunction one with the other. We must so love Peace, as not
to lose Truth, in matters substantial: And so love Truth, as not to break Peace
in matters indifferent.

Lastly, Let us turn away and avoid, only that which is evil in them; this is
of the same Import with that Caveat which our Savior gave to his Disciples,
against the Scribes and Pharisees. To beware of their Leven (i. e.) all that is
sour and infectious, which will spread the Contagion, and propagate the
mischief. Let us distinguish the good from the bad, the light from the
darkness; Let the one be called day, and the other night; Let the one be
imitated, and the other avoided. Ephesians. 5.11.
Let only the unfruitful works of darkness be rejected: But let us welcome the
Light, and embrace Love, and imitate the good, wherever we meet with them:
And if we do so, then Mercy and Truth shall meet together, Righteousness and
Peace shall kiss each other. Truth shall flourish out of the Earth, and
Righteousness shall look down from Heaven: Yea, the Lord shall show
Loving Kindness, for his Salvation is nigh unto them that fear him, that Glory
may be in our Land. Amen.

SERMON IV.
PROVE. XIX. 25. Smite a Scorner, and the Simple will beware; and reprove one
that has Understanding, and he will understand knowledge.


THE Proverbs of Solomon are a Collection of wise Sentences and Apophthegms,
grounded upon the long Observation, and ripe Experience of one of the most
Potent Princes, and wisest of Men: And since Proverbs in general are observed
to contain the Wisdom of all Nations, therefore we may reasonably expect to
find a rich Treasure of Divine Truths, in those of which Solomon was the
Author, or else by Collection made his own. All the Books of the Old Testament
may well be compared to a fruitful Soil, but this of the Proverbs abounds with
a more rich Vein, and is of the greater Use, because it contains Precepts
accommodated to all the Necessities of humane Life; for the most part they have
no coherence, but are set down just as they came to the Mind of the inspired
Author. The Verse which I have read to you, is of the nearest Importance, and
shows us the prudent use which a wise Man makes of a friendly Reproof; and what
great advantages he reaps by it. Reprove one that has understanding, and he
will understand knowledge (i. e.) it is a Sign of a Wise, a Good, and an
understanding Man to take Reproof patiently and thankfully, to give an
attentive Ear to it, to be very quick-sighted in discovering his own Faults,
when they are laid open to him, and very diligent and industrious in reforming
himself. Reprove one that has understanding, Psalm. 55.32.
and he will understand Knowledge. From which words I shall show,

I. The Excellent use which a wise Man makes of a friendly Reproof.

II. The great Difficulty of performing this friendly Office.

III. I shall lay down some Motives to engages us to set about it: And,

IV. Give some Rules and Directions, for a right Management of our selves, in
the Execution of it.

And first of the excellent Use which a wise Man makes of a friendly Reproof.
Prove. 25.12.
As an Ear-ring of Gold, and an Ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise Reprover
upon an obedient Ear, which is thus Paraphrased by a Right Reverend Father of
our Church. A good Man will not think himself reproached, but rather obliged by
a prudent Reproof, which meeting with an attentive, considering, and patient
Mind, makes a Man take it so kindly; that he esteems him who bestows it, as
much as if he had hung a Jewel of Gold, or put the richest Ornament about his
Neck. There is nothing harder to find than a true Friend; and he is the truest
and best Friend, who will most impartially Reprove us for our Faults, show us
the Errors of our Lives, discover to us those Rocks on which we split, and
faithfully tell us when we do amiss; and therefore this is one way of making a
Friend of an inveterate Enemy, by taking notice what fault or weakness he
upbraids us most with, and accuses us of; and thus by coming to the knowledge
of our Errors, we take the first step toward the Amendment and Reformation of
them: And if Reproof is so useful from an Enemy, how much more beneficial may
it be made from a Friend? Who will both inform us when we go astray, and set us
in the right Path; who will conceal our Faults from other Men, and yet
impartially expose them to our own View; who knows first how to Lance and lay
open the Sore, and then to apply a fit Remedy to it. Certainly he who has got
such a Friend, is possessed of an inestimable Treasure, and there is required
only an understanding Mind, and a sanctified Heart, to make him capable to
receive Benefit by his Advice. But alas! For the most part Self-conceit is so
prevalent in us, that we dote even upon our Blemishes and Imperfections,
because our own; we fall in Love with our own Pictures, though never so deformed
and ugly, and there is no readier and surer way to disoblige us, than by
performing the most friendly Office in the World, the giving us a faithful
Glass to behold our selves in, and setting our Actions in a true Light: This
seems to be such an Act of Superiority, as few Men can admit of; for though we
must give the Pre-heminence to others in Riches, and Power, and the Gifts of
Fortune; yet few Men are willing to believe, any one is more Wise, Prudent, and
Discreet, than themselves. And therefore,

II. It must needs be a very difficult Task to perform this kind and friendly
Office, and that in Respect either,

1. Of the Reprover, or 2. Of the Person who is to be reproved. And first I
shall consider the Difficulty of it with Respect to the Reprover. For,

1. A Wise and good Man (and such Persons are only fit to Reprove others) is
for the most part too modest to reprove other Men. Either he has too low and
mean Opinion of himself and his performances, or else he is desirous to keep at
home, and finds that a right Management of his own Actions, is a full Employ
sufficient to take up all his time and thoughts; he is not willing to
intermeddle with other Men's Concerns, or to intrude himself into Business which
does not belong to him: Or he is sensible, that he himself is guilty of many
Miscarriages; and the Reflection on his own Infirmities, withholds him from
Reproving the Failures of other Men, who (as he is apt to think) are better
than himself. 2. A good Man is apt to Err on the Charitable side, he is with
Difficulty persuaded to believe ill of his Neighbor, though the Crime which is
charged upon him, is apparently and notoriously true. Charity will find out
many Excuses, turn the best side of things, and make the most candid
Representation of his Neighbor's Actions they will bear, and in this Sense at
least, 1 Ephesians. 4.8.
Covers a multitude of sins. 3. A good Man is apt to be too timorous: A mild
and humble temper of Mind makes him fearful of disobliging those with whom he
maintains a fair Correspondence, and to whom probably he may have been
beholding for many good Offices, and for these and such like Reasons he may be
very averse, and backward to the performance of this Duty; though it must be
confessed, he is much to blame for being so: For Difficulty is so far from
being a just Excuse for the nonperformance of our Duty, that it is the best
Argument can be made use of, to persuade us to set about it more manfully and
courageously. Thou knew that I was an austere man (said the Lord to his idle
and unprofitable Servant) taking up that I laid not down, Luke 19.22.
and reaping that I did not sow: Wherefore then gave thou not my Money into
the Bank; (i. e.) Since nothing but a diligent and vigorous Endeavor to serve
God, will enable us to perform our Duty; therefore we ought to employ all our
Strength and Industry, turn every stone, use all just and likely means, which
will yield us any help and assistance: And so much the rather, because the
Difficulty of performing this Duty will appear still greater, by considering,

2. The Person who is to be Reproved. For we must not always expect to meet with
a kind and favorable Acceptance of what we Design for the good of our
Neighbor. Many Men are like those Swine mentioned in the Gospel, if we throw
the Pearls of good Advice before them, they will be so far from thinking
themselves beholding to us, for this our kind and charitable Office, That they
will turn again and rent us. Matthew. 7.6.
We must expect to lose their good Opinion and Friendship, and that they will
become our Enemies, because we tell them the Truth. For,

1. We shall find that some Men think themselves too great to be Reproved. They
are indeed conscious of their own Failings, they know that they are guilty of
many scandalous Crimes, and gross Immoralities; but yet they Fancy that they
may live, without any manner of Restraint, because they are above the common
Rank and Level of Mankind: They have Plenty of all the good things of this
World, sufficient to maintain them in Pomp and Grandeur, without a servile
Dependence on any one; and therefore they look upon it as an Intrenchment on
their Privilege, to be called to an Account for their Words or Actions, or to
be Reproved for their evil Deeds, though with never so much Prudence and
Discretion, Mildness and Submission. What is more frequent, than for Men of
plentiful Fortunes, to lavish out those good Gifts of God's Providence) of
which they are only the Stewards and Trustees) in Rioting and Drunkenness,
Chambring and Wantonness, on this false Supposition, That they may do what they
please, with what they (through mistake) call their own? How many are there that
fill all places, where they come with Oaths and Execrations, and the
blasphemous Abuse of God's most holy Name, and yet would look upon it as a
great piece of Rudeness, Ill-breeding, and an intolerable Affront, should any
one reprove them for so doing?

2. Others there are, and those of all Ranks and Degrees, who think themselves
too good to be Reproved. There are too many who are so puffed up with a
Pharisaical Opinion of their own Righteousness, that they make their own Words
and Actions, the Standard whereby they try all Religion and Virtue; they first
lay it down for a Rule, that that Church or Party of which they are Members, is
the only true one upon Earth, they Fancy themselves the only Elect of God, and
Favorites of Heaven, and then make this false and dangerous Inference, That
they can neither think, nor Act amiss; for since they are the Elect, and
precious in whom God sees no sin, therefore it is high Injustice for any one
else to take any notice of their Miscarriages. To how little Purpose would it
be to reprove a Man, that is so full of his own Righteousness, that he thinks
he has attained unto Perfection, and is so pufft up with the Contemplation of
his own Performances, that he aspires to Works of Supererogation; for to be so
humble, as to disclaim any Pretense to merit, and to be truly sensible of our
own Wants, is a Qualification absolutely necessary to render a Man capable of
receiving benefit by good Advice.

And Lastly, most Men are too Wise to be reproved. Self-conceit is so natural
and graceful a Vice, that all Men are more or less given to it, Prove. 3.5.
we are all apt to lean too much to our own Understandings; and to esteem those
Opinions false, and those Practices ridiculous, which do not exactly fall in
with our Pre-conceptions, till by use they are rendered Customary and Familiar
to us: we have a kindness for every thing, which carries our own Badge upon it,
or has any Relation to us, and are fond of the Offspring, either of our Minds
or Bodies, though never so much deformed. With what Extenuating Circumstances do
we cloth our darling Vices, so that they may appear, if not like Virtues, yet
more venial and excusable? Reprove the Covetous Man for his Avarice, and he
will tell you, you are mistaken, that he is only laying up against a rainy Day,
and wisely provident against future Contingences; and what you call Sordidness
is only Foresight and Frugality. Admonish the Prodigal and tell him, that he
will soon squander away, what his more frugal Ancestors took so much Care to
rake together, and he will smile upon you, and make you this Answer, that he
hates to be sneaking and niggardly; and what you term Profuseness and Luxury,
he mis-calls Liberality. You will find it a difficult Matter to persuade the
Superstitious, that Religion does not consist in splendid shows or ritual
Performances: Or the blind Zealot, that whilst he destroys his Brother, he does
not do God good Service: Or the giddy Enthusiast, that his tongue is not
touched with a Coal from the Altar. Mankind are generally wedded to their own
Opinions, and Practices, and are more influenced by Education and Custom, than
Reason; so that though they are convinced they are in the wrong, yet it goes
against the Grain to confess, and acknowledge their Error. For Wisdom and
Knowledge is the distinguishing Character of Mankind, that which renders one
Man more excellent than another, and by consequence gives the Superiority; for
whoever is mistaken must acknowledge, his defect in Wisdom or Prudence, at
least as to that Particular, and that he was in some measure a Fool, which is
the greatest Reproach and Imputation can be cast upon a Man. For though it is the
necessary consequence of the Fall of our first Parents, and the Weakness and
Corruption of our Natures, that amidst the hurry of worldly Business, and the
many Emergencies of humane Life, the best and wisest Man in the World is
frequently guilty of Follies and Over-sights; yet we shall find few Men willing
to acknowledge it, and it is Grace alone which by rendering us truly humble, can
make us sensible of our miserable and indigent Condition, Rev. 3.17.
and how poor, and blind, and naked we are. These are the Difficulties which
must be encountr'd withal, by that Man who undertakes to Reprove his Neighbor,
which would be sufficient to discourage any wise Man from venturing upon this
Province, were he influenced only by prudential Principles, and temporal
Inducements; but since God, has made it the Duty of every good Man, we may be
assured,

III. That he has given us sufficient Motives to go through with it, and
Encouragements to perform it; which are such as these. Consider,

1. That much Glory will accrue to God by a faithful Discharge of this Duty.

2. Much Good Will redound to our Neighbor.

3. We our selves shall reap much Benefit thereby.

4. We shall avoid those Mischiefs which the neglect of this Duty will
certainly bring upon us.

1. By a faithful Discharge of this Duty we shall bring much Glory to God; by
encouraging Virtue and Goodness, and preventing a multitude of Sins; for the
best way to keep out that Deluge of Atheism and Profaneness, Looseness and
Debauchery, which of late years is broke in upon us, and is like to be our
Ruin, is vigorously and courageously to oppose our selves against the Stream,
and by showing our open Detestation and Abhorrence of it, if possible, to stem
the Tide of prevailing Vice. At such a time as this, when the Calamity is grown
Public, there is no standing Neuter, he that is not active and zealous in this
Matter, and does not use his utmost Endeavors to discourage Vice and
Profaneness, is to be deemed a Rebel and Traitor against Virtue and Religion.
For when Men who profess, that they believe the Gospel of our Savior Christ,
and expect Salvation through his Merits, shall sit still and hear the Holy
Scripture made the Subject of the Jests and Drollery of profane Men, his
Gospel ridiculed, his holy Name dishonored, and not be moved, and transported
against such blasphemous Discourse, when they shall show no open Abhorrence and
Detestation at unjust, unrighteous, or wicked Actions; they give these impious
Wretches too much Reason to believe, that though they make Profession of Religion
with their Mouths, yet they are such Fools, Psalm. 10.1.
as to say in their hearts There is no God, and that they have as little true
Sense and Reverence for a supreme Being, as themselves. For what generous Man
can be contented to sit still, and hear his best Friend reproached, and spoken
ill off? What dutiful Son can endure, that any Aspersions should be cast upon
his Father, that his Words and Actions should be ridiculed, without taking
notice of, and resenting the Affront? much more Reason have we to be zealous,
when we hear profane Wretches set their mouths against Heaven, and blaspheme
the God that made them, and with one Breath of his Displeasure, can reduce them
into nothing, or into a Condition worse than nothing. If good Men would resent
this Dishonor done to God, and Reprove those who are guilty of it, Men might
be privately wicked, but they durst not be so publicly Profane; there might
be many ill Men, but there would be very few ill Examples; Vice would be out of
Countenance, and be deprived of its keenest Weapon, and most prevailing
Argument, Fashionableness and Imitation; Dan. 12.3.
and if those who turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars of the
Firmament, certainly those who hinder and prevent others from being wicked,
shall not miss of a due Reward.

2. Our Neighbor would receive much Benefit by a friendly Admonition. For though
at first Reproof will be unwelcome and troublesome, and he may be rather
enraged than amended by it; yet by degrees a gentle Reproof will make its way,
and Gain upon him, and if ever he comes to be reformed, he will reap the
Benefit of it, Peace of Conscience, and Quiet of Mind in this Life, and
everlasting Happiness in the Life to come. And who can be justly sensible, what
inestimable benefits he confers upon his Neighbor, and what apparent Danger,
he delivers him from, by being instrumental in his Reformation, and yet think
any Pains too great to bring about this excellent Work? For shall wicked Men
take more Pains to pervert and ruin the Souls of Men, then good Men shall to
save them alive? Shall the Drunkard and Lascivious Person be more diligent to
draw others into the same excess of Riot, than the Chaste and Temperate, are to
reclaim them from those Vices? This would be to Dishonor our Christian
Profession, and publicly to own, that the Devil has more faithful Servants
than our great Lord and Master. Let us therefore follow the Example of the
blessed Jesus, who made it his chief Business to reprove the World of sin, of
Righteousness, and Judgment; John 16.8.
he came upon this Errand, lived a Laborious Life, and died a painful and
ignominious Death, for this very End, that he might turn Sinners from the evil
of their ways, and promote Virtue and Piety in the World. To Reprove our
Neighbor is therefore the highest Instance of Charity, since hereby we design
him the greatest good Imaginable, the Happiness both of Body and Soul. And this
we should be the rather prevailed upon to attempt; since,

3. By Reproving others we may reap much Benefit and Advantage by it our selves.

First, hereby we shall provide our selves a Friend to do the samekind Office
for us. For most Men are apt to recriminate, and when they are touched to the
quick themselves, they think to extenuate their Crimes, by finding fault with
those who Reproved them, and since we are all weak and infirm Creatures, and
subject to the like Passions with other Men, a most excellent use may be made
of such Recriminations: We may hence discover our most secret Faults, and form
an effectual Motive to amend them. For, 2. It will make us ashamed to be guilty
of those Sins, which we Reprove in another; and the Consideration that his Eye
is upon us, will make us more wary in our Carriage toward him, and more exact
in the Government of our Lives and Conversations. Thou that teach another
(says the Apostle) teach thou not thy self; Romans 2.21.
thou that preachest a Man should not steal, do thou steal; thou that say
a Man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery, thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? 3. We shall Entitle our selves to
a blessed Reward, He that says to the Wicked Thou art Righteous, shall the
people Curse, Prove. 24.24, 25.
Nations shall abhor him: but to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a
good Blessing shall come upon him.

Lastly, We shall hereby avoid those Mischiefs which the neglect of this Duty
will certainly bring upon us. For if we do not admonish our Neighbor, when we
see him commit any grievous and presumptuous Sin, we our selves are Partakers
in his Guilt, and shall be accountable for it before God. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
but rather reprove them. And not to Reprove them will be accounted, to have
fellowship with them. These are such weighty Considerations, and powerful
Motives, as one would think should encourage every one to the Practice of this
Duty, though never so Difficult. But since it requires not only Courage and
Ability, but also a great measure of Prudence and Circumspection to perform it
aright, I shall in the

IV. and Last place, lay down some Directions for a due and prudential
Execution of it.

1. Propose to your self a good End in Reproving others.

2. Have certain Knowledge of the Offense.

3. Endeavor to avoid that Fault your self, you reprove in others.

4. Use the most inoffensive Words, and do it after the mildest manner
imaginable.

5. Observe such due Circumstances of Time and Place; as your Christian
Prudence shall direct.

1. Be sure to propose to your self a good End in reproving others. Which must
be the Benefit and Amendment of the Person to be reproved. For if it appears,
that the Reason why you reprove him, is to vent your own Passion, or to give
way to the Resentments of your own Mind, the Person reproved, will reap very
little Benefit by it; he will look upon it as a personal Quarrel, proceeding
from the Ill Will of his Adversary, and rather seek a way how he may retaliate
the Injury (as he calls it) than look into his own Breast, and amend his Fault.
It Is the first step to a Cure, to have a good Opinion of our Physician, which
will incline us to follow his Advice, and make a due Application of his
Prescriptions: For it is not the Excellency of a Medicine, without a proper and
timely Application of it, can make it effectual. If therefore we desire our
Reproof should take place, we must be sure so to manage it, that the Person
admonished, may look upon it as an Effect of our Love and Good Will, our
sincere Desire to promote his Interest, rather than of any Advantage, we may
propose to our selves by it, or the gratifying a peevish and querulous Humor.

2. Let us be sure to have certain Knowledge of the Offense, before we take
upon us to Reprove any one. An uncertain Rumor or common Fame (which is to
frequently a common Liar) is not a sufficient ground of Reproof, much less a
groundless Surmise, or wide Conjecture: But we must be morally certain of the
Offense, and either Witnesses of it our selves, or else we must have such plain
Evidence for it, (though not ocular Demonstration) as no reasonable Man can call
in Question, before we believe an ill Report of our Neighbor. To yield a ready
and willing Ear to Defamation and Tale-bearing, shows that either we are very
Ill-natured our selves, or else very Credulous; that we want the most excellent
of all Christian Virtues, which is the very Life and Soul of Christianity, I
mean Love and Charity to our Neighbor, which as the Apostle tells us, Is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6.
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things; (i. e.) believes and hops the best of every thing, and every Man.
And this is a Grace so Essential to Christianity, that whosoever is destitute
of it, may make what Pretenses he pleases to Purity, Holiness, and Perfection,
but he is in the lowest Form of Christ's School, and ignorant of the first
Rudiments of true Religion.

3. Be sure you your self are not guilty of that Fault, Psalm. 141.5.
which you Reprove in others. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not
break my head. For though it is the Wisdom and Duty of every good Christian, to
suffer the Word of Exhortation and Reproof, though from the worst Man, and his
most inveterate Enemy: Yet for the most part it so falls out, that the Reproof
of those Men, who are notoriously guilty of the same Crime, makes very little
Impression upon us; we can hardly believe them in earnest, who blame us for the
doing those things which they recommend by their own Examples; and we are very
apt to conclude, that the Reason why they cry down the Vice, is that they may
engross the Practice of it to themselves. But when a Man of known Virtue and
Probity, takes upon him to Reprove, his Admonitions earty weight and Authority
along with them; the Reverence which is paid to his Person, sets an edge upon
his Reproofs, and he does not so much request, as command a Reformation.

4. In Reproving we must use the most inoffensive words, and do it after the
mildest manner imaginable. Brethren, Gal. 6.1.
(says the Apostle) if any Man be overtaken in a fault, you that are spiritual
restore such an one in the spirit of Meekness, considering thy self least thou
also be tempted. If his Offense proceed either from weakness, or inadvertency,
from mistake, or the frailty of humane Nature; the Oil of Pity and Compassion,
a mild and friendly Admonition will sink deeper into his Mind, and sooner heal
the wound, than a more rough and churlish Medicine. There is indeed a time when
we must use the Caustic, and the Corrosive, when we meet with a daring and
insolent Offender: At such a time as this to be cold or lukewarm is to give up
the Cause of God, and to encourage Men in their wicked doings. We must show our
selves Zealous, for the Law of our God, and the Good and Welfare of our
Brother: But then we must take Care that this Zeal be according to knowledge,
Romans 10.2.
That it be moderated and tempered with true Christian Prudence.

5. And Lastly, we ought to observe such due Circumstances of time, and place,
etc. as our Christian Prudence shall direct, and right Reason dictate to us.
It Is the Observation of Men conversant in Business, that the Success of our
Undertakings depends much on our right timing of them, and in nothing more than
in Administering Reproof. God came to Adam in the cool of the day, and the best
time to advise a Man, is when he is Sedate and Calm, and at leisure to consider
of the Counsel we give him. Every Man has his mollia tempora fandi; Seasons
when he is willing and disposed to receive an Impression, and the way to make
our Advice successful and profitable to him, is to lay hold on these
Opportunities, for as Solomon well observes, A word spoken in due season, Prove.
15.23.
how good is it? it is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. There must be
also regard had to the place, for the more private our Reproof is, it is for
the most part the better. Matthew. 18 15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault between thee and him
alone. Public Correption is then only necessary, when others are to be warned
to leave the same Sin, and avoid the same Snare. Neither are all Persons to be
treated after the same manner: Inferiors must be very careful how they behave
themselves toward their Superiors and Governors; Is it fit to say to a King,
Job 34.18.
thou art wicked? and to Princes, ye are ungodly? Great Care must be had, least
what we think Zeal for God, and the Good of our Neighbor, should be justly
interpreted Sawsiness and and Presumption: And therefore, when Nathan was sent
by God himself to Reprove David, he does it after the most modest and
submissive manner; by representing his Case to him in a Parable, and decently
veiling his Reproof under the name of another Man. With our Equals and
Inferiors, we may use greater Liberty and Freedom, only taking Care, that
whilst we reprove the Vice we do not show any distaste to the Person.

Many more Rules might be given, but in this, as in such like Cases, much is to
be left to Christian Prudence; and he who carefully observes the first Rule I
laid down (with which I shall also conclude) cannot do very much amiss. Which
is, That we make the Glory of God, and the good of our Neighbor, the End and
Aim of our Reproof, as well as of our other Actions.

SERMON V. PREACHED When the CHAPEL was newly Furnished and Beautified.
PSALM XCVI. 9. O Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.


IT IS agreed on by the whole Current of Interpreters, that the inspired Penman
of this Psalm, sets forth the Kingdom of the Messiah, and the blessed Effects
of it, the Conversion of the Jews, and the Salvation of all Nations; and hereby
shows us not only how God was worshipped under the Law, but points out to us how
he expects to be worshipped under the Gospel. The beginning of this Psalm
contains an Exhortation to all the People of the World, as well Heathens as
Jews, to praise God for that wonderful Blessing, of sending a Savior to preach
the Gospel unto them, and revealing the Doctrine of Remission of Sins; and
therefore he commands his Worshippers, To declare his Glory among the Heathen,
and his wonders among all the People, that all the Earth should sing unto the
Lord, and that they should show forth his Salvation from day to day, so that
their Praise might be as extensive as his Benefits, and in some measure bear
Proportion with his Blessings, which were to be shed upon all the Nations of
the world, and to continue for ever, Ver. 1, 2, 3. In the following Verses he
inforces this Duty of praising God, by some Arguments drawn from the
Consideration of his glorious and wonderful Attributes; his Majesty, Glory,
Power, and Wisdom; which were after an extraordinary manner displayed and
manifested in the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, and from thence he
concludes, Ver. 7, 8, 9. That it was the Duty of all Men to frequent the place
of God's Public Worship, to Prostrate themselves before him, and to admire,
reverence, and adore his Holy Name. Honor and Majesty are before him: Strength
and Beauty are in his Sanctuary: Give unto the Lord Glory and Strength, give
unto the Lord the Glory due unto his name, bring an Offering, and come into his
Courts: And having in these words described the Worship of God, after the
manner of worshipping him under the Law, by approaching his Temple, and
bringing a Sacrifice; in the words of the Text he explains himself, that he
does not mean that these Sacrifices should continue under the Gospel, and that
those who lived under the Reign and Kingdom of the Messiah, should worship as
the Jews did, but that it would be their Duty to worship God in the Beauty of
Holiness, (i. e.) with such a pure and devout Frame of Mind, such suitable
Affections, such becoming, decent, and orderly Behavior, as were typify'd and
denoted to them by the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Law. O Worship the
Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

In which words we have these two plain Lessons taught us.

I. That all Christians are obliged frequently to meet together for the Public
Worship of God.

II. That the Public Worship of God, ought to be performed in the most decent
and solemn manner imaginable.

1. That all Christians are obliged frequently to meet together for the
performance of God's Public Worship. By Worship I mean, that immediate
Worship, which is offered up to God in his Sanctuary, that Public
Acknowledgment of his Government, and Sovereignty over us, by the performance
of those Duties, which are enjoined us in the first Table, such as are praying
to him, magnifying his Holy Name, hearing his Word, and receiving his
Sacraments; which Duties are in a peculiar manner called the Worship of God,
because they have God for their immediate Object, they are addressed to him,
and terminate in him: The Will of God is the Reason why they are performed, and
his Honor and Glory ought to be the ultimate End of the performance of them.
So that the Worship here meant may be defined, that religious Adoration which
is offered up unto God, in the Public Assemblies of Christians. The Command of
worshipping God in the Text, was Originally given to the Jews; but hereby was
denoted and typify'd to us, that more pure and spiritual Worship, which was to
succeed that of the Jews, and was to be offered up unto God under the Gospel.
For there is a rich Vein of Gospel Truths, which runs through the Old
Testament, and particularly the Book of the Psalms, of which one of the
Principal is this Command of Worshipping God in Public, which is as obliging
to us Christians, as ever it was to the Jews. As may be made appear from these
following Considerations.

1. Because God has instituted and commanded this sort of Worship: It Is not
only a branch of the Law of Nature, but also a Principal part of instituted and
revealed Religion. The Light of Nature will teach us, that there is one first
Cause of all things, who contains in himself all those Perfections, in the most
eminent Degree, which he is pleased to communicate to inferior Beings, and is
infinitely more excellent, than the Workmanship of his own hands: And since
it is natural for us to proportion our Esteem and Veneration of things,
according to that Worth and Dignity we apprehend to be in them, it will from
hence follow, that the Contemplation of these infinite Perfections, will
require and ought to raise, our Praise and Adoration. For we receive all that
we have from him, and therefore we ought in the most solemn manner imaginable,
to return him the Praise and Glory due unto his Holy Name: So that whether we
contemplate the Excellencies of the Divine Nature in the general, or the
Effects of his Goodness derived down to us in particular; either of them will
afford sufficient Motives, to oblige us to frequent the Public Worship of God.
For to what end can we imagine our reasonable Soul is placed in us? Why were
our Bodies enlightened with this Ray of Divinity? But that we might be in a
Capacity of considering, and contemplating the wonderful works of God's
Creation and Providence. To what end have we a Power given us of communicating
our Thoughts one to another, but that we might join together in celebrating the
Praises of our great Creator? And it is for this Reason, that the Psalmist calls
the Tongue man's Glory; Psalm. 57.8.
because the first and chief End of our Speech, was to Praise and Glorify God.
From these and such like Reflections, the generality of Virtuous and thinking
Men, have given their Assent to this Truth; That the Public Worship of God is
absolutely necessary, and our indispensible Duty: And therefore how wide soever
Men of different Persuasions are, from one another in their Way and Manner of
worshipping God (which proceeds from their different Notions of the Perfections
of God) yet all Religions in the World center and agree in this common Truth,
and Principle, that the Worship of God ought to be Public and Solemn.

Public Worship therefore is the Dictate of Nature, a Precept of universal and
eternal Obligation: But besides it is our declared Duty by positive Institution.
The Jews we know had a set and Solemn Worship dictated to them by God himself,
they were under his immediate Guidance and Government, he was their God and
their King too, their Civil and Religious Sanctions were blended together, and
their Worship so truly Public, That we do not find any expressly Commanded by
the Law of Moses, which was not so. And this I the rather mention, because it is
on all hands agreed, that the Jewish Worship was a Type of the Christian, and
though the Ritual part of it was no longer obliging than till the coming of the
Messiah, who was typify'd thereby; yet all those Duties which were founded upon
Moral and eternal Reasons (as Public Worship is confessed to be) were to
continue to the end of the World. And therefore our Savior tells us, That he
did not come to destroy the Law, Matthew. 5.17.
but to fulfill it, (i. e.) he came to perform those things which were
represented by the Types and Ceremonies of the Law, which having had their
Completion in him, we might reasonably expect should pass away: But he came to
confirm and establish Moral Duties, to place them in a clearer Light, and to
give Mankind juster Notions of them, and to engage us to perform them, by more
powerful Motives. To this end he made it his first and principal Care, to
establish the Public Worship of God, and to refine it from its Dross, and to
reform it from all those Superstitions and Abuses, which in a long Tract of
time were crept into it: Because the Purity of Divine Worship is the Foundation
of all Religion, the Cement of Society, and the Sourse and Original of all
Moral Virtue. To this end our Savior instituted an Evangelical Priesthood, a
particular Order of Men, invested with Authority to preach the Gospel to the
whole World, to offer up Public Prayers, and Thansgivings unto God, and to
unite Men into Societies, for the Public, and more solemn Performance of the
Duties of Religion, and to gather him a Kingdom or Church through the whole
World; (i. e.) A Society of Men, who enter into Covenant by Baptism, to obey
the Authority of our Savior Christ, and to live by those Laws, which he has
instituted and appointed in his Holy Gospel.

He therefore who neglects the Public Worship of God (which is one of the
Principal Institutions of the Christian Religion) does in effect disown God's
Authority, denies his Savior, and casts himself out of his Protection: And
therefore the Apostle so earnestly exhorts the Hebrews. Not to forsake the
assembling of themselves together, Heb. 10.25.
as being one effectual Means to engage them to hold fast the Profession of
their Faith, and to secure them from the Commission of that heinous and
dangerous Sin, of Apostatizing from the Christian Religion.

2. If we consider the Nature of Divine Worship, it will from thence appear,
that to Worship God Publicly, is absolutely necessary, and our indispensible
Duty. For since Worship is an Acknowledgment of the Excellencies, and
Perfections of that Being, whom we adore, it is evident that the more Public
this Acknowledgment is, the more perfect and acceptable is the Worship in the
sight of God; because it is more conducive, and answerable to those Ends, for
which he at first instituted, and designed it. Now the Reason why we are
obliged thus Publicly to acknowledge the Excellencies, and Perfections of God,
is that we may hereby express the Sense of our poor, indigent, and necessitous
Condition, and the infinite Majesty, Power, and Goodness of God; that we
receive every thing we possess from this Fountain of Goodness, and depend on
him for all that we enjoy: And therefore since we can make him no other
Returns, we ought not to withold that of a verbal Acknowledgment, and the
natural Expressions of a grateful Mind: And since God is Good, not only to
every one of us in particular, but to all the whole Race of Mankind; and since
his most valuable, though most unregarded Favors, are bestowed upon us in
Common; therefore we ought to join together in celebrating his Praises, and to
express our Thankfulness with the greater Veneration, and Solemnity.

3. Consider the Benefits which accrue both to our selves and others, from the
Public Worship of God. We are Creatures naturally addicted to Imitation, and
rather inclined to do as others do, than to take their Advice, and believe what
they say. Example has a strange influence upon us, in matters Spiritual as well
as Temporal; our Passions are wonderfully raised, when by a Holy kind of
Emulation, we as it were contend in the Fervency of our Devotion. For as Fire
kindles Fire, and turns all other Materials into its own Nature: So a Holy and
Christian Zeal will produce its like in the Breasts of all who behold it. A Man
may go on a long time in the neglect of God's Worship in private, and too many
there are, who feel little or no Remorse in the Omission of their Closet
Devotions; but who can behold the Pious and Devout Soul prostrate before God,
repeating the Prayers of the Church with Fervency and Devotion, and a
Congregation united together both in Heart and Voice, but he must needs be
affected with it: Psalm. 39.3.
While he thus muses the Fire will kindle in his breast, and he cannot forbear
speaking with his tongue the Praises of God. How often have profane and wicked
Wretches, who came to the Public Worship of God; either out of Fashion, or
Custom, to look and gaze about them, or on some worse Design, been touched by a
Coal from the Altar? how often have their Hearts glowed within them, and they
have taken up serious and Solemn Resolutions, of serving and worshipping God
better for the future? And I am persuaded were but these good Resolutions
seconded, did not Men divert those good Thoughts, and put them out of their
Minds by Business or Pleasure, they would not fail of having a lasting
influence on their Lives and Conversations.

Innumerable are the Benefits which we receive, by joining together in the
Public Offices of Religion; which every Pious and Devout Person is sensible
of, though it is a Difficult matter to form in others a suitable Notion or Idea of
them. Who can declare the wonderful Blessings which God bestows on all such as
delight in his Sanctuary? Here are those living waters, which allay the Thirst
after sensual Enjoyments, that Bread which is the natural Food and Nourishment
of our Souls: By by these Ordinances our Faith is strengthened, our Hope
confirmed, our Charity enlarged, our Devotions rendered more fervent; and by
the Force of our united Prayers, we take even Heaven it self. God pours out a
double Portion of his Holy Spirit, upon such as frequent his Ordinances, Matthew.
18.20.
and our Savior Christ has promised, that when two or three are gathered
together, he will be in the midst of them. Who then would omit one opportunity
of serving God in Public? who would neglect to join himself to the
Congregation of God's People one Lord's Day? when he knows not but he loses
that Season of Grace, which would be most beneficial to his immortal Soul. Let
us therefore neglect no opportunity of serving God, for we know not when the
Spirit of God will work most powerfully on our Hearts. The poor impotent Man
had lain a long while at the Pool of Bethesda, and yet had he been absent but
that one time when our Savior came thither, it is highly probable he had never
been cured. And therefore let no excuse Serve, let no Business divert us from
making our constant Approaches unto God's Altar: For the Spirit blows when, as
well as where it lists, and we must blame our selves, if through our own
neglect, we lose the Benefit of his Operations. Some indeed pretend, that tho
they are not so frequent at the Church, yet they make it up in their Closets,
but God will not thus be compounded with: Our private Devotions are
unquestionably our Duty, our particular Wants call for our private Prayers, and
our particular Mercies for our private Thanksgivings; but we shall not reap any
Benefit by them, when they occasion the neglect of our Duty in Public. When
two Duties stand in Competition one with another, we ought to apply our Minds
to that Duty, whereby most Glory will accrue to God, most Benefit to our
Neighbor, and which will best serve to promote the good of our own Souls: And
since all these Ends are best obtained, by the Public Worship of God, it is but
reasonable that our Private Devotions should give place to it. And yet there is
no necessity that either of them should be neglected; every good Christian will
find convenient Times and Opportunities for both of them: But when there is a
necessity, that one of them should be omitted, we may assure our selves God
will be best pleased, when we make the most Public Acknowledgments of his
Goodness, and join together to implore his Mercy.

These are some few of those many Obligations, which ought to prevail with us,
to give a constant Attendance on the Public Worship of God. I proceed to show,

II. That this Worship ought to be performed, in the most solemn and decent
manner imaginable; in that Beauty of Holiness, which becomes every devout
Worshipper, and which the Text requires of us. That we may understand the full
import of this Expression, it will be useful to consider, that the words in the
Original are differently rendered by Interpreters: Some will have them
translated in ornatu Sanctitatis; and then they denote that true Faith, and
those Holy Affections of Soul, with which every devout Worshipper ought to
approach the Throne of God. Others choose rather to render them, cum decenti
Sanctimonio; which more plainly denotes, That Reverence and Decency of
Behavior, which certainly becomes every one, who speaks to the great Creator
and Governor of the World. The Septuagint following the literal Sense of the
Words reads it, (...); with reference to the Place, in which God was worshipped
amongst the Jews; denoting to us, that the fittest Place for the Public
Worship of God, is that which is Consecrated and Dedicated to that Purpose:
That God will afford his more immediate Presence in that Place, Ezra. 6.12.
In which he has chosen to set his Name, and will there dispense to us the
larger Effusions of his Grace. For though God is present at all Times, and in all
Places, and hearkens even to the Sighs of the Prisoner, who lies in the deepest
Dungeon: Yet the Church is as it were his Throne, from whence he gives Public
Audience, where we have most reason to expect a speedy Answer to our Petitions.
And therefore the Psalmist so often repeats that Exhortation, of coming and
appearing before God in his Courts. And Strength and Beauty are in his
Sanctuary. The 6th. and 8th. Verses of this Psalm.

I shall take in all these different Versions, and then they will give us the
meaning of worshipping God in the Beauty of Holiness, in its utmost Latitude.
Which consists in these three things.

I. In the good Disposition of our Souls.

II. In the becoming and suitable Behavior of our Bodies.

III. In the Decency and Solemnity of those Circumstances, which attend our
Worship.

1. The Beauty of Holiness consists in the good Disposition of our Souls; when
our Understandings are filled with gloriour Ideas of God's Power, Majesty, and
Goodness; our Wills resigned to his Divine Will; and our Affections drawn out
after him; when the Consideration of his Majesty, produces an Holy Awe and
Reverence in our Souls; his Truth and Fidelity, Trust and Reliance on him; his
Goodness, Gratitude and Thankfulness for his Mercies, Love and Charity toward
all Men; in short, when the Contemplation on God's glorious Attributes, begets
in our Souls, Affections suitable to the Divine Nature, then are our Minds duly
qualified and prepared, to perform that Spiritual Worship which God is best
pleased with, and takes most delight in. John 4.24.
For God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. And
therefore it is no wonder, that of so many, who frequent the Public Worship of
God, so few reap Benefit by it, because the Generality of Worshippers render
themselves incapable of receiving those Blessings, which God offers them in his
Holy Ordinances: They come into God's Courts carelessly and negligently, without
a due Sense of the importance of those Duties they are going to perform; their
Minds are full of vain, worldly, and sinful Thoughts, polluted with carnal
Desires, and Affections; and then no wonder that they take so little delight in
the Service of God, and reap no more Benefit by it.

2. If we would worship God in the Beauty of Holiness, we must comport our
selves after such a manner, as is suitable to the Duty we are about; and express
the Zeal and Fervency of our Souls, by becoming and expressive Gestures of our
Bodies. Did we consider, That the place we tread is holy ground; Exodus 3.5.
that God and his Holy Angels look down upon us, and behold us; the House of
God would strike a greater Awe and Reverence on our Minds, than the Throne of
any temporal Prince; which will not fail of exacting from us the worship of our
Bodies. Genesis 28.17.
How dreadful is this place (says Jacob;) This is no other, but the House of
God, this is the gate of Heaven.

A due Sense also of the importance of the Business we are about, would have
the same Effect; for were we begging of God some temporal Blessing, which we
might well be without, indifferency in our Behavior would better become us;
but when the eternal Welfare of our Souls lies at stake, when we are Candidates
for an everlasting Inheritance, we cannot be too earnest, we cannot be too
Devout; had we a thousand hands, and a thousand tongues, they might all of them
be employed to express the Devotion of our Souls, and the Fervency of our
Affections. It Is not a bare joining in the Prayers of the Church, a repeating
the Responses, and putting our selves in that Posture the Rubric enjoins; it is
not the avoiding the Indecencies of a profane or clownish Worshipper, I am now
pleading for; this the Custom of the place, good Manners, and gentile
Education, will exact from us: But that we go farther, and by the Humility,
Gravity, and Composedness] of our Behavior, stir up Holy Affections in our own
Minds, and encourage others to imitate our Example.

Lastly, the Beauty of Holiness does also consist, in the Decency and Solemnity
of those Circumstances, which Accompany our Worship. Which though they consist of
Rites and Ceremonies in their own Nature indifferent, yet are ordained to an
excellent end, and are of admirable use for the promoting Devotion, and
Uniformity in the Service of God. The Generality of Mankind are very much
influenced by the shows and appearances of things, and whatsoever is pleasing
to the Eye, has an easier Admission, and makes a deeper Impression on the Mind.
And therefore it has been the Care of Holy and Devout Christians, in all Ages
of the World, when Religion had the Countenance of Public Authority, and was
in a flourishing Condition, to build Churches for the Public Worship of God,
to keep them in good Repair, to furnish them with such Ornaments, that the
Worship of God may be performed orderly, decently, and solemnly, and appear
regular, and beautiful in the Eyes of the Beholders; and hereby raise up in
their Minds awful, and reverent Thoughts of that God, who is there worshipped.
For it is a Sign that Religion is vile and cheap in the Eyes of those Men, who
(as the Prophet speaks) can suffer the house of the Lord to lie wast, whilst
they dwell in ceiled roofs: They spare no Cost to raise, beautify, and adorn
their own Houses, They ceile them with Cedar, Jer. 22.14.
and paint them with Vermilion; and yet will not contribute the least Mite to
the Service of the Temple. Quorsum perditio haec? is their usual demand, To
what end is all this Cost and Charges? were it not better, that all this Money
was spared, and given to the Poor? To whom I answer in the words of a Learned
Knight (which probably will give better Satisfaction, Sir Edwin Sands in his
Speculum Europae.
than if spoken from the mouth of a Clergyman) Though the Ornaments (says he) of
such places as are Dedicated to God's Service, ought to be rather Grave, than
Pompous; yet it could never sink into my Heart to imagine, that the allowance
for furnishing them out, should be measured by the Scanty Rule of mere
Necessity (a Proportion so low, that Nature it self has gone beyond it, even in
the most ignoble Creature) or that God has enriched this lower World, with such
wonderful Variety of things, Beautiful and Glorious, that they might serve only
for the pampering mortal Man in his Pride; and that to the immediate Service of
the great Creator, Lord, and Giver of them; only baser, cheaper, and less
Beautiful things ought to be employed: Especially seeing, that as in Princes
Courts, so in the Service of God, this outward State and Glory being well
disposed; does beget, increase, quicken, and nourish, the inward Reverence, and
respectful Devotion, which is due to so Sovereign a Majesty. Thus this truly
Pious and Devout, as well as excellently Learned Person. To whom Assents the
voice of all Antiquity; it is well known, what Care was taken, that the
Tabernacle of Moses should be as rich, and as Beautiful as Art could make it;
in what Glory, Splendor, and Beauty, the Temple of Solomon was built; how
desirous David was to have been the Founder of it: But since that Honor was
reserved for his Son Solomon, he made it his business to provide Materials, and
tells us, Moreover because I have set my Affection to the house of my God, 1 Chronicles. 29.3.
I have of my own proper Goods, of gold and silver, which I have given to the
house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,
even three thousand talents of gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of
refined silver. And when this House was destroyed, a second Temple was built,
which though much inferour to the former, yet for Beauty, and Magnificency was
the wonder of the whole World.

And thus 'twas not only under the Law, but from the first planting of
Christianity; as soon as ever the Christian Religion was tolerated by the Civil
Magistrate, their great Care was to build Churches, for the more Decent and
Solemn Worship of God. And when those Churches which were overthrown in the
Dioclesian Persecution, were re-edified, adorned, and Beautified, under
Maximinus: The Historian tells us, Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 2.
That the Hearts of all Men were filled with a Divine Joy, to see those
Churches raised to a greater height, and adorned with a more splendid
Magnificency, than their first Founders had bestowed upon them. It Is plain to
any one who consults Ecclesiastical History, that as the Christian Religion
increased, and Kings and Emperors became the nursing Fathers of the Church;
more stately and magnificent Structures were built, and Dedicated to the
Service of God: No Cost was spared, nothing was thought too good for this
sacred Use: The whole Christian World did seem to rejoice, that they had the
Liberty of bestowing their Goods to this holy Purpose, and their profuse
Liberality was spoken of with Honor, and Approbation. St. Jerome. ad Nepotian.
de vita Clerici Ad Demetr. Epist. 12. Ad Gaudentium.
It Is confessed there are some Passages in the Fathers, which seem to condemn
these expensive Buildings; but then 'twas only comparatively, when there was so
much laid out upon these Structures, that there was nothing left to bestow on
the living Temples of the Lord; and they had such a mistaken Zeal for adorning
Churches, that they starved the Poor; and did not provide a competent Allowance
for those who served at the Altar.

And now what remains, but that we who profess our selves Members of the Church
of England, endeavor to adorn our Profession by a diligent and constant
Attendance on the Public Offices of Religion, by a due Preparation of our
Minds for these Holy Duties, and a devout Comportment of our selves in the
performance of them, and a Filial regard to all those Devout Rites and
Solemnities enjoined us by our Superiors: That so we who are now Members of
the Church Militant, may as far as the frailty of our Condition will permit,
resemble that hidden Dignity and Glory, wherewith the Church Triumphant in
Heaven is glorified, and Worship our God in the Beauty of Holiness.

SERMON VI.
1 THESE. V. 22. Abstain from all appearance of Evil.


THE latter part of this Chapter is a Recapitulation of several Truths
delivered in the Body of this Epistle, between which there is no strict
Connection, neither have they any exact dependence one upon another; only the
words of the Text, and those which go immediately before, do bear some
Relation. For in the Verse before the Text the Apostle gives Directions
concerning our Practice of those things which are Good: We must carefully
examine all things by the Touchstone of God's word, whether Doctrines or
Practices, and we must distinguish between those which seem and appear to be
good, and those which are really so; We must reject the one, and hold fast the
other. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good: But we must take quite
different Measures, in relation to those things which are Evil, which either
are plainly contrary to the Law of God, or which we have any probable Reason to
suspect are so: We must abstain from all appearance of Evil. There is indeed
another Interpretation of these words; those who follow the Syriac Version
render them, Abstain from every kind of Evil: But since this Word is not so
rendered in any other place of the New Testament, nor is there any Reason from
the Scope and Coherence of the words to translate it so, I shall rather choose
with the Generality of Interpreters, to follow the vulgar Translation, and
render it as in my Text, Abstain from all appearance of Evil; and the rather,
Phil. 4.^^.
because the positive part of this Precept, is contained in other places of the
Holy Writ.

The words thus understood may be considered, either as they relate to the
Articles of our Faith; or, as a Rule for the directing our Lives and
Conversations: The latter of these is chiefly intended in the Text; and
therefore my present Enquiry shall be, What those Actions and Practices are
which have the appearance of Evil, and from which we are commanded to Abstain.
That I may give a more plain and satisfactory Answer to this Question: I shall
consider these words, 1. Absolutely; and 2. As they bear a Respect and Relation
to our Neighbor.

First, Taken absolutely, they may be resolved into this Proposition.

That we must not do any Action, which either really is, or has the Blush, or
appearance of Evil.

Secondly, If considered with Respect to our Neighbor they import,

That we must abstain from all such Actions which may probably be an occasion
of Offense, or Scandal to our Brother.

First, I shall consider the words absolutely, and then they import these three
things.

I. That we must abstain from every Action, Word, or Thought, which is contrary
to the Divine Law.

II. That we must abstain even from lawful Actions, if they appear Evil to us.

III. That we must abstain from all such Actions, which have any Tendency to
incite, ensnare, and tempt us into Sin.

1. That we must abstain from every Action, Word, or Thought, which is contrary
to the Divine Law, though it may appear of never so little Concernment.
Whatsoever is a breach of God's Law, though in the smallest, and most
inconsiderable Circumstance, must be carefully avoided by us; because every
such Transgression will expose us to God's Anger, and by Consequence render us
liable to everlasting Punishment. Let us therefore carefully avoid even the
lighter breaches of our Duty, let us make a Covenant with our Eyes, and set a
watch over the thoughts of our hearts, and take Care that we do not offend with
our Tongue; remembering that at the last day, every idle word must be accounted
for, and that in God's Book, all the Thoughts and Intents of our Hearts are
recorded. Some Sins are indeed of a deeper Dye than others, and do admit of
more heinous Aggravations: Sins committed wilfully and presumptuously, are more
hateful to God, wast the Conscience more, and by consequence are more dangerous
to the safety of our Souls, than those Sins into which we are betrayed by the
frailty of our Natures, and the surprise of a Temptation. But if we consider
Sin in it self, and in its own Nature, no Sin can be small or little, or as the
Papists speak, Venial; for every Sin is a willful Transgression of the Law of
God, 1 John 3.4.
and whoever wilfully offends God, justly incurrs the Sentence of eternal
Damnation: Nay even the lighter breaches of our Duty, may be attended with such
Circumstances and Aggravations, as may render them of more pernicious
Consequence unto us, than those which in their own Nature imply a greater
Guilt; a small Injury done on purpose, to vilify and reproach us, is resented
more heinously, than when we sustain a greater Damage through the Folly and
Inadvertency of our Neighbor; and therefore we have Reason to conclude, That
the least Sin wilfully committed, and obstinately persevered in, will deprive
us utterly of God's Favor and Protection. How vain and dangerous then, is that
known distinction of Sin amongst the Papists, into Sins venial, and Sins mortal
(i. e.) as they explain it, into such Sins as do deserve eternal Damnation, and
such as only deserve some Temporary Punishment? Especially since under the Head
of venial Sins, they rank the grossest Enormities; so that even Murder shall
become a venial Sin, if committed to maintain a Man's Honor, or under Pretense
of returning some trivial Affront. A Box on the Ear, has been made by some
Jesuitical Casuists, a justifiable Provocation for a Man to imbrue his hands in
the Blood of his Neighbor; though our Savior has in express Terms determined
the quite contrary; so plainly do these Men make void the Law of God, by their
Traditions and Distinctions. But,

2. We must abstain even from lawful and justifiable Actions, if they appear
Evil to us. For we are told, That whatsoever is not of Faith is sin (i. e.)
Romans 14.23.
whosoever does any Action without that persuasion and assurance of Mind, of
the Lawfulness of his doings (which is here called Faith) he sins in so doing.
It Is therefore our Duty to Act according to the present Persuasion of our own
Minds; and having used the best means to inform our Consciences of what is good
and lawful, convenient and most expedient to be done, and by consequence most
pleasing unto God; to walk according to our knowledge, in Uprightness and
Integrity: And there is no Question, but he who thus Acts according to the
Light of his own Conscience, and performs what he sincerely believes to be his
Duty, will be more excusable when he does amiss; than that Man who thinks he
Acts in Contradiction to the Divine Will, and his own Knowledge, though he should
happen to be in the right: For no Actions are good, without the rectitude of
the Will of him who performs them; and therefore he who resolves upon an Action
which he believes to be a Transgression of the Divine Law, does violence to his
own Conscience, and commits a very heinous Sin, though the Action in it self
should be lawful and Praiseworthy. For our Conscience is God's Vicegerent in
our Souls, and sustains the part of a Judge, as well as a Witness and Accuser;
and supposing our Conscience duly informed, whilst we follow its
Determinations, we cannot do amiss. But yet this is not so to be understood, as
if we were hereby excused from performing a known, and absolutely necessary
Duty; only because we are not fully satisfied, in the Lawfulness of every
minute Circumstance, which is required to the performance of it. This would
administer Fuel to such perplexity and scruples in the Service of God, as would
render Christ's easy Yoke far more Burdensome, than all the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Jewish-Law. If therefore we are commanded by an
unquestionable Authority, to perform an Action which our Consciences tell us,
is lawful and necessary to be done; our Christian Prudence will direct us not
to be too nice, in weighing every particular Circumstance, but in this Case to
prefer our Submission to a known Law of God, or our lawful Governors, before
the trivial Doubts, of an unsettled and wavering Conscience: And the Reason is
plain, because the willful Omission of a known Duty, is certainly a grievous
Sin; whereas we are not certain, whether the performing of it, with that
questionable Circumstance, is so or no; and therefore common Prudence will
direct us, rather to venture upon some Circumstances of an Action we are not so
fully satisfied in, than on the Omission of a known Duty, which is certainly a
Sin; and to abstain from those Actions which are manifestly Evil, rather than
from those which have only the Appearance of it: Thus a common Soldier is
obliged to execute the Commands of his Superior Officer, a Servant of his
Master, without playing the Casuist, and nicely enquiring into the Reason of
them; they are only the hands which are to execute what the Head Commands, and
if the Action is not plainly Contradictory to the known Laws of God or the
Land, they ought to Obey: Their Superiors will be answerable for all the
lesser Defects, whilst there will be great Allowances made to that Man, who for
the maintenance of Order and Discipline, Peace and Charity, not only Sacrifices
his own private Opinions, but squares his Actions in things of lesser moment,
so, as to comply with the great Ends of Government. But,

3. We must abstain from such Actions, as have any Tendency to incite, ensnare,
and tempt us unto Sin; and avoid as far as possibly we can, all such things as
are the necessary Occasions, and Incentives unto Evil: For he that wills the
Cause, wills the necessary Effects, and Consequences which follow thereupon; he
that exposes himself to Temptation is Blameworthy, though he does not fall into
it, nor is overpowered thereby. It Is the Business and Duty of a reasonable
Being, by reflecting on its past Actions, to collect from thence, what will be
the necessary Effects and Consequences of things; and to avoid not only those
things which are Evil in the least Degree, but also all those which were the
Inlets and Inducements to it. The true spiritual Warrior will not have any
Parley with his Enemy, he stands continually on his Guard, and will not suffer
him to make the least Approaches toward him; well knowing that he is only then
secure when his Enemies have not the Power and Ability to hurt him; and that
the first step toward his Ruin is to be secure; Psalm. 30.6.
and to fancy he stands so fast, that he can never be moved. It will be
therefore the wisest Course for every one to consider; what Sins he is most
addicted to, what Vices bear the greatest sway in his Temper and Constitution,
how he comes to be betrayed into these Sins, what were the Occasions, the
Motives and Inducements to them; and let him take up the Resolution of the
Psalmist, I will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes, Psalm. 101.3.
I will remove far from me all such Objects and Examples, Shows and
Appearances, as may prove a snare to me, and betray me into Sin.

Thus for Example, If he finds himself of a malicious and revengeful Temper,
let him as much as possibly he can avoid being Angry; let him endeavor to
subdue and keep under his Passion, when first raised, and throw these Coals out
of his Bosom as soon as he can, for it is impossible that he should retain them
long the^e, and not be burnt: Anger maintained and encouraged turns naturally
either into Fury, or Malice; and when once it degenerates into either of these
Devilish Tempers of Mind, who knows what will be the mischievous Effects of it?
That spark which might easily have been suppressed, will be ungovernable when
blown up into a Flame; and therefore it is the safest way, either to bring our
selves to such a meek and humble Temper of Mind, as not to be angry at all: Or
to restrain it within its due Bounds, and hereby prevent its being criminal and
sinful. If he finds himself addicted to Uncleanness and Lust, let him make a
Covenant with his Eyes, Romans 13.14.
and abstain from all such things, as make provision for the Flesh; let him
give himself up to Fasting and Prayer, and use such wholesome Mortifications, as
may bring his Appetites into Subjection to the reasonable Powers of his Soul.
If Drunkenness is his darling Vice, let him not look upon the wine when it is
red, when it gives its color in the Cup, when it moves it self aright, but
consider that at last it biteth like a Serpent, Prove. 23.31, 32.
and stingeth like an Adder. Let him put a knife to his throat (in Solomon's
phrase) when he is in pleasant and agreeable Company, (i. e.) consider the
Danger he is in of abusing those Blessings of God to Intemperance and Luxury,
which were designed for his Comfort and Support; and let him as much as
possibly he can avoid all such Places and Company, as are likely to promote
Excess and Riot. Thus we find that Joseph being solicited by his Lascivious
Mistress, to defile his Master's Bed, would not so much as hearken unto her,
Genesis 39.10.
or tarry with her in the house. The Nazarenes being forbid the use of Wine,
would not eat the husk and kernel of the Grape; nay so careful were they to
avoid all the Temptations to Sin, that they would not so much as pass through a
Vineyard, lest they should covet the forbidden Fruit. Very remarkable is the
Example of that excellent Emperor Theodosius, who being betrayed to some rash
and sinful Actions by the sudden transports of his Passion, obliged himself
never to execute any matter of moment, till he had first repeated the Lord's
Prayer; that by giving himself time for second and more sober Thoughts, he
might calmly deliberate what he ought to do. Many more Instances might be
added, were it needful; this being a Rule of daily use, and practiced by
Heathens as well as Christians.

And now having endeavored to state this Question, how we ought to abstain
from all appearance of Evil in matters Practical, in Relation to our selves, I
shall proceed to show,

Secondly, How we ought to abstain from all appearance of Evil with Relation to
others; for the doing good to others, is as absolutely necessary, as the being
good our selves; and our great Business in this World, next to the Salvation of
our own Souls, is the being beneficial to our Neighbor, and the endeavoring
by all ways possible to promote his Spiritual and Temporal welfare; whereby we
shall not only please God and glorify him, but pursue our own true Interest
also: For since every Man has a share in the good of that Society in which he
lives, whatsoever benefit accrues to the Community, must in the end redound
upon every particular Member of it; and therefore the best way to secure to our
selves the Help and Assistance of others, when we have occasion for it; is to
be as useful and helpful, as possibly we can be to those who are embarked with
us in the same common Interest. Romans 5.9.
For a good Man one would even dare to die (says the Apostle.) Goodness or a
Charitable disposition toward our Neighbor (i. e.) an Inclination to do all
the Good we are able to all Men, is a Temper of Mind, which carries such
endearing Charms along with it, that a Man would rather venture his own Life,
than such a Benefactor to Mankind should be deprived of his: And therefore it is
both our Duty and Interest, to employ all those Talents God has entrusted us
with for the common Good, and to lay out our Time and Thoughts in being
beneficial to those amongst whom we live; in instructing the Ignorant,
reproving the faulty, making Peace amongst such as are at Variance, and
administering to all the Necessities of our Brother, and expending in works of
Charity, whatsoever we have more than will make a comfortable Provision for our
selves and Families, according to that Station and Condition in which God has
placed us in the World. This is a Duty laid down negatively in the Text. We
must abstain from all appearance of Evil. (i.e.) We must set so strict a Watch
over all our Words and Actions, that we neither speak nor Act any thing which
may be to the Prejudice, or Offense of our Brother: we must not only take Care,
that we be not openly injurious to him, or do him wrong in his Person, Estate,
or Good Name; but we must avoid speaking any word that looks like an Injury, or
has though but an oblique Tendency to his Disparagement and Disgrace, or which
has any Probability of being mis-interpreted for an Affront; if we foresee it
may draw any ill Consequence after it, or give him any Cause of just Offense,
we ought to restrain our selves, and by no means to utter it. And if so, then
herein is implied, that we do to our Neighbor all the good Turns which lie in
our Power, that we love him as our selves, and make our own Self-love the rule
and measure of our Words, and Actions toward him, and in all things dealing
with him, as we our selves if we were in the same Circumstances, Matthew. 7.12.
would desire to be dealt withal. All these positive Duties are contained in
the words of the Text, and as strictly enjoined us, and as Emphatically
expressed, as they could be by any positive Command.

This is a Duty dictated to us by the Light of Nature, enjoined us almost in
every Page of the New Testament, and enforced by the most powerful Inducements,
our unquestionable Interest, both here and hereafter. A Duty which God seems so
concerned for, that he has declared he had rather dispense with his own
immediate Service, than it should be omitted; Matthew. 9.13.
he is better pleased with Mercy ( i. e. doing good to our Neighbor,) than
with Sacrifice: A Duty which even the worst of Men, those who seem to have cast
off all Fear of God, and Sense of Religion think themselves obliged to perform.
For a Sense and Principle of Honor, is sufficient to engage Men to bear a
sincere Affection to their Country and their Friend, to be just and faithful
in their Dealings, and punctual observers of their Word. We may find Examples
enough amongst the Heathens, of those who have been Patriots to their Country,
and have given the world the most generous Instances of an inviolable
Friendship; and therefore I shall urge no more Arguments for the performance of
so plain and necessary a Duty, but proceed to lay down some Rules to direct us
in the Practice of it. And since our Actions are either Good, or Evil, or
Indifferent, I shall lay down three general Rules, in Relation to every one of
these: And,

I. We must not be so desirous of doing good to our Neighbor, as to do any
Action in its own Nature, or by necessary Consequence Evil; though we are assured
some great good might be effected thereby.

II. We must sometimes omit even good Actions, when they may probably be the
Occasion of some Evil, or a reasonable Offense may be taken at the performance
of them.

III. In things indifferent, it is our Duty many times to abridge our selves in
our Christian Liberty, for the good of our Brother, and to abstain from such
things which we foresee will give him just occasion of Scandal and Offense. And,

1. We must not do the least evil Action under this Pretense, that much Glory
will accrue to God, or much good to our Neighbor thereby; for God has not
given us any Permisson, much less has he laid upon us any Necessity of
committing the least Sin, though upon never so plausible a Pretense; he has
chalked out to us the plain Path of Integrity and Honesty, and has placed a
Monitor within us, which continually gives us this Advice, Isa. 30.21.
This is the way walk therein; and whenever we go astray through the
Solicitation of a prevailing Lust, he recalls us unto the Practice of our
Duty. As the end to which all our Actions ought to tend, is Holy; so he has
appointed such means to attain it, as are pure and Holy too; and has given us
sufficient Power to do our Duty, without making use of any indirect means. It
highly derogates from the Honor of an absolutely good and all powerful Being
to fancy, that he cannot bring about his Designs by just and lawful means; or
that he has any occasion for the Sins of Men to advance his Glory. What can any
Man have to say for himself more than Vzza had, 1 Chronicles. 13.9. who driving the
Cart in which the Ark of God was placed, and seeing the Oxen stumble, so that
the Ark was in manifest Danger of falling, put forth his hand and took hold of
the Ark, which was only lawful for the Priests to do; and we are told Verse 10.
That the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzza, and he smote him, because
he put his hand to the Ark and he died there before God. St. Paul has plainly
determined this Point with a God forbid. And not rather as we are slanderously
reported of, Romans 3.6.8.
and as some affirm that we say, Let us do Evil that Good may come, whose
Damnation is just. The Almighty Arm of God is sufficient for the Government of
the World; and since he can bring about the wise Designs of his Providence, by
an immediate Act of his Power, he has no need of our Assistance: And therefore
when we venture upon any unlawful Action out of an honest Design (as we think)
of doing good, we usurp God's Prerogative, and interpose in that which does not
belong to us: Like undisciplined Soldiers we run out of our Ranks, and leave
the Posts in which we were placed; and though we may do some Service, yet we must
expect to be punished for our Mutiny and Disobed nce. And for the most part God
blasts the Designs of such Men, who care not what means they make use of to
bring them about: They are generally unsuccessful in their Enterprises, and
convinced by fatal Experience, that the most hopeful Attempts prove Abortive,
unless prosper'd and protected by the Divine Grace and Blessing; thus it is for
the most part, but whenever it proves otherwise, and God sees it fit to permit
evil Men to prosper for some time, yet there is always some fatal Calamity or
other, which either attends, or follows such sinful Actions; and puts a plain
difference between the Uprightness of the Righteous, and the crooked and
perverse Ways of the wicked. Let us therefore never be prevailed on to do the
least Evil, though for a good End; for God has obliged us to do no more Good,
than lawfully we can do; nay Good ceases to be so, and turns into Evil, when
brought about by unwarrantable Means: For to a good Action it is necessary that
every Circumstance do concur, and that the means as well as the end is
agreeable to the Laws of God; though a Deficiency in any one Circumstance is
sufficient to denominate it an evil Action. It Is therefore our wisest Course to
make the Law of God, the Rule of all our Actions, and he who is justly sensible
how often he transgresses this Law, will never be guilty of the Folly, of
endeavoring to be righteous overmuch, and to do what God has not made his
Duty. But this is not all. For,

2. It may so happen, that a good Action lawfully may and ought to be omitted,
when some Evil may proceed, or some Scandal may be taken at the performance of
it. For though we are always obliged to do all the good we can, yet we are not
obliged to do it at all times; it is in many Cases left to our own Prudence to
determine, what times and places are most fitting and convenient for the
performance of some Duties. The positive Command of God ought certainly to be
obeyed and executed, when commanded us, how pernicious soever the Consequence
of it may seem to be; because the Omission of a known Duty is a wilful Sin: Yet
when only the Duty in general is commanded us, and the time and manner of the
performance of it left to our own Discretion; then our Christian Prudence will
direct us so to perform it, as most Glory may redound to God, most good to our
Neighbor, and we our selves may reap most benefit thereby. Our Savior Christ
does exhort us to imitate the Wisdom of the Serpent, Matthew. 10.16.
as well as the harmless Simplicity of the Dove; and it is the great Wisdom of a
good Man to manage and husband wisely the Opportunities of doing good, that
every Duty may be performed in its proper time and place; for as he who gives
seasonably is said to confer a double Benefit: So he that has the Skill to fit
out every Duty with its proper Circumstances, will entitle himself to the more
excellent Reward in the World to come. For it sometimes happens that an
indifferent Action performed in due time and place, may have an admirable
influence on those who behold it, and be the occasion of much good, and then
every good Christian ought to embrace so happy an Opportunity: At another time
an Action which in it self is Good and Praiseworthy may be the occasion, that
God may be blasphemed, and our Neighbor injured; and then it is certainly our
Duty to omit that good Action, till some more convenient Opportunity presents
it self. This is the meaning of that excellent Rule of the Schools, Affirmativa
praecepta obligant semper, sed non ad semper, (i. e.) though the positive
Commands of God are always obliging, yet they do not always limit us to the
present time of performing them. I shall make this plain by an instance or two;
to reprove those who do amiss, especially those who are committed to our Care,
and live under our Jurisdiction, is our unquestionable Duty, and enjoined us by
the Laws both of God and Man, but when this Duty must be performed, is left to
our Christian Prudence and Discretion; for many times, it will be necessary to
wink at their Faults, and pass by their Miscarriages, and to leave the
Correction of them till some other Opportunity, when we have the Prospect of
doing more good by it, herein following the Advice of our Blessed Savior, Mat.
7.6.
Give not that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before
Swine, least they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you:
To give our Alms in Public may sometimes be our Duty, that we may encourage
others to be liberal to the Poor, and so let our light shine before men, Matthew.
5.16.
that others seeing our good works may glorify our father which is in heaven:
But when this End is so far from being obtained by the Public Distribution of
our Alms, that it gives others occasion to believe that we are Proud and
Vainglorious, and do it only to be seen of Men; then the more private our
Almsdeeds are, the more acceptable they are unto God, And our heavenly Father
who sees in secret will reward us openly. Matthew. 6.^^.
It were easy to heap up many more Instances of this Nature, but these may
suffice; and therefore I shall only add, That since it must be left to every
ones Prudence, when these Duties are to be performed, and when omitted,
therefore no strict Rules can be given for the performance of them, but only in
the General we make this useful remark; That then we Act with the greatest
Prudence and Discretion, when we pursue those Ends, for which those Duties were
at first instituted and commanded us: Thus he Administers Reproof best, who
most prevails upon the Person Reproved to reform and amend; and he gives his
Alms to the best Purpose, whose Charity is most extensive and seasonable, in
relieving the Necessities of his poor Brother.

3. In things indifferent we ought to abridge our selves in our Christian
Liberty for the good of our Neighbor, and to abstain from such things as we
foresee, will give him just occasion of Scandal and Offense. For though every
Man is the nearest to himself, and that first Principle of self Preservation
engages us in the first place to consult our Good and Happiness; yet where some
great benefit will accrue to my Neighbor, by an Action which brings to me only
some inconsiderable Loss and Detriment, I ought to remove the Consideration of
my own Advantage, to make room for the greater Good of my Neighbor: And so on
the other hand, when I foresee that my Neighbor will receive any prejudice by
any indifferent Action of mine ( i. e. by any Action which I am no ways obliged
either to do, or not to do) I ought to abstain from it: Now because this is a
general Rule which will admit of some Difficulty in the Application of it, I
shall endeavor to give some more particular Directions for the Government of
our Practice herein. And,

1. We must abstain from all such indifferent Actions, as we foresee will be a
snare in the way of our Neighbor, and tempt him to the Commission of any Sin,
or the Omission of any known Duty. For since a good Man cannot but be troubled
and afflicted, when he sees his Neighbor fall into any Sin, and hereby
dishonor God, and ruin his own Soul; therefore it must needs be incumbent
upon him to use all means possible to prevent it, and rather to retrench
himself in his lawful, and innocent Enjoyments, than his Neighbor should
receive any prejudice thereby. As for Example, the drinking a Health is an
indifferent Action, which I may do or let alone, without the Commission of any
Sin; but when I foresee that the beginning of a Health, or the drinking of it,
will be a Shooing-horn to Intemperance, and an occasion of drinking more than
is fit; or when some in the Company may be disgusted thereby, or it may be a
probable occasion of breeding Differences and Quarrels amongst them; then at
such a time and in such a place, it is my Duty to abstain from it. Innocent and
harmless Recreations are certainly indifferent Actions, but when the spending
our time in these Recreations, will occasion the neglect of our Duty, either to
God or Man; when they will be a snare in the way of our Neighbor, either by
betraying him into extravagant and sinful Passions, or spending that Time and
Substance which ought to be employed in providing for his Family, then they
have the appearance of Evil, and must be avoided.

2. When an indifferent Action is liable to be mistaken, and my Neighbor may
hereby be induced to do an Action which is utterly unlawful, then I ought to
abstain from it. Thus it was the Custom of the Primitive Christians, to go
daily to the Tombs and Monuments of the Martyrs, and to pray by them, that by
the remembrance of their holy Lives, and patient and courageous Deaths, their
Zeal might be kindled, their Devotions rendered more fervent, and that they
might take up more steadfast Resolutions of following their Examples: But when
from Praying at the Martyrs Tombs, they began first to commemorate them in
their Prayers, and then to pray to them, and at last to make Mediators and
Intercessors of them; when this indifferent and at first Praiseworthy Custom
was thus grossly abused, then it was high time for every good Christian to
refrain from it.

3. When my doing an indifferent Action, may induce my Neighbor (who is not
satisfied in the Lawfulness of it) to do the same Action, then I ought to
abstain from it. This was that famous Case of the Romans, who being but newly
initiated into the Christian Religion, and therefore not fully instructed in
the Extent and Latitude of their Gospel Liberty, thought it unlawful to eat
Meats sacrificed to Idols, and therefore St. 2 Cor. 6.3.
Paul commands that they should give them no offense, which Beza Interprets, Ne
quidpiam ad quod possint impingere, etc. (i. e.) that those who thought it
lawful to eat these Meats; should not tempt those Persons to partake of them,
who were of another Opinion; but ^ather to endeavor to satisfy them of the
Lawfulness of it, and to bear with them, and give them no occasion of Offense
till they were better informed.

Lastly, We ought to govern our selves after such a manner in all our
indifferent Actions, that we may recommend our selves to the good Opinion of
our Neighbor, and endeavor hereby to gain an Interest in his Affections, that
we may be enabled to do him more good, and to promote the Glory of God in the
world. And therefore if we foresee, that by any indifferent Action we shall
forfeit his good Opinion, or that our indifferent Action is liable to his rash
Judgment, uncharitable Censures, and will give him occasion to harbor Malice,
and Ill Will in his Mind, then it is our Duty rather to retrench our selves in
our lawful Liberty, than to be the occasion of so much mischief to our Brother;
or to exclude our selves from the blessed Opportunities of doing him good; for
it is the Apostles Advice, That we should not only think on those things which
are just and honest; Phil. 4.8.
but whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.

But here I shall interpose one Caution, that in all these Cases it is supposed,
that the Action still remains indifferent: For those Actions which are in their
own Nature indifferent, may become necessary by some Circumstance limiting and
bounding them; and if my indifferent Action, is annexed to a necessary Duty, or
determined by a lawful Authority, I am no longer at Liberty which way to Act,
nor will an appearance of Evil be a sufficient Excuse, for my abstaining from
it. These are some of those Rules which the best Casuists have laid down, but
yet they will not reach to all particular Cases, and where they fall short, our
Christian Prudence will be the best Guide and Director, hereby following the
Example of the Apostles of our Savior Christ, who did not live themselves up
to any particular Rule, but in indifferent Matters, suited their Actions to the
Exigences of things, and comported themselves so, as that they might best
promote the Glory of God, the good of the Church. If therefore we have to deal
with such, as having had leisure, and parts, and Opportunity to examine things,
may reasonably be thought to dissent from us, our of Interest and Design, and
are so unjust as to deny us, that Freedom which they themselves enjoy; my
Advice is to stand fast in that Liberty with which Christ has made us free,
Gal. 5.1.
least by any mean and undue Compliances we should confirm the Erroneous, shake
the Faithful, encourage the Adversary, and disturb the Peace of the
Government^, both in Church and State, which is settled amongst us: But of
others let us have Compassion, Jud. 22.
making a difference; those who are indeed weak in the Faith, and for want of a
due Information are scrupulous in the lesser matters of Religion; let us
instruct them in the Extent of their Christian Liberty, and the Lawfulness of
those indifferent things, they are offended at; let us be careful that we do
not give them just occasion of offense, or disgust them either by our Words or
Actions; but endeavor to win them over by all the lawful Arts and Endearments
of Kindness and Condescension: And if we must still differ in smaller Matters,
let us love as Brethren: If we cannot be of one Mind and of one Opinion, Yet
let us be all of one Heart and of one Soul. Amen and Amen.

SERMON VII.
ECCLES. V. 1. Keep thy foot when thou go into the House of God, and be more
ready to hear than to give the Sacrifice of Fools: for they consider not that
they do Evil.


THE Design of the Royal Preacher in these Words, is to persuade his Hearers,
to approach with humble Reverence, both of Body and Soul, into God's immediate
Presence, and to behave themselves during the time of Public Worship with a
becoming Decency and Devotion; to come into his House with ^ouls affected with
awful and reverential Apprehensions of his Divine Majesty, with open Ears and
obedient Hearts, disposed to do whatsoever he commands them. Keep thy foot
(says the Wise Man) when thou go into the House of God. (i. e.) Prepare and
fit thy self to partake of these holy Ordinances, compose thy Mind and thy Body
to a Behavior suitable to the Dignity of those Duties thou art about, and the
weight and importance of them. The Expression is a plain Allusion to the Custom
of the Eastern Countries, of plucking off their Shoes when they made any
Profession of solemn Respect, or trod on Consecrated Ground, and of washing
their Feet before they entered the Palaces of their Kings, or the Places
dedicated to God's Public Worship. Of these Customs we have several Instances
in the holy Scriptures, Exodus 3.5.
when God appeared unto Moses in the Bush, he commanded him to put his shoes
from off his feet, because the place whereon he stood was holy ground. And the
Captain of the Host said unto Joshua, Josh. 5.15.
loose the shoe from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is
holy. Loosing or plucking off the Shoe was a Ceremony of the same import, with
uncovering the Head amongst us, a Token of Respect and Reverence: And therefore
they washed and made clean their Feet when they went into Public Assemblies:
So that Keeping the feet is a very proper Expression to denote that Respect and
Veneration, that Humility of Mind, which is a requisite Qualification for every
devout Worshipper, who enters into the House of God, and that Reverent demeanor
of himself whilst he is there. Keep thy feet when thou go into the House of
God, or (as the Original may be rendered) when thou come into the House of
God, which denotes to us, both how we ought to Prepare our selves before we
come to the place of God's Public Worship, and how we must comport and demean
our selves when we are there: And therefore it is presently added, And be more
ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools; (i.e.) be sure to bring an
attentive Ear, and an obedient Heart along with thee, with which God will be
better pleased, than with those Sacrifices whereby wicked Men think (though very
foolishly) to appease the Anger of God, and to render him favorable and
propitious to them, though they lead their Lives and Conversations never so
contrary to his Laws: for they consider not that they do Evil, they do not
consider that God has openly declared, That he hates and abhors the Sacrifices
of such Men, who offer them up with unclean hands, and an impure heart; such as
those who think that their Attendance upon the public Offices of Religion,
will atone and make amends for the wickedness and immorality of their Lives:
This being the plain meaning of the words, I propose to make some Enlargement
upon them, under these following Heads.

I. I shall consider how we ought to Prepare our selves before we join in the
Public Worship of God.

II. How we ought to demean our selves whilst we are Worshipping him.

III. What is to be done after the performance of the public Duties of
Religion.

1. How we ought to Prepare our selves before we join with the Congregation, in
the Public Worship of God.

For our Edifying and receiving benefit by the Public Duties of Religion, in a
great measure depends on a due Preparation for them, it is to no Purpose to sow
the good seed of the Word, unless our Hearts are manured and cultivated,
Prepared and disposed to receive it. Our Prayers will be turned into Sin, Isay
29.13.
if whilst we speak to God with our lips, our hearts are far from him, nor will
our receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper be of any use to us; if whilst
we are partaking of the Holy Elements, we cherish and harbor sinful, and
impure Thoughts. And here it may be seasonable to take notice of a dangerous
Mistake, which many of the Professors of Christianity are guilty of: They
pretend to have a deep and serious Sense, what a weighty and solemn Duty the
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is, and it is for this Reason that
they forbear it, because they think they are not sufficiently prepared for it;
and yet at the same time these very Men presume to come to the Church, to
address themselves unto God's Throne, and hear his Holy Word without any
Preparation at all, as if the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was the only Duty
of Religion, which required Care in the performance of it. Thus they are too
nice and scrupulous on the one hand, whilst they are too negligent and profane
on the other; they wholly omit one Ordinance of God, because they do not think
themselves sufficiently prepared for it, and lose the benefit of all the rest,
because they will not Prepare themselves at all. For what other Reason can be
given, why Men who live so long under the most powerful Preaching of the Word
of God, Edify so little by it, why their Understandings are so little improved
in Spiritual Matters, and their Lives and Conversations so little bettered
thereby; but because they do not bring prepared Minds, and good Dispositions
along with them; their Thoughts are taken up with worldly Affairs, their Hearts
are filled with corrupt Affections, and many wicked and impure Spirits have
taken Possession of their Souls, and then no wonder, that the Holy Spirit of
God does not take up his abode with them, when they are not in a Capacity to
give him any suitable Entertainment.

Some Preparation therefore is absolutely necessary to be made before we attend
on the Public Worship of God: Which may be performed after this or such like
manner.

Upon the Lord's Day, or any other day Dedicated to the Public Service of God,
and set apart from our private Employments, to the more solemn Worship of our
Creator, as soon as ever we awake, let our Souls be seasoned with some holy and
devout Meditation. Let us consider, that at the same time the Sun salutes our
Eyes, and refreshes our Bodies with his comfortable Beams, Mal. 4.2.
The sun of Righteousness does arise with healing in his wings, and makes us
the Overtures of some peculiar Favors: That this Day is set apart by the great
God of Heaven and Earth, to receive the Homage of his Vassals, and to give them
the Liberty of entering his Courts, appearing before his Throne, admiring his
Excellencies, adoring his Perfections, celebrating his Praises, and laying open
their Wants before him, and begging Supplies; and that therefore it is both our
Duty and Interest to improve these Seasons of Grace, to Prepare our selves to
meet our God, and not only to put our Bodies into a Decent and becoming Dress,
but to adorn our Souls with such Qualifications and Dispositions, as are
requisite for Poor, sinful Men, when they appear before the great Creator and
Governor of the World. And because the Preparations of the heart are from the
Lord; Prove. 16.1.
it will be necessary to prostrate our selves before the Throne of his Grace,
and to beseech God, Jam. 1.17.
Who is the Author and Giver of every good and perfect Gift, that he will
inspire our Hearts with holy Dispositions, and afford us the Assistance of his
Holy Spirit, to enable us to cast out of our Minds, all vain and worldly
Thoughts, to subdue all Carnal and corrupt Affections, and to offer up to him
our Bodies and Souls, a pure, undefiled, and acceptable Sacrifice: That we may
spend this day (especially that part of it, which i^ ^edicated to God's
immediate Service) ^^ter so Holy and Devout a manner, as may promote our
Spiritual Welfare, and hereby Glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Matthew.
5.16.
Let us beseech Almighty God, that his good Spirit may go along with us through
all the Duties of the day, and incite, strengthen, and confirm us in every good
Work: That he would teach us to Pray with Fervency, and an holy Assurance that
all our Requests (which are conformable to the Will of God) shall be granted
us; to hear his Word with Attention, and firm Resolutions of performing
whatsoever we are convinced is our Duty; and to Praise him with gladness and
cheerfulness of Soul, with Hearts filled with the grateful Resentments of his
Benefits, and Loving kindness toward us.

In the next place let us read some Portion of the Holy Scripture, and make
this the Subject of our Meditation; till the hour approaches when we are called
upon to join with the Congregation in our Devotions, and we hear the Summons to
attend God's Public Worship. It will then be time to enter upon a more
particular Consideration, how we have passed the last Week, how well we have
performed those Resolutions which we have formerly taken up, what Sins we have
since been guilty of, what good Duties we have omitted, and that we should be
sorry for these our Neglects, and bewail our Mis-carriages, and resolve that we
will amend our Lives, and never be guilty of the same Sins for the time to
come; but that we will walk more uprightly, and more exactly, in Obedience to
all the Commands of God.

This is that Preparation of Soul, which every one ought to make before he
enters into the House of God. For God will not be served with unclean hands,
and an unsanctify'd heart; he abhors even the most solemn Fasts of those Men,
who smite with the Fists of wickedness; Isa. 58.4.
he expects that the sprinkling water should be sprinkled upon us, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and that we should cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of Flesh and
Spirit, when we draw near unto him, And wash our hands in innocence, Psalm. 26.6.
before we compass God's Altar. Let us therefore never omit this Examination of
our selves before we enter into God's House, when we have time and opportunity
so to do: For though upon some sudden Emergencies, all this Precaution is not to
be used, this Exactness of Preparation may be omitted, and a general and
habitual Preparation of Mind will suffice; yet this will in no wise excuse the
constant Neglect of this Duty, nor take off the blame from those Men, who live
in the constant Omission of it; for it is highly reasonable to believe that
Self-Examination is a Duty in some Degree as absolutely necessary to be
performed before we attend God's Public Worship; as it is before the receiving
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: Which Sacrament was anciently an Essential
part of the Public Worship of God, though of late years it has been scandalously
neglected. And therefore as when Men come to the Table of the Lord without due
Preparation, 1 Cor. 11.29.
they trample under feet Christ's holy Body and Blood, and eat and drink
Condemnation to themselves: So when they frequent the House of God, and attend
upon his Ordinances carelessly and negligently, they grieve God's Holy Spirit,
provoke him to leave and forsake them, to give them up to hardness of Heart,
and a reprobate Mind; Isa. 29.13, 14.
Forasmuch as this People (Says the Prophet) draw near me with their mouth, and
with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me,
therefore behold I will proceed to do a mavelous work, and a wonder; for the
Wisdom of their wise Men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent
Men shall be hid. God does not now always punish Profaneness and Coldness in
our Devotions, with temporal Evils, and sickness in the Body, as formerly in
the Primitive Church: But he has exchanged them for such as are far more
dreadful, such as endanger the Soul, and take away the spiritual Life of a
Christian. Every unsanctify'd approach which we make unto him, renders us more
cold and indifferent in our Devotions, till at last i^ leads us by degrees into
open Profaneness and Atheism. Let therefore every one who desires to receive
the blessed Influences of God's holy Spirit, and that his Soul may be a Temple
fitted and prepared for him to dwell in; Let him I say, first cleanse his Heart
by a due and strict Examination of himself, and a serious and hearty Repentance
for the Errors of his ways; Let him thus keep his feet before he goes into the
House of God (i. e.) observe what Paths he has walked in, how the Affections of
his Soul are fitted, and disposed to partake of these holy Ordinances.

Lastly, Whilst we are going toward the House of God, let us entertain our
selves with such Meditations as these. Let us consider the Glorious Majesty of
that God before whom we are going to appear, that he is the great Creator,
Preserver, and Governor of the World, who humbles himself to look down upon
the Sons of Men, being exalted above all Praise, and exceedingly Happy and
Glorious, above all that we can conceive and think: It Is this God who grants us
Audience, and vouchsafes us the Favor of making our Addresses unto him: Let us
consider also our own Vileness and Sinfulness, how unworthy we are of so great
Favors, and hereby raise up in our Souls, that humble Awe and devout Reverence
of the Supreme Being, Levit. 26.2.
which is required of every one who Worships God. Thus the devout Cornelius
tells Peter, That he and all the rest were present before God, Acts 10.23.
to hear all things which were commanded them by God, (i. e.) they had
considered with themselves, who it was that was to speak to them, and that the
words they were to hear, were not the words of Peter, a frail sinful Man like
themselves, but the words of God. Thus before we present our Petitions unto
God, we are commanded to consider that God is in Heaven, and we on Earth; (i.
e.) that there is an infinite Distance between the Creator and his poor
Creature; that he is the most Perfect, the most Glorious, and the most Holy
Being, but we only dust and ashes, vile Earth and miserable Sinners; vile we
are in our own Nature, but we have made our selves much more so, by our
manifold Sins, and repeated Transgressions. When therefore we approach the Holy
Temple of the Lord, Let us say thus within our selves; Genesis 28.17.
How dreadful is this place, this is certainly the place where the Lord dwells?
I am now going to the House of God, to appear before the Lord Almighty, who has
my Soul in his hand, and the breath of my Nostrils at his disposal, in whom I
live, and move, and have my Being; I am drawing near to the King of Heaven and
Earth, to present my self before his Face, to pay him my Homage, and to make
him the Tenders of my bounden Duty and Service: Let me therefore put my Mind
into such a devout Frame, as he will accept of, and take Care that I behave my
self with Reverence, Decency, and Devotion. And now having brought you to the
Temple. I proceed to show,

2. How we ought to demean our selves when we enter into the House of God, and
whilst we are performing the Duties of Religion. And here I am to consider, 1.
The Frame and Disposition of our Souls. Joh. 41.24.
2. The Gesture of our Bodies. God is a Spirit and will be worshipped in Spirit
and in Truth, (i. e.) requires principally, and in the first place the Worship
of our Souls, and then that of our Bodies.

Now to a due worshipping God with our Souls, there are required these three
things.

I. Attention of our Minds to the Duty we are about.

II. The Intention and Ardency of the Affectons.

III. The Consent of our Wills, and their Conformity to the Divine Will and
Pleasure.

1. If we would offer up unto God an acceptable Service, our Minds must be
attentive to the Duty we are about; whilst we are praying to God for those
Blessings we stand in need of, or praising him for those we have received, we
must either be meditating on the God we Worship, or, the thing we desire or
praise him for: For since Worship is the Acknowledgment of those Excellencies
and Perfections which are in the Divine Nature, it is impossible we should have
any serious Sense, or make any due Acknowledgment of these Perfections, unless
we keep our Minds intent upon them: We may as well commend the beauty of an
Object we never saw, and be taken with that Music we never heard, as admire
and acknowledge those Excellencies we never thought on or considered. For to
serve God with our Mouths, when our Thoughts are wandering some where else, and
employed about some other Business, is but Lip-Worship at the best; a Sacrifice
without an heart, which God will utterly detest and abhor. It Is therefore one
of the principal Devices of the Devil, 2 Cor. 2.11.
of which we ought not to be ignorant, to excite and stir up vain Thoughts in
our Minds, during the time of Divine Worship, to divert them upon worldly and
sinful Objects, and hereby to deprive us of that Benefit we might otherwise
obtain, by a due and conscientious performance of these Duties. And therefore
it ought to be the Care of all good Christians to stand continually upon their
Guard, to bear a strict Eye over their Hearts, and as soon as ever they find
any vain and sinful Thoughts spring up in their Minds, to cast them out: To
restrain and bring back their wandering Thoughts, and never to make them their
own by consenting to them, or dwelling upon them. Some Men are more addicted to
roving and volatile Thoughts than others are, from their natural Temper and
Constitution, and therefore are not so blameable for that which they cannot
help: But it is then only they are faulty, when their Will closes with them,
when they do not make Use of the most proper means to prevent them, (i. e.) A
due and conscientious Preparation of their Hearts for Religious Duties; then do
they corrupt their most Holy Offerings, and turn the Sacrifices of their
Prayers and Thanksgivings into sin. Let it therefore be our first and principal
Care to fix our thoughts, and keep them attentive to the Duties we are about,
and we shall soon find that he who has thus well begun, has half finished his
work: If we can but once bring our selves to be serious and attentive, to apply
our Minds to the Worship of God, this will naturally produce

2. The Intention and Ardency of our Affections: Romans 12.1.
For the Duties of Religion are in themselves so reasonable a Service, so
excellently fitted to bring about those Ends for which they were appointed, and
so agreeable to the Faculties of our Soul; that there is required little more
to recommend them to our liking and delight, than a sober and serious
Application of our Minds, and a daily and constant accustoming our selves to
them. It will be tedious and irksome to us at the first, to spend our time in
Religious Duties, to pray and hear God's word, and meditate upon it; but when
we have once got the Victory over our corrupt and stubborn Natures, by a daily
Practice of these Duties; nothing will yield us so much Pleasure and Delight on
this side Heaven, as the pouring out our Prayers before God, the laying open
our Wants, and begging Supplies, the magnifying his Name for Benefits bestowed
upon us, and communicating to others the grateful Resentments of our Souls.
These are the Employments of Saints and Angels above, and will create a kind of
Heaven in every good Man's breast, whose Mind is taken up with such glorious
Conceptions, and joyful Resentments as these. Psalm. 19.10.
These (as David tells us) are sweeter than the honey and the honey comb. Which
made him choose rather, to spend one day in God's Courts, Psalm. 84.10.
than a thousand elsewhere. Let us therefore Worship the Lord our God with all
our heart, and all our mind, and all our soul. Let us embrace his Truth with
our Understandings, treasure it up in our Memories, and caress it with our
Affections. Let us pray unto him with Faith, Zeal, and Fervency; and praise him
with a due Admiration of his Goodness, and grateful Resentments of his Mercy
and Loving Kindness; and then nothing will remain but that,

3. We close with it by our Wills, and conform them to his Divine Will and
Pleasure. That we resolve to amend our Lives in every particular wherein we
have done amiss, and to yield a sincere Obedience to the Laws of God, in every
known Instance of our Duty; that we may not perform our Devotions, only that we
may be thought to be Religious, but that we may be really so; and not only be
wiser Men, but better Christians. For the end of all the Devotional parts of
Religion is chiefly to lead us unto Practice; they are enjoined us as helps and
means to assist us, To direct our Conversations aright, and that hereby we may
be the better enabled to live up to the Rules of Reason and Religion. Do but
take any particular Duty into your Consideration, and you will find, that it
has a necessary influence upon our Lives, and a direct Tendency to assist us,
in a due performance of our Duty. For Instance, would it not be absurd to
imagine, that God has commanded us to Repent of our Sins, because he takes
delight in the Sighs and Tears of the Penitent Sinner? For he who is a Being of
infinite Goodness, is never better pleased, than when he is doing us good, and
communicating his Blessings unto us: But the Reason why he commands us to
Repent, is that he may make us sensible of the Evil Nature of our Sins, and the
Misery and Ruin which our Vices betray us into; and that hereby we may be
deterred from those Actions, which are so dishonorable to God, and so
prejudicial to our selves: Nor would it be more reasonable to Fancy, that our
Prayers and Praises make any addition to his Glory, or increase his Happiness,
for he is infinitely, and therefore perfectly happy in the Enjoyment of
himself; but these Duties are enjoined us, that by the performance of them, our
Souls may be more seriously affected with a humble Sense of our own weakness,
and a grateful Resentment of God's Goodness, whereby we may be inclined to
yield the readier Obedience to his Commands, and be drawn by these cords of a
man to obey his Laws. I might instance in all the other Duties of instituted
Religion, Hosea 11.4.
but from what I have already said it plainly appears, That all the parts of
Public Worship do directly tend to make Men more Holy in this Life, in order
to make them more Happy in that which is to come; and that then it does obtain
the End for which it was appointed, when we take up Resolutions of living
better, and of conforming our Wills to the Divine Will and Pleasure.

Thus I have showed what that Worship of our Souls is, which God requires of
us; that it consists in the Attention of our Thoughts, the Intention of our
Minds, and the Harmony of our Wills with God's Divine Will. I come to consider,

2. How we ought to Worship God with our Bodies: For since our Bodies, as well
as our Souls were the Workmanship of his hands, it is but highly reasonable we
should pay him the Homage of them, and serve him also with our Bodies which are
his. That we should dispose our selves during the time of Divine Worship to
such Decent, becoming, and reverential Gestures, that we may make it evident to
all Men, that our whole Man is dedicated to his Service. And this will be best
performed by bearing in mind this general Rule, That we put on that Gravity,
and seriousness of Looks and Behavior, and deport our selves after such a
manner, as the belief of God's immediate Presence, and the solemnity of his
Worship requires from us.

For though Irreverence, and Indecency in the Public Worship of God, is by too
many esteemed a light and trivial Offense, and hardly worth taking notice of;
which proceeds from this false Notion, they are prepossessed with; That if they
serve God with their Minds and Spirits, it is no matter what their bodily
Behavior is: Yet this will be found to be a gross Mistake, and of dangerous
and pernicious Consequence, if weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and of
unprejudiced Reason; for,

1. Why should we believe those Men will Worship God with their Souls and
Spirits, who will not Worship him with their Bodies? If they will not do so
easy a thing, as to comport their selves decently and affectionately, during
the time of Divine Service, it is not probable that they should perform, that
which is far more difficult, to Worship him with Intention of Soul, and Ardency
of Affection. It requires their utmost Diligence and Application, to keep their
Minds attentive, and to go along with the Congregation in all the parts of
Public Worship, which these Men will never take the Pains to perform, who both
by their Looks and Gestures declare, That their Minds are in some other place,
and employed on some other Business. A multitude of needless and insignificant
Ceremonies, such as are enjoined in the Church of Rome, tend to divert our
Minds from the business we are about, and make so much employment for our
Bodies, that 'twould be very difficult to serve him with our Souls: But this
cannot be laid to the Charge of our Religious Worship, nor do I plead for them;
it is only a devout and reverential Deportment of our selves I would enforce, a
behaving our selves with that Decency and Uniformity our Church prescribes,
that Gravity and Seriousness, that humble Prostration of our Bodies and Souls,
which becomes Men who are in the immediate Presence of the great God of Heaven
and Earth. That this is our Duty will appear,

2. From the Nature of Divine Worship, which (as I have formerly observed)
consists in that Awe and Reverence which Men have for the Divine Majesty, and
the Sense of that infinite distance which is between the Creator and his poor
Creatures, who continually depend upon him for every thing they enjoy; which
makes them approach his Presence with Humility of Mind, and a profound
Adoration of his infinite Perfections, and will discover it self in their
Looks, Words, and Actions: For there is so close an Union between our Souls and
Bodies, that when the one is seriously affected, the other cannot remain
unconcerned; when our Minds are filled with glorious Ideas of God's wonderful
Perfections, his Majesty, Power, Goodness, and Loving Kindness toward us; we
may as well think to carry Fire in our Bosoms, and not be burned, Prove. 6.27.
as to contain our selves from discovering the Sentiments of our Minds, by
visible Demonstrations.

Besides it is Essential to Public Worship, that we make known the Thoughts of
our Souls, by Public Tokens of Reverence and Signs of Honor; this being one
chief end of our Worshipping God in Public, Romans 15.6.
that we may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, and incite and stir up
one another, to praise and adore him, and declare to the whole World, what a
Reverence we retain for his infinite Perfections; which can no other ways be
done, but by our external Behavior, and devout Deportment of our selves. And
therefore it is worth our Observation, That there never was any man deservedly
eminent for Piety and Devotion, who did not join Bodily Worship with his mental
Adorations. I shall only add a third Consideration.

3. That God and his holy Angels are present in our Congregations, and
therefore we ought to be more careful, that we behave our selves Decently, and
carry our selves with Humility and Respect (uncovering our Heads, and bending
our Bodies, and giving all the Signs of Attention and readiness to yield
Obedience to his Commands) than we would be in the Presence of a temporal
Prince. Did God appear in our Churches in a visible manner, as formerly he did
in the Congregation of the Jews, there is no question but that the Dread of his
glorious Majesty, would put every one of us into the most humble and devout
Postures; yet God is here present of a truth though we know it not; God and his
holy Angels do not only look down and behold us, but are as certainly present
in this Congregation, as if we beheld them with our Bodily Eyes. Let us
therefore prostrate our selves before God, Psalm. 95.6.
And kneel before the Lord our Maker; let us give him the Worship of our Souls,
and of our Bodies, And praise him in the Congregation of his Saints, and bow
down our selves before him.

3. I come to consider in the last place, what is to be done after the
performance of the Public Duties of Religion. And here that the good Seed of
the Word may take deep root in our Hearts; let us not give up our Minds to our
secular Affairs, and worldly Thoughts, as soon as ever Divine Service is ended,
much less should we let loose our Thoughts to Pastimes and Recreations, though
never so innocent and harmless; for were there no Divine Command, common
Prudence would dictate to us, that the best way to fix those Truths we have
heard upon our Memories, is to take some time to recollect our selves, and to
digest what we have heard by serious Meditation; and that in all Probability
the diverting our Thoughts to other Employments, will deface all those good
Impressions the word of God has made on our Minds, blot them out of our
Memories, and make those Truths which have been delivered like the Seed sown by
the way side, Matthew. 13.5.
which becomes a prey to the Fowls of the Air. Let us therefore spend some time
in recollecting what the Preacher has delivered to us, in considering what
Article of Religion has been explained, what Virtue has been recommended, what
Vice reproved, what Arguments and Motives have been used, and in short, in
comparing the Doctrine delivered with the written word of God; and if we find
it agreeable to it, then let us treasure it up in our Minds, and transcribe it
into our Lives. Let this be the chief end of hearing God's Word, that we may
yield a more exact Obedience to his Commands, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and grow wise unto Salvation.

To this End, let us conclude all with our affectionate and fervent Prayers to
God, that he would be pleased to inlighten our Understandings, open our Hearts,
and incline our Wills, and to render his good Word effectual to the
accomplishment of those Ends for which it was designed, that we may not be only
bare hearers of the Word, but doers of the same. Let us praise and magnify his
Name, for the many gracious Opportunities he has given us of entering his
Courts, and approaching his Sanctuary, that we have the Liberty of Worshipping
him in Public, and enjoy the glorious Light of his Gospel, whilst so great
part of the World sit in darkness and the shadow of Death. Psalm. 107.10.
And let us not only content our selves with making a verbal Acknowledgment of
these Favors; but testify our Thankfulness by a constant Attendance on his
Worship and Word, and making it the standing Rule for the Government of our
Lives and Conversations.

SERMON VIII.
2 COR. XII. 9. And he said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee.


WONDERFUL good and Gracicious are the Designs of Providence toward Mankind,
both as to this World and the next, and the end of all God's Dispensations in
this Life, is so to exercise their Graces, to implant in them such virtuous
Dispositions and Habits, that they may be capable of the Enjoyment of that
infinite and eternal Happiness, which he has prepared for them hereafter. And
therefore 'twas excellent Advice, though from the mouth of an Heathen. -- Si vis
consilium
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris:
Nam pro jucundis, aptissima quaeque dabunt dii,
Charior est illis homo, quam sibi --


Which is as much as to say, Commit thy self, and all thy Concerns to Divine
Providence, let him determine what is most convenient for thee, what is most,
requisite in the Course of thy Affairs; for God loves Man, better than Man
loves himself, and does him good oftentimes against his Will, and though he
denies him those things which are grateful and acceptable to his fleshly
Appetites and Desires, to his carnal Lusts, and inordinate Passions, yet he
gives him other Blessings which are more wholesome, and more profitable to him.
Thus a careful Physician prescribes safe and beneficial, though unpalatable
Medicines to his diseased Patient; and thus God deals with Mankind, mercifully
and bountifully, and frequently denies his Requests and Prayers out of Kindness
to him, that he may furnish him with those things which are more safe, and more
convenient for him. This is an useful Lesson, and to be learned from St. Paul's
Experience, as it is contained in the Text, and the two preceding Verses. Least
(says he) I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of
Revelation, there was given unto me a thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me, And he said unto me, my
Grace is sufficient for thee: So that the words of the Text are an Answer to
St. Paul's Prayer, wherein God instead of delivering him from the buffeting of
Satan, which was the thing he prayed for, Promises to give him his Grace to
endure it, which would be far more commodious and advantageous to him. My Grace
is sufficient for thee. That I may Discourse with the greater Profit upon these
words: I shall consider,

I. What it is which God Promises. His Grace.

II. The measure and proportion of it. Such as should be sufficient.

III. The Person to whom it was promised, to the Apostle St. Paul. My Grace is
sufficient for thee.

As if God should have said thus unto him; I will not answer thy Requests, in
exempting thee from thy manifold Troubles and Afflictions; but least thou
should be oppressed by them, I will give thee what is more expedient for thee,
to wit, my Grace which is sufficient for thee.

1. What it is which God Promises, viz. his Grace: Which taken in the general,
denotes the Power and Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, renewing the Soul to the
Image of God, and continually strengthening, and guiding it in Obedience to his
Will. Now from the same Spirit proceeds Diversity of Grace; there is Gratia
gratis data, or the miraculous Unction of the Holy Ghost, whereby to one is
given the Gift of Miracles, to another speaking with Tongues, to a third
Prophesying; but this is not the Grace meant in the Text, 1 Cor. 10.12.
for this was communicated to wicked, as well as to good Men, to Bala^^ and
Saul, and Caiphas and Judas, as well as to the rest of the Apostles; this was
the occasion of tempting St. Paul to the Sin of Pride, of which he speaks in
the Verses before the Text. And those excellent Gifts and Endowments with which
this Apostle was furnished, tended to puff him up, and exposed him to the
Buffettings and Temptations of the Devil: But that Grace which upheld and
strengthened him, and was sufficient for him; was what the Schoolmen call
Gratia gratum faciens; or the Grace of Life. Such as are all the saving Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit, which are wrought by his Help and Assistance in the
hearts of Believers, such as Faith, Hope, Charity, Purity, Humility, and all
other gracious Habits of the Mind, which the Apostle calls the fruit of the
Spirit, and wherein the Image of God, the Power of Godliness, and the Spirit of
Christianity do truly consist. Ephesians. 1.6.
This is that Grace which renders us acceptable unto God, and is in effect
eternal Life unto us. This is that Grace which is best described by its
Effects, Romans 6.23.
Which illuminates our Understandings, teaches us those things we know not, 1 John 2.27.
and brings us to the Knowledge of the Truth; this renews the Image of God in
our Souls, governs our perverse Wills and Affections, Counsels and Actions,
God's holy Spirit leading, guiding and directing us in all our ways; Romans 8.14.
this unites us unto Christ our Head, Comforts us in all our Affliction and
Distress, whether of Body or Soul; and therefore the holy Spirit is called the
Comforter, Joh. 15.26. Psalm. 45.8.
and the Oil of Gladness. And lastly, It helps us in all our Streights, and
Supports us in times of the greatest Distress and Extremity; it keeps us from
despairing of God's Mercy when we consider our manifold Sins and
Transgressions, or from questioning his Providence, because of our Miseries,
and from backsliding and falling off from Christ for fear of Danger, or any
other worldly Respects. In short, it enables us to do all things, Phil. 4.13.
which God requires of us, through Christ that strengthens us. Which brings me
to the

2. Observable in the Text. The measure and proportion of this Grace; it is such
as is sufficient to enable us to undergo whatsoever God shall please to lay
upon us. My Grace is sufficient for thee: 1 These. 5.23.
For since that God who gives this Grace, is in himself All-sufficient,
therefore there is no question, but that the Assistance which he affords, will
be sufficient to bring about those Ends for which he gave it. God's Grace
sanctifies all the Faculties of our Souls, all the Powers of our Body; it is
sufficient in every State and Condition of Life, it cheers us in Adversity, it
restrains us in Prosperity, not suffering us, either to be puffed up with the
one, or to droop under the Burden of the other. It is a sufficient Remedy
against all Temptations, and fortifies our Souls against all sorts of
Batteries. Ephesians. 6.12.
When we are afflicted, it tells us, That our Sufferings here are not worthy to
be compared with that eternal weight of Glory, Romans 8.18.
which shall be revealed in us; or if we abound in Blessings, or in Gifts
natural, or supernatural, it tells us from whence they came, and to what end
they were bestowed upon us, that we must not hide these Talents in a Napkin, or
abuse the Grace of God unto Wantonness, but promote as much as in us lies the
Glory of God, the good of our Neighbor, and the eternal Welfare of our own
Souls. Though we offer up our Prayers to God without present Returns, or apparent
Success, it tells us, That God forbears to give us those good things we ask
for, that he may try our Patience and Perseverance; and since he does not see
it expedient to grant them, therefore it is our Duty to wait the Determination
of his good Pleasure. Again, God's Grace is sufficient for all Persons; our
heavenly Father is so merciful, that he shines as well upon the bad as the
good; of his fullness all receive Grace for Grace. Joh. 1.9.
And though the Grace of God is not imparted to all alike, yet every Man receives
a sufficient Portion of it, sufficient to supply all his Wants, both Temporal
and Spiritual. For as if you dip Vessels of different Sizes into the Sea, every
one will be full of Water, though every one does not hold the same quantity, so
though there are different Gifts, and different Administrations, and different
measures of Grace communicated to Men; yet God withholds from no Man
sufficient Grace, to enable him to be good and virtuous, and to answer all his
pressing and unavoidable Necessities. The Israelites in the Wilderness gathered
Manna, Exodus 16.18.
according to every Man's eating, when they did measure it with an Omer, he
that had gathered much had nothing over, and he that had gathered little had no
lack: So God gives his Grace unto Men, according to every Man's necessity;
measure it with an Omer, weigh all the Circumstances and you will find, That
neither he that has little has Cause to repine, nor he that has much, to boast.
One Man is surrounded with Temptations, burdened and loaded even to the ground
with Afflictions, oppressed with Difficulties, and to this Man God gives a
greater Portion of his holy Spirit, he assists him more powerfully, he
strengthens and confirms him after an extraordinary manner, and enables him to
close and grapple with the Difficulty or Temptation which assaults him. Another
has been nurtured in Vice, and brought up in Debauchery, and it is necessary,
that he should be reclaimed from his Evil doings, with a strong hand, and an
out-stretch'd Arm. A third has been long accustomed to good, and is naturally
inclined to Sobriety and Virtue, and requires only the ordinary Assistance of
God's Grace to keep him so. Thus God like a Wise Householder proportions his
Gifts to the Wants, and Necessities of his Children and Servants, and will
require of every one according to what he has received, and reward them
according to their Works; he that has but one Talent given him, if he well
employs that one, may obtain the Government of one City; though he has not the
highest place in the Kingdom of Heaven; yet he will find Admittance there,
where the least degree of Happiness, will consist of Joys unspeakable, which
transcend all comparison. But if God call out any one to give Testimony to the
Truth, or to be an eminent Example of Patience or Long suffering, or taking up
the Cross, he will furnish him with proportionable measures of Strength; so
that the good Christian may rest assured, that though at present he finds
himself weak and frail, and unable to undergo the Affliction, which he fears
will suddenly fall upon him, yet I say he may assure himself, that the Divine
Assistance will always attend him, God will never leave him, nor forsake him,
but as his troubles grow upon him, so shall he be supplied with more Power,
more Courage, and more Ability, to bear up under them. God is faithful, 1. Cor.
10.13.
and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to bear, as St.
Paul assures us. And that God has been faithful in the performance of this, as
well as his other Promises, we need no other Testimony, but that of our own
Consciences. For if we look back upon the past Transactions of our Lives we
shall find, how frequently God's Grace has suggested to us, This is the Way,
walk in it, when we were in suspense how to behave our selves; and has as it
were Pointed out our Duty to us; how often we have been pricked at the heart,
when we have committed any Sin, and stirred up and incited to do good; and the
Reason why we have done amiss, and transgressed God's Commands has generally
been, because we have not improved those good Motions, and followed the
Dictates and Impulses of God's Grace within us. For though we are not to look for
any other Directions, for the Government of our Lives, besides those of God's
written word; and if we have any thing suggested to us, which is opposite to
this established Rule of our Duty, we ought to look upon it as a snare of the
Devil, and the Instigation of an evil Spirit: Yet on the contrary, when we find
any vigorous and strong Inclination to do that, which we are fully assured is
our Duty to do, at that time, and in that place; then we may assure our selves,
that this is the Motion of God's holy Spirit, the Grace of God working in us,
and that it is our Duty to comply with it, to encourage and improve it; and if
we do so then, it will certainly bring to pass that Effect, for which God at
the first designed and intended it. It remains therefore, That God's Grace is
sufficient for us, (i. e.) gives us Strength, Ability, and Means enough to
subdue the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; and that if we are brought under
the Dominion, and Power of any of these, we must accuse our own Sloth, and
Laziness, in neglecting to use and improve to the uttermost, those means and
helps which God has afforded us. This will be made more evident by considering,

3. The Person to whom this Promise is made, My Grace is sufficient for thee:
And if we consider the Person here spoken of (the Apostle St. Paul) according
to that account which is given of him in the Holy Scripture, we shall find in
his Life, such variety of Circumstances, so very remarkable and instructive,
that there is hardly any Condition we can fall into, wherein we may not receive
Benefit by his Example, and have an Instance of the Powerfulness, and
sufficiency of God's Grace. Let us consider him as a Jew, how zealous was he in
the Profession of that Faith, how furious in the Persecution of all such, who
either taught or lived in the Observance of the Christian Religion? Acts 23.6.
He was a Pharisee the Son of a Pharisee. And by consequence a rigid Observer,
not only of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, but also of all the Traditions
of the Rabbis; so that though he lived at that time, when our Savior Christ
was on Earth, and had heard of, if not seen, the Miracles which he wrought, yet
was he an inveterate Enemy to him and his Religion. And this mistaken Zeal for
the Mosaical Law carried him forth to a furious Persecution of the Church; he
was consenting to the Death of the Martyr St. Stephen, Acts 22.20. Acts. 8.3.
Acts 9.1.
He made havoc of the Church, and breathed out nothing but threatenings, and
slaughter against the Disciples; dragging Men and Women to Prison, and
procuring Letters of Inquisition against them from the High Priest; and yet for
all this, God's Grace was sufficient to bring him from the bondage of the Law,
to the Freedom of the Gospel, and the only Righteousness in Christ Jesus; to
make him Preach that Faith, which he formerly persecuted, and from an Enemy, to
become a Martyr for the Christian Religion. Consider him now as a Christian,
and then you will find him remarkable for the exact Government of his Life, his
Graces, his Afflictions, his Infirmities.

1. He was remarkable for his austere Life and Conversation. Like one who
strove for the Mastery, he abstained from all things which might hinder him in
his Christian Course, 1 Cor. 9.27. 1 Cor. 15.10.
beating down his Body, and bringing it into subjection, he labored more
abundantly than all the rest of the Apostles, traveling from Nation to Nation,
from City to City, never wearied with Preaching, never baffled with Opposition,
never tired with disputing, and all this through the Grace of God which was
sufficient in him.

2 If you would take a Survey of his Graces you may read, That he prophesied,
he spoke with Tongues, he wrought Miracles; what shall I say, he was
enlightened, (...), with an abundance, an Excess, a multitude of Revelations; he
was caught up into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4.
and heard words which it was not possible for Man to utter. These were such
Privileges, such evident Demonstrations that he was beloved of God, and a
Favorite of Heaven, that nothing could keep him from being puffed up with them,
but an extraordinary measure of God's Grace, with which he was endowed. And as
God's Grace was sufficient for him in Prosperity; so,

3. Did it support him in a day of Adversity, and Affliction; he was, as he
himself tells us, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
in stripes above measure, in Prisons frequent, in Deaths often. Of the Jews five
times received he forty stripes save one, thrice was he beaten with rods, once
was he stoned, thrice he suffered shipwreck, a night and a day he was in the
deep: in Journeyings often, in perils of Waters, in perils of Robbers, in
perils by the Heathen, in perils by his own Countrymen, in perils in the City,
in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false
Brethren; in Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and
Thirst, in Fastings often, in Cold and Nakedness, etc. And at last after Forty
years Persecution, he was beheaded at Rome; had not the Grace of God been
sufficient for him, he could not have suffered so courageously, nor have
gloried in his Sufferings with such Christian Bravery, nor have promised
himself the Crown of Righteousness, with such an earnest Hope, and steadfast
Assurance.

And Lastly, we have his Infirmities; there was sent him a Thorn in the Flesh,
S. Chryso. the Iliack Passion. Tertul. the Headache. Cyprian, some Bodily
Disease.
as the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, by which some of the ancient Fathers
understood some bodily Disease and Infirmity; but the generality of
Interpreters, with more Probability affirm, That by this Thorn in the Flesh is
meant, not any particular Evil, but all manner of Temptation, by which the
Devil strove either to undermine his Faith, or to beat him from it. And that he
might get the better of all these, and be more than a Conqueror, God Promises
him his Grace, and assures him, that it should be sufficient for him; and we
find by the Consequence, that it had its desired Effect; This Grace of God was
sufficient to keep him humble, when he beheld the most glorious Revelations,
and was rapt up into the third Heaven, to support him amidst the most grievous
Tribulations and Afflictions, to strengthen and confirm him under Temptations,
and though by earnest Prayer he could not obtain a present Deliverance from his
Temptations, yet by the Grace of God he reaped the Fruit and Benefit of them;
an Addition of Grace and spiritual Strength, whereby he was enabled to obtain
the Victory over them in this World, and an eternal, and never-fading Crown of
Glory in the next.

And now what remains, but that we make a right Improvement of all these
Considerations, and direct our Thoughts from the Contemplation of these words
in the General, to consider the influence they ought to have on our particular
Lives and Conversations. And to this end I shall endeavor to draw such
Inferences, as naturally flow from the Truths already delivered. And,

1. It Is the Interest of every Man to state the Case plainly between God and
his own Soul, and to examine his own Heart, whether he has got saving Grace or
no; for since this alone is sufficient to support a Man in Affliction, and to
keep him steady under all the Turns and Vicissitudes of humane Affairs, it
certainly behooves every one to be well assured, that he is possessed of this
Jewel of great Price; especially since it is so frequently counterfeit ed, and
Men are so ready to impose upon themselves, and deceive their own Souls, and to
embrace the shadow of Religion instead of the Substance. Try and examine well
your selves, know you not your own selves, that you must have this true saving
Grace of God, unless ye are Reprobates. Take heed all things are not according
to the outward appearance; the Prince of darkness often transforms himself into
an Angel of Light; A Man may hear, and read God's Word, and pray frequently and
fervently, and yet not have the true Gift of Understanding, and Spiritual
Wisdom; He may (says the Apostle) Give his Body to be burnt, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
and all his Goods to feed the Poor, and yet not have the Gift of Love; he may
have a Faith sufficient to remove Mountains, and yet be nothing; he may have
all Knowledge and all Prophecies and the tongue of Men and Angels to utter it,
and yet be only a sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal. But a true saving
Grace will discover it self by such Effects as these, by a sincere Love to God,
a fervent Charity to your Neighbor; and a sober Meekness in the Estimation of
your selves. If you have a sincere Love to God, you will avoid Evil, and do
Good out of such Principles and Motives as these; because the one is pleasing,
the other hateful in the sight of God, because Sin debases our Nature, and
provokes God to withdraw his Grace from us, and grieves his Holy Spirit. If you
have fervent Charity to your Neighbor; you will Love him for God's sake,
because he enjoins it, and maintain an universal Charity for all Men, as well
Enemies as Friends; Luke 6.13.
you will Love those who hate you, bless those who Curse you, and pray for
those who despitefully use you, and persecute you. If you have sober Meekness,
and a just Valuation of your selves, you will have a low and mean Opinion of
your Self, and your Performances, and readily acknowledge your own Frailties,
and be sensible of your Infirmities, and confess that naturally you are
insufficient for every good work; 1 Cor. 15.10.
and that it is from God's Grace alone that you are what you are: You will rely
on the infinite Mercy of God, and the sole Merits of Jesus Christ, and pray
incessantly for the continuance of God's Favor and Assistance, without being
puffed up with an overweening Opinion of your own Abilities, or casting an
envious Eye, or a disdainful Look on the Seize of other Men. These are
the Chief and Principal Fruits of the Holy Spirit, and are the necessary
Effects of saving Grace: Gal. 5.22.
And if after a diligent Search, and serious Enquiry, it plainly appears, that
you are possessed of these Qualifications, you may then, and not otherwise be
secure, that you have truly God's Grace, even the Grace of Life.

2. If you find you have true Grace, endeavor to cherish and increase it: For
though God has promised, That his Grace shall be sufficient for us; yet this is
a Promise made good only to such Persons, who perform the Condition annexed to
it, that is, who join their own Endeavors with it. This is the Duty on our
part to be performed, which if neglected will intercept the Emanations of God's
Grace, grieve the Holy Spirit, and provoke him to depart from us, and forsake
us; if therefore we would keep that Grace which God has given us, we must
cherish and improve it, we must hearken to its Motions, obey its Commands,
comply with its Councels, and pray that God would continue and increase it to
us. Let us Pray for all such Mercies, both Temporal and Spiritual as we stand
in need of, but let us make our most fervent and frequent Addresses at the
Throne of Grace, for the Blessed Influences and Assistances of God's Holy
Spirit; and beg of God instantly, that he would be pleased to give us his
Grace, to enlighten, assist and comfort us in all our Exigences, and to teach
and enable us, to make a due Use and right Improvement of all other Mercies.
Thus much in the General, but more particularly,

3. Let us learn to be thankful for that measure of Grace, which God has
bestowed upon every one of us; since it is such as God sees sufficient for us,
and as much as will enable us to work out our Salvation. If David can slay the
Philistine with a Sling and a stone, what need has he of Readiness Armor? If God
enables us to perform what he requires of us, what occasion have we for any
irresistible Impulse, or any force upon our Wills: When we may be saved like
Rational Creatures, by God's Grace in Conjunction with our own Endeavors, why
should we expect to be driven on by a blind Instinct or Fatality? If our Gifts
are sufficient to subdue our Spiritual Enemies, and obtain Heaven, we ought to
be content, and thankfully acquesce in the Bounty of our good God, and liberal
Benefactor. We are taught indeed to covet earnestly the best Gifts, 1 Cor.
12.31.
and to strive continually to grow in Grace; but having done our Endeavors, we
ought to rest satisfied with that Measure and Proportion of Grace, which God is
pleased to impart to us. If our Neighbor has greater Gifts than we have, it is
a Sign that he has made more use of them, that his N^cessities are greater, his
Duties, Temptations, and Trials more weighty, frequent, and troublesome;
whether therefore we have ordinary Grace, let us neither repine at God, nor be
dejected in our selves, nor envy others: Or whether we have extraordinary
Grace, let us not forget God, or be puffed up, 1 Cor. 12.11.
or despise others; for this diversity of Gifts proceeds from the same Spirit,
distributing to every Man as he will.

4. Let us hence learn to endure Temptations, and Afflictions patiently. For
though our Afflictions at the first sight appear never so grievous and
insupportable, yet God has promised, that he will lay no more upon his Servants
than they are able to bear; he will proportion his Assistance to their Wants,
and give them Strength to undergo that Burden, he is pleased to lay upon them,
His Grace will be sufficient for them.

What good Man can undergo greater Troubles and Calamities than St. Paul did?
And yet through the Grace of God, he was not only supported under them, but he
arrived to so high a Degree of Trust and Confidence in God, as to make them
matter of Joy and Satisfaction, and to Glory in them: Where that long Catalogue
of Afflictions is introduced with this Preface; Seeing that many Glory after
the Flesh, 2 Cor. 11.18.
I will also Glory. And let us but summon up our Christian Courage, and
Resolution, let us but put forth that Strength which God has given us, and pray
to God fervently, and uncessantly to give us his Grace and Blessing; and there
can no Affliction befall us, which we shall not be enabled to go through with
and at last see a Happy and Comfortable end of it; we shall receive the benefit
of it in this World, and obtain the Reward of our Patience in the next. And
therefore,

5. and Lastly, We may from hence learn to refer the Success of our Prayers
unto God. If we do not presently receive an Answer to our Petitions, let us not
despond or conclude, that God either does not hear, or will not grant a
favorable Answer to our Requests; for there may be many Reasons, why God may
defer the giving us those Mercies we pray for, and sometimes to deny us those
things which we think good and convenient for us: Perhaps there may be a Defect
in our Prayers, we may not have prayed with sufficient Fervency, Piety, and
Perseverance: Perhaps the thing we pray for, is not expedient for us, or God
sees it will be more for our good to be without it; and in all these Cases,
though he denies our Requests, Gal. 6.9.
yet he consults our benefit and advantage. Let us not therefore be weary of
well doing, considering, That at last we shall reap if we faint not, our
Prayers will return into our Bosoms laden with Blessings. And in the mean
while, it may be sufficient to support and comfort us, to consider that God
deals with us after the same manner he did with many holy Men, and eminent
Saints, whose Examples are recorded in the Holy Scripture for our Instruction;
David, though a Man after God's own Heart, yet by much Weeping, Fasting, and
Praying, 2 Samuel 12.
could not obtain the Life of his Child. And Samuel though a Prophet of the
Lord, could not prevail with God to continue the Kingdom upon Saul and his
Posterity. St. Paul in the Text, 1 Samuel 16.1.
though one of the Apostles of our Savior Christ, and though he not only
prayed thrice; but offered up vehement Supplications and Prayers, could not
obtain an Exemption from the buffetings of Satan. When therefore we offer up
our Prayers, and Supplications to God, let us always make our Requests with
Resignation, and Submission to the Divine Pleasure, and after the Example of
our Blessed Savior, annex this Condition to all our Petitions; Nevertheless
not as I will, Mat. 26.39.
but as thou will. And then if God does not see fit to give us the Blessings we
pray for, he will give us some better thing instead of them: Or if he does not
deliver us out of that Affliction or Trouble we groan under, he will bestow
upon us a suitable Measure of Grace to support us under it. Either of these
Considerations may be a sufficient Encouragement to place our Trust and
Confidence upon God, and to Persevere in our Addresses at the Throne of his
Grace.

SERMON IX.
PROVE. IV. 23. Keep thy Heart with all Diligence: For out of it are the Issues
of Life.


IT was deservedly looked upon, as one of the chief Excellencies of the Persian
Laws, that they did not so much design the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice,
as the using means to prevent the Commission of it, that by a careful Education
of Youth, in the Principles of Virtue and Morality, they took away the Cause of
all inordinate Desires and Affections, and rendered their Duty so familiar, and
habitual to them, that they had no need of those terrible Tortures, and Bloody
Executions, whereby other Lawgivers frighted their Subjects into Obedience.
And of this Nature is the Duty recommended, in the Text: For was but this one
Precept sincerely conformed to, did we but perform this one Duty
conscientiously and honestly, we should find very little Difficulty in yielding
Obedience to all the rest. For that Man would never commit Murder, that durst
not be angry without a Cause; nor be adulterous in the Act, who did not first
transgress in his Desire: Can we think he would be Guilty of a deliberate
Perjury that fears an Oath, or defraud another, who permits not himself to
Covet? For if the first Sparks of ill were quenched within, they would never
break out into a Flame; and therefore it was Advice well becoming the Wisdom of
Solomon. To keep our Hearts with all Diligence: For out of them are the Issues
of Life.

In which Words be pleased to take Notice.

I. Of a Duty recommended to us. To keep our Hearts.

II. Of the manner how this Duty ought to be performed. With all Diligence.

III. Of the Motive to engage us thus to perform it: For out of them are the
Issues of Life.

IV. I shall add some Directions to facilitate this Duty to us, and to assist
us in the due Government of our Hearts.

1. Here is a Duty enjoined us. Psalm. 12.2. 2 Kin. 10.30. Matthew. 22.37. 2 Samuel
24.5. Romans 7.22. (...) the Man within us. 1 Pet. 3.4. (...). the hidden Man of
the Heart.
To keep our Hearts. Now the Heart has different Acceptations in the Holy
Scripture; it is sometimes taken for one Faculty of the Soul, and sometimes for
another; for the Understanding, the Will, the Affections, the Conscience, and
sometimes for the whole Soul. I shall take it in the most comprehensive Sense,
and then it will denote to us all the Thoughts; and Inclinations, the Passions
and Affections of the Soul. For 'twas the Opinion of the Ancients, that the
Heart was the Seat of the Soul, and the Instrument of its most noble
Operations. So that by keeping the Heart is meant, a looking into the most
private Recesses of our Soul, a curious and particular Observation what is
transacted there; the taking a view of all our Inclinations, Passions, Desires,
and Affections, and comparing them with the Rule of God's Word, approving those
which are Good, and disallowing those which are Evil. It denotes also the
making use of such Means, as may be effectual to bring our Souls into a due
Frame and Temper; the taking Care that the Thoughts of our Hearts, may not be
taken up with any unlawful Object, or drawn out too far on any sensual
Pleasure, or worldly Advantage; but that we sincerely desire, and heartily
endeavor to render them entirely conformable to the Laws of God.

Not that it is possible for the best, and most Holy Men, to govern their
Hearts so exactly, as never to transgress the strict Rules of their Duty, or
never to offend in Thought: Alas! Vain and sinful Thoughts will continually
spring up in our Minds, they are the necessary Effects of our depraved Natures,
and the Devil will take all Opportunities of inciting them in our Souls, and
presenting such tempting and alluring Objects to our Phancies, as will produce
inordinate Affections, and Desires. It Is not in our Power, and therefore it
cannot be our Duty, so to keep our Hearts, as that no vain Thoughts should
intrude themselves there: Whilst we continue in these frail Bodies, and Houses
of Clay, we shall be subject to many Passions, and the Fumes which arise from
our inferior Appetites will cloud our Understandings, and in some measure
captivate our Reason. It Is plain and Evident, that many of our Thoughts proceed
from the Frame and Constitution of our Bodies, and do in a great measure depend
on the present Circumstances we are in, and the Objects we converse with. If we
are of a cold and Phlegmatic Constitution, we shall be affected with
Melancholy, and distrustful Thoughts, and Phancies; if of a Choleric Temper,
Passion will sometimes get the upper hand of us; when we are at Ease and in
Prosperity, our Thoughts will be apt to be too gay and volatile; if in Pain or
Misery we must needs be sensible of it, and poring on it. And therefore all
that a good Christian can do, is to Endeavor to keep his Heart, in as good a
Frame as he possibly can, to be continually on his Guard; and though he cannot
attain to Perfection in this Life, yet to endeavor after it, by curbing his
unruly Passions, governing his Affections, and Appetites by the Laws of Reason,
and whenever they break out, and Act irregularly, reducing them within their
due Bounds, and not allowing or delighting in the least sinful Thought, or
suffering it to dwell or remain in our Hearts, but casting it out with all
speed and Indignation imaginable. And this must be done

II. With all Diligence, which denotes these two things. 1. That this Duty
ought to be our constant Employment, that we do not let any day slip without
examining the Frame of our Hearts; for if we sleep never so little, The Evil
one will take the Opportunity of sowing his tares in our Souls, if we are not
always upon our Guard, the Cares and Business of Life, or the Pomps, and
Vanities of the World, will imprint either such light and garish, or such
Melancholy, and distracting Ideas of things in our Minds, as will produce a
fruitful Crop of Vain, Sollicitous, and Sinful Thoughts: This must be the
business of every day, for the Thoughts of our Hearts are apt to be disordered
with every Gust of Passion, and will require a watchful Eye, and a continual
Care, to keep them in any tolerable Order. 2. The keeping our Hearts with all
Diligence, implies the greatest Intenseness, and Application of Mind
imaginable. For we must take a great deal of Pains to come to a through
knowledge of the thoughts of our Heart. The Heart of Man is deceitful, and
desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.
who can know it? Which Text, though primarily intended to denote the
Difficulty of knowing what other Men think, or what Opinion we shall have of
things hereafter; as appears by the coherence of the Words with those which
went before, yet they may well serve, to intimate to us the Difficulty of
giving an impartial Judgment of the present Sentiments of our Minds, and what
the true bent and Tendency of our Desires, and Affections are; for we are so
fond of our Bosom sins, and those darling Delights, which either Custom or
Inclination has endeared to us, that we think we can never sufficiently caress
them; and though our Affections are drawn out after the most extravagant manner
after them, yet we cloth them with such plausible and specious Pretenses, as
make the most criminal Enjoyment of them appear (at least to us) harmless and
lawful. Who is there that will not readily acknowledge that we ought to Love
God, with the most intense and zealous Affection, With all our Soul, and with
all our Strength, and the good things of this World, in a lower and subordinate
Degree? and yet how difficult a Task would it be to persuade the most sordid
and miserable Worlding, That his Affections are not placed on things above, but
on things below? and though he is notoriously guilty of this Vice of
Covetousness, and sees the Folly of it in other Men, yet is he not able to turn
his Eyes inward, and to discover it in himself; so great Diligence and Industry
does it require, to range over all the turnings and windings of our Hearts, and
to be acquainted with all those crooked Paths, which Sin and Error have made in
our Souls. And if there is so much Diligence required to know the thoughts of
our Hearts, it must needs call for our utmost Care to manage them aright, and
keep them in due Order. And therefore there will be the more need to consider,

III. The Motive made use of in the Text to engage us, to the Performance of
this Duty. For out of them are the Issues of Life, (i. e.) our Happiness both
in this Life, and the next does depend upon a diligent and conscientious
Discharge of this Duty.

1. Our Happiness in this World depends upon it. For,

1. By keeping our Hearts, we shall learn to manage our Affairs with Prudence
and Discretion. For the greatest part of those extravagant Actions which Men
commit, proceed either from the want of a due Deliberation before they enter
upon Action: Or, a discreet executing what their Reason tells them, is fit and
ought to be done. Either they are hurried on by the Violence of their sensual
Appetites, and headstrong Passions, or biased by some inordinate Lust, and
corrupt Affection, and these betray them into indiscreet, absurd, and sinful
Words, and Actions. Now he that is accustomed to keep his Heart, considers well
and deliberately every Circumstance of an Action, before he puts his Thoughts
into Excution; he weighs first his own Power and Ability, and then enquires
both into the Lawfulness, and Expediency of the thing he undertakes; by which
means he avoids those Rocks upon which so many split, (i. e.) Rashness in
setting upon those things he has neither Power nor Skill to perform on the one
hand, and a too great Diffidency, and distrust of his own Abilities on the
other: The first of these produces Shame and Disappointment, when a Man finds
himself not able to compass the End he aimed at, and falls short of his too
bold and daring Designs; the second deprives him of many valuable Benefits and
Advantages which lie in his way, and require only the Pains of seeking after
them, and possessing himself of them. And in truth since all our Words and
Actions are the Streams, which flow from the Fountain of our Hearts, therefore
it must needs follow, that he who governs his Heart wisely and prudently,
cannot go far astray in his Words and Actions, all our vital Operations will
savor of that Root and Principle from whence they proceed; and a Holy Life
must needs be the necessary Effect of a sanctified Heart.

2. A due Government of our Hearts, will produce Peace, and quiet of Mind, by
freeing us from those raging Passions, and sensual Affections, from proud,
malicious, and envious Thoughts, which disturb our Peace and Quiet, and render
our Lives uneasy and burdensome to us. For it has been an old, and a very
true Observation, that Content and Satisfaction, and by consequence Happiness
in this Life, does not proceed from the abundance of the Goods of this World,
or the indulging our selves in sensual Pleasure, but from the Temper and
Constitution of our Minds; in a contentedness and satisfaction with that
Condition, the wise Providence of God has allott'd us, and a discreet Enjoyment
of those good things he has made our Portion in this World. A sound Mind in a
sound Body, was the wise Wish of a Heathen Poet; for that Man whose Heart is
full of Envy or Malice, or sollicitous Care, or Pride, would be uneasy on a
Throne, and miserable amidst the most plentiful affluence of worldly
Enjoyments, but he who has obtained the Art of Governing his Thoughts, by the
Laws of Reason and Religion, will enjoy the Pleasure of a quiet and composed
Mind, amidst all the noise and hurry of this World, and remain contented and
satisfied with his Condition, without casting either an envious Eye on the
Possessions of those who are above him, or a disdainful Look on those who are
in a meaner Condition than himself. From hence will flow,

3. Peace of Conscience; 1 John 3.21.
for if our Hearts condemn us not then have we confidence toward God, that Man
who has been so careful, as to set a strict and diligent Watch over his
Thoughts, will be from thence assured, that his Heart is upright toward God,
and has good grounds to believe that he is in his Favor, and under his
Protection, and this will produce the greatest Joy and Satisfaction imaginable;
and therefore 'twas good Advice which the Oracle gave Craesus.

(...), the way to be Happy is to know thy Self; for a through Knowledge of our
own Hearts, and the Government of our Thoughts according to the Rule of God's
Word, is a chief Ingredient, as well as the principal Cause of a happy Life in
this World.

These are the blessed Effects of Keeping our Hearts as to the Concerns of this
Life; but if we consider, 2. Its influence on our eternal Happiness, we must
needs judge it highly reasonable to use our utmost Care and Diligence in the
Performance of this Duty. For,

1. God has made the Keeping our Hearts one part of our Duty. The words of the
Text are not only a prudential Council containing Matter of Advice, but a
Positive Command; God expects we should comply with it, and yield our Obedience
to it. It Is true, the Jews of old did imagine that Thoughts were not sinful,
unless immediately Blasphemous against God, and therefore they did not blame
the Intention of the Heart to commit Murder or Adultery, unless 'twas actually
put in Execution; which we have the less reason to wonder at, because there are
so many amongst us, who maintain this absurd Opinion, and Fancy their Thoughts
are so free, that they shall never be called to Account for them; if they can
but Act so cunningly as to escape the Censures of Men, Psalm. 55.21.
if they can but speak words smoother than Oil, they are not at all sollicitous
how their Hearts stand affected. But let these Men consider, Romans 2.15.
that at the last day when God shall judge the secrets of Men, we shall be
called to an Account for all the Thoughts and Intents of our Heart, as well as
for the loudest Words, and most public Actions; in God's Book not only the
Members of our Body, but the Thoughts of our Mind are written; and therefore we
are commanded, not to make Provision for the Lust of the Flesh, Romans 13.14.
(...), not to contrive beforehand, how we may fulfill our sinful Appetites and
Desires. Solomon tells us, That the Thought of Foolishness is sin, (i. e. Prove.
2.4 9.
a foolish Thought) and that a Man of wicked Devices, or Thoughts God will
condemn. Prove. 12.2.
And St. John affirms, 1 John 3.15.
That whosoever hates his Brother, or retains any Rancour or Malice in his
Heart is a Murderer: Now as on the one hand, God will accept of the sincere
Intention of those Persons, who fail in their Obedience only for want of Power
and Ability, to perform what he has commanded them: So on the other, our
Thoughts may be sinful in the sight of God, though we have neither Will nor
Power to put them in Execution. Abraham only intended to Sacrifice his Son
Isaac, Heb. 11.17.
and this holy Purpose of his Heart was imputed to him for Righteousness; Genesis
18.12.
and when Sarah dis-believ'd the Promise of God, and derided it in her Heart,
she is said to laugh within her self, and God resents the Provocation. And
though it is true, that when a wicked Thought is put into Execution, and breaks
out into a wicked Act, Jam. 1.15.
when Lust has conceived and brought forth Sin, it is of a far more heinous
Nature, and deeper Dye, than when it was only an Embryo, or in the Birth; yet
in many Respects our Thoughts may be more wicked, than either our Words or
Actions can be. For, 1. Our Thoughts are more numerous than our Actions. There
must be many Preparatory Motions of the Mind, many Thoughts twisted together,
to produce one deliberate sinful Action: How many Plottings and Contrivings,
Desires and Hopes, Wishes and Complacencies, must go before the Commission of
every evil Deed? There must be first a Scheme erected in our Minds, the Means
and Methods must be resolved on, the Instruments must be chosen, and the thing
frequently acted over in our Thoughts, before any notorious sinful Action can
be committed. 2. The same Sin may be acted over a thousand times in the Mind,
which can only be once performed in the outward Action. We may take a great
deal of Pleasure and Delight in recalling the Sins we have formerly committed,
in representing them in our Fancies, and reacting them over in our
Imaginations, and hereby draw down a fresh Guilt upon our selves. Nay, 3. We
may be guilty of those Sins, by contriving them in our Minds, which can never
possibly be really acted; thus the Covetous Man may rob his Neighbor of his
Wealth, though he never obtain the Possession of it, the Malicious and
Revengeful may murder his Enemy, when out of his reach, and the Cruel and
Blood-thirsty may imagine all Mankind to have but one Neck, and then cut it
off, Psalm. 14.1.
and the Atheist may say in his Heart there is no God, and fancy him excluded
out of the World. From these, and such other Considerations it is obvious to
conclude, That we are not left at liberty to think as we please, but that the
Government of our Thoughts is a necessary and indispensable Duty. Nay so
absolutely necessary is it to our eternal Welfare to keep our Hearts, that no
Word or Action can be good or acceptable unto God, which does not proceed from
a sanctified Heart. A wicked Man may perform many Acts of Justice and Charity,
but if they do not proceed from a good Disposition of Mind, they are only
splendida peccata, counterfeit Virtues, and therefore the Apostle tells us, 1
Cor. 13.1.
That if we give our Goods to feed the Poor, and have not Charity, (i. e.) a
sincere Love to God, and our Neighbor (which is seated in the Heart) all those
good Deeds will profit us nothing.

2. The Keeping of our Hearts, is conducive to our eternal Happiness, because
the maintaining our Communion with God depends on it. Now our Communion with
God is maintained by our offering up Prayers and Praises unto him, and his
Acceptance of them, and bestowing on us, the blessed Influences of his Holy
Spirit; and if so, then what Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving can be
acceptable unto God, which is offered up from a Heart full of impure Desires
and Affections, reeking with Lust, or Anger, or Revenge? He is a pure and holy
Spirit, and delights to dwell in a humble and contrite Heart; Isa. 57.15.
and if our Hearts are infected with Envy, Malice, Pride, or Lust, we shall
grieve him, and he will depart from us, and then the Devils those impure
Spirits will take Possession of our Souls, they will become a Cage of these
unclean Birds, a fit Habitation for these Legions to dwell in.

3. A right Frame of Heart is a Qualification absolutely necessary, to render
us capable, of enjoying eternal Happiness, in the Life to come. For our
Happiness in the other World, will in a great measure depend on the
Preparations we have made for it in this: Our Life here is a State of Probation
and Trial, a small Span of time allotted us, to furnish our selves with
virtuous Habits, and Divine Qualities, (those wedding Garments) which will
render us welcome Guests at the Marriage of the Lamb. And therefore if we would
have any well-grounded Hopes of Happiness in the other World, we must make it
our Employment here; to restrain our Passions, moderate our Affections, inflame
our Hearts with Zeal and Devotion, and accustom our selves to holy Meditation;
these are Qualifications absolutely necessary to make us relish the Pleasures
of another Life. For we may with as good Reason hope to satisfy our Hunger
with precious Stones and Diamonds, or our Thirst with the sight of stately
Buildings, or goodly Apparel; as that a malicious, envious, lustful, or
covetous Person, (whilst he continues so) should take delight in the Beatifical
Vision, and in singing Praises and Hallelujahs unto God. So necessary is it,
that we cleanse and purify our Desires and Affections, to qualify and dispose
us for eternal Happiness, as well as for the Happiness of this Life. I come now
in the last Place,

IV. To add some Directions to facilitate this Duty to us, and to assist us to
govern our Hearts aright.

1. Be diligent and industrious in the Business of your lawful Calling. For
every Man either has or ought to have some lawful Employment or Calling, in the
Exercise of which he should endeavor to promote the Glory of God, and to be a
useful Member of that Community in which he lives; those who by the Eminency of
their Birth, and the largeness of their Fortunes, move in a superior Orb, and
seem to be freed from that Original Curse, Genesis 3.19.
of getting their Bread with the sweat of their brows, are so far from being
exempted from it, that as they have more Talents committed to their Trust, so
their Accounts will be the greater at the last day. Now by Diligence in our
lawful Callings, we shall keep our Minds intent upon their proper Objects; and
hereby raise up useful, and profitable Thoughts in our Souls. Nay we may
improve the Business of our Callings, to administer occasion for devout and
holy Meditations. Those who go down to the Sea in Ships (says the Psalmist) see
the Works of the Lord, Psalm. 107.23.
and his wonders in the Deep. The Tradesman whilst he weighs his Wares,
considers, that all his Thoughts, Words, and Actions, are weighed in the
Balance of the Sanctuary; the Husbandman when he Tills the ground may call to
mind, What long Furrows the Scourges made on the back of our Savior; Psalm.
129.3.
when he beholds his Crop, it may put him in mind of the Resurrection; that as
the Corn perishes in the ground, and sprouts out again more green and fresh
than it was before, so our vile Bodies, after they are buried in the Grave,
shall arise at the last Day in greater Glory and Splendor; when he gathers his
Grain into his Barn, he is put in mind of the Day of Judgment, when the Good
shall be taken up into Heaven, and the Wicked like chaff shall be burned with
unquenchable Fire: Matthew. 3.12.
Thus the Business of every Man's particular Calling, whatsoever it is (I have
here given only the most obvious Instances) may be improved to raise up
Religious Thoughts; and the Mind may be, and for the most part is, best
employed, when the hands are at work. On the contrary, there is nothing more
fruitful of vain and sinful Thoughts, than Sloth, and Laziness; for our
Thoughts are restless, and in perpetual Motion, and will grind one upon
another, Eccl. 33.27.
if they have no good Employment. Idleness teaches much evil (says the wise Son
of Syrach) some Copies have it all evil. The Devil thought the fittest time to
tempt our Blessed Savior was, when he was alone, and in the Wilderness; and
that saying of Cato was subscribed to by the wiser Heathens as an Oracle, nihil
agendo, male agere disces: for when Men have nothing to do, the Devil will be
sure to find them Employment: And therefore it ought to be our Care, even when
we unbend our Minds from more serious Matters, and allow our selves those
Diversions, which the frailty of our Natures, and our good God has indulged us
in, to employ our Minds on such harmless, and innocent Recreations, as may
render them more active, and our Bodies more vigorous in the Service of our
Maker.

2. Next to Idleness, let us avoid bad Company; for it is a common and true
Observation, that a Man may be known by the Company he keeps; Conversation wins
insensibly upon us, has the most endearing Charms, and makes the most lasting
Impression upon our Minds.

3. Check wicked Thoughts at the first appearance, and let us not suffer them
to dwell in our Hearts, for the sooner we cast them out, we shall do it the
more easily; every moment we suffer them to remain there, they will grow more
powerful, and the Difficulty will increase by the neglect of our Duty. If
therefore we find in our Hearts any wicked Imagination, that exalts it self
against the Knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 10.5.
and is contrary to the known Rules of our Duty; let us maintain no Treaty with
it, or excuse it saying, Genesis 19.20.
Is it not a little one, but put it out of our Minds, as soon as possibly we
can. The Devil will be continually suggesting evil Thoughts into our Fancies,
and soliciting us with the most alluring, though pernicious Objects; he will
endeavor to disturb us in our Devotions, by diverting our Affections, and
turning the Current of our Thoughts on our worldly Affairs, and casting into
our Minds, vain and sinful Imaginations; these are those Birds of Prey, Genesis
19.11.
which attend the most pure and holy Sacrifice: But then it is our Business to
drive them away, and not to harbor, or allow of any thought in our Minds,
which we should be ashamed to have discovered in our Words and Actions. To
incite us to the performance of this Duty; let us consider,

1. What Pains wicked Men take to get rid of good Thoughts. If they happen into
Company, where good Discourse and pious Admonitions, have made some Impressions
upon their Minds, if some Truth is set home upon their Consciences, by some
good Book, or awakening Sermon, or they happen to be put in mind of their
latter End, and a Judgment to come, by a fit of Sickness, or the Death of some
Friend or Relation, or any other surprising Emergency; how restless are they
till they have got these Thoughts out of their Minds, and are rid of these
uneasy Companions? Do they not run from one Business to another, from one
Diversion to another, and turn every stone, to still the Clamours of an
accusing Conscience? shall not we use our utmost endeavor to cast out sinful
and wicked Thoughts, and take as much Pains to be happy, Quantascunque tenebras
factis tuis perstrinxeris, Deus lumen est. Tertul. Heb. 4.12.
as others do to be wretched and miserable? Consider farther, That God sees and
takes notice of all our Thoughts, He pierces even to the dividing asunder of
the joints and marrow: And discerns even the most hidden Thoughts and Intents
of the Heart. Now if the Sinner is so effectually awed, and detered from his
Sin, by the Presence of some grave Person, who remarks and over-sees his
Doings; how dares he allow himself in wicked Thoughts, when he considers that
the great God of Heaven and Earth looks down upon him, and beholds the Intents
and Purposes of his Heart; that at the last Day all his most secret Thoughts
shall be exposed to the view of Men and Angels, and wrote in such legible
Characters, that the whole World may read them. To both these add this
Consideration; consider what has been the Event of harboring evil Thoughts in
our Minds, what the issue has been, and in all Likelihood will be? Did not all
the presumptuous Sins you ever committed in your Lifetime, begin in your
Heart? were they not forged and contrived there? And how can you tell, but that
the Allowance of one wicked Thought, may be the Rise of the most villainous Act?
No Man was ever wicked all of a sudden. The Sinner at first is timorous and
bashful, and goes on by Degrees, till at last he arrives at the highest Pitch
of hardness, and Impenitency. Many a Man there is, who thinks it can be no
heinous Offense to cast a covetous Eye on other Men's Goods, or a wanton Look on
his Neighbors Wife; and yet whosoever does not restrain these evil Affections
of his Mind, will soon lie under an unavoidable Temptation, to commit the
grosser Acts of Theft and Adultery; for if we allow our selves in the lighter
Breaches of our Duty, we shall soon come to think every Sin to be so, and
wicked Thoughts harbored and encouraged, will produce wicked Actions. Had
David at first suppressed his lustful Thoughts after the Wife of Vriah, he had
never added the Murder of the Husband to Adultery with the Wife; but when once
he gave way to sinful Thoughts, this Man after God's own Heart, this holy
Prophet, as well as great King was born down the Stream of his vicious
Inclinations, and committed the vilest Acts of the most presumptuous Sins.
Consider therefore with thy self, that though a vain and wicked Thought is a
Sin of Infirmity, when it enters into our Mind, without our Consent and
Approbation, yet we shall very much increase the Guilt, when we allow our
selves in it, and it may prove very dangerous to our eternal Welfare.

4. If sinful Thoughts still press into our Minds, divert them to some holy
Meditation, and take this hint of bending your Thoughts to the contrary Duty.
Thus if you are tempted to plot and contrive the Commission of any Sin, make
this the Occasion of fortifying, and strengthening your Resolutions against the
Commission of that very Sin; of considering its evil Nature, and dangerous
Consequences, and hereby increase your Hatred and Detestation of it. Are the
sinful Pleasures which you have formerly enjoyed, represented to your Fancy?
Let the Remembrance of them renew your Sorrow and Repentance, for your
disobedience to God's Law, and the Breach of his Commandments, and put you upon
begging God's Grace and Assistance, that for the time to come, you may live
more uprightly, and unblameably. Are you perplexed and troubled with
blasphemous and Atheistical Thoughts? Fall presently on the Contemplation of
the wonderful Works, which he has made, and the curious Operations of his
hands, consider this stupendous Fabric of the World, the infinite Variety,
and yet exact Order, and due Subordination of Beings contained in it; ask thy
self, what Power it was which first created it, and still continues to preserve
it, which has furnished irrational Creatures with unerring Instincts, that
teaches the Bird to build its Nest, the Spider to weave its Web; look into the
curious Frame and Composition of that lesser World thy own Body, Psalm. 139.14.
and behold there, how fearfully and wonderfully thou art made. And by such
Contemplations as these affect thy Mind with a humble Awe and devout Reverence
of God's Power and Majesty. Are you tempted to Envy the Prosperity of your
Neighbor? Consider how many Gifts of God's Bounty you have received, how much
you enjoy more than you deserve, and how unthankful and ungrateful you have
been for those good things, God has already given into your hands. Are you
given to lustful Thoughts? Turn this strange Fire into a Holy Zeal for God's
Glory. Do presumptuous Thoughts rise up in your Heart? Consider your former
Sins, and repeated Provocations against God, and take occasion from hence to
exercise your Humility. Are you overwhelmed with Despair? Call to mind God's
gracious Promises, and admire his infinite Goodness, who has given his only
begotten Son, and sent him into the World on Purpose to atone for your Sins,
and to accomplish the great Work of your Salvation, and still makes you the
Proffers of Pardon and Forgiveness; by such Meditations as these, you will
imitate your heavenly Father, in drawing Good out of Evil, and make the
Temptations of the Devil, the occasion of promoting your eternal Welfare. Nay,
if you thus resist the Devil he will flee from you, James 4.7.
his Assaults will be neither so frequent, nor so furious, when he finds they
serve only to exercise your Graces, and make you more watchful.

5. Season thy Heart every Morning with some Holy Meditation, Dedicate the
First Fruits of thy Thoughts unto God. How precious are thy Thoughts unto me O
God (says the Psalmist) how great is the sum of them? Psalm. 139.17, 18.
If I should count them, they are more in number than the Sand: When I wake I
am still with thee. The constant and serious Meditation, on those great Motives
to a Holy Life; the Example of our Blessed Savior, the Torments of Hell, the
Joys of Heaven, the certainty of Death, the Terrors of Judgment, if made the
Subject of our Morning Meditations, would be a Spring and Source of good
Thoughts all the day long, and produce in our Minds, suitable Desires and
Affections; and to this End let us constantly read some Portion of the Holy
Scripture, This will be a Lamp to our feet, Psalm. 119.115.
and a light to our Paths; it will both inform our Judgments, what we ought to
do, and incline us to walk in the Way of God's Commandments.

6. And lastly, Let us beseech Almighty God that he would give us his Grace,
and enable us with the Assistance of his Holy Spirit, to Keep our Hearts, and
govern our Desires and Affections. And though this Duty is too difficult to be
performed by our own Strength, yet we may be assured, that God will enable us
to go through with it, because he requires nothing of us, which is not in our
Power to perform. He has promised, Isa. 42.3.
That he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, but
that he will encourage every Effort that we make toward a good and virtuous
Life. His Grace was never denied to any one, who did but sincerely desire it,
and endeavor to render himself capable of receiving of it, Luke 6.38.
To him that asks it shall be given, not only what he prays for, but also the
larger Effusions of his Holy Spirit, he often prevents our Prayers, and is more
ready to give, than we are either to desire or receive.

And now what remains, but that we being furnished with these Helps, and
assured of the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, immediately set upon the
Practice of this Duty; and endeavor with all Care and Diligence imaginable, to
keep a strict Watch over the Thoughts and Affections of our Hearts. It Is true,
this cannot be performed without much Pains and Industry, but what Design which
is either great and glorious, useful and honorable, can be compassed without
Labor; and yet we have this Encouragement, that every day will make it more
easy, the greatest Hardship is in the beginning: But when we have accustomed
our selves to pious and devout Meditations, they will become more delightful to
us, than the most voluptuous and sensual Imaginations. We shall take more
Pleasure in meditating on God's Word, and contemplating those Joys which are at
God's right hand, and will be the Lot and Portion of the Blessed in Glory, than
we could do in an earthly Paradise. Certainly there can be no greater Happiness
on this side Heaven, than that which the pious and devout Soul enjoys, when he
is enflamed with Zeal, and transported with Devotion, when with St. Paul he is
as it were caught up into Heaven, on the Wings of Contemplation, and receives
the earnest of the Beatifical Vision. These are Joys beyond the Ken of a
sensual Mind, and the peculiar Rewards of those Persons, who have prepared
themselves, and rendered their Hearts capable of receiving them, by cleansing
them of all sinful and impure Lusts, and decking and adorning them with Holy
Affections and Desires. With these Men the Holy Spirit will take up his abode,
and where he dwells there must needs be Love, and Peace, and Joy unexpressible:
This is the most Blessed Condition we can attain to in this Life, and the
surest Mark and Token, that we shall be eternally Happy hereafter.

SERMON X.
MATTHEW. VII. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would, that Men should do
unto you, do ye so unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.


COMMENTATORS put their Invention upon the Rack, to find out a Connection
between these Words, and those which went before. The word (therefore) seems to
denote that they are an Inference drawn from preceding Premises. Some there
are, who think that they bear a Relation to those Precepts, in the fifth
Chapter of this Gospel, and the beginning of this, which treat of the Love of
our Neighbor: Others are of Opinion, that they relate only to the seventh and
following Verses of this Chapter, in which our Savior teaches us how we ought
to Pray, and then (as they think) presently adds a Rule for the Government of
our Actions; hereby intimating to us, That our Prayers and Endeavors ought to
go hand in hand, and that when we pray to God for those things we want, we
ought to make use of the Means which God has appointed for the obtaining them.
This is certainly true, and affords us matter of wholesome Advice, but upon
reading the Chapter we shall find, that this Connection seems to be rather
strained and extorted from the Text, than the natural Design of the inspired
Penman; and therefore I shall rather look upon these Words as an entire
Proposition, containing matter of Advice, how we should behave our selves
toward our Neighbor: And the rather because it is observed that this Particle
(therefore) is often redundant, and serves only to pass from one Subject to
another, and in the Syriack Version, it is wholly omitted. As to the Occasion of
these words, it is highly probable, that they were designed to oppose the gross
Mistake of the Scribes and Pharisees, who doated so much on the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Jewish Law, as to prefer them before the Works of Justice,
and Mercy, as may plainly be gathered from the thirteenth Chapter of St.
Matthew, the twenty third and twenty fourth Verses. And therefore we find the
Prophets so earnest in exhorting them to Works of Justice and Mercy, proving
that these are the great Lines of our Duty, Isa. 1.11.
and that in Comparison with these, the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law were of
little value or worth. Amos 5.22.
And the same Design is carried on by our Savior in the Text; he endeavors to
take them off from being too nice and superstitious in the Observance of the
Ceremonial part of the Jewish Law, and to engage them in the pursuit after real
Holiness, and the Practice of the Moral Precepts of Religion. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye so unto them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets.

In my Discourse upon these Words, I shall Consider,

I. The Meaning and Design of this Rule.

II. I shall mark out its Bounds and Limitations.

III. I shall recommend it to your Practice, by showing its Usefulness and
Excellency.

IV. I shall conclude with some few Reflections on what has been said in the
preceding Discourse.

I. As to the Meaning and Design of these words. They are certainly an Appeal
to that first Principle of Self-preservation, which God has implanted in all
animate Beings. Irrational Creatures are guided to it by Instinct (i. e.) the
unerring hand of Divine Providence, but Mankind is directed by Reason, which
teaches them to seek after those things which support their Being, and by
necessary Consequence, which contribute to their Well-being and Happiness in
this World. Now since our Well-being and Happiness in this World does consist
in the Enjoyment of those agreeable Objects, which are presented to our
Appetites and Desires, according to the Rules of right Reason; And since the
same Objects produce the same Inclinations, and Passions in all Men; therefore
from hence will result an unavoidable Obligation of dealing by all Men, as we
our selves would desire to be dealt withal, if we were in their Condition and
they in ours; for since we should necessarily desire such and such things, if
we were in the same Circumstances our Neighbor is in, therefore it is but
reasonable, that we should grant him the same things when in our Power, which
we should expect from him, if he were in our Circumstances, and we in his. This
therefore is an universal Rule of Justice and Equity, and made use of by our
Savior Christ, to supply the Defects of those particular Laws which he has
laid down in his Holy Gospel, that when we are at a loss how to Act (either
because the Action is not determined in the Holy Writ, nor have we any plain
Precept for the performance of it, or when we suspect that our Passions, and
corrupt Inclinations have clapped a bias upon our Reason, or when we would
discover the due measure of our Actions, and with what agreeable Circumstances
they ought to be performed) then we may appeal to this dis-interess'd Judge,
which God has placed in our Bosoms, and demand boldly of our selves; how we
should desire to be dealt with, and what we might reasonably expect, if we were
in the same Condition our Neighbor is in. For the Holy Gospel has not provided
particular Laws of equal extent, with all the Actions of humane Life, nor given
Directions how, and in what manner, and in what measure, every Circumstance of
an Action ought to be performed: If this were attempted we might well say, That
the World it self could not contain the Books which should be written. Joh.
21.25.
And therefore the Gospel only Chalks out to us the great Lines of our Duty, it
commands the Practice of the most necessary Precepts, such as are those which
are enjoined in this and the preceding Chapters, and leaves our Reason to work
out what ought to be done upon particular and casual Emergencies, to direct in
some Cases what is lawful, and in most what is prudent and expedient: And for
our greater Security has laid down some general Rules, which if seriously
considered, and carefully attended to, will be sufficient to direct our Reason
in all its Judgments, and Determinations. Thus in Relation to the Duties of the
first Table which principally concerns the Worship of God, the Holy Gospel
commands us, Joh. 4.24, 24.
To Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, to direct our Addresses to God alone,
through one Mediator our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and several other
particular Precepts it gives us, as to the necessary and Essential parts of
Divine Worship. But our Directions how to behave our selves as to the
Circumstances of Worship, are all referred to this general Rule. 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order: And thus in Relation to the
Duties of the second Table, which concern our Neighbor; our Savior has laid
down many excellent Precepts, in this admirable, though short Epitome of
Morality, his Sermon on the Mount, and then Closes all with this Rule of
universal Influence, Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye so
unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

The End and Design then of this Rule, is to teach us how to behave our selves
toward our Neighbor, which is the most difficult and most neglected part of
our Duty. For we are generally so much biased by Self-Love, that when any
Controversy is started, in which our own Interest is concerned, we are very
nice and exact in Claiming what belongs to us, and is our due; but when the
Scales are turned, and it is our Duty to weigh and consider, what our Neighbor
may justly expect from us, then we make use of false Weights and Measures, and
too often determine directly contrary to the plain Rules of Justice and
Honesty. We are not so apt Scholars in learning this Lesson of Charity, as we
are severe Masters in exacting it from others. And therefore,

II. I shall mark out the Bounds and Limitations of this Rule, and consider the
just extent and Latitude of these words. Whatsoever ye would, etc.

1. It Is evident, that this Rule is determined to the Duties of the second
Table; for so it is limited in the very words of the Text. It Is whatsoever ye
would, that Men should do unto you, etc. Some there are indeed, who would have
this Rule extend also to the Duties of the first Table, and to be the measure
of our Duty toward God, but this without the support of any good Reason; for
though Religion may properly be said to be Justice toward God; because all the
Service which we owe, and are able to pay unto God, is highly just and
reasonable, and what is but our bounden Duty and Service; yet the distance is
so great between an infinitely perfect Being, and us Poor, vile Worms, His
Works are so wonderful, and his ways past finding out, that it is utterly
impossible, and 'twould be the highest Presumption for us, to weigh our Actions
in the same Balance with his. These words are therefore limited to the Duties
of the second Table, as may be plainly made out from that parallel Place, where
our Blessed Savior being asked this Question, Matt. 22.3.
Master which is the great Commandment of the Law? Returns this Answer, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and
with all thy Mind, and this is the first and great Commandment, and the second
is like unto it, Namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: And then
adds, on these two hang all the Law and the Prophets. Where we may see that
this Rule is made to be the Sum and Substance only of the second Table.

2. This Rule is determined to those things which tend to the benefit and
advantage of our Neighbor. And therefore St. Austin reads the Words,
Quaecunque bona, etc. Whatsoever good things ye would that Men should do unto
you, do ye so to them. For there are some Men of such envious and malicious
Tempers, that they would willingly undergo any severity themselves, on
Condition that their Enemy might endure the same; and suffer their own Houses
to be burnt, that his might perish in the Flames; nay, lose one of their own
Eyes, that he might be deprived of the like Advantage. Like the pretended
Mother of the living Child, would say; 1 Kin. 3.26.
Let neither of us have it, but let it be divided. Others there are of so proud
and churlish a Disposition, that they scorn to be obliged, and had rather be
without a Benefit, than to be beholding for it to one they hate: Such a Man as
this would sooner die than owe his Life to an Enemy, and in regard to these Men
this Rule must be understood thus.

3. Whatsoever ye would that any Man (not this or, that particular Person)
should do unto you, do ye so unto them.

4. If we would put the Case right, we must suppose the Circumstances to be the
same between our Neighbor and our selves. For one different Circumstance will
very much alter the Nature of an Action, thus upon Supposition, that I am
stronger, and more healthy than my Neighbor, I may be willing that he may do
some things to me, which if I should do the same to him, would tend very much
to his Prejudice and Disadvantage. A rich and wealthy Man may be willing, that
others should withold their hands from doing him good, that he might have the
same Excuse, to deny his charitable Relief to the Poor. Nay, mere difference in
Opinion may make it unreasonable, that I should desire some things of such a
Man, which he might very reasonably demand of me, and I should readily comply
with.

5. We must take Care in applying this Rule, that our Desires be restrained to
those things, which we have just and reasonable cause to expect from our
Neighbor, and then this Rule will run thus. Whatsoever ye have just and
reasonable cause to desire that any Man in the same Circumstances should do
unto you, do ye so unto them. For every Malefactor, who is Sentenced to
Punishment for his Evil Deeds, would willingly have his Punishment remitted,
and the Judge himself would desire it, if he was in the same Circumstances and
a Criminal at the Bar: But yet it is not just and reasonable, that all
Criminals should be pardoned, for this would make the Law it self u^eless, by
relaxing the co-ercive Power of it, and render Magistrates cheap and
contemptible, when they are no longer ble to be a Terror to evil Doers, Romans
13.3.
but only Encouragers of those who do well.

These are the most considerable Limitations which Casuists have affixed to
this Rule, to which all the rest may easily be referred; which being duly
understood, and considerd and will prepare my way,

III. To incite and encourage you, to the Practice of this Rule; by showing the
Excellency, and Usefulness of it, in all the different Emergencies of Life. And,

1. It Is a Rule plain, and easy to be understood. A Rule which lies Level to
every Capacity, the most plain and ignorant Person may comprehend it, and yet
it is worthy the Study and Observance of the Wise and Learned, there is no need
of turning over huge Volumes, of Learning the Languages, Customs, and Manners
of other Nations, every one that will but look into his own Conscience, will
find this Rule engraven there. Other Laws are perplexed with innumerable
Difficulties, spun out into nice and curious Questions, and depend much upon
Customs, and Usages in the Practice of them, so that it requires much Study and
Pains to attain to any competent measure of Knowledge in them; but this is as
soon learned as comprehended, and as soon comprehended as seriously considered;
it requires nothing, but an ordinary Application to understand it, and an
honest heart to put it in Practice.

2. It Is a most just and reasonable Rule. Isocrat. ad Ni^oclem. Diogenes
Laertius, l. 5. p. 313. Dion Cassiu^, l. 52 492, 493.
'Twas esteemed so both by Jews and Heathens, before the coming of our Savior;
they collected this Rule from the Principles of Reason, and laid it down for an
undoubted Axiom, and unquestionable Truth. It Is true, that it is not found in
express Words, in the Canonical Books of the Old Testament, but yet it was
certainly known to the Jews, Levit. 19.18. Deuteronomy. 16, 11, 12. Psalm. 7.4.
both because we may find there many Precepts of the same Import, and in the
Apocryphal Book of Tobit, an Expression very near of kin to it, Do that to no
Man which thou hate. The Emperor Severus (who had these words frequently in
his Mouth, and was so taken with them, that he ordered them to be wrote in his
Courts of Judicature) is said to have had them from the Jews and Christians, of
whom he entertained a more favorable Opinion, merely on this Account. But not
to depend solely on Authority, it is plain, that this Rule is sounded upon that
first Principle of self Preservation: For since every Man desires to preserve
himself in being, and to live as easy and comfortably as he can; we cannot
reasonably expect that other Men should part with those good things we stand in
need of, unless we give our helping hand to supply their Wants. For though Men
are placed in different Ranks and Stations in this World, yet do they naturally
depend one upon another, and mutually contribute to the Weal of the Community,
the one cannot say to the other, I have no need of thee; but the Poor is as
useful to the Rich, as the Rich is beneficial to the Poor: And therefore, it is
highly reasonable, that every Man should endeavor to be as useful, and
assistant to others, as he expects they should be to him. For what Reason have
I to expect that another Man should contribute to my Happiness, but upon such
Grounds and Principles, as make it equally as reasonable, and necessary for me
to contribute to his? What Privilege, or Prerogative can any one Man imagine
himself, to have above the rest of the World, that all Men should agree
together to make him Happy, without any respect to their own Interest and
Welfare? Can we imagine any Man to be more concerned for another Man's
satisfaction than his own? Or to be better pleased in making another Man happy,
than to be so himself? Since therefore every Man does in the first place,
desire and seek after the Preservation of his own Being, and then endeavor to
keep himself in as easy and agreeable a Condition as possibly he can, and
since this cannot be effected without a mutual Participation of those good
things which other Men are possessed of; it evidently follows, that the way to
induce them to part with those good things which would be useful to us, is
reciprocally to contribute to the supply of their Necessities; and the most
just and equitable Rule of governing our Actions toward them, is placing our
selves in their stead, and considering what we should reasonably expect from
them, if we were in the same Wants, and under the same Circumstances.

3. It Is a Rule of universal Influence. A Rule which will serve at all Times,
and for all sorts and degrees of Persons, and may be applied to all Exigences,
and will reach all sorts of Cases depending between us and our Neighbor. It Is
a Rule which will serve the Peasant, Episcop. Institut. Theol. p. 249.
as well as the Prince, and obliges the Prince, as well as the poorest Subject.
It teaches Inferiors to pay Respect and Submission to those who are in a
higher Station, because they do expect it from those who are below them; it
teaches Superiors to be kind, and beneficent to their Inferiors, and to
afford them seasonable Help, Counsel, and Relief, because they look for these
good Turns, from those who are above them; and it engages every one to be kind
and faithful to his Equals, that hereby he may purchase their Love and Fidelity
toward him; it engages Magistrates to distribute Justice impartially, because
they would think it their due, to be protected both in their Life and Estate,
and would be desirous, to be secured from all Wrong and Violence, if they were
private Men. Nay, this Rule will not only teach us to give every one his due,
because we do expect to receive our due from others, which is strict Justice:
But hereby every Man may Erect a Court of Chancery in his own Breast, and
consider when, and how it comes to pass, that strict and rigid Justice becomes
the highest Injustice; when we ought to proceed according to the Letter of the
Law, and when, and in what Cases it allows of some Mitigation and Relief: In
short, there is hardly any Case in which we are doubtful, how to behave our
self toward our Neighbor, in which we may not be directed by the Application
of this excellent Rule.

4. This is a Rule by which we shall be Judged both here and hereafter. Matt.
7.2.
For with what Judgment we judge, we shall be judged; and with what measure we
mete, it shall be measured to us again. That which induced the Heathens to
observe this Rule, was an awe and dread, that the future Event of their
Actions, should be agreeable with their present Dealings with other Men. And in
truth we have many remarkable Instances, both in Sacred and profane Authors,
of God's dealing with Men according to their Works, and inflicting such
Punishments on them in this World, as exactly square with their Offenses; and
hereby as it were pointing out to others, that this was the very Cause why they
were inflicted. When we read that Haman was hanged on the very same Gallows,
that he caused to be Erected for poor Mordecai, that Adonibezek (who cut off
the Thumbs and Great Toes of Threescore and ten Kings, and forced them to
gather up the Crumbs under his Table) had the same Calamity inflicted on him,
Judge. 1.7.
we have good Reason to believe, that the Reflection he made was true. As I
have done, so has the Lord requited me; we cannot but take notice that God's
Justice bears pace with these Men's Sins, and that they received the just
demerit of their Offenses: But where Justice is slow-paced, and does not seize
the Sinner in this Life, it will certainly overtake him at the last, and at the
great Day of Account, when we shall all stand before God's Tribunal, the chief
Enquiry shall be made; how well we have observed this Rule, whether we have
been Conversant in works of Justice and Mercy, in feeding the hungry, clothing
the naked, Matt. 25.36.
comforting the afflicted, etc. and such as our Behavior has been, such will
our Sentence be.

Thus I have endeavored to recommend this excellent Rule laid down in the Text
to your Practice, because it is the most plain and easy Rule, highly just and
reasonable, of universal Use, and suited to all Conditions and Circumstances,
of Humane Life, and the Rule we shall be judged by, both here and hereafter. I
come,

IV. And Lastly to conclude, with some few Reflections on the preceding
Discourse. And,

1. I shall take notice, That the Way to do good to our selves, is to do good
to others. For since we are all the Members of one Body, of which Christ is the
Head, whatsoever one Member enjoys, the other Members partake of the Benefit.
Every good Deed which we perform is an Addition to the common Treasury, in
which every one has a share and interest: And the more Good any Man does, the
stronger Claim he has to the help and assistance, Love and Friendship, of other
Men. A truly good and beneficent Man, is a Benefactor to all Mankind; because
his Love extends to all, though he has not always an Opportunity, or Ability of
exerting it; and this Divine Quality has such endearing Charms, that it must
needs attract the Love and Friendship of others, the Benefits which he bestows
enrich him, and return into his own Bosom: So that the words of the Text will
be found true even in this Sense; that the way to make our selves Masters of
the Affections of other Men, and to secure to our selves their Help and
Assistance in a time of need, or to obtain from them those things we desire, is
to make our selves as useful and beneficial to them, as our Circumstances will
permit. Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye so unto them,
etc. From whence we may infer,

2. That no Pretense of any Injury received, can be a reasonable Cause for our
returning it; or for our doing Evil to other Men. Their unjust Dealings with
us, ought to be no Standard, nor will they be any reasonable Excuse, for our
Dealing with them after the same manner; for it is not whatsoever Men have done
to you: But whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you. Now there is no
Man would willingly receive any Injury either in his Body, Goods, or
Reputation; and therefore he ought to be careful, that he does none to other
Men: And if he does receive any Prejudice from them, to take Care that he is
not provoked to resent it so far, as to be Guilty of a more heinous Crime, by
returning of it. For to return an Injury, renders a Man more blameable, than at
first to inflict one: For he that does an Injury to another Man, does not
consider of what pernicious Consequence his injurious Action is, he does it
rashly and unadvisedly, he is blinded with Passion, and though he Wills the
Action, yet probably he may disown the ill Effects which it produces: But he
that returns an Injury, does not only sin knowingly, and deliberately, but
wilfully and obstinately, in opposition to his own Sense and Feeling, he
plainly perceives all the evil Consequences of the Action, he is sensible of
them, and has smarted under them, and yet he goes on maliciously to execute his
Revenge. It Is therefore our unquestionable Duty, either to pass by Injuries,
and take no Notice of them if small and inconsiderable, or generously to
forgive them, and by heaping Coals of kindness upon the Heads of our Enemies,
endeavor to melt them down into Love and Friendship; unless in some particular
Cases, where some Circumstances render it more advisable, to remit them to the
Umpiridge of the Law.

3. From hence we may infer of what vast Importance it is, that this Rule
should be seriously considered, and Conscientiously practiced. For as on the
one hand it is plain, that the greatest part of those Mischiefs which happen,
either to Communities, or to private Persons, do in a great measure proceed
from our neglect of this Rule: So on the other it is as evident, that a careful
Observation of it, would wonderfully conduce to their Weal, and flourishing
Condition. With respect to Communities it is evident, That were Men once let
loose from the Obligation of this Rule, the World would be filled with
Bloodshed, Rapine, and Oppression; every one would seize on what best pleased
him, and the strongest Arm would have the greatest share: But since every one
is desirous to retain, and enjoy those good things which he does possess, hence
it is that he finds it necessary to join with others for their mutual defense.
Not but that Man is naturally a Political Creature, and takes delight in the
mutual Society, and converse of reasonable Beings like himself; and therefore
Mankind would have formed themselves into Societies, though the World had
continued in its Original Innocence, and Violence and Oppression had never
entered into it: But yet since the Fall, our Natures are so depraved, and we
have degenerated so far from that noble Rank of Beings, in which we were
placed, that had not Men some Awe of this Rule upon their Minds, there would be
no possibility of living in the World: And if it is necessary to the Essence of
Government, much more to its Well-being; for do not all our mutual
Correspondence, and friendly Converse depend on the Practice of those Virtues,
which naturally result from the Observance of this Rule; such as are Veracity
in our Words, Faithfulness to our Trust, Justice in our Dealings, and the like.
And thus as to the Concerns of particular Persons, is it not obvious that this
Rule when duly observed, directly tends to root out all Envy, Passion, and
Malice from the Hearts of Men; to take away the Causes of Differences, and
Animosities, and to promote Peace and Quietness, and a good Understanding
between Neighbors and Acquaintance? would it not be effectual to secure us
against Fraud, Oppression, and Injustice? Would it not beget Comfort and
Satisfaction in our Minds, and prove of wonderful Force and Efficacy, to
support us under all the Troubles and Afflictions, which can possibly befall us
in this Vale of Tears?

Many are the Benefits which would flow from a due and conscientious Observance
of this Rule, only to name them would take up more time than I have now left,
and therefore I shall remit this Subject to your private Meditations, though
the best way to Frame an adequate Notion of them, would be to put this Rule in
Practice.

4. Let us admire the infinite Goodness of God, who is pleased to govern us by
such Laws, as are highly just and reasonable, and tend to promote our
Happiness, both in this World, and the next. He does not impose on us such
Arbitrary Commands, as carry with them no Reason why they should be obeyed, but
only the Will of the Imposer; but the Essential Goodness of his Nature inclines
him, to give us such Laws, as ennoble our Natures, and make us more like
himself, and more capable of that Happiness, which he has prepared for us, as
the Reward of our Obedience. He first places in us a natural Instinct to Love
and preserve our selves, and then makes this both the Measure and Motive of
loving others: So plain and evident is it, that God designs the Good and
Welfare of his Creatures, because he makes their Desires, the Measures of their
Duty; and his Commands are agreeable to their natural Inclinations.

5. And Lastly, how unexcusable shall we be left, if we do not live in the
Observance of this excellent Rule. For had God laid a more weighty Burden upon
us, had he commanded us all those numerous Observances, which the Jews under
the Law were obliged to perform; A yoke which they were not able to bear: Or
all those Mortifications, and that Austere way of Living, which some poor
Mistaken Christians impose upon themselves; yet we should have had Inducements
sufficient to perform all this: Heaven and eternal Happiness would have made
amends for the hardest usage we could have undergone in this World: But when
God has laid upon our Shoulders, so good and gracious a Yoke, such Just
reasonable and equitable Commands, so agreeable to our Natures, and so much for
our Interest; what can we say for our selves? What Excuse can we make, if we do
not comply with them? Can any thing be more reasonable, than to do by others as
we would have others do by us? And yet the Observance of this Rule, comprehends
the chiefest part of our Duty. Even those who are most backward in the
performance of it themselves, yet are generally very rigid in exacting it from
others: There is no Man but would willingly be comforted in a time of Trouble,
protected in a time of Danger and Calamity, relieved in a time of Want and
Sickness, though he neglects the performance of these Duties toward his
Neighbor. What Answer then shall we make at the great Day of Account, when an
Inquiry shall be made, whether we have visited the Sick, fed the Hungry, or
clothed the Naked, and relieved the Prisoner, and in short, whether we have
done Justice and loved Mercy? How dreadful will that Sentence be which shall
pass upon those Men, who have neglected these Duties? And if those Persons
shall be condemned, who have neglected them, who have barely omitted the
performance of them, where shall those Men appear, who have practiced the quite
contrary? Who have oppressed the Poor and Needy, circumvented and defrauded
their Neighbor, and have went on during the whole Course of their Lives; in
Acts of Injustice, Oppression, Extortion; contrary to the Checks of their
Consciences, and the known Rules of their Duty? Certainly God will pour out the
full Vials of his Wrath upon these Men, and give them their Portion with
Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

God grant that we may not be Partakers in their Guilt, and then we shall not
undergo the same Punishment: but that by a conscientious Observance of this
Rule, of doing by others, as we our selves would desire to be done unto; we may
obtain the end of our Hopes, and the Fruit of our Obedience; the Salvation of
our Souls.

FINIS.
THE Reader is desired to Correct these following Errata's with his Pen.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 2. r. Man. p. 10. l. ult. r. Virtuous. p. 20. l. 22. r. which. p.
27. l. 21. r. it were. p. 60. l. 18. r. recount. p. 89. l. 21. r. grateful. p.
92. l. 18. r. let out. p. 104. l. 3. r. Chapel. p. 245. l. penult. r. writ.

Besides some literal Faults which are easy to be (...) ended by the Eye.


