A TREATISE OF THE TRUE and ANCIENT JURISDICTION OF THE House of Peers.

By Sir ROBERT ATKYNS, Knight of the BATH.

State super Semitas antiquas.
LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCIX.

To the Honorable The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
in Parliament Assembled. The Humble Petition of Sir Robert Atkyns Knight of the
Bath,
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioner, in the several Public Employments he has undergone,
has had more than ordinary occasion of observing the increasing Jurisdiction
of the Courts of Equity in this Kingdom, and how the Common Law (the Birthright
of every Englishman) has been, and still is every day more and more invaded by
it.

He has taken the pains to collect many of those continual complaints from
time to time made by the Commons of England in Parliament, against the Exercise
of that New Jurisdiction in the very beginning of it.

And your Petitioner has great reason also, to take notice of the Exercise of
the Jurisdiction of Appeals from the Proceedings of those Courts: And humbly
presents this Honorable House with what he has collected, in order to your
Service therein.

Your Petitioner craves leave to make use of that freedom which belongs to
every Englishman, to tender you a Complaint against so public and spreading a
Grievance.

He does not Appeal, nor complain of any thing that merely concerns himself: He
only subjoins a Case wherein himself was a Party, merely as an Instance of the
large Exercise of a power against the known and fundamental Rules of the
Common Law, as he conceives.

That Case of your Petitioner happened very lately in the Chancery; But it is
generally known in the Courts of Westminster Hall, That as your Petitioner had
occasion, he has for many years frequently and publicly in his Station
enveigh'd against the Encroachments of Courts of Equity, and that late course
of Appeals.

But on the behalf of the whole Kingdom he humbly offers his Service, and lays
before You what he has observed and collected upon this Subject, after near
Threescore years Experience.

And submits All to your Wisdom, to proceed in providing Just Remedies.

And your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc. Robert Atkyns.

OF THE Supreme Jurisdiction IN THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND.
THE House of Lords have a very Ancient and Transcendent Jurisdiction; but it
is not Absolute nor Arbitrary in the Exercise of it, nor Universal; and in all
Cases it is a Power Limited by Law, and must be Exercised according to the
known Rules of Law.

And though the Peers are very Great and Honorable, yet they are but Men, and
not Infallible; and therefore a Writ of Error lies upon their Judgments: And
the Law allows that liberty to the meanest Subject, to demur to the
Jurisdiction of any Court whatsoever, even that of the House of Lords.

Let us Enquire into their Jurisdiction, when it began, and in what Cases they
have a Right to it.

An Eminent Author, supposed to be the Late Lord Hollis, upon occasion of the
great Cause between Skinner and the East-India-Company, (so much disputed
between the Two Houses of Parliament) has in Print Asserted.

That the House of Peers has their Right of Judicature from the beginning of
the Nation, Page 134.

He affirms it is a Power Lodged in them by the very Frame and Constitution of
the Government.

As to the Extent of their Jurisdiction, Page 213. he affirms, That they have
an undoubted Right to an Universal and Unlimited Power of taking Conusance of
all manner of Causes of what nature soever; and of Judging and Determining of
them, if no particular Law do otherwise dispose of them. Nec Metas rerum, nec
tempora ponit.


The first of these seems to Entrench very far upon the Regal Power. He not
only makes their Power equal in time to it, owning no Derivation from it, but
in effect Claims a Co-ordination with it: But the Claim of such an Independent
and Original Power, sounds like that which is taken to be a peculiar of the
Supreme Power, as to the Administration of it, viz. In all Causes, and over all
Persons, etc. Nay, he holds that the Peerage sets bounds both to Power and
Liberty, Page 71. as this Author maintains it. It may easily be understood (by
what follows) what is meant there by (Power) viz. The Regal Administration of
it. Whereas the Common Law of England, and all the Authors and Writers of it,
do with one Consent acknowledge, Jurisdictions within this Realm are derived
from the Crown. And that no Court has an Absolute and Unlimited Power, save
the Supreme Court of the Nation, consisting of the King, Lords, and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, and in them indeed is the True Supreme Power under
God. But that, according to the different nature of Causes, some are
distributed into one Court, and some into another: But not any one Court has
Jurisdiction in all Causes, save that of the Parliament.

And that all Courts must proceed by some certain known Rules, that is, the
Courts of the Common Law, Secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae; And Courts
of Equity, according to the ancient and constant Precedents, and Usage.

But this Court of Peers (for I confine my self still to what is asserted by
this Noble Author) does wholly exclude the King, and ingross all to themselves?
No, by no means. He allows the King a single Voice among them, Page 145. as a
Chief Justice in another Court, whose Voice or Opinion has no more force than
that of a Puisny Judge. No, not so much as a Casting-Voice, where they are
equally divided.

I shall offer to Consideration upon what grounds and proofs this Noble Author
does Entitle the House of Peers to this Unlimited Jurisdiction.

He has been led into these Opinions, I fear, by some late over-zealous and
injudicious Writers, who, out of a too fond and forward Zeal to depress the
House of Commons, in the late Exorbitant Power which they took upon them in the
late Times, in order (I say) to the decrying of their Usurped Power; those
Writers thought they could never sufficiently Exalt the Power of the Lords, to
overbalance that of the Commons.

And it may perhaps be useful (by the way) to take notice of the strange
Revolution that in the late Times happened to the Government of this Nation.

1. Our Kings began first to strain Prerogative too high upon the Subject.

2. Both the Houses of Parliament thereupon joined together in Usurping upon
the Regal Power.

3. After some short time the late House of Commons, by the help of their Army,
laid aside the House of Lords. (Sic cum sole, perit Syderibus decor.)


4. After some time again a lesser part of the House of Commons exclude the
greater part.

5. And these their own Army overtop, as being but the Fragment of that House.

1. -- Sic Medus ademit 2. Assyrio: Medoque tulit moderamina, Perses* 3. Persen
subjecit Macedo, Cessurus and Ipse 4. Romano.
These Modern Writers, who are such earnest Advocates for the House of Peers,
ascribe to the Lords all that vast Power and Jurisdiction, which they read in
our Ancient Histories to be exercised by the National Assemblies in the Times
of the old British, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings.

Thus Writes Mr. William Pryn, in his Plea for the Lords and House of Peers,
Page 164. That the House of Peers had this Sovereign Jurisdiction vested in it
both in the Times of the British, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings; and other
Modern Writers Chyme in with him.

Whereas it is most Evident by our more Ancient and most Judicious Authors, and
Antiquaries, That the great Assemblies which were convened in Ancient Times
here in England, were quite of another Constitution and Complexion from the now
Two Houses of Parliament, and had no resemblance to them.

It was in those Ancient Times but one great and numerous Assembly that met:
Not distinguished either by those several Terms of Lords and Commons; or by Two
Houses, the Upper and the Lower, nor by any other dividing Titles.

Those great Assemblies had under our several Kings, and together with them,
the whole Legislative, and Judicial Power, with little distinction to be found
in the Exercise of those Two mighty Powers. The Members of them were not
qualified neither by any Title of Honor, (though there might be honorary
Titles in those Times) but they were qualified and entitled to their Power by
their Possessions and Tenures, and some few by certain great Offices.

This great Assembly could not properly be called The Representative of the
Nation, (for they came not all to these Assemblies as chosen by the People) but
most of them came thither in their own Personal inherent Right, and might more
justly be called, the Principals of the Nation, and looked upon as the true
Owners and Proprietors of the Nation, accounting the Land-Interest to be the
main, and the true, and stable Interest, and might therefore truly be termed,
The Nation it self Assembled, or the People Assembled.

It was the Land-Interest then that gave both Honor and Power. Dat Census
Honores; yet it cannot be denied, but that the Ancient Boroughs did Elect their
Representatives, even in the most Ancient Times, who were at first a small part
of these great Assemblies; though now much more numerous, and weigh down the
balance; and this is proved to have been long before the Time of King Henry
the Third, though those late Writers date it from that time only.

It would be folly to undertake to give any clear or large account of the
Supreme Judicatures that were in the Times of the Ancient Brittons, Saxons, or
Danes, which many of our late Writers pretend to do.

For Tacitus in the Life of Agricola tells us of the old Brittons, that at the
time of the coming of the Romans into this Land, they did not so much as in
Commune Consulere; that is, they had no Common Council, nor did they meet
together to Consult how to repel their common danger; but were divided into a
multitude of Feuds and Factions, under their Reguli or pretty Princes.

Rarus duabus tribusve Civitatibus ad propulsandum Commune periculum Conventus.

After the Britons were wholly subdued by the Romans, they received Law and
Magistracy from their Conquerors. Net legibus suis patriis uti permissi sunt
(though it is impli'd, that they had Laws of their own) Sed Magistratus a
populo Romano cum Imperio and securibus missi, qui jus dicerent, says Learned
Cambden in his Britannia Page 48. for which he cites his Authors.

The Saxons, who succeeded the Romans, divided the Nation into Seven parts, and
Constituted the Heptarchy. It were in vain to search for an House of Lords, or
any one Supreme Judicature all that time for all the Nation.

The Supreme Judicature in those times must be Seven in number, if any; for the
Seven were Independent one of the other.

Most part of the State of the Saxon Government is so obscure (says our great
Seldom) that we can see only Steps or torn Relics of them, rather than so much
as might give full satisfaction.

If there be any thing in their times to our purpose, (that is, concerning one
Supreme Court of Judicature, to which the whole Nation was subject) it must
fall toward the latter end of the Saxon Times; After Egbert, King of the
West Saxons, had reduced the other parts of the Heptarchy under his Obedience;
when they did in unum coalescere, and were all seven melted down into one Mass.

And after the several Governments and parts were united, though the Government
was but One, yet there were Three several and distinct Laws remained in force,
which had their several Limits and Precincts. See Lambert, De priscis Anglorum
Legibus, Page 180.

And these were not merely some certain different Customs (for so it is to this
day in our several Counties; as of Gavelkind, and Borough- English, etc. but
they were under Three distinct Systems or Bodies of Laws; so that it could not
be any way practicable during that time, to have any one great Court of
Judicature for the whole Land.

By which of those Three Laws should that great Judicature have proceeded?

But after some time those Three different Bodies of Laws were found
incompatible with one entire Government, as it came to be at last; and
therefore King Edgar (a Saxon King) out of these Three Bodies of Laws, by the
Counsel of his Wise men, Composed one great Body of Law to be observed by the
whole Nation of England. And Edward the Confessor gave new Vigor and Life of
this new Body, which was afterward extracted out of those Three Old Bodies of
Laws, and are indeed the Fountain and Materia prima of that which we now call,
The Common Law of England.

From these we derive our Trials by Twelve Men, our levying of Fines of Lands,
and the Offices of Sheriff, Coroner, Constable, and many more of our Laws,
Customs, and Offices continued amongst us ever since unto this day.

And these are those good Old Laws of King Edward the Confessor, which William
the First (who is styled the Conqueror) did more than once swear to govern by;
which proves him to be indeed no Conqueror. And these make up the greatest part
of Our Magna Charta.

I shall mention some few Precedents, in the time of the Saxons, of their
Supreme Judicature, and examine what resemblance they bear with that used at
present amongst us.

And then I shall give some account of the Supreme Court of Judicature in the
beginning of the Norman Government during the time of their first Six or Seven
Kings; and by the way still examine, how justly any Court now in being, can be
said to derive their Power from them, and to Sit and succeed them in their Seat.

And in the last place, I shall make my Conjecture, how and at what time the
Magnum Concilium in Parliamento, or the House of Peers, first began to exercise
the Supreme Judicature.

And while I run through the Precedents, and cite my Authors, whoever reads
them, may at the same instant make their Observation of these particulars
ensuing, which I conceive will evidently result and arise from them.

1. First, That the Supreme Power of Legislature, and the Supreme Power of
Judicature (which yet are distinct things in themselves; for it is one thing,
jus dare, and another thing, jus dicere) both these high Powers (I say) under
our several Ancient Kings, resided in one and the same Assembly, consistting of
the very same Persons, but with different methods in their way of proceeding,
that is, whoever had an hand in the Legislature, was not excluded from the
Judicature, wherein it differs from our present Constitution; which is, that
the House of Peers, who have but a share in the Legislature, yet now claim to
themselves the sole power of Judicature as the last resort.

2. Secondly, Another thing that I shall observe out of the several Precedents
and Authors that I shall mention, is this, That the great Convention and
Assembly that anciently had these Two great Powers of Legislature and
Judicature, were but one entire great Body and Assembly, not divided into two
or more parts, nor distinguished (as now) into Two Houses, or by the names of
Lords and Commons; but these Powers resided equally in them, Tota in Toto.

3. Thirdly, That all, or the far greatest part of the Members of these great
Assemblies, came not thither by the choice, or at the will and pleasure of the
Prince, as he thought fit to single them out by name, (as Peers are made
usually) nor did they all come by Election or Office, though there were some of
both those sorts, viz. The Bishops, and the Burgesses of the Buroughs: but the
far greatest part came by a certain Right they had to meet in those Assemblies;
but what gave them their Right, or qualification, or capacity, so to meet, does
not so clearly appear to an hasty Reader of our History, and Antiquities.

It is evident, it was not any mere Title of Honor or Dignity; for Anciently
in England there were not any Dignities but what were also accompanied with
Offices, and ceased with the Office.

But it did proceed from their Lands and Posessions: which as they gave them
Honor, so they gave them Power and Authority in those Ancient Times. And this
they learnt from the Romans, whose Example was followed herein by most of those
Nations that had fallen under their Conquest.

4. Fourthly, These Assemblies were very great and numerous, far exceeding in
number both Houses of Parliament at this day (were they both put together) so
that they cannot with any color of Reason be thought an Assembly of Lords
only, (as our Novel Writers would impose upon us;) for it is absurd to think
that so great a number should be all Lords, for then there would be none left
in the Nation to bear the Character of Commons, save only the Plebs, or Faeces
Populi: And the Title or Distinction of Lords cannot subsist, without a body of
some Inferiors, from whom the Lords may be distinguished. Toll Relatum, and
tollis Correlatum.


5. Fifthly, Though the Freeholders of the several Counties did not then (as
now) meet in those Assemblies by their Representatives duly chosen, so that any
Assembly could properly be said to be the Representative of all the Commons of
England, (which is much insisted on by our new fort of Authors, who would decry
and depress the House of Commons, as being but of yesterday, in comparison with
the Antiquity of the House of Lords; that is, but from the Nine and Fortieth
year of King Henry the Third; whereas the Lords have been (as they affirm) from
time immemorial, and co-aeval with the Nation it self; yet (which is more in
Vindication of the Antiquity of the Commons in Parliament) it will appear, that
the Freeholders generally met there themselves, (in the great Assemblies then
used) in their own proper persons, undistinguished by any such Terms of Lords
and Commons and all were upon the same level.

A Representative is but of the Nature of a Deputy, or Delegate, to supply the
place of one that is absent; such as in the House of Lords they call Proxies,
(who sometimes have been such as were no Members of that House) and such as in
the Convocation of the Clergy they called procuratores Cleri.

But the great Freeholders, as being the Principals (rightly called) may more
properly, and in a true genuine sense be styled, The National Assembly. Those
met in their own proper personal Capacity; for the Land-Interest in the hands
of the true Owner (the Freeholder) is the only true, stable, permanent, fixed
Interest of the Nation. The Farmers and Copyholders were at first, and in
Ancient Times looked upon, and accounted, but as Servants and Dependants upon
the Freeholders, and little regarded by the Common Law. And for those that
followed Merchandise, and Trade, though they ever sent to these great
Assemblies by Election, (the Manufacture of Woollen Cloth greatly flourishing
in the Reigns of King Henry the Second, and King Richard the First, which gave
occasion to those Ancient Guilds or Societies that were settled in Lincoln,
York, Oxford, and other Cities, and Ancient Buroughs in England; which Trade
was wholly lost in the troublesome times of King John, Henry the Third, Edward
the First, and Edward the Second: And then our Trade ran in Woolls, Woollfels,
and Leather, carried out in Specie, till recovered again by the peaceable times
of King Edward the Third, as the most Learned in the Law, the late Chief
Justice Hales does assert in his Origination of Mankind;) yet those Ancient
Buroughs were not then so numerous in those Elder times, nor were the Traders
then in so great Esteem, as having to do in Movables only, and a transient
Interest; and as we use to say, Here to day, and gone to morrow, and were
therefore of an Inferior account, and made no great Figure. And it was then a
Legal Disparagement for the Guardian in Chivalry to marry the Ward, being the
Heir of a Freeholder that held by Knights's Service to the Daughter of the
Burgess of a Borough.

6. Sixthly, The last Observation shall be this, That the Freeholders
increasing at last, in their number, by the sub-dividing of their posessions
and tenures, and thereupon growing seditious and tumultuous, and an unwieldly
Body, and less valuable and venerable in their Individuals and particulars,
Mole ruebat sua, they came to be divided, and the greatest part of them at last
discontinued their coming to these Assemblies, and so they broke in two, and
fell into two Houses, and their Powers became parted between them; and one part
assumed or had assigned to them, some of the Powers, and the other part what
was left: Cum quercus decidit, unusquisque ligna colligit. Yet there is reason
to think that it was thus distributed and determined by Agreement in a National
Assembly.

These Observations and Conclusions I have thought fit and proper, to propose
before I peruse the Precedents, and cite my Authors; That the Reader may take
notice, by the way, upon the opening of them, how properly, truly, and
naturally these Observations result, and are made out, some by one Precedent
and Author, and some by another, which otherwise by an hasty reading might
possibly escape the being observed.

It will not be altogether impertinent, by the way, to take notice of the
temper and usage amongst the Ancient Britons, before the coming of the Romans,
testified by our most credible Authors which seem to have a countenance this
way, viz. of translating all public Affairs by the body of the Freeholders:
And that it may appear, that this humor of the Nation was, as we use to say,
bred in the bone. Although they seldom or never had any National Assemblies, as
before has been observed, unless upon some great and extraordinary sudden
occasion, like that of choosing Cassibilan for their General upon the Invasion
by the Romans, or the like, which was but temporary.

Tacitus, the Roman Annalist, says of the Ancient Britons, De Minoribus rebus
Principes consultant: De Majoribus, Omnes. Ita tamen ut ed quoque quorum penes
plebem arbitrium est, apud Principes praetractentur.

Note, ( Principes) here signifies not Princes or Monarchs, but the great or
chief men, as will appear by what follows.

The Plebs, or common sort, were not excluded, whenever they did consult, or
transact any public Affairs.

Ziphilinus out of Dio Cassius, speaking of the Britons. Apud hos (says he)
Populus magna ex part Principatum tenet.

This is not meant of the power of Government, as if they were a Republic, or
had any thing of a Democracy; for Caesar in his Commentaries tells us, that the
Old and Primitive Government amongst the Britons, as to the Title and outward
Form of the Administration, was Monarchial and Regal. Olim Regibus parebant
(says he). But it must therefore be understood, that the People had this
Principatum in Subordination to the Kings. It was not Engrossed into the hands
of an Aristocracy; and what can Principatus else consist of; unless in
Legislature and Judicature?

Our late Innovators would have us believe, that ( Populus) does sometimes
signify only the Lay-Lords, met in these Ancient great Assemblies, in
distinction only from the Clergy; as when our Annals or Records mention Clerus
and Populus, (as they often do) it is not (say they) to be understood, as if
the Common people met; but only those of the higher Rank, the Lords, or
Nobility. Therefore I have cited Tacitus, who speaks of the Plebs, or
Plebeians, who used to meet to consult of the greatest Matters, De Majoribus
Omnes consultant, as before was observed. ( Omnes) comprehends the Plebeians,
and excludes none.

But under their favor ( Populus) does most usually signify All but the
highest Rank, and is exclusive to them only, though sometimes by way of
distinction from the Prince or Clergy.

Thus in that old lofty Title of the Roman Republic, Senatus Populusque
Romanus, where the word ( Populus) is exclusive of the Senate, and distinct
from it.

Thus Learned Vinius the Civilian in his Commentaries upon the Imperial Laws,
Page 12. says Plebs a Populo dissert, Nam appellatione Populi, Universi Cives
significantur, Connumeratis etiam Patriciis and Senatoribus. Plebis autem
appellatione sine Patriciis and Senatoribus, caeteri cives significantur; but
in no Author (till among these new Writers of ours) does ( Populus) signify the
Lords or Patricians, exclusive to the middle or common sort (as they would have
it.)

To come to the times of the Saxons, who next succeeded the Romans, even in the
time of the Heptarchy, We have one Instance or Precedent in the time of Ina,
King of the West Saxons, (which was the most Powerful of all the Seven, and at
last swallowed up all the rest.)

Lambert in his Book, De Priscis Anglorum legibus, Fol. 1mo. beginning with
King Ina, Anno 712. says, He made his Laws suasu and Instituto Episcoporum
suorum, Omnium Senatorum suorum, Et Natu Majorum Sapientum Populi sui, in Magna
servorum Dei frequentia.

Brampton (the Historian) as Mr. Seldom cites him, renders it, Multaque
Congregatione servorum Dei; and Lambert again, Fol. 62. says, King Edgar Anno
959. (who was one of the English Monarchs after the time of the Heptarchy) gave
his Title to his Laws thus, viz. Leges quas Rex Edgarus frequenti Senatu
Sancivit: and afterward, Fol. 148. in a remembrance and recital of some of
King Ina's Laws, it is said, Hoc factum fuit, per Commune Concilium and
assensum Omnium Episcoporum, Principum, Procerum, Comitum (no word of Baronum)
for they were not in being till afterward in the time of the Normans. But the
title of King Ina's Laws goes on, and says further, Et Omnium Sapientum,
Seniorium, and Populorum totius Regni; that is, in English, The Common Council
of the whole Nation was made up of all these, and but One Body.

In the time of King Etheluph, King of West-Sex, there was a great Assembly, or
Parliament (says Mr. Seldom) held at Winchester, Anno 855. (now above 800 years
since:) Where were present the Archbishop (but one) Bishops, and Ducum,
Comitum, Procerumque totius terrae, aliorumque fidelium Infinita Multitudo, for
which he cites Ingulphus.

This was at that time the Supreme Judicature, and the last Resort.

There was a Proceeding in a Civil Cause before their Supreme Court, or
Witena-Gemot; under King Eldred, Son to King Edgar, who began his Reign (says
Dr. Heylin) Anno 978. one Leoffius had bought Land of Adelwold Bishop of
Winchester, and denied to pay for it; And he had also dis-seis'd the Bishop of
certain other Lands:

Edicitur placitum apud Londoniam; where the Duces, Principes, Satrapae ex omni
part confluerant; which word ( Satrapae) extends to the middle sort, as I
shall show by and by. The Bishop coram cunctis suam causam patefecit (he opened
and pleaded his own Cause) before them all. Qua, re, been, and rite, ac aperte
ab omnibus discussa (not commanding the Parties and Auditors to withdraw while
it was debated by the Court) Omnes reddiderunt Iudicium on the Bishop's side.
This Case is also mentioned by Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, Page 633.

One case more that I shall trouble the Reader with of the Saxon times, shall
be that of Earl Godwin in the time of Edward the Confessor, Seld. ib. 634.
There the King himself, in his own person, did Sue an Appeal of Murder against
Earl Godwin for the death of Alfred; The Witena-Gemote sat at London and the
Cause was heard before Omnes Regni Magnates; where the word ( Magnates)
comprehended also persons of the middle sort, as well as those of the highest
Rank, (as I shall clearly prove); but the matter was compounded, and twelve
Earls bought it off with as much Money as Each of them could carry to the King
in their Arms. Note, this was in the time of a Saint King too, viz. (St.
Edward.)

I come now to the times of the Normans, where we may have a much clearer
account, and by the Precedents and Writers of those times, the Observations I
have made concerning the different Constitution of the Supreme Judicature then,
from what is now used, will much more evidently appear.

William the First (styled the Conqueror) though he took great care to enquire
out the Laws and Customs of the Realm used in the time of Edward the Confessor
(his immediate Predecessor) by a Jury of twelve Men out of every County, and
took an Oath more than once to observe them; yet he introduced a mighty Change
in the state of Affairs in disposing of the Lands, and reserving new Tenures.

But this I may with some confidence affirm, that though the persons were
changed, that is, French or Normans instead of English or Saxons; yet the
Substance, the Frame and Constitution of the Government still continued as it
was before, and likewise the Body of the Laws.

The Saxons Witena-Gemot now began to be called a Parliament, after the French
Language; but it consisted of the same sort of Men, whose Right to meet there
(I speak as to the generality) was from their possessions: And in like manner,
and of the same persons, was the Supreme Court of Judicature composed, though
different in power; yet was there no difference in the qualifications of
persons.

Now the old titles of Dux, Alderman, or Earl, Heretoche, Vavasor, and Thane,
where translated into Comes, and Baro, though very improperly.

But long after this Era, or Epoche, of the coming of the Normans (as before),
they were no otherwise honorary than merely as they were officiary, or feodal.
There were no Stars that served only to shine and glitter, but they all had
their useful influences too: And the honor was but the shadow or reflection of
their Power and Authority, and they had the Ballast too of large Possessions.
Ut Romae olim Senatores e censu Eligebantur; so was it ever in England till the
time of King Edward the First, or Edward the Third, when mere swelling Titles
came in the place of Offices and Estates.

And it seems very consonant to Reason and Justice, that none be admitted to a
share in the Legislature, (which disposes of Lands, and imposes Taxes and
Charges upon them;) and that none have a Voice in the Supreme Court of
Judicature, (which Judges and Determines ultimately of Estates and Titles to
Lands,) but such as have good Estates in Lands themselves; as by the old Saxon
Law (which continues Law still) that none shall serve of a Jury that is to try
the Title of Land, but he that has a Freehold in Land of his own.

The Bishops in the Saxon times held their Lands free from all Secular Service
in Frank-almoign; but they had Place and Voice in Parliament, as Bishops, and
as they were spiritual only, but not in respect of any Tenure or Baronies, as
afterward they did in the times of the Normans. And Burgesses were Elected to
Serve for the several Buroughs (which were then but few) as is clearly proved
by the Record of Edward the Second, of a Petition of the Burgesses of St.
Albans, as it has been published by Mr. Petit of the Temple.

And it is very likely, that the great Officers of the Kingdom came thither by
virtue of their Offices. But the greatest part (no doubt) of that great Body,
was made up of those who had a Right to meet there in respect of their
Possessions (their Freeholds.) And from thence, and from the great Power and
Authority which they shared in, at those great Assemblies, they were in the old
Saxon Laws and Annals styled Nobiles, Magnates, Proceres, Primates, Principes,
Seniores, Sapientes, and by such like Compellations.

And from hence have arisen those gross Mistakes and Errors, which some of our
late zealous Writers have been guilty of, who affirm, that ever any one House,
as now constituted, had that great power from the first Constitution of the
Government.

In our Saxon Laws and Annals, all the great things that were acted in those
times, and all the Laws that were then made, and the Judgments then given, are
reported to be made and done, by persons described and mentioned by the Titles
then in use; namely, by the Names of Aldermen, or Thanes; and by the Attributes
of Nobiles, Principes, Proceres, and the like.

Our Norman Translators when they Translate those Saxon Titles, render them
(though unduly) in the dialect, and by the Titles used in their own Times, viz.
Comites and Barons; because in their own times none were usually accounted
Magnates, Nobiles, Proceres, Principes, and the like, but such as were in the
^^^mes styled Comites and Barons. From hence our late inconsid^rate Authors,
(such as Sir Robert Filmer, Mr. Pryn, and others) hastily catch at these
Mis-translations, and from thence fiercely argue, that all the power both of
Law-making and Judicature under our Ancient Kings were only in the Comites and
Barons, and so still ought to be; And that the Commons have but Usurped upon
the House of Peers, and that from the time only of King Henry the Third.

Whereas in truth there were in those times of the Saxons no such Titles (as
Comites and Barons) in use, to any such purpose as they have been applied to,
since the coming of the Normans; and they had another kind of signification and
power, long after the coming in of the Normans, till about the time of King
Henry the Third, than what they have now; and not till much about the same time
is it that these Anti-Commoners allow to be the first beginning and date of the
Jurisdiction of the House of Commons; and that till then there was no such
House.

Our Famous Seldom takes notice of these Mis-translations of the Saxon Laws and
Annals by the Norman Writers, Page 604. of his Titles of Honor.

The Translation, says he, of (Alderman) or (Earl) in King Athelstan's Laws
into the word ( Comes) proceeded from the ignorance of them, who, after the
Norman Monarchy, in their turning and translating the Saxon Laws, thought that
(Earl) was used for ( Comes) in King Athelstan's time, because it was so
afterward in their own times.

That kind of fault (says Seldom) is most common.

Sir Henry Spelman (another of our Learned Antiquaries) takes notice of the
same Error in our Norman Translators, in rendering Words and Titles, Non e more
Saeculi antiquioris, but according to the Titles of Honor used in their own
times; when in truth they signified different things.

As if a man should go about to prove the Name and Office of High-Sheriffs to
be as Ancient as the times of the Romans; because Godwin in his Roman
Antiquities, Page 176. translates the words ( Triumviri Capitales) into ( Three
High-Sheriffs;) and should argue that whatever was done at Rome by those (
Triumviri) should therefore belong to the Office of our High-Sheriffs, which
would be ridiculous.

We may as well argue that the vast power Exercised heretofore in England by
the Capitalis Iustitiarius Angliae (as his Title was) who indeed was all one
with a Pro-rex or Viceroy (and whose Office wholly ceased in the time of King
Edward the First) may now be used by the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, who
often has the same Title as ( Capitalis Iustitiarius Angliae) given him.

( Nobilis) says Mr. Seldom in the Saxon times denoted every Gentleman.

Now because ( Nobilis) in our times is mostly restrained to the Peers of the
Realm, whom we call (the Nobility,) our new Writers and Arguers ascribe all
that power to the Lords in Parliament, which they read in the Norman
Translators (such as Matthew Paris, etc.) was Exercised in the Saxon times by
those that in those times were styled ( Nobiles); when in truth that Power and
Authority was in the times of the Saxons likewise in the hands of the middle
sort of persons in the Kingdom, as well as in those of the highest sort under
the Saxon Kings, and all then called ( Nobiles.)

Thus ( Thanes) who in the Saxon times signified Lords of Manors, and was not
a distinction of Honor, is generally translated ( Barons) by our ( Norman)
Translators; and that was not so altogether improperly done (as I shall show by
and by;) for the word ( Baro) from the time of the coming in of the Normans,
and a long time after, signified no more than a (Tenant in Capite) and was then
no Title of Honor.

The words Nobiles, Proceres, Magnates, Optimates, and such like, were not in
the Saxon times restrained to the men of the highest Rank, such as our Earls
and Barons are now; but extended to all persons of the better sort, and above
the vulgar. Not only to Patricians and those of the Senatorian Order, (to speak
in the Roman dialect) but also to those of Equestris Ordinis, excluding none
but the Ignota Capita, or sine Nomine turba, such as the Romans styled (
Plebeians.)

Sir Henry Spelman, in his Glossary, Page 84. Avo Henrici primi (says he)
Procerum Appellatione computari videntur Omnes maneriorum Domini: So that
Titles in the Saxon times, and in the beginning of the Norman times did all
resolve themselves into possessions of Lands, and were feodal.

For the word ( Magnates,) it most clearly includes also those of the middle
sort; or (as I may term it in the now dialect) of the lower Nobility.

Mr. Petit of the Temple, in his Book of (the Ancient Right of the Commons
asserted) cites a Record in the Tower, Tertio of E. 2. membrana 16 ta. dorso,
Rotulo clauso; where there are these words entered, viz. Inhibitio, ne qui
Magnates, viz. Comes, Baro, Miles, seu aliqua alia Notabilis persona transeat
ad parts transmarinas. So that by this ( videlicet) Milites are comprehended,
under the word ( Magnates), and Nobilis, is no more than ( Notabilis.)

Fleta lib. 2. cap. 42. fol. 93.37. H. 3. In majori Aula Westminster. in praesentia
Regis, Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, Priorum, Comitum, Baronum,
Militum, Et Aliorum Magnatum regni Angliae, etc. which allows ( Milites) to be
( Magnates) in the time of King Henry the Third, and some inferior to (the
Milites) under the word ( Aliorum.)

Lambert in his Book De priscis Anglor. Legibus. Fol. 176. recites verbatim a
Charter of King Henry the First, de Confirmationibus legum Edwardi Regis.
Testibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Baronibus, Comitibus, Vice-comitibus, Et
Optimatibus totius regni Angliae. So that the word ( Optimates) stooped as low
as to Knights and Sheriffs (for there were no Vicounts till long after the time
of King Hen. the First.)

The same sense of the words ( Magnates and Proceres) appears in a Record of
the Exchequer in the King's Remembrancer's Office, inter Communia brevia de
termino Trinitatis. 34. E. 1.

Nay, the words ( Baro and Baronagium) which one would think should be Propria
quarto modo, to our Peers, and should be peculiar and characteristical Notes of
distinction between Peers, and all others their Inferiors: These very words had
a much larger extent, and were comprehensive of all Tenants in Capite; Nay,
communicable to all Lords of Manors, if not to all Freeholders: And this for a
long time after the coming in of the Normans, who introduced them first amongst
us.

And the very Title of ( Barons) gives all our Peers, whether dignified with
those higher Titles of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, or Vicounts, the sole Right of
Sitting in the House of Peers, and they Sit there Eo nomine, and not merely by
force of those higher Titles.

Hence it is, I presume, that those higher dignities are never conferred alone,
but accompanied at least with that most peculiar Title of the Peers, I mean the
Barons.

Now nomine Baronagii Angliae, Omnes quodammodo regni Ordines continebantur,
(says Learned Cambden) in his Britannia, Page 137.

And Sir Hen. Spelman in his Glossary, Page 66, 67, 68, 69, 70. Upon the words
( Barons Comitatus) says, Hoc nomine contineri videtur antiquis paginis Omnis
Baronum feodalium species. Proceres nempe and Maneriorum Domini, nec non liberi
quique Tenentes, Anglice Freeholders, qui Iudiciis praefuere Aulae Regiae, the
then highest Court of Judicature. Seldom in his Notes upon Eadmerus. Fol. 168.

The same Learned Author, in his Titles of Honor. Fol. 609.691. tells us, that
in the beginning of the Reign of William the First, Honorary or Parliamentary
Barons, were only Barons by Tenure, and created by the King's Writ or Charter
of good Possessions, whereby William the First reserved to himself a Tenure in
Chief by Knight's Service, or by Grand Serjeanty. And that Knights Service was
to serve the King upon occasion with such a number of Men at Arms as was
reserved by the Charter, or Grant; and this is called a Tenure per Baronagium,
and the number of all Knights Fees (out of which Baronies were made up)
amounted (as Ingulphus, who lived in the Conqueror's time, says,) to Sixty
thousand Knights, or Men of War.

Now these Tenants in Capite were the most of those that made up the great
Assembly, called a Parliament, and they were the Judges of the Supreme
Judicature; for, as Mr. Seldom says, in those times, Tenere de Rege in capite,
and to be a Baron, or to have a Right to sit with the rest of the Barons in
Councils, or Courts of Judgment, according to the Laws of those times, are
Synonomies, and signify the same thing.

All these Tenants in Capite (had the whole Kingdom been put into a Scale, and
weighed as Bocaline the Italian weighed all the Princes and States in Europe:
These Tenants in Capite (I say) made up the greatest part of the weight, I may
say, the whole weight, if Land only were to be weighed.

For under these Tenants in Capite by degrees in process of time, all the
Freeholders derive their Estates, who are therefore to be accounted as cast
into the Scale with the Tenants in Capite; who originally had all the Lands:
For Lease-holders, Farmers, and Copyholders, are but in the nature of Servants
or Persons employed under the Freeholders; and the Copyholders did truly and
literally hold their Lands at first ad voluntatem domini, till time gave it the
Reputation of a Legal Custom, and to a more durable interest; and Leases for
above 40 years, were not allowed in those ancient times; but adjudg'd and held
to be void, as vying in value with Inheritance; but they have of later times
been countenanced by Courts of Equity, and made equal in esteem with Freehold
Estates and Inheritances, being altogether under the Rule and Government of
those Courts, and having their dependence upon the decrees of those Courts, and
have the same privileges and favors with Inheritances, under the new notion of
being by their decrees made to wait upon the Inheritances, and subject to
Trusts, which those Courts take upon them to have the Controulment of; and
hereby the Freehold and Inheritance of Lands are of little regard and value, in
comparison of those high powers and privileges which by the Law and Original
Institution of the Nation did at first belong to them: All this tends to the
great Subversion of the Common Law, and of the very Constitution of the Nation;
and to all the good Rules and Orders of it; and in length of time, if not
before remedied, will bring all Estates in Land to depend upon Decrees in
Equity, and to be Ruled by their Arbitrary Proceedings, and then farewell to the
Common Law.

And these Freeholders, who were but the offspring of those Ancient Tenants in
Capite, are by the Common Law, the true and right Owners and Proprietors of the
Kingdom: And accordingly, as in them was the true value, stable, firm, and
fixed interest of the Nation; so in them did the Law place the Power and
Government under the King, (who was always the Supreme in the Administration.)
Hence it is, that a Trial by Freeholders, is in the Sense and Language of the
Law, a Trial per patriam; for they are indeed the Country, and the Country is
truly theirs.

And it is a mighty power if we Enquire into it, and much of it still remains;
though it has been exceedingly abated and humbled, by the swelling of Equity,
and by certain Acts of Parliament made in troublesome Reigns; yet there are
some remains, and the marks and footsteps of those many and great benefits that
are lopped and pared off from it.

These Tenants in Capite, and Freeholders were the Persons who under our Kings
made up the Primitive Constitution of our Government, both as to the
Legislature, and the Supreme Judicature, or last Resort, though now those
powers run in a new Channel.

I shall instance in some of those Ancient and Inherent Rights and Freedoms,
which those Freeholders, or Tenants in Capite did enjoy at the Common Law, and
in the times of the Saxons, and from times as Ancient as any Records do reach,
till, by several Acts of Parliament, made for the most part in unquiet times,
they were deprived of them: Which will best discover the true and original
Constitution of the Government, and give great light to the matter we have now
in hand, viz. to find out the Supreme Judicature.

Almost all the Suits and Causes that did arise in the Nation, came under the
hands and power of the Freeholders, ad primam instantiam, at the first rise of
them, and they judged of them both as to matters of Fact, and points in Law, in
the Country.

And then the greater and weightier matters of the Law met the same persons
again at the last Resort of all Causes in the Witena-Gemots: For these
Freeholders made up the main body of those Common-Councils and great Assemblies.

Sir Hen. Spelman, in his Glossary. Fol. 70. speaking of the Magnates and
Proceres, explains who were meant by those high terms, that is, the good
Freeholders. And he shows likewise what Judicial power they had, in those first
times.

Magnates, and Proceres, were they, Qui in Curiis praesunt Comitatuum, hoc est,
Ipsarum Curiarum Iudices, quos Henricus primus, (the Son of the Conqueror,)
legum suarum cap. 30. esse libere tenentes Comitatus demonstrat. Regis Iudices
(inquit) sunt Barons Comitatus* qui liberas in eis terras habent. There are
the Persons and Judges, viz. Freeholders: Per quos debent Causae Singulorum
alterna prosecutione tractari. There you have their Power and Jurisdiction.

Among the Laws of King Henry the First, c. 7. Collected by Mr. Lambert, de
priscis, etc. Fol. 180. The Title of the Law is, De generalibus placitis
Comitatuum quo modo vel quando fieri debeant.

Sicut antiqua fuerat institutione formatum generalia Comitatuum placita certis
locis and diffinito tempore convenire debent; Nec ullis ultra fatigationibus
agitari, nisi propria Regis Necessitas, vel Commune Regni Commodum saepius
adjiciat.

Intersint autem Episcopi, Comites, Vice-domini, Vicarii, Centenarii,
Aldermanni, praefecti, praepositi, Barons, Vavasores, Tungrevii, and caeteri
Terrarum Domini. These were the Judges of the Court.

Then for the Extent of their Jurisdiction, and the Universality of the Causes,
it proceeds thus, viz.

Agantur primo Verae Christianitatis Iura, now termed Ecclesiastical Causes.
Secundo Regis placita: Pleas of the Crown, or Criminal. Postremo Causae
singulorum, between party and party.

And in the time of the Saxons, who first introduced this Course and Method of
Justice, Suitors were not permitted to pass by this first Application and
Address, before the Barons, or Freeholders, (whom now we call Free-suitors at
the Country-Court) and per Saltum to begin at the Courts of Westminster, or to
follow the King's: Lambert de priscis, etc. Fol. 62.

It is amongst the Laws, quas Edgarus, Anno 959. frequenti Senatu sancivit,
Fol. 63. Nemo in litem Regem appellato, nisi quidem domi, justitiam impetrare
non poterit: Sin summo jure urgeatur (if he meet with hard measure in the
Country) ad Regem provocato; that is, to the King in his highest Court.

Then was me proper time of Appealing to the King in his great Council (as it
is said in that Magnum placitum, in Ryley's Placita Parliamentaria, Page 84.
between Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, (and they are the very words of the Judgment in that Case) Dominus
Rex est omnibus and singulis subditis suis Iustitiae debiton.

But the King alone in his own Person never Administered Justice or Equity, but
together with his great Court, or by his Delegates (the Judges) in inferior
Courts, as I have fully proved in my Treatife of the Chancery.

These great Freeholders, or Tenants de Rege in Capite, as they were, and still
are the Judges of the County Court, (which in Ancient times was the most busy
Court,) so they had by the Common Law, and from time as far as any Record, or
English History does reach, that mighty freedom of choosing all both Civil and
Military Officers or Magistrates under whom they lived.

They chose those that the Saxons called Heretoches, or Ductores Exercitus,
whom, according to the dialect of the present times, we call Lord-Lieutenants,
and Deputy Lieutenants, and the rest of the Commanders. These they chose at
their Folk-moot, or County Court.

These Freeholders chose the Sheriffs of the several Counties, which we all
know by sad Experience, many times, nearly concerns our Lives, Estates, and
Liberties: For these Sheriffs have the posse Comitatus, and the Return of
Juries, and the Execution of all public and private Justice.

These Freeholders had the Election of the Conservators of the Peace, who had
that power which is now in the hands of the Justices of the Peace, and has
been so from the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third, at which time
it was wrested out of the hands of the Freeholders by an Act of Parliament
procured by Queen Isabel, during the Lifetime of her deposed Husband, and in
the Minority of her Son King Edward the Third, merely to gain the power of the
Kingdom into the hands of her party that she made against her Husband (the
deposed King.) And ever since the Conservation of the Peace has been in the
hands of the Commissioners; or Justices of the Peace. This we are taught by our
Acts of Parliament, and by the Learned Lawyer and Autiquary (Mr. Lambert) in
his Eirenarcha, Fol. 16. and 19, 20. and 147. and by Sir Edw. Coke in his
Second Instit. Fol. 174, and 558.

These Freeholders ever did, and still do to this day choose the Coroners (who
were heretofore the most sufficient Knights of the County.)

And they still choose the Verderors where there are any Forests.

All this appears to have been the Right of the Freeholders long before the
Conquest. See Lambert, in his Book of the Saxon Laws, Fol. 147. among the Laws
of King Edward.

Erant and aliae potestates and dignitates (for Power and Offices, Titles and
dignities in those times went hand in hand.) Per provincias and per singulos
Comitatus totius Regni constitutae qui Heretoches apud Anglos vocabantur. sc.
Barons, Nobiles, and insignes sapientes; Latin vero dicebantur Ductores
Exercitus. Isti vero viri eligebantur per commune Concilium per singulos
comitatus in pleno Folk-mote, sicut and Vice-comites Comitatuum Eligi debent.
Ita quod in quolibet Comitatu semper fuit Unus Heretoch*Electus.

These are not the words of Mr. Lambert, or merely his Opinion and Conceit, he
only recites the words of the Law in the Saxon times. And the Law does refer it
to the times of the English, or Britons, for they were the men who called these
Leaders by the name of Heretoches.

Thus we see how large an extent this word ( Barons) did bear; that it
comprehended all Tenants in Capite, who at first were the only Freeholders:
Till by Subfeodations the number of Freeholders encrease'd infinitely, which
caused a great alteration. But the first Tenants in Capite had large
Possessions.

Notandum est (says Sir Hen. Spelman) libere hos tenentes nec tam exiles olim
fuisse, nec tam vulgares, ut hodie deprehenduntur, nam villas and dominia in
minutas hereditates nondum distrahebant.

We have set forth their Country Jurisdiction; now to speak a word of their
Supreme Jurisdiction.

Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary tells us, Barons olim de causis
cognoscebant ad Aulam Regiam delatis. There was the last resort, and the Court
of Equity.

King William the First (says Mr. Seldom) in the 4th year of his Reign, brought
the Bishops and Abbots under the Tenure by Barony, Concilio Baronum suorum,
which by the Proofs that I have already offered, signify the Tenants in Capite,
and the Eminent Freeholders, and a Parliament, (as Mr. Seldom takes it.)

The Bishops contended earnestly against it; for the Power and Jurisdiction
being then in the hands of so great a number, it made it the less desirable; so
that, as Sir Hen. Spelman tells us, The Clergy looked upon it as a diminution
of their former Immunity and Freedom which they had assumed and adjudg'd due to
themselves. Detrahere videtur nomen Baronis ab Ecclesiasticarum Immunitate quam
tunc Ecclesiastici maxim splendebant. Hoc. nostratibus (says Sir Henry
Spelman) jugum injecit, Omnium Primus. Willielmus Senior.

But in the Tenth year of King Henry the Second, Thomas of Becket, that proud
and insolent Prelate, would have cast off this Yoke again, like a Son of
Belial, and he stiffly stood upon the Exemption of the Clergy. Then (says
Seldom) that great Parliament at Clarendon was held: And Roger of Hoveden says,
that Clerus and Populus Regni were then Assembled, which Mr. Seldom expounds to
be a Parliament.

In this Parliament (says Seldom) those Avitae consuetudines (which made the
great quarrel between Thomas of Becket, and King Henry the 2 d.) were
Recognized.

And it is very material toward the deciding of another great Controversy that
has of late been agitated, that Custom for the Prelates withdrawing from
matters of Blood, is recited as one of these Avitae Consuetudines; for the
Bishops (as I observed before out of Mr. Seldom) had places in those general
Conventions in all the times of the Saxons. And in all those times it seems it
was their custom to withdraw: For it was Avita Consuetudo, and we know that
Customs must be exactly pursued. And this Custom is acknowledged and declared
by Act of Parliament, (the Parliament at Clarendon.) Though by the Ancient
Canons of the Church, (which was the ground of that Custom) at first it was
left to their own choice.

Among those Articles this was one, Quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and Universi
Personae qui de Rege tenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege, sicut
Baroniam, and sicut caeteri Barons Debent interesse Iudiciis Curiae Regis cum
Baronibus quousque perveniatur ad Diminutionem membrorum, vel ad Mortem.

Who these ( Barons) were in those times most plainly appears by this very
Law, viz. They are such Qui tenent de Rege in Capite: And what their Right, and
Power, and Jurisdiction is, (for which purpose I chiefly cite it) debent
interesse Iudiciis Curiae Regis: This Curia Regis plainly appears to be the
Supreme Judicature, which we are enquiring after, and which some late Writers
conceive did in all times belong to the House of Peers; but it is a mistake in
them, by occasion of the word ( Barons) mentioned in it; And they think it
bears their Signature, and peculiarly belongs to them: Whereas by this Law it
undeniably appears to belong to that vast number of Tenants in Capite.

And if we may believe Sir Henry Spelman (who is fide-dignus,) the Honor was
so much the less, because it was transferrable.

Cum autem feodales isti Barons nomen dignitatemque suam ratione fundi
obtinuerint, transfer olim aliquando videatur cum ipso fundo. The Terra did
transire cum Onere, for so the Honor, being accompanied with a Duty, was
accounted in those days: Honos was not without the Onus.

The only Titles that we meet with in the Saxon times, as we learn out of Mr.
Lambert, Sir Henry Spelman, Mr. Seldom, and Mr. Cambden, are Alderman, which in
the times of the Danes was translated into Eorl; and in the Norman times into
Comes. And the Title of Heretoch. (which I have just now Explained) and those
other Titles of Vavasor, and Thane, had all a reference to possessions in Land;
And were rather Officiary than Honorary, and were generally due to these
Tenants in Capite, who were the same with ( Barons.)

For that of Alderman, or Comes, or Satrapa, says Cambden, in his Britannia,
Page 135, and 136. Comitis nomen ut dignitatem notaret sine administratione, in
usu non fuit, in the Elder times; and so says Seldom in his Titles of Honor,
Page 604.

Nec dum haereditaria fuit dignitas: Initio dignitas temporaria posted vitae
aequalis. But in that Age, Titles of Honor and Place were no more hereditary,
than Virtue and True Worth were, which are not ex traduce*

In the beginning of William the Conqueror, Comites caeperunt esse feodales and
hereditarii.

Dux nomen Officii, non Honoris, says Cambden, Page 134, 135. Oneris, non
Honoris. It was no Title of Honor, till King Edward the Third made his Son
Edward the Black-Prince, Duke of Cornwall.

And King Richard the Second, (that Prince's Son) made Robert de Vere the first
Marquess, that is, of Dublin.

And King Henry the Sixth made the first Viscount, which still is also a name
Officiary.

Selden's Titles etc. page 621. The King's Thane was he that held of the King
in chief by Knight's Service. He was of the same kind with them, who after the
coming of the Normans, were Honorary, of Parliamentary Barons.

The name of Vavasor, says Seld. ib. 625. was feodal only, and not at all
honorary. In Doom's-day (says he) it sometimes occurs as a Synonomy, with
liberi homines Regis.

These Tenants de Rege in Capite, were the persons that had Right to Sit in
Parliament, and in the Supreme Judicature and Councils, during the times of the
first Six or Seven of the Kings next after the coming of the Normans. Selden's
Titles, etc. page 705. To the Magnum Concilium, and Solenne Concilium.

King Henry the Second, Omnibus qui de Rege tenebant in Capite mandari fecit,
etc.

And Mr. Seldom ib. page 701, and 702. gives us Precedents of Causes Determined
in this High and Supreme Judicature.

As that between Thomas Archbishop of York, and Ulstan Bishop of Worcester,
touching certain possessions, Anno Quarto of William the First.

In Concilio Coram Rege, Archiepiscopo, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Commitibus, and
Primatibus totius Angliae; and it has already been shown, who are understood
by ( Primates.)

And ib. page 703. There was a Decree made touching the Primacy of Canterbury,
Totius Regni assensu (says Eadmerus) which (says Seldom), expresses a full
Parliament, supposed to be in the Fifth year of the said William the First, at
Pinneden in Kent.

Now for the mighty number of which this great Assembly did ever consist, Mr.
Petit, in his Book, wherein he asserts the Right of the Commons, page 100.
cites a passage out of Matthew. Paris. page 255. who says that in the year 1215.
Decimo Sexto Iohannis Regis, there met Tota Angliae Nobilitas in Unum collecta,
quae sub Numero non cadebat; and yet it is called ( Nobilitas.)

And Cambden, in his Britannia, page 137. speaking of their number, says,
Ipsaque Baronum multitudo persuadet tales fuisse Dominos qui jus in sua ditione
dicere possent. All Lords of Manors that had their Courts Baron, which from
thence had also their name of Courts Baron.

Sir Hen. Spelman in his Glossary says of these Barons, That they were Ingens
Multitudo, quae plus minus, were Thirty thousand, nullo tecto Convocari
poterat. Therefore they met in great Camps and Fields. And Sir Hen. Spelman
says, He can hardly believe ( Quod nonnulli perhibent) quod Omnes Barons locum
aliquando in summis illis Comitiis obtinuisse, because of their vast number.

By all this that has been said, and so fully proved, I suppose it clearly
appears, that those that made up the Assembly for the Legislature, and Supreme
Judicature, came thither by a feodal Right (unless the Burgesses only, and some
Ecclesiastical Persons, and some great Officers.)

Here is not in all these Precedents, Records, or Testimonies of approved
Authors and Antiquaries, the least mention of any distinction among them, like
that of Lords and Commons, or Upper and Lower House; or that they were divided
in their place of Sitting or Meeting; for as is before observed, their number
was so vast, that nullo tecto convocari poterant. No one House could hold them.

In the case of Godsol, and Sir Christop. Heydon, 12. Iac. in Sergeant Rolls 1.
Rep. Fol. 18. It was affirmed by Sir Edward Coke, that in Ancient Times all the
Parliament sat together; and that he had seen a Record of it in the Thirtieth
year of Henry the First. But William Pryn (according to his accustomed humor)
contradicts Sir Edward Coke in this, in his Preface to Sir Robert Cotton's
Abridgment of the Records of the Tower.

It may be concluded, that they all had a Right to come to the great
Convention; for had they all been called by special Writs, (as the Lords now
are,) the King would never have called so great a number, which do but hinder
business.

There is not the least mention of special Writs, and it would have been an
infinite Work to issue out so many Writs, Printing not being then invented.
Therefore no doubt but they came thither by a general Summons. There is not the
least intimation of any distinction in their Power, but every one had a like
share in the Power, both in the Legislature and Judicature.

None came amongst them by a mere Title of Honor and Dignity, but in Right of
their Possesions and Tenures. This was not indeed the Representative of the
Nation; but, (as I said before) the Principals, and in effect, the whole Body
of the Nation, which is much greater.

But at last this great Body fell with its own weight; for, says Sir Hen.
Spelman, Cum sua tandem laborarent multitudine Conventusque sic magis premerent
quam Regni Negotia Expedirent, (they did rather hinder than help) Consultius
visum est, ut neglectis Minoribus, praecipui tantum, per breve Regis
evocarentur. It was with this Constitution of the great Assembly of the
Freeholders of the Nation, as it happened with the City of Rome, when it had
attained to its Acma and full growth, Mole ruebat sua.

And Learned Cambden tells us in what time a division of this great Body was
effected. Henricus Tertius (says he,) (in his Britannia, page 137.) Ex tanta
Multitudine (speaking of the Parliament in those times) quae seditiosa and
turbulenta fuit, Optimos quosque Rescripto ad Comitia Parliamentaria evocaverit.

Here we have plainly the Original of the House of Peers, and of particular and
special Rescripts or Writs of Summons to the Optimacy, distinctly, and by
themselves. Cambden quotes his Author for this, but names him not. Ex satis
antiquo Scriptore loquor, (says he.)

It was referred to the King to single out, and select some to whom he thought
fit to direct his special Writs or Summons, and these and no other were to come
to Parliament.

If this may be credited, then we have the Epoche, and the Date of our present
Constitution, and the Original of the Division of that very ancient, great, and
numerous Assembly; and it made a mighty Metamorphosis and Change. The
Freeholders parted with that great Power and Interest which they had both in
Legislature and Judicature, from the very Foundation of the Government, and the
Nation it self: Even from the time of the Ab-origines, (if there were ever any
such,) and they have been upon the losing-hand ever since, as appears by what I
have already observed in closing their Rights of Elections.

And thus they brake in two, and became two Houses both at one time, and were
Twins in their Birth. Here was no Primogeniture, yet the one went away with a
double portion upon the parting.

And this (taking in the History) is a confutation of that Opinion, That the
House of Commons (as being by Election) was in time long after the Date of the
House of Peers; surely they started both together.

Great Seldom agrees in the Substance with Mr. Cambden, but differs from him
only in the time, and some other circumstances, when this Revolution happened.
And for Mr. Cambden's satis antiquus Author, Mr. Seldom professes he diligently
sought for this Author, but could never meet with him; nor does Mr. Seldom give
any credit to that Author.

He supposes the distinction of Majores, and Minores Barons, (which doubtless
did arise upon this Revolution) page 708. began not long before the great
Charter of King John (Father to King Henry the Third) and that Charter was made
in the Seventeenth and last year of King John.

This Division of Barons (which all Writers agree in, and which appears by
King John's Great Charter) evidently shows, that the two Houses began at the
same time; for Majores cannot be without the Minores. But Mr. Seldom supposes
this was done by Act of Parliament, though that Act be not now Extant: Nor is
there any express Memorial of it. And he supposes it was not submitted to the
King to choose out whom he thought fit; But that the Act of Parliament did
mention them by name at first, to whom particular Writs were to be directed.

Some part of the very words of that Charter of King John's we have in Mr.
Selden's Titles of Honor, page 709. and in Sir Hen. Spelman in his Glossary,
page 83. Faciemus (says that great Charter) Summoneri Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, and Majores* Barons Regni, Sigillatim, per
literas nostras: Et praeterea faciemus submoneri in generali per Vice-comites
Omnes alios qui in capite tenent de Nobis; which is a clear proof, that till
about this time, there was no distinction: And that which did Constitute a
Parliamentary Baron, was his Tenure de Rege in Capite; so that all who held in
Capite, had an inherent Right to sit there. And that before this time, all came
by a general Summons directed to the Sheriff.

What has been hitherto said serves to prove, That before this time of King
John, or King Henry the 3 d (his Son) there was only one great Assembly of the
Nation; that is, of the most Eminent, and all the considerable and interested
persons of the Nation, who came not by Election, save those that were chosen
from the few and ancient Buroughs: Nor was there then any Representative, as
now.

And that those great Assemblies were in those times the true Baronage of
England, and that the word (Baronage) did not belong only to such as the King
by special Writ is pleased to call or summon; or by Patent to confer the Title
upon; but as our most judicious Writers tell us, the word ( Baronagium) did
extend to all Degrees and Orders; for they came to all great Assemblies by
Tenure, till the aforesaid time of Division.

And there are the footsteps of this Ancient Right still amongst us, in that
the Freeholders (whom we call Free-suitors) are still the Judges of that Court,
which Anciently was the great and buisy Court (the County Court.) And those
Elections that are still remaining of Trustees or Representatives in
Parliament, and of diverse Legal Officers, which must be by Freeholders only,
and the persons to be chosen, ought to be out of the Freeholders themselves.

And so much of the Ancient Constitution of a Baron still remains, as that in
his Creation he must be entitled of some place, that it may favor of the
Realty, and make the Honor and Title Inheritable.

And the Baron still continues his Freedom from Arrests, as having by
presumption of Law, an Estate in Land, which will make him liable to Justice:
And therefore a Distringas shall issue out against him instead of a Capias. And
the Law will allow of no Averment against a Peer, that he has no Lands whereby
to distrain or to levy Issues upon.

No doubt but the Lords had from the time of this great Division ever since, a
very large, though not an universal Jurisdiction; nor have they had it from the
very first Constitution of the Government, as is by some pretended.

When this great Assembly, this great and numerous Body, was divided into
parts, no doubt but the several parts did (as the Four great Captains after the
Death of Alexander the Great did) assume and take to themselves by Agreement,
several shares of the power that was then dissolved.

The Lords took a large share, and the Commons, (for so now they began to be
distinguished) took the rest; and we may reasonably suppose it was confirmed by
some Law that then passed, and has been since lost.

And the like presumption we know is made by our Courts of Law in many like
cases: And it is well known that the Parliament- Rolls of that time are all
lost.

And the best Rule whereby to judge what was allotted to each, will be by
ancient, constant, quiet, and uninterrupted Usage and Practice. Usus and
consuetudo est Lex Parliamenti.

The House of Lords did exercise a Jurisdiction in cases of Appeals for
Criminal Causes, till by the Act of 1mo. of Henry the 4 th c. 14. they were
restrained.

That Act does Ordain, That from thenceforth no Appeals shall be pursued in
Parliament, the Exposition of which Statute must be made by observing the
mischiefs that occasioned the making of that Law, and the constant practice
after it.

The preamble recites, That many Mischiefs did often arise by Appeals: And the
History of the times of King Richard the 2 d. (the next preceding King) tells
us what those Mischiefs were: When in that disorderly troublesome Reign, the
Lords were so divided into Feuds and Factions, that the Lords (who were to be
the Judges) became Parties, and were Appellants one against another. This was
the mischief.

Then for the practice after the making of that Act, that Law was never
intended according to the generality of the words, to exclude all Appeals
whatsoever, but such only as were at the suit of private persons.

For the constant practice has been, ever since, as well as before, to admit
of Appeals in Parliament, when they come to the Lords by Impeachment from the
Commons.

The Lords had, and still retain, the Jurisdiction over their own Members, for
trial of Peers in cases Capital.

The Lords had, and still have the Jurisdiction in Writs of Error, to examine
Judgments given in the King's Bench; but this was under certain Rules, and with
some restraint; for constant and quiet usage and practice do warrant all these.

Let us enquire into the placita Parliamentaria, I mean those that are
published by Mr. Ryley, of the times of King Edward the First, King Edward the
Second, etc. and observe what light they give us.

The true Title of those Pleas are Placita coram ipso domino Rege and ejus.
Concilio, ad Parliamenta sua. In which Titles, Regis Concilium, and
Parliamentum, seem to be distinguished, and to signify two several things (as
in truth they did.)

When and how came these Pleas to be discontinued ever since the time of Edward
the 4 th? When did the Law pass that restrained them? We have not one such Plea
to any effect, between the time of King Edward the Fourth, and the time of King
James the First, nor from thence to this day, near 300 years. What is come in
the place of them?

The Placita Parliamentaria were in a strict and regular form of Pleadings. The
Petition of Declaration, the Plea, the Replication, the Rejoinder, and the
Continuances entered upon Record in Latin, and the process was by Latin Writs;
and all the Proceedings entered upon Record in Latin, as Proceedings at the
Common Law ought to be. How came this to be altered? All of later times (at
least before the Lords) are in English, and the process are English Orders only.

Had these Placita been before the Lords, how happens it that there are so few
(if any) Reports among them of Pleadings upon Writs of Error, which the Lords
claim as out of all dispute to be within their Jurisdiction? Hardly any of
these are to be found amongst them; and these had been worthy Reporting, being
in matters difficult, weighty, and full of Learning.

What was this Regis Concilium (so constantly mentioned) in these Pleas, as
those before whom they were held?

Amongst these Records and Pleas, we find All the Peers themselves in a Body
several times petitioning to the King and this Council, and receiving Orders
and Rules from that Council.

It is absurd to think, that all the Lords in a body would petition to
themselves; as at the Parliament held 14 th of Edward the Second, Ryley's
Placita Parliamentaria, page 425.

Ex part Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum, and aliorum, porrecta est petitio in
hoc Parliamento, in haec verba.

A nostre Senior le Roy and a Son Counceil monstrent les Erce-evesque Praelats,
Counts, and Barons, and les auters grantz Seigniors dela terre.

Concerning payment of Escuage. And the Answer to this Petition is, per
Concilium Regis, the like ib. page 448.

We have another Example of it in the Appendix to that Book, viz. of the time
of 18 Edward the Second, page 619. wherein the Lords in a body pray liberty to
approve or improve their Manors, without the King's License. And the Answer to
it is, That it could not be done without a new Law, to which the Commons would
not consent.

It is evident in those Records and Pleas, that others are mentioned to be of
that Council, then the Peers, as page 266, and 331.

There is an Inhibition by the Treasurer, and the Concilium Regis, not to
deliver a Prisoner; and page 386. 14 th Edward 2. the King appointed who should
receive Petitions at the Parliament, and who should Answer them: And those that
were appointed to Answer them are called Triers of Petitions: These seem to be
the persons that made the great Council, or the King's Council, (as they are
called in those Records.) These in Parliaments of late have been wholly
discontinued.

We find this Council, while they were in being, sat in Places, where we
cannot reasonably suppose that the House of Lords ever sat; as page 87. in Mr.
Ryley's Placita Parliamentaria, Coram Rege and Concilio apud Land. in domo
Ottonis de Grandissono, extra palatium ipsius Domini Regis apud
Westmonasterium. And page 98. at Bergavenny; and page 108. at Stilbeneth. extra
London, which I suppose is meant of Stepney.

And the Judges are mentioned as Members of this Council, page 140. not mere
Assistants.

Now we come to Writs of Error; wherein it is generally admitted, that the
Lords have a Jurisdiction, and from thence (as I suppose) it is inferred by a
parity of Reason, that they likewise have a Jurisdiction in Appeals from Courts
of Equity. An Appeal from a Decree in Equity being something of the same nature
with a Writ of Error at the Common Law.

It is true our Law Books are full of this Title, and speak of Error sued in
Parliament. But under favor it is not of an universal Jurisdiction in all
Cases of Erroneous Judgments, but with diverse Restrictions, and under certain
Rules in our Law Books.

It has been often Resolved, that the Lords cannot proceed upon any Writ of
Error, till first the King has Signed a Petition for the Allowance of a Writ
of Error to be sued out.

As in the Year-book of 22 Edward the 3 d. Fol. 3. It is there held, that a
Writ of Error in Parliament lies not, till the King be petitioned for it, and
till the King have Signed the Petition. Which Signing is indeed the Commission
which gives the Authority.

And in the case of Edward Hadelow, Hadelow's Case.
where Judgment was given for the King: Upon the King's Signing a Petition for
a Writ of Error, and the Writ sued out, the Roll in which the Judgment was
entered, was brought by Sir William Thorp, Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
into the Parliament: Upon which the King assigned certain Earls and Barons, and
with them the Justices, to hear and determine the business: And before it was
determined, the Parliament was ended; yet the Commissioners sat still, but the
King was gone.

And it was urged before the Delegates (for so they are called) That the
Judgment could not be Reversed, except in Parliament; and there it is said,
that the King has no Peer in his Land, and that they cannot judge the King.

How came that in to Debate? Why it was in the Case of an Outlawry, which is
always for the King's benefit; and where the King is concerned, the Lords have
no Jurisdiction without the King's allowance; and the King does not think fit
to refer it to the whole House of Lords; yet the King will have Justice done,
and he will be informed if the Outlawry were duly sued out. But the King
himself assigns the persons that shall judge of it; And yet it is said, that
this is suing Error in Parliament; for when the Parliament is risen, it is held
that the Delegates appointed by the King could not proceed: So that Pleas may
be held in Parliament by the King and his Council, such as he shall specially
appoint for that purpose at every Parliament.

And yet they may be styled Placita Parliamentaria, being transacted only in
time of Parliament, but not by the Parliament.

This case of Edward Hadelow teaches the true nature and course of a Writ of
Error in Parliament, and the right method of proceeding upon it, and the King's
Prerogative in it: And how that case wherein the King is any way concerned in
interest, (as he is in cases of Outlawry) shall be Examined by none but such as
are specially assigned by the King.

See the case in the Year-Book of 1mo Hen. the 7 th. Fol. 19. Flourdew's case.

By Advice of all the Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber, which is a case Reported
in Latin;

Oportet partem habere billam de Rege indorsatam: Et super hoc Cancellarius
faciet breve de Errore, Et tunc capitalis Iusticiarius de banco Regis; (so that
it is only from the Court of King's Bench, but no other Court) Secum adducet in
Parliamento breve de Errore, Et praedictam billam sic indorsatam. And the Clerk
of the Parliament is to have the keeping of the Bill Endors'd; This proves that
it is their Commission by which they proceed, and it must remain with the Clerk
of the Parliament, not with the Chancellor.

The Lord Dyer's Reports, 23. Eliz. Fol. 375. tit. Error. Plac. 19. there is a
Supplication Signed by the Queen, for a Writ of Error.

We have another Precedent in Sir Francis More's Reports. Fol. 834. in the case
of Heydon and Sheppard. pasc. 12. Iac. 1mi The like in Leornard's Reports the 3
d. part. Fol. 160. in the case of the Queen and Hurlston.

Now concerning Proceedings in Equity in general, the English Court of
Chancery, (the Court of Equity there) it has not been of any great Antiquity,
and upon what Legal Foundation it stands, is not easily to be affirmed: As I
have made appear in a larger Treatise, Of the Original of the Jurisdiction of
the Chancery in matters of Equity; To which I refer my Reader.

Our Ancient Authors, as the Mirror of Justices, Glanvil, Bracton, Briton, and
Fleta, although they treat of the Chancery, as it proceeds according to the
Rules of the Common Law, viz. in Repealing of Patents, and in Cases
Priviledg'd, yet none of them do once mention the Court of Equity there; and
yet their undertakings were to treat of all the several Courts then in being,
which proves the Court of Equity in Chancery was not then in being.

It has been adjudg'd, 26. and 27. Eliz. in the King's Bench in Perrot's, and
in Marmaduke Langdales Case. Cok. 12. Rep. Fol. 52. That a Court of Equity
cannot be Erected by Patent, but only by Act of Parliament, or by Prescription.

And the Chancery has no Prescription for a Court of Equity, as appears by
those Ancient Authors.

If the Chancery it self have no Right of Prescription, then there is no
Foundation for any Prescription in Cases of Appeals* nor is there any Act of
Parliament that gives it.

The First Decree (as I take it) in Chancery, is but of the time of King
Richard the Second; and that was Reversed, for that it was in a matter properly
determinable at the Common Law.

The best proofs of the Power and Jurisdiction of a Court are the Records and
Precedents of a Court: And if it be by Prescription, it must appear by ancient
and frequent Precedents. Plowd Comment. in the case of the Mines. Fol. 301. b.

And if any Court Usurp a Jurisdiction in a case where it appears in their very
Proceedings themselves, that it has no lawful Jurisdiction; what they do in
such case is Coram non Iudice, and is utterly void.

Now concerning the Exercise of a Jurisdiction by way of Appeal from a Court of
Equity for Error in their Decrees, I shall make mention of the very Records,
and Acts of the House of Lords.

I have searched into the Journal of the Lords, and I find a Record or Entry
there of the Parliament held 18 Iac. 1. Anno 1621. And we need search no
higher, for that gives a full account of all the times then passed, as to the
point in hand, viz. Of the Supreme Judicature and Jurisdiction.

18 Iac. 1. Fol. 175. Of the Lord's Journal, I find by an Entry of the 30 th of
November in that year, That a Comittee had been named by the Lords to take into
consideration the Customs and Privileges of the Lord's House, and the
Privileges of the Peers, or Lords of Parliament.

And that a Sub-Committee had been named, who had express power to reward such
person as by their Warrant should search among the Records for Privileges and
Customs; and that Mr. Seldom had been appointed for that purpose, and had taken
much pains in it.

I observe by the way, That the House of Lords were not then of the same
Judgment with the Noble Author I have before mentioned, who asserts the Right
of Judicature of the House of Peers to be by the very first Constitution of the
Government, Universal, and in all Causes whatsoever, unless restrained by some
Act of Parliament.

Had that been true, there had been no need to search for Precedents to warrant
their Proceedings in any case. It had been sufficient to justify the
Proceedings, if no Act of Parliament could be found to restrain them in any
such case; the labor of which would have been properly on his part that would
presume to dispute their Jurisdiction.

No, the Lords took the right course to examine it; if there were no
Precedents, the Lords concluded that then they had no Right to a Jurisdiction;
and no Persons, nor Court, can assume to themselves at their own will, any
Authority or Jurisdiction; Quis me constituit Iudicem? said our Blessed
Savior, there must be a constitution of it. And it was properly enough asked
by the Scribes and Pharisees of our Savior, Who gave thee this Authority?

I would observe too, that the Sub-Committee of the Lords employed for that
purpose, (of searching for Precedents) a person, who was in his Element, (the
Famous Seldom); no Record could escape his discovery

Further in the 208 th Folio of that Journal of the 18 th year of King James,
on the 14 th of December, the then Archbishop of Canterbury (for he, it seems,
took special care of it) mentions in his Report to the Lords the Proceedings of
that Committee, viz. A Collection made of Customs and Orders of the Lord's
House, and of their Privileges made out of Records: And he presented that
Collection to the House, and desired it might be preserved as a Memorial
whereunto men may resort as occasion should require, and make use of it. It was
thereupon ordered by the House, to be delivered to the Clerk to be kept for
that purpose.

So that this was intended by the whole House of Lords to be a Standard,
whereby to measure and judge of their Jurisdiction and Privileges for the
future.

I find the Title of that Committee, Fol. 91. to be, A Committee for searching
for Precedents for Judicature, Accusations and Judgments, anciently used in
this High-Court of Parliament.

This shows, it must be an ancient Usage or nothing. Therefore late and modern
Usage and Precedents, are, in the Judgment of the Lords, of no great Weight, to
Entitle them to a Jurisdiction.

Moreover, Fol. 105. of that Journal, there is an Order made, 27. Mar. 1621.
for Collection of Money among the Peers to pay the Charge for searching for
Records in the Tower, and elsewhere, and to have Copies of them certifi'd under
the Officer's hands. Every Earl and Viscount was to pay Forty Shillings, and
every Bishop and Baron Twenty Shillings.

I have perused that Book, Entitled, A Collection of Privileges or special
Rights, belonging to the Baronage of England.

What is meant by that Title, appears by the Table to the Book, which consists
of these Heads following, viz.

1 st Judgments Of Offenses Capital. Fol. 11. b. 1 st Judgments Of Offenses not
Capital. Fol. 25. 1 st Judgments Upon Writs of Error in Parliament. Fol. 88.
Another Head, is, The Lords appointing Judges out of themselves, for
Examination of Judgments in other Courts, Fol. 95.

I thought this last Head, or Title, might afford something to our purpose,
relating to Appeals.

Under this Head there is nothing mentioned but concerning Erroneous Judgments
given in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, or upon the Statute of 27
Elizabeth, Cap. 8. Of Judgments given in the Exchequer-Chamber, by the Judges
of the Common Pleas, and the Barons of the Exchequer, upon Error to Examine
Judgments given in the King's Bench; from whence Error lies also before the
Lords, by the express words of that Statute; which no doubt is therefore a very
Legal Power and Jurisdiction in the Lords, being Exercised in the method
directed by Law, as before is observed.

The Book of this Collection expressly takes notice, That no Writ of Error lies
in Parliament upon a Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas, till that
Judgment have been Reversed, or Affirmed in the King's Bench. As it was
answered in Parliament, in the Case of the Bishop of Norwich. Rot. Parl. 50. E.
3. Articl. 48.

The like Resolution did the Lords give after Hearing all the Judges, and long
Consultation, and a referring the Consideration of that matter to a numerous
Committee of the Lords, in a Case of the late Earl of Macclesfeld; wherein that
Earl was Plaintiff in the Exchequer, in an Action of Slander, and Judgment
there in that Court given against him; whereupon the said Earl (since this last
Revolution) sued Error before the Lords, passing by the method directed by the
Stat. of 31. E. 3. Cap. 12. for Suing Error upon Judgments given in the
Exchequer; And the Lords were upon the very point of Reversing that Judgment in
the Exchequer; but being by one of the said Judges then also sitting on the
Upper Wooll-sack, put in mind of that Stat. of E. 3. they did forbear to
proceed to do any more upon it, referring it to the Order limited by that
Statute.

This proves, That the Lords are tied to a method too, in cases where they have
a Rightful Jurisdiction: They must not take it ad primam Instantiam, nor per
Saltum.

In that Collection I have mentioned, under that Lemma of Examination of
Judgments in other Courts (which is comprehensive enough) I find notice taken
of Hadelow's Case. 22. E. 3. Fol. 3. and Flourdew's Case, 1 H. 7. Fol. 20.
which I cited before at large. And these concern only Cases of Erroneous
Judgments in the King's Bench.

Under the Title of Offenses not Capital, there is mention of no case but upon
Accusations for Criminal Causes.

It begins with William Latimer's Accusation of John at Lee for Offenses
against the State.

It mentions the Case of Richard Lions, for procuring of Patents for private
advantage, and of the new Impositions without Parliament.

It instances in the Case of William Lord Latimer accused by the Commons, And
the Case of Alice Peirse.

And the Case in 7 Richard the 2 d number. 11. of Michael de-la-Pool, Chancellor
of England, accused by John Cavendish of London, Fishmonger, for Bribery.

And the Earl of Northumberland's Case, 5 H. 4. number. 26. and Thorpe's Case; but
they are all in Criminal Causes.

While this Committee was in being, I meet with an Appeal made to the Lords
from a Decree made in Chancery: And (as I take it,) it is a decree made by the
Lord Bacon (though he is not named by his name) it is Fol. 181. in the Journal
of the Parliament, 18. Iac. 1621.

The Third of December in that Parliament, Sir John Bourchier by Petition
Appeals to the Lords from a Decree in Chancery, wherein he himself was
Plaintiff against John Mompessom and others, and there were cross Suits, and
they were about Accounts between them. And Sir John Bourchier had a Sum of
Money decreed to him, but not for so much as he thought was due; and therefore
he Appealed, and complained in his Petition to the Lords, of an hasty Hearing
of his Cause in Chancery, and that his Witnesses were not heard, and uses the
very formal word of Appeal in his Petition.

Fol. 188.6. December, It was referred to the Lords Committees for Privileges,
to consider whether it were a formal Appeal, or not.

I must confess, it does not clearly appear to me, what the true meaning, or
ground of that Order is; for (as I now said) the Petition does expressly use the
word ( Appeal.)

The 10 th of December Fol. 196. The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Reported,
That diverse Lords Sub-Committees appointed to search for Precedents, cannot
find that the word ( Appeal) is usual in any Petition for any matter brought
before them. This deserves to be noted.

So that it seems the Lords Committees understood the meaning of their Order to
be, to search for Precedents (if there had been any) where the Lords had used
in former times to admit of, and to receive Appeals before them, against
Decrees made in Chancery, or in any Court of Equity.

The Archbishop further Reports, That they could not find so much as the word (
Appeal) used in any Petition; Note.
and that it must have been by way of Petition, if any way. This shows the
Novelty of it; for he likewise reports, That all matters complained of before
the Lords must be by (...) Petition, and in no other Form.

And that the Ancient accustomed Form of the Petitions must be ( To the King
and his Great Council;) Note.
this is very observable.

Note here, That the Direction and Entitling of Petitions to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, omitting and leaving out the
King in the Direction (as it is now used, and has been ever since King Charles
the First went away from the two Houses in 1641.) is not according to Ancient
Form and Custom.

And that the Ancient accustomed Form was not to the Lords, by the Title of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled in Parliament, as now used, but to the
Great Council.

Whom that great Council did consist of, and by whom Nominated and Constituted,
I have made some conjecture, by what I have before in this Treatise discoursed
of, concerning that Magnum Concilium in Parliamento; and concerning the ancient
and constant usage till of late years, and until the separation between the
said King Charles, and the Parliament, of the King's appointing Triers of
Petitions in every Parliament. Let the Reader take occasion here to look back
upon what I have herein already discoursed upon this Subject, which may give
light to this matter.

In the last place, the Archbishop reports, That they could find but only one
Precedent of this nature; which was a complaint by Petition against Michael
de-la-Poole (Lord Chancellor) for matters of Corruption.

Which Precedent I have mentioned before; for Michael de-la-Poole, Lord
Chancellor, was accused in the Seventh year of King Richard the Second, by John
Cavendish of London Fishmonger, for Bribery.

I presume too, according to the usual Form of Petitions, (as the Archbishop
reports them to be) that this Petition was directed to the King and his Great
Council, and not to the Lords, etc. assembled in Parliament.

But I conceive this only Precedent (as the Archbishop calls it) is no
Precedent of the same nature, (as has been so frequently used of late, and
still is) for an Appeal against a Decree merely for Error in Judgment.

For to Err in Judgment in making a Decree, and for the Judge that makes the
Decree, to receive a Bribe in the case, are two different things; for to Err in
Judgment (as Humanum est Errare) is of a mere civil Nature; but to be corrupt,
and take a Bribe, though the Decree be just, is of a Criminal Nature; and
therefore not to the purpose of what we are discoursing.

And there are about 240 years distance in time, between this only Precedent,
and the time of this search made by the Committee of Lords, viz. 18. Iac. 1. (a
large Casma in a usage and custom for the Exercise of a Jurisdiction.

And the matter in hand must still be determined by Precedent and Custom.
Consuetudo Parliamenti est Lex Parliamenti, is the old Rule.

This complaint by Sir John Bourchier was in a matter, not of Error in
Judgment, for then that Error must in particular have been assigned, and the
Judge not have been reflected upon; but the complaint is of a
Maladministration in the Judge (an hasty Hearing, and Witnesses not heard.)
And therefore the Lords in that case censure the Petitioner for casting a
scandal upon the Judge. For the Lords Examined the matter, and found the
suggestion of the Petition to be false. The Cause had had a deliberate Hearing,
and the Petitioner's Witnesses had been heard; yet the Petitioner for the
scandal had but an easy penance, and that was remitted wholly, viz. to
acknowledge this offense.

But note this was a proceeding against him upon his own Petition: He himself
Entitled the Lords in this case to a Jurisdiction. It does not appear that any
Adverse party was Summoned to defend it, the Lord Keeper himself defended it
upon the point of scandal.

There is yet another most Memorable Case in the very Journal of the Lords too,
and that is Four years after. viz. 22. Iac. 1. which is as follows; and it
comes strongly home to the point in hand, viz. of Appeals.

28. An. Dom. 1624.
May 22. Iac. 1. William Matthews petitioned against George Matthews, by way of
Appeal, in the House of Lords, and questioned a Decree made by the Lord Keeper
in Chancery on the Defendant's behalf, from which Decree William Matthews
Appealed.

It is to be found in the Journal of the Lords. 28. May 22. Iac. 1.

The Lords Committees, who were appointed by the whole House to Examine the
Cause, Heard Council on both sides several days, and Reported to the House
their Opinion for the Petitioner and Appellant.

Thereupon the Respondent, George Matthews, petitioned the Lord's House against
that Report, and Opinion of the Committee; and in his Petition alleges, That
he was informed by his Council, That it had been the course of the House to
Reverse Decrees only by Bill legally Exhibited; that is, by a Bill to pass into
an Act by Parliament; (for what can a Bill in that case otherwise signify?)
This shows, that the whole Parliament are the proper Judges of it.

The Lord's House hereupon being tender and cautious how they entertained a new
Jurisdiction, name another Committee of Lords, to set down an Order in that
Cause.

That Committee Report their Order, viz. That the Cause be Reviewed in Chancery
by the Lord Keeper, by such Lords as the Lords House should name, and by any
Two of the Judges, as the Lord Keeper should name,

For which end the Lord Keeper is to be an humble Suitor to the King from the
House; to grant a Commission to himself (the Lord Keeper) and the Lords to be
named by the House.

The Lords House approved of the Order, and named Seven Lords. The King granted
the Commission accordingly, and the Decree in Chancery was Reversed upon it.

The Orders are to be seen in the Register's Office of the Chancery. Mich. and
Hill. 22. Iac. 1.

This is a dischargi^g all that the Lords had before done in it; Note.
though they had in effect arrived at the very Port, and made a conclusive
Order and Decree.

But after all, refer it to the right and usual Method in the main of it, viz.
to be determined by a Commission from the King to the Lord Keeper himself, to
Salve his Honor in it, ( Quod in consulto fecimus, consulto revocemus) and to
some Judges (who are the most proper) and to the Lords, who for that purpose
were recommended by the House of Lords, (which is in compliance with their
desire, but not Stricti Iuris.)

But the King's Commission is the true, regular, and warrantable ground and
foundation of all the further Proceedings in that Case.

And all this by the Direction, and with the Opinion and Judgment of the Lords
themselves, in a Case wherein they had begun, and made a large progress in the
Exercise of a Jurisdiction, and then wholly desisted.

Nor is the Subject without a proper and ordinary remedy (if our Law Books may
be credited) where he is grieved by an Erroneous Decree in a Court of Equity.

See Sergeant Rolles's Reports the 1 st Part, Fol. 331. the Case of Vaudrey
against Panel. Sir Edward Coke cites a Case there, Mich. 43. Elliz. in the
Chancery between the Countess of Southampton, and the Lord of Worcester,
Resolved by all the Judges, That when a Decree is made in Chancery, the Queen,
upon a Petition may referr it to the Judges, (but not to any other;) and so
(says that case) the practice and proceedings have been; which make a Law in
cases of Equity, and the Lord Chancellor agreed to it, (the Lord Egerton) and
accordingly upon Petition to the Queen, and a Reference by the Queen to the
Judges, that Decree was Reversed.

The like we may read in Andersons's Second Reports, Fol. 163. The Earl of
Worcester, and Sir Moil Finche's Case, the same with that of the Countess of
Southampton, and Bulstrode's Third Part, Fol. 118. See Sergeant Rolles's
Abridgment, the First Part, Fol. 382. Ruswell, and Every's Case. 15 Iac. 1. and
Arden and Darcy's Case, 8 Iac. 1.27 H. 8. Fol. 15.

But as to the Remedy against an Erroneous Decree in Chancery, I have already
given my advice at large in that former Treatise of mine beforementioned, to
which I refer my Reader. It is high time that it should be settled in some
constant course.

The Noble Author, supposed (as I said before) to be the late Lord Hollis, in
his Book beforementioned, has asserted a very large Jurisdiction to belong to
the House of Peers, which in the consequence, if it be observed and put in
practice, will be of mighty concernment to the Subjects: Nor has it been
answered, or taken notice of by any, as far as I have heard.

That Author ascribes to the Lords a power to try, and determine a matter of
Fact in issue, although the Right of a Freehold depend upon it; and this, by
Proofs without a Jury, page 66. and this he grounds upon the Precedent of the
case of William Paynel, the Record whereof is in Ryley's Placita
Parliamentaria, Fol. 231. What then becomes of that great privilege of the
people of England, of being tried by the Country, and by their Neighbors;? and
inferior Courts of Equity will be very apt to tread in their steps, and do the
like; and it deserves to be inquired into, if it be not already frequently so
done.

The Lords will not be likely to reform it upon Appeal from these Courts of
Equity, if that should be assigned for Error, if they themselves should
practice it, as this Author says they may.

Nor does that Precedent of William Paynell any way countenance that practice;
for there the ( Concilium Regis) gave Judgment upon Matter of Fact confessed,
where there needed no trial at all.

The same Noble Author affirms, That the Lords may entertain or dismiss Causes
as their occasions will give them leave, or as they have leisure from the
greater affairs of the Kingdom; so that sometimes they cannot be at leisure to
do Justice: If this Opinion be allowed, Cessa regnare, says the Petitioner to
King Philip of Macedon, when that King refused to answer her Petition for want
of leisure.

The Lords can (says the same Author) grant a temporary dismission to a
Defendant, by an Entry made of Eat inde sine die ad praesens: but may Summon
him again for the same Cause at another time when they think fit: If this be
true, a man shall never know when his Cause is at an end; nay, the Chancery
will give further costs after the Parties and Cause are out of the Court, and
long after the whole matter is at end, without any new process.

The persons of whom this high Judicature does consist had need be men of great
Learning in the Law, and of long Experience: For the matters that should come
before them are such, as are too difficult for the inferior Courts to
determine, and are very abstruse; and yet those inferior Courts are generally
furnished with such as are of great Abilities, and long Experience, and usually
spend Thirty or Forty years in hard study, to make them fit for the discharge
of their Offices.

Be Learned ye that are Judges of the Earth, says Almighty God, that Judge of
Judges. Hence Governors are wont to be called Senators, and in the time of the
Saxons they were called Eoldermen or Eldermen, for their Age, Gravity, and
Experience.

It would indeed be a Miracle in Nature, if any one could truly affirm of
himself, Me jam jam a puero, illico nasci Senem, or nasci Iudicem, to be able
to judge in those abstruse and difficult Causes.

St. Paul being accused before Faelix, did (and that without insinuating
flattery) tell his Judge, That he did the more cheerfully answer for himself,
because Faelix had been (as St. Paul acknowledged) of many years a Judge unto
that Nation: And he said the like when he stood before King Agrippa, because he
knew him Expert. And it is a just and commendable course, always practiced in
all our inferior Courts. That after a Cause has been pleaded, that both
Parties, and Council, and Witnesses, and all others that will, are permitted to
be present, and to hear the Repeating, and opening, and true stating the Case
by the Bench, and Court, and to hear the Debate of it, to observe, and be in a
readiness to rectify any misapprehension, or mistake (if any happen*) and so to
set the Court right again.

As also, that the grounds and reasons of the Opinions of the Judges may be
known, that the People may the better know thereafter how to square their
actions: And that the Law may be the better known to those that are subject to
it. For there ought to be one certain known Rule of Law, whereby one and the
same Case is to be determined, and not two or more contradictory Laws in one
and the same place.

It was a woeful condition, when at the same time some were burnt in Smithfield
for being Protestants, and others for being Papists; which made one cry out,
Bone Deus, quomodo hic vivunt! etc. Inferior Courts, and the Superior must
judge by the same Law and Rule; for Misera est Servitus, ubi jus est vagum. And
it is impossible to serve two contrary Masters; and it is a sad case, where the
Trumpet of the Law gives an uncertain sound, for then a man knows not how to
order his affairs.

There may indeed be a different Method, and Course of Proceedings in the
several Courts, and yet all conform to the same Law. And it is sometimes said
by our Judges, that what is Law in the Exchequer is Law also in the
King's Bench, and Common Pleas.

If it were otherwise, great Confusion would arise. And this Law is not known
by Inspiration, it is not infused all at once, but acquired by long Study, and
long Experience.

Sir Francis Bacon, in his Advancement of Learning, page 445. holds it just,
that Judges should allege the reasons of their Sentence, and that openly in
the Audience of all the Court.

And anciently amongst us in England, the Courts used to enter the reasons
given by the Judges, upon the Record of the Judgment; which is now supplied in
some measure, by Reports of Cases adjudg'd, and of the Arguments at Bar, and at
Bench.

But we have few or no Reports of Cases adjudg'd in the Supreme Court, since
those that are printed by Mr. Ryley.

In that ancient Cause of Adelwold, Bishop of Winchester in the Saxon times
under King Eldred, the Record mentions, that the Bishop himself, Coram cunctis
suam causam patefecit. He pleaded his Cause himself.

Qua Rebene, and rite, ac Aperte, ab Omnibus discussa, (it was openly debated)
Omnes reddiderunt Iudicium. This was at the Miccel-Gemot, there was no
withdrawing.

And Eadmerus gives us the like Instance in the Cause of Lanfrank Archbishop of
Canterbury in the time of King William the First; it is in his Historiae
Novorum, page 9. Adunatis (says he) Primoribus and Probis viris de Comitatibus:
quaerelae Lanfranci in Medium ducerentur, examinarentur and determinarentur. In
medium, that is, before, or in the midst of all that vast Company.

To Conclude, and in order to the obtaining a safe and speedy remedy, let our
Law makers be mindful of that old Advice and Caution, viz. -- Sero Medecina
paratur
Cum Mala per long as invaluere moras.


FINIS.

