A DISCOURSE Occasioned by the DEATH OF The Right Honorable THE Lady CUTTS.

By FRANCIS ATTERBURY, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
School.

TO The Right Honorable JOHN Lord CUTTS, Baron of Gouran, etc.
My Lord,
AT Your Command I preached this Discourse; but upon so short a warning, that
nothing less than Your repeated Commands could have excused me for publishing
it. The Subject of it is Death; a thing which You, my Lord, have very
familiarly conversed with, and seen in all its Shapes; but never, I believe,
found it so truly terrible as in the Face of my Lady.

All that were about You were witnesses, with how Sensible a Concern You bore
the Loss of Her: and indeed it was such a Loss, as even all Your Courage was
but little enough to bear. I pray God, it may turn to account to Your Lordship
another way; and may furnish You with such Reflections, and inspire You with
such Resolutions, as, if well pursued, will make You amends for any Loss, on
this side Heaven.

Your Lordship has chosen to express some part of Your Grief this way, by
giving the World an Opportunity of grieving with You: which it will certainly
do, wherever my Lady Cutts's Character is truly known; and I have endeavored
to make it known in the following Pages, with all the Sincerity that becomes my
Profession: a Quality, which, I must own to Your Lordship, I would not forfeit
upon any account; no, not though I were sure of doing the greatest Good by it.
Some part of what is there written I know, and the rest I do in my Conscience
believe to be true, after a very strict and particular Enquiry.

If I may be so happy in what I have said, as to contribute any ways toward
fixing a True Opinion of my Lady's merit, and spreading the Interests of Virtue
and Piety by the means of it, I have all the Ends I proposed to my self in this
Discourse; beside the Honor of publishing to the World that I am

Your Lordship's Most obedient and most humble Servant, Francis Atterbury.

A DISCOURSE Occasioned by the DEATH of the Right Honorable the Lady CUTTS.
ECCLES. vii. 2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to go to the
House of Feasting: for that is the End of all Men; and the Living will lay it
to heart.
THE first Step to Happiness is to correct our false Opinions; and to learn to
esteem every thing according to that Rate and Value, not which the World, or
our own mistaken Imaginations may have placed upon it, but which in it self,
and in the accounts of right Reason and Religion it really bears.

The Wise Hebrew therefore has, in this Chapter, laid together a Set of
Religious Paradoxes; which however they may startle and shock us a little upon
the first hearing, yet when closely examined, will appear to be very serious
and weighty Truths; and such, by which the whole course of our Lives ought to
be steered and governed.

In the first Verse of this Chapter (the Verse before the Text) he tells us,
that a Good Name is better than precious Ointment, and the day of ones Death,
than the day of ones Birth. A Good Name is better than precious Ointment; i. e.
rich Oils, and sweet Odors, (in the use of which those Eastern Countries
mightily delighted) are not half so grateful, or valuable, as a good
Reputation, well founded: This is more truly fragrant, more diffusive of its
influence, more durable: it gives a man greater comfort and refreshment, while
Living; and preserves him better, when Dead, than the most precious Embalmings.

And again, The day of ones Death is better than the day of ones Birth; i. e.
the day of the Death of such an one, as has, and deserves a Good Name; of such
an one, as has lived well, and died well, is preferable by far to the day of
his Birth: for it enters him upon a State of perfect rest and tranquillity, of
undisturbed joy and happiness; whereas the Day of his Birth was only an Inlet
into a troublesome World, and the beginning of sorrows.

And then it follows, very naturally, in the words of the Text, that It is
better [also] to go to the to House of Mourning, than to go to the House of
Feasting: as Death to a Good man is more advantageous than Life, so to a Wise
man the Contemplation of the one is more desirable than all the Enjoyments of
the other. He had much rather be present at the sad Solemnities of a Funeral,
than partake of those Festival Rejoycings, which are usual in all Nations, but
especially among the Jews, at the Birth of a Child.

Hard Doctrine this, to the Men of Liberty and Pleasure! who have said to
themselves, Come on, let us enjoy the things that are present, let us fill our
selves with costly Wine and Ointments, and let no Flower of the Spring pass by
us: let us crown our selves with Rosebuds before they be withered! Hard
Doctrine, I say, it is to such men as These; and which will run the hazard of
not being entertained by 'em. The Wise man therefore has condescended to prove
as well as assert it, and to back the severe Rule he has laid down with very
convincing Reasons: for that, says he, is the End of all men, and the Living
will lay it to heart. As if he had said, This Dark and Melancholy State it
will one day certainly come to our share to try; and what must some time or
other be undergone, ought now and then to be considered beforehand: this is the
End of all men, and all men therefore should have their Eye and their Thoughts
upon it. And then further, We are most of us so immersed in the Pleasures, and
taken up with the Follies of Life, that we need all methods of reducing our
straggling Thoughts and Desires, and of giving our selves a Serious Frame and
Composure of Mind: and of all Methods, this of repairing to the House of
Mourning is best adapted to that Good End, and will soonest and most
effectually bring it about: The Living will lay it to Heart.

I have largely explained the Connection and Meaning of the Words, which have
been pitched upon to employ Your Thoughts on this mournful Occasion. The next
thing should be to excite You to a Compliance with the Direction there given,
by the particular Arguments of the Text, and by several other powerful and
moving Considerations: to prove to you the Folly and Emptiness of a Life led
all in Mirth and Jollity and Pleasure; the Wisdom and Reasonableness of
shifting the Scene sometimes, and of turning the Gloomy side of things toward
us; in a word, of exchanging the House of Feasting for the House of Mourning,
and of making a discreet and decent use of those sad Opportunities of
Reflection, which God, mercifully severe, is pleased to put into our hands.

But I am prevented in this part of my Discourse by the Pious Design of this
Meeting: You are already doing that thing which I should recommend to You from
the Text, paying the Tribute of Your Tears to the Memory of One, whose Worth
You knew, and whose Want you feel; and bewailing the Loss of Her, under the
different Characters She bore of a Wife, a Daughter, a Relation, a Mistress, a
Friend.

All therefore I have to do on this occasion, is, to fall in with Your Pious
Grief already raised, and to bear a part in it, by dwelling together with You a
while on the Character of that Incomparable Lady, whose Death we lament; by
uniting, as well as I am able, the scattered parts of it, and recalling to Your
Thoughts at once the several Excellencies and Perfections of which it was
composed: which made her beloved and reverenced by You while Living, and will
make her Memory ever Dear and Desirable to You, now She is Dead; and which
raised her above the greatest part of her Sex, much more than any Outward Marks
of Rank and Distinction.

It Is now, after her Decease a fit time to speak of her in those Terms of
Respect which she deserved: for in her Lifetime she would not bear it, and
took pains to avoid it; hiding as many of her Virtues as she could from Public
Observation, and so behaving her self in the practice of those She could not
hide, as showed She had no mind to be told of 'em: discountenancing, as far as
lay in her power, that odious and designing Flattery, which Custom has now
made a kind of Debt from Persons of one Sex to those of the other, and almost a
necessary part of good Breeding.

But the Dead may be praised with Decency, though the Living hardly can:
especially Such of the Dead, as have not probably a greater indifference and
unconcern for what we say to their advantage now they are Dead, than they had
heretofore while they were Living.

There is a Public Homage due to Desert, if we take a proper Season of paying
it; and the Ministers of the Gospel, who are entrusted with so many Methods of
promoting Piety in the World, are entrusted with this among the rest, the
giving Honor where Honor is due; and the provoking the Imitation of Men, by
setting before 'em shining Patterns of Virtue, as well as the inculcating good
Rules and Precepts of Life: it is their immediate and particular Employment to
Praise God; and it does, no doubt, in some measure also belong to 'em, to
praise those that are Like him.

And now how shall I enter upon this fruitful Argument? What Particular of her
comprehensive Character shall I first choose to insist on? Let us determine our
selves to begin there where She always began, at her Devotions. In These She
was very Punctual and Regular: Morning and Evenning came not up more constantly
in their Course, than Her stated Hours of Private Prayer; which She observed
not formally, as a Task, but returned to 'em always with desire, delight, and
eagerness. She would on no occasion dispense with her self from paying this
Duty; no Business, no Accident could divert her from it; She esteemed it her
great Honor and Happiness, to attend upon God; and she resolved to find
Leisure for That, for whatever else She might want it.

How She behaved her self in these Secret Transactions between God and her own
Soul, is known to Him alone whom She worshipped: but if we may guess at her
Privacies, by what we saw of Her in Public, we may be sure She was all
Humility* Devotion, and Fervency; for so She remarkably was always, during the
time of Divine Service. Her Behavior was then the most devout and solemn, and
yet the most decent, and natural, and unaffected that could be; there was
nothing in it either negligent and loose, or evtravagant and strained: but all
was full of attention and composedness; it was throughout such as declared it
self not to be the work of the Passions, but to flow from the Understanding,
and from a thorough knowledge of the true Grounds and Principles of that her
Reasonable Service.

This Knowledge She attained by early Instructions, by much Reading, and
Meditation, (to which She appeared from her Infancy to be very particularly
addicted) and, give me leave to add, by a very diligent and exact attendance on
the Lessons of Piety which were uttered from the Pulpit; which no one practiced
better, becaure no one delighted in, listened to, or considered more. For at
these Performances She was all Attention, all Ear; She kept her Heart fixed and
bent to its holy Work, by keeping her Eye from Wandering.

It was her misfortune indeed, that the Exemplariness of her Behavior called
off the Eyes of several to observe it; but more Her and Their misfortune, that
when they had seen it, and satisfied their Curiosity, they did not go on also
to imitate it. She often expressed her dissatisfaction at that Indecency of
Carriage which universally prevails in our Churches; and wondered that They
should be most careless of their Behavior toward God, who are most
scrupulously nice in exacting and paying all the little Decencies that are in
use among Men.

When the Bread of Life was distributed, She was sure to be there, a devout and
never failing Communicant; and the strictness of her Attention, and the
reverence of her Behavior, were, if it were possible, raised and improved on
those occasions: The lively Image of a Crucified Savior then exhibited, could
not but make very moving impressions on a mind of so much pious Warmth and
Tenderness.

Books She took pleasure in, and made good use of; chiefly Books of Divinity,
and Devotion; which She studied and relished above all others. History too had
very often a share in her reflections; and sometimes She looked into pieces of
pure Diversion and Amusement; whenever She found 'em written in such a way, as
to be Innocent, as well as Entertaining. I need not tell You, to how narrow a
choice She was, by this means, confined.

But of all Books, the Book of God was That, in which She was most delighted
and employed; and which was never, for any considerable time, out of her hands.
No doubt She knew and felt the great use and sweet influence of it in calming
her mind, and regulating her desires, and lifting up her thoughts toward
Heaven; in feeding and fanning that holy Flame, which the Love of God had
kindled in her Heart, and which She took care, by this means, to keep
perpetually burning.

When She met with any thing in her Reading, there or elsewhere, which would be
of remarkable use to her in the conduct of her Life and Affairs, She trusted
not her Memory with it; not even that excellent Memory, which She safely
trusted with every thing besides: but immediately committed it to Writing. Many
Observations of this kind She has left, drawn from good Authors, but chiefly
from those Sacred Pages; and in collecting which, whether her Judgment or her
Piety had the largest share, it is not easy to say.

The Passages of Holy Writ which She took notice of were indeed commonly such
as related either to the Concerns of her Spiritual Estate, or to Matters of
Prudence: but it appears also that She spent some time in mediating on those
places where the sublimest Points of Christian Doctrine are contained* and in
possessing her self with a deep sense of the wonderful Love of God toward us,
manifested in the mysterious Work of our Redemption: for She had something more
than what in the Language of this Loose Age is called, a Lady's Religion. She
endeavored to understand the great Articles of our holy Faith, as well as to
Practice the good Rules of it; and She sensibly found, that the best way to
excite her self to the practice of the one, was to endeavor to understand the
other.

And this Book of God She was more particularly conversant in, on God's day; a
Day ever sacred to Her, and which therefore wore always in Her Family a Face of
Devotion suitable to the Dignity of it. It was truly a day of Rest to all under
her Roof: her Servants were then dismissed from a good part of their attendance
upon Her, that they might be at liberty to attend on their great Lord and
Master, whom both She and They were equally bound to obey. There was such a
Silence and Solemnity at that time observed by all about her, as might have
become the House of Mourning; and yet so much Ease and Serenity visible in
their Looks (at least in Her Looks there was) as showed, that They who were in
quick and sensible concern at any thing, which She thought it did not become
either Her to hear, or others to say.

True Piety, which in great measure consists in an Humility and Submission of
mind toward God, is attended always with Humility and Goodness also toward
his Creatures; and so it was in this Excellent Lady. Never was there a more
deep, and unfeigned, and artless Lowliness of Mind seen in her Rank and
Station: as far as she was placed above the Most of the World, yet She
conversed as it were upon the level with All of 'em: and yet when She stooped
the lowest toward them, She took care, even at that time, to preserve the
Respect that was due to her from them. She had so much true Merit, that She was
not afraid of being looked into, and therefore durst be familiar: and the worst
effect of that familiarity was, that She was better known by it, and by
consequence more loved and valued. Not only No one of her Inferiors ever came
uneasy from her, (as has been said of some Great ones) but so assured were all
beforehand of her sweetness of Temper, and obliging reception, that no one ever
went uneasy to her: When She opened her Lips, Gracious Words always proceeded
from thence, and in her Tongue was the Law of Kindness. Her Reservedness and
Love of Privacy might possibly be misinterpreted sometimes, for an Overvalue of
her self, by those who did not know her; but the least degree of Acquaintance
made all those Suspicions vanish. For though her Perfections both of Body and
Mind were very extraordinary, yet She was the only Person in the World that
seemed, without any endeavor to seem, insensible of 'em. She was, it is true,
in as much danger of being Vain, as great Beauty, and a good natural Wit could
make her: but she had such an overballance of Discretion, that She was never in
pain to have the one seen, or the other heard. Indeed This was particular to
her, and a very distinguishing part of her Character, that She never studied
appearances, nor made any advances toward the Opinion of the World; being
contented to be whatever was good or Deserving, without endeavoring in the
least to be thought so: and this, not out of any affected disregard to Public
Esteem, but merely from a Modesty and Easiness of Nature, which made her give
way to others, who were more willing to be observed. And yet She had also her
Hours of Openness and Freedom, when her Soul eased it self to Familiars and
Friends; and then out of the good Treasure of her Heart what good things did
She bring forth? Her Mouth was at such times, in the Comparison of Solomon, a
Well of Life, which ever sent forth such pure and sweet Streams, as pleased the
Senses, and refreshed the Hearts of all that drank at 'em. So that a doubt it
is, which was most to be admired in her, what She did, or what She did not say:
It was wonderful that One, who, when She pleased, could discourse so fitly and
so freely, should yet choose to be silent on so many occasions; it was as
wonderful, that She, who was so often silent, should, whenever She spoke, charm
all that heard her.

We may be sure, that She, who had such a command over her Tongue, kept no less
strict and watchful a Guard upon her Passions; those especially of the Rough
and Troublesome kind, with which She was scarce ever seen to be disquieted. She
knew not what the Disorders of Anger were, even on occasions that might seem to
justify, and to require it: as much as She hated Vice, She chose rather to
look it out of countenance, than to be severe against it; and to win the Bad
over to the side of Virtue by her Example, than by her Rebukes.

Her sweet Deportment toward Those who had the happiness to be with her could
be outdone by nothing but her tenderness in relation to the Absent; whom She
was sure to think and speak as well of as was possible: and when their
Character was plainly such, as could have no good Colors put upon it, yet She
would show her dislike of it no otherwise than by saying nothing of 'em.
Neither her Goodnature, nor her Religion, her Civility, nor her Prudence,
would suffer her to censure any one: She thought, she had enough* to do at
home, in that way, without look^ng much abroad; and therefore turned the edge
of all her reflections upon her self. Indeed She spared others as much as if
She had been afraid of 'em, and her self as little, as if She had had many
Faults that wanted mending: and yet, 'twas because She knew no great harm of
her self, that She could scarce be brought to suspect any in others.

Her Conversation might, for this reason, seem to want somewhat of that Salt
and smartness, which the ill-natured part of the World are so fond of; a Want,
that She could easily have supplied, would her Principles have given her leave:
but her settled opinion was, that the Good Name of any one was too nice and
serious a thing to be played with; and that it was a foolish kind of mirth,
which, in order to divert some, hurt others. She could never bring her self to
think, that the only thing which gave Life and Spirit to discourse, was, to
have some-body's Faults the subject of it; or, that the pleasure of a Visit
lay, in giving up the Company to one-another's Sport and Malice, by turns. And
if These are the chief marks of Wit and Good-breeding, it must be confessed
that She had neither.

With all this Goodness, Gentleness, and Meekness of nature, She had at the
same time a degree of Spirit and Firmness, unusual in her Sex; and was
particularly observed to have a wonderful Presence of mind in any accident of
danger: to show, that Innocence and Courage are nearly allied, and that even in
the softest Tempers, where the one of these is in perfection, there will and
must be a good degree of the other.

Shall I say any thing of that innate Modesty of Temper, and spotless Purity of
Heart, which shone throughout her whole Life and Conversation? a Quality, so
strictly required of her Sex, and so generally, I hope, enjoyed by it, that it
may be thought, not so properly commendable in any of 'em to have it, as
infamous to want it. However, in the most common and ordinary Graces there are
uncommon Heighths and Degrees; and it was the particular happiness of this
Wondrous Good Lady Remarkably to excel in every Virtue that belonged to her;
even in those, in which almost every body excells.

Shall I say, that from this love of Purity it was, that She banished her self
from those Public Diversions of the Town, which it was scarce possible to be
present at, without hearing something that wounded chaste Ears; and for which
She thought no amends could be made to Virtue, by all the Wit and Humor that
might go along with it? These Good Qualities, she knew, served only to
recommend the Poison, and make it palatable, and thought it therefore a piece
of service to other people, (who might perhaps be influenced by Her Example) to
stand off; though She her self were secured from the Infection. This questionless
was One reason of her allowing her self in those dangerous Entertainments so
sparingly; but it was but One of Many: She had really neither Relish, nor
Leisure for 'em; nor for a thousand other things, which the World miscalls
Pleasures. Not that She wanted naturally a Taste for any thing of this kind,
for her Apprehension was fine, and her Wit very good, and very ready at
Command, whenever ehe pleased to exercise it; but She had turned her Thoughts
so much on things of Use and Importance, that matters of mere Pleasure grew
flat and indifferent to her: She was so taken up with the care of improving her
understanding, and bettering her Life, in the discharge of the Offices
necessary to her Rank, in the Duties of her Closet, and the Concerns of her
Family, that she found, at the foot of the account, but little time, and less
mind, to give in to those vain Amusements.

She did not think it (as, I fear, it is too often thought) the peculiar
Happiness and Privilege of the Great, to have nothing to do; but took care to
fill every Vacant Minute of her Life with some useful or innocent Employment.
Indeed none were Vacant: for the several Hours of the Day had their peculiar
business allotted to them, (whether it were Conversation, or Work, Reading, or
Domestic affairs) each of which came up orderly in its turn; and was, as the
Wiseman speaks, (to be sure under Her management it was) beautiful in its
Season.

And this Regularity of Hers was free and natural, without Formality or
Constraint; it was neither troublesome to Her, nor to those that were with her:
when therefore any accident intervened, it was left off with as much ease as it
was practiced: for amongst all her discretionary Rules, the chief was, to seem
to have none; and to make matters of Form give way always to Circumstances and
Occasions.

She wrought with her Own Hands often, when She could more profitably and
pleasingly have employed her time, in Meditation, or Books; but She was willing
to set an example to those, who could not; and She took care therefore, that
that example should be well followed by all that were about her, and whom She
had any immediate influence over: for She knew very well, that the description
of a Good Wife and a Perfect Woman in the Proverbs, (a Description which She
much delighted in, and often read) was chiefly taken up in commending that
Diligence by which She looks well to the ways of her Household, and eats not
the bread of Idleness: and She knew also, that she, whose words these are said
to be, was no less a Woman, than the Mother of King Lemuel.

Diligence, and Frugality are Sisters: and She therefore, we may be sure, who
was so well acquainted with the one, was no stranger to the other. She was
strictly careful of her expenses; and yet knew how to be Generous and to
abound, when the occasion required it. But of all ways of good management, She
liked That the worst which shuts our hands to the Poor; to whom She was ever
very Compassionate and Charitable. To the other delights, with which an high
Fortune furnished her, She was insensible almost; but on This account She
valued it, that it gave her an opportunity of pursuing the several pleasures of
Beneficence, and of tasting all the sweets of well-doing. She delivered the
Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and Him that had none to help him: the
blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon her, and She caused the
Widows heart to sing. Very easy sure will this make her Audit at the great day
of account; that Charity will doubtless be allowed to be a Skreen to her few
Infirmities and Faults, which, when sprinkled by the Blood of Christ, can cover
a multitude of Sins.

In the exercise of this, and of all other Virtues, She was wonderfully Secret;
endeavoring to rise up, as near as She could, to the Rule of not letting her
right hand know what her left hand did. And this Secrecy of hers She managed so
well, that some of the most remarkable Instances of her Goodness were not
known, till after her death; no, not by Him, who was partaker of all her Joys
and Sorrows.

Retirement and Privacy She always loved, and therefore chose it, when, after
the Death of a near Relation (an Excellent Person The Old Lady Pickering.
under whose Care She had been bred) She was at Liberty to have lived
otherwise. From that Time to her Marriage, which was more than Three Years, She
hid her self in the Country; having an early and settled aversion to the Noise
and Inconveniences of a Town-life; and too little an opinion of her self, to
think, that it was so much the interest of Virtue and Religion as it really
was, to have her known and distinguished.

When afterward She went to Court, (as it was necessary for Her sometimes to
do) She did it with an Air, which plainly showed, that She went to pay her Duty
there, and not to delight her self in the Pomp and Glitter of that place. Had
She gone thither soon enough, to see that Good and Glorious Queen, the Ornament
of It, and of her Sex, She had been taken, we may presume, into her Intimacy,
and into her Bosom; for their Minds were nearly allied, and their Characters,
and Manners, and ways of Life not unlike; allowing for the difference of
Stations.

I need not, I cannot well say more of her: and if therefore I have fallen
short, in any parts of her Character, (as I am sensible I have in many that I
have mentioned, and in more that I have left untouched) I desire those
particular Defects may be supplied from this General account of her; that She
very much resembl'd Her, who was the Pattern of all that is Good and Amiable in
Womankind.

Whether She had this excellent Pattern in her Eye, I am not able to say, when,
soon after her Marriage, She declared to several Friends her thoughts, that
Every Woman, especially Women of Quality, ought to do as much Good as they
could in the World; and that the shortest, and surest way of doing this was, to
endeavor by all means to be as good a Christian, and as good a Wife, and as
good a Friend as was possible.

She endeavored, and she effected it; for She filled all Characters that she
fell into, and rose up well nigh to all the Obligations that She lay under: She
was devout, without Superstition; strict, without Ill-humor; good-natured,
without Weakness, cheerful without Levity; regular, without Affectation. She
was to her Husband the best Wife, the most agreeable Companion, and most
faithful Friend; to her Servants, the best Mistress; to her Relations, the most
respectful; to her Inferiors, the most obliging: and by all, that knew her
either nearly, or at a distance, She was reckoned and confessed to be one of
the best of Women.

Solomon indeed, in the Chapter from whence my Text is taken, has a very severe
Censure of the Women of His Time and Country: Behold, this have I found, (says
the Preacher) counting One by One, to find out the account; which yet my Soul
seeks, but I find not: One Man among a Thousand have I found, but a Woman
among a Thousand have I not found: by which he seems to intimate, as if he had
never met with One Good Woman among all the Daughters of Israel. If that be his
meaning, I will be bold to say, that, had the Virtuous Lady we lament been in
his Court, and of his Acquaintance, That Passage I read from him had not now
been part of Holy Writ: for even Wisdom it self could not but have born witness
to the Goodness of her Character.

And yet all this Goodness, and all this Excellence was bounded within the
Compass of Eighteen Years, and as many Days: for no longer was She allowed to
live among us. She was snatched out of the World as soon almost as She had made
her appearance in it; Like a Jewel of high price, just shown a little, and then
put up again; and We were deprived of her by that time We had learnt to value
her. But Circles may be complete, though small; the Perfection of life does not
consist in the Length of it: if it did, Our Savior, to be sure, would not have
died so soon after Thirty.

Short as her Life was, She had time enough in it to adorn the several States
of Virginity and Marriage; and to experience the Sadness of a kind of Widowhood
too: for such She accounted it, when her Lord was long absent from her; mourned
as much, and refused as much to be comforted, till his Return.

As her Life was short, so her Death was sudden; She was called away in haste,
and without any warning. One day She drooped, and the next She died; nor was
there many hours distance between her being very easy in this World, and very
happy in another. It seems, as if God, who had resolved to take her to himself,
and to Company more worthy of her, did it hastily on purpose, least, if the
account of her Illness had spread far, and lasted long, the Prayers of so many
Good Men and Women as had surely been engaged on her behalf, should have proved
unsuccessful, their Importunities unavailable. He may be thought unwilling, I
say, to put such a Discouragement on the United Devotions of his best Saints
and Servants; and, in order therefore to prevent their Applications, to have
removed her from hence, e're they could be aware of it.

However, though She was seized thus suddenly by Death, yet was She not
surpised: for She was ever in preparation for it; her Loins girt, (as the
Scripture speaks) and her Lamp ready trimmed, and burning. The moment almost
that She was taken ill, She was just risen from her Knees, and had made an end
of her Morning Devotions. And to such an One a sudden Death could be no
misfortune. We pray indeed against it, because few, very few, are fit for it;
and the Church is to proportion her Forms to the Generality of Christians: But
where a Good Soul is in perfect Readiness, there the sooner the sad Stroke is
struck, the better; all Delays in this case are uncomfortable to the Dying, as
well as to those who survive 'em.

In truth, She could not be called away more hastily than She was willing to
go. She had been used so much to have her Conversation in Heaven, and her Soul
had been so often upon the wing thither, that it readily lest its Earthly
Station upon the least becken from above; and took the very first opportunity
of quitting her Body, without lingering, or expecting a second summons. She
stayed no longer, after She was called, than to assure her Lord of her entire
resignation to the Divine Will; and of her having no manner of uneasiness upon
her Mind; and to take her Leave of Him, with all the expressions of tenderness.
When this was over, She had nothing more to do with her Senses; and therefore
sunk immediately under her Illness, and, after a short unquiet slumber, slept
in peace.

Thus lived, and thus died this Excellent Lady, whose Character I have here
represented in short, as my Time, and the Measure of such Discourses as these,
would suffer me; and endeavored to renew a faint Image of her several Virtues
and Perfections upon your Minds. I have done it in a confused manner, and
without the nice Divisions of Art; for Grief is not Methodical. It is enough,
if what I have said serve any ways to make her Resemblance present to your
thoughts, though it be not after the best and liveliest manner: when the Life is
gone, a Picture drawn even by an unskilful hand has its Use and Value; and
those who Loved what it represents, though very unequally, will be touched at the
Sight of it.

You all are so, I question not, at what has been said; touched in various
Manners, and in different Degrees, as Your Relation to her was nearer, or
further off; as You knew more or less of her. But You do not mourn alone; many
Living there are, that do now, and many more there are, who shall hereafter,
when her Character has spread, lay it to heart. The World has had a Loss as
well as You; True Virtue and Piety have suffered in her fall: and All
therefore, that have a Regard for Them, shall bear a part with You in Your
Sorrows.

The True Servants of God shall lay it to heart; who from their Souls desire
the increase of Religion and Goodness, and know the Power and Influence of so
sweet, so winning, so perfect a Pattern as was set by Her: who promised
Themselves a mighty Countenance, and the World strange Advantages, from her
Exemplary Sanctity and Goodness.

They that Minister in holy things will lay it to heart; to whom She repaired,
with so much constancy and seriousness, to hear the Divine Oracles explained by
'em, and to enquire the Law at their mouths. They consider, what an Helper and
Furtherer of their pious Labors they have lost; and how much more lifeless and
ineffectual their Discourses will now be, than they were heretofore, when She
encouraged 'em by her presence, and by her practice; and by the strict
attention She paid to 'em, made way for 'em into the hearts of Others. Virtue
went out from her in whatever congregation She appeared; She secretly raised
and set an Edge upon the Devotions of the Place: Every Day of her Life preached
up Goodness as effectually, as the most rational and moving Sermon.

The Enquirers into the Methods, and adorers of the Mysteries of Divine
Providence, will lay it to heart. Why, will they say, when God has most Work to
do in the world, is one of the best and faithfullest Instruments of his Glory
called out of it? why is She snatched away from us at a Time when we could
least have spared her? when Iniquity and Irreligion run high, and Piety is in
danger of growing out of Fashion, and out of Countenance? Why, in such a
Juncture, is this Good Lady taken? and why are so many of her Sex, so unlike
her, left? Is it in Mercy to Her, on in Judgment to Us? Is it because She was
too good to live here, or because We were too wicked to deserve her company?
Righteous art Thou, O Lord, when we plead with Thee: yet let Us talk with Thee
of thy Judgments!

Her Domestics will lay it to heart, whom She shone upon always with a singular
Goodness; who were near Witnesses of her most retired Graces and Virtues; and
had the best opportunities of forming themselves upon her admirable Model: and
who will now (alas!) be destitute of her Example, and Encouragement; of her
sweet Advice, and gentle Reproofs; and will be left to live upon that Stock of
Virtue, which has been happily laid in by 'em, that Measure of Goodness which
They have already derived, from attending and observing Her.

Finally, the Poor will lay it to heart, whose Bowels She refreshed, and whose
Wants She relieved; and was ever their sure Refuge, and Support, their Kind and
Merciful Patroness and Friend.

But above all, her Relations will lay it to heart; Those, to whom She was most
nearly joined by Blood, or Love; and who had a more particular Interest in all
her Virtues: They will lay their hands on their Breasts, in the Day of
Adversity, and consider; how have we offended, that we are thus grievously
punished? and which of Our Miscarriages is it, that this Heavy infliction is
Intended to reform?

This is the wisest and best Use that can be made of such Solemnities as these;
not by the means of 'em to excite our truly pious and Christian Grief to an
immoderate and unchristian Degree, nor to sorrow as Men without hope; but to
take Occasion from thence to search and enquire into our selves; to learn the
meaning of these Divine Admonitions; and, after we have interpreted 'em truly,
to resolve to obey 'em.

The Dead are unquestionably happy, whose Loss we deplore: Happy will the
Living be also, if they thus wisely, thus effectually lay it to heart! It is
better doubtless to go into the House of Mourning, than into the House of
Feasting; but upon this condition, that we come better out of the one, than out
of the other: that we leave our Vanities and our Vices behind us; that we lay
aside our Affections toward this World, and our Indifference toward another;
that we put on holy and hearty Resolutions of being even Now, what we shall
wish we had been, Hereafter, when the Fatal Hour approaches; and of living the
Life of this Righteous Person, that we may dye her Death too; and be remembered
and lamented, as She is, by those who survive us.

Let us assure our selves, that the best way of doing honor to her Memory will
be, by making her Character still live in Our Lives and Actions; that the
truest instance of our Love and Esteem of Her is, to endeavor to be Like Her:
for Thus, we shall even add to the Vast Reward She is entitled to, some further
Degrees of Happiness and Honor; and shall make the Crown of Glory she is to
wear, bright as it will be, yet brighter, in the Day of General Retribution.
Till when, it may be piously supposed, that the Saints departed are not
admitted to the Fullness of Joy, that in the mean time the Influence of their
good Examples and good Deeds spreading far and wide, That too, when their
Accounts are made up, may be taken into them; and the Fitness and
Proportionableness of their exceeding great Recompense then bestowed, be
manifested in the Sight of Angels and Men.

Wherefore lift up the Hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees! Think not so
much and so long on the incomparable Character of the Deceased, as to forget
the true Use You are to make of this afflicting Accident; and to neglect those
good Improvements under it, which the Wise and Kind Inflicter expects at Your
Hands. You have paid Your sad Respects to Her; be not now wanting to Your
selves: but Gird up the Loins of Your Mind, and be Ye comiorted!

The Consideration of what She was, which afflicts You, should much rather
cheer and revive You: had She been worse indeed, You would with more reason
have bewailed her. But why should You continue to mourn for One, who is entered
upon a state of unspeakable Joy? Why should You be dejected at Her Advancement?

She is gone to the place, where all Tears are wiped from her Eyes; where there
is no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying: She is gone, and her Works have
followed, and will follow her, to her Great and Endless Advantage. God grant,
that when We also follow her, we may do it with as little Surprise, and as much
Cheerfulness!

To him, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor,
Adoration, and Thanks, now, and for ever! Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, May 29. 1692. Published by Her
Majesty's special Command.

The Power of Charity to cover Sin. A Sermon, before the President and
Governors of Bridewell and Bethlehem, in Bridewell-Chapel, Aug. 16, 94. being
Election-day. Published at their Request.

The Christian Religion increased by Miracles. A Sermon before the Queen at
White Hall, October. 21, 1694. Published by Her Majesty's special Command.

The Scorner incapable of True Wisdom. A Sermon before the Queen, Dec. 28.
1694. Published by Her Majesty's special Command: These four by Mr. Francis
Atterbury: printed for Tho. Bennet.

Folio.
Thucydides, Greek and Latin, Collated with five entire Manuscript Copies; and
all the Editions extant: also illustrated with Mapps, large Annotations and
Indexes; by I. Hudson M. A. and Fellow of University College Oxon. To which is
added, an exact Chronology, by the Learned Henry Dodwell; never before
published: printed at the Theater Oxon.

Athenae Oxoniensis; or, an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops, who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford, from 1480, to the end of
the Year 1690; giving an account of the Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and Death
of all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives, with the
Fate and Character of their Writings. The Work so complete, that no Writer of
note of this Nation, for Two hundred Years, is omitted: In two Volumes.

A new Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Sian; by Monsieur de la Loubiere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King to the King of Siam, in 1687, and
1688; wherein a full and exact account is given of their Natural History; as
also of their Music, Arithmetic, and other Mathematick Learning; illustrated
with Sculptures. Done out of French by Dr. P. Fellow of the Royal Society.

Father Malbranch's Treatise concerning the Search after Truth: The whole Work
complete; to which is added, his Treatise of Nature and Grace, being a
Consequence of the Author's Principles contained in the Search; together with
F. Malbranch's Defense against Mr. de la Ville, and several other Adversaries.
All Englished by I. Tailor, M. A. of Magdalen College Oxon* and printed there.

Dr. Pocock's Commentaries on Hosea, Micah, Malachy, and Joel: printed at the
Theater Oxon.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, the 8th Edition. To which is added, the
Cu^ter of Coleman-street, never before printed in any of his Works.

Quarto.
A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament, in two
parts, by Father Simon, of the Oratory.

A Discourse sent to the late King James, to persuade him to embrace the
Protestant Religion; by Sam, Parker, late Bishop of Oxon. To which are prefixed
two Letters, the first from Sir Lionel Ienkins on the same Subject; the second
from the Bishop, sent with the Discourse: All printed from the original
manuscripts.

A Sermon before the King and Queen, by Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy, at his primary Visitation.

Of the Reverence due to God in his public Worship: A Sermon before the King
and Queen at White Hall, March 25. 1694, being the fifth Sunday in Lent; by
Nicholas Lord Bishop of Chester.

Two Sermons, one on a Thanksgiving before the House of Commons in November
1691; the other before the Queen, in November 1692. by Dr. Jane, Dean of
Gloucester.

Three Sermons before the Queen, by Dr. Resbury.

Three Sermons, one on a Thanksgiving at Worcester; the second before the
Queen; the third upon the Occasion of a public Charity. By Dr. Talbot Dean of
Worcester.

Two Sermons by Mr. Adams, one before the Lords Justices, upon the taking of
Namur; the other before the House of Commons, Nov. 5.

A short defense of the Orders of the Church of England; by Mr. Milbourn.

An Account of the Proceedings of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Exeter,
in his Visitation of Exeter-College in Oxon. The second Edition. To which is
added, the Censure of The Naked Gospel.

A defense of the said Proceedings; with an Answer to the Case of
Exeter-College, and the Account Examined. These two written by James Harington
Esquire

Certain Considerations for the better establishment of the Church of England;
with a Preface by James Harrington Esquire

A Letter to a Lord, in answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled, An Enquiry into
the Causes of the present fears and dangers of the Government; in a Discourse
between a Lord Lieutenant and one of his Deputies.

A Sermon at the Funeral of John Melfort Esquire by Mr. Easton.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Willoughby Chamberlain; by Mr. King, School.

Two Sermons; the first of Anger, before the Queen; the other before the Lord
Mayor; by Mr. Blackburn, Chaplain to the Bishop of Exeter.

Two Visitation Sermons at Guildford in Surrey, in 1697; the first on
Enthusiasm; the other of the Necessity of Reformation and an holy Life; by W.
Whitfield, M. A. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Octavo and Twelves.
Twenty four Sermons upon several Occasions, in two Volumes: by Dr. Robert
South, D. D. the second Edition.

Sermons and Discourses upon several occasions, by Dr. Stradling, Dean of
Chichester; together with an Account of the Author; by James Harrington Esquire

Sermons and Discourses upon several occasions, by Dr. Meggot, Dean of
Winchester.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Roman Emperor: Translated out
of Greek into English by Dr. Causabon, with Notes. To this Edition is added,
the Life of the Emperor, with an account of Stoic Philosophy; as also Remarks
on the meditations. All newly written by Monsieur and Madam Dacier.

Mr. Waller's Poems complete.

Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God; pathetically discoursed of in
a Letter to a Friend, by the Honorable R. Boil. The seventh Edition.

Academy of Science; being a short and easy Introduction to the knowledge of
the Liberal Arts and Sciences, with the Names of such Authors of note as have
written on every particular Science. By Dr. Abercromley.

A Letter to a Divine of the Church of England, concerning the composing and
delivery of Sermons.

The Inspiration of the New Testament asserted and explained; in answer to the
Six Letters of Inspiration from Holland, etc. By Mr. Le Wroth.

Cardinal Bona's Guide to Eternity; Englished by Sir. R. D'estrange.

Remarks on some late Writings of the English Socinians, in four Letters, done
at the Request of a Socinian Gentleman, by Mr. (...), Minister of Dovercart and
Harwich.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces; to which is added, the Life of his
present Majesty King William the Third, from his Birth to his Landing in
England: By Mr. Tho. Brown; together with all the Princes Heads taken from
Original Draughts, by Mr. Robert White.

Monsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, containing many curious
Reflections, very useful and necessary for the right understanding and judging
of the Excellencies of Horace and Virgil. Done into English from the French,
together with some Reflections on Prince Arthur. To which are added, an Essay
upon Satyr, by Monsieur Dacier; and a Treatise upon Pastoral Poetry by Monsieur
Fontanelle.

A Comparison between Pindar and Horace, written in French by M. Blondel,
Master to the Dauphin; Englished by Sir Edw. Sherburn.

Monsieur Rapin's Reflections upon Aristotle's Poetry; containing the
nacessary, rational and universal Rules for Epick, Drammatick, and the other
sorts of Poetry; with Reflections on the Works of the Ancient and Modern Poets,
and their Faults noted. Translated by Mr. Rhymer, by whom is added, some
Reflections on the Poets of the English Nation.

A Voyage to the World of Des Carts; translated from the French by T. Tailor,
M. A. of Magd. Coll. Oxon.

Memoirs of the Court of France, and of the Court of Spain; both written by the
ingenious French Lady: The later Englished by Mr. Tho. Brown.

A Discourse of Religious Assemblies; wherein the Nature and Necessity of
Divine Worship is explained and asserted, against Negligence and Profaneness:
For the use of the Members of the Church of England: By George Burghop, Rector
of little Goddesden in Hertfordshire.

A Conference with a Theist, in two parts, by W. Nicholls, D. D. Rector of
Selsey in Sussex.

The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in general; or, the first Grounds and
Principles of Human Duty established. In Eight Sermons preached at St. Martins
in the Fields, at the Lecture for the Year 1697, founded by the Honorable R.
Boil Esquire. By F. Gastiel, B. D. and Student of Christ-Church, Oxon.

Aeschinis in Ctesiphontem, and Demosthenis de Corona Oration. Gr. Lat.
Interpretat. Lat. and Vocum. Difficilimum explicationem adjecerunt. Per P.
Foulkes, J. Friend. Aedis Christi Alumni.

Aesopicarum Fabularum Dibectus, Gr. Lat.

Twelve Sermons in the Press, on several occasions: Being the third Volume. By
Robert South, D. D. never before Printed.

Iacobi Patriarchae de Shiloh Vaticinium a depravatione Iohannis Clerici, in
Pentateuchum Commentatoris, Assertum Opera and Studio Sebastiani Edzardi,
Accedit Ejusdem Disserratio de nomine Elohim, Auctori Iudicii de R. Simonii
Historia V. Test. Critica opposita.


