An Account of the TRIALS OF William Ld. Russell, William Hone, John Rouse, and
William Blake, who took their Trials at the Old-Baley, on the 13th of July,
1683, for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, and raising
Rebellion in the Land.
Entered according to ORDER.

THE Lord Russell on the 13th Instant came upon his Trial, and after some
debates relating to the Legality of the Jury, in relation to their not being
Freeholders, and that dispute being over ruled, the Court proceeded to Try him
upon the Indictment of High Treason, to which he had pleaded, Not Guilty; upon
which the Kings Council related to the Jury the several passages that had
happened, and declared the nature of the Crime; which was not only bent against
the Life of the King, but against all his good Subjects, or to that purpose:
Then the Evidence were called and Sworn, who declared that the Lord Russell had
been at several places or meetings, where together with the Duke of Monmouth,
the Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Fergason the Anabaptist Parson and others,
had conspired to Levy War, Raise Rebellion, and to compass the Death of His
Majesty; and that diverse of their faction were interessed in the Conspiracy,
and were in order to a general Rising to be in a readiness, and some of them to
provide men, especially Mr. Trenchard of Summersetshire, who was to raise a
considerable Body of Horse and Foot about Taunton; but failing to perform his
promise, the business was put off contrary to the expectation of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, who, as it was Sworn, did declare, that he had Nine or Ten thousand
Men at his beck, all brisk Boys; who would rise and seize upon the City, and
that after they were better strengthened, to Sally out and seize upon the
Court; that diverse considerations were had how to manage the design, and that
the Government should be Subverted. A Paper in the nature of a Declaration
being for that purpose provided, and read at a Tavern in Lumbard-street,
insinuating diverse Grievances of the Nation, to incite the people the better to
approve of the Conspiracy; and that after the Death of the Earl of Shaftsbury,
who upon discontent and fear of discovery, withdrew himself into Holland, they
framed amongst them a Council of six persons to manage the Plot, and that the
Lord Russel was one of the Six, and that they had been often in consult, how
still to carry on the design, some being of opinion, that the insurrection
should be made in London, others in the Country; and the latter reason was for
that, If the Insurrection was made in the Country, the King must send his
Guards to repulse them, when in the mean time the City left as it were
defenseless, should be seized by such as were in readiness; and the better to
strengthen themselves, they had given a Messenger appointed by the Consult
Sixty Guinies to go into Scotland, to stir up the discontented Gentry of that
Kingdom to make Insurrections there; and that a fond of money was to be raised
to supply necessary charges, To this Evidence the Lord Russel put diverse
Interrogatories, and produced many Lords and Eminent Clergymen, to give
Testimony of his Life and Conversation, using many Arguments to extenuate the
Crime: But after the various Debates, the Lord Chief Justice having repeated
what had occurred upon Evidence, to the Jury that found him guilty, William
Hone came upon his Trial, for Traitorously conspiring to kill the King; and for
that purpose procuring Arms. The first he confessed, but denied the latter: but
it appearing by Witnesses, that he was to be one of those that were to have
assassinated the King in his return from New Market; and for that purpose had
made provision for Horse and Arms, and had at Coffee houses, and other places,
confessed the Treasonable Design he had to kill the King, and that he first
engaged himself in the dire Conspiracy, at the instance of Richard Goodenough;
and the like Treason being proved against him by positive Evidence, he was
convicted of the Treasonable Conspiracy.

John Rouse having pleaded Not Guilty, upon his Arraignment, was Tried for High
Treason, for conspiring the Death of the King, and the Government to subvert,
being in diverse Consults for the carrying on the Design, being very active on
all occasions to promote the Hellish Design, which himself could not greatly
deny; wherefore upon full Evidence he was found Guilty of Treason.

Captain Blake having a Bill of Treason found against him for designing the
Death of the King, the chief charge against him was, a design be had to take
the Tower in, to effect which, the Witness declared that he provided Shipping
and Guns to batter the Tower, and Grenades was to be thrown into it to make
breaches to enter, diverse Seamen being designed in a readiness for that
purpose: But the positive matter of fact being sworn to but by one Witness,
though another gave circumstantial Evidence, the Jury acquitted the Prisoner.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham. 1683.


