A SERMON Preached at Westminster Abbey. March the 25th 1691.

By THOMAS ASTON, M. A.

The 2d. of Timothy the 4th. and the 3d. For the time will come when they will
not endure sound Doctrine, etc.

LONDON: Printed, ANNO 1691.

A SERMON Preached at Westminster-Abby. March the 25th. 1691.
Psalms LI. ver. 6. But lo! Thou requirest Truth in the inward Parts.


TO that Question, Micha 6, 8. O Man! what does the Lord require of thee? My
Text gives a direct Answer. God requires truth in the inward parts. But what he
requires, he must first bestow; so that in all our performances, we may truly
say with Holy David, Of thine own Lord have we given thee. This Truth is a
Conformity of Man to his most Holy Creator. God made Man in his own Image,
perfectly upright, but he continued not in that Honor, Rebelling against the
Worlds Monarch, was disinherited, lost himself and all his Posterity, depraved
their Nature, disenabling them to perform that good some are inclined to. Now
(though he cannot reach it in performance) God requires that Man in his heart
and affection, should be according to what he was in his first Creation.

This Truth is four-fould, 1st. Of Judgment. 2d. Of Heart. 3d. Of Speech, and
4th. Of Action.

First, Truth of Judgment is a Conformity to the Word of God, the Rule and
Proof of Truth. (viz.) when a Man informed by the Sacred Scriptures, and
enlightened by the Holy Spirit, remains steadfast in that Doctrine the word of
God teaches: then there is Truth in Judgment. It Is for this that St. Peter
commends the scattered Tribes, 2. Epistle, 1.12. I will not be negligent to put
you in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and are established
in the present Truth. And unto this settled Judgment St. Paul exhorts the
Ephesians, 4, 14, 15. Be not like Children tossed too and from with every wind
of Doctrine, but speak the Truth in Love. Error and Unstableness is contrary to
this Truth.

Secondly, Truth of Heart is Godly Simplicity and Sincerity (Mel Sine cera) In
1 Pet. 2.2. We have this Expression, The Sincere Milk of the Word. Milk not
mixed with Water. And in 1 Cor. 5.8, Sincerity and Truth are conjoined, Let us
keep the Feast with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth, Contrary to
this Truth, is Hypocricy or Pretense.

Thirdly, Truth in Speech, is when the Tongue becomes a direct Interpreter of
the Heart, when a Man plainly speaks the Truth from his Heart. Contrary to this
is Lying (speaking one thing and thinking another) which St. Paul positively
protests against. I speak the Truth, I Lie not. We are dehorted from the one,
and earnestly advised to the other by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.25. Put away Lying
and speak every Man Truth to his Neighbor.

Fourthly, Truth in Action, is a just and plain Dealing, both with God and Man;
an honest rendering to every one, what of right belongs to him. Contrary to
this Truth is Perfidiousness, Collusion and ungodly encroaching upon the Right
and Property of others. Our Lord and Savior (not out of Complement, but as he
really deserved) honored Nathaniel with the Character of a Just Dealer. An
Isralite in truth, in whom there is no guile.

These are the four Branches of Truth, and we dare not to exclude any of them,
the whole lump of Man must be leavened with Truth. His Judgment and Opinion
must be sound. His Affections Sincere, his Speech Verity. And his Coversation
so plain that it cannot be blamed.

And that which Stears all, is a true Judgment. For though the Heart be
sincere, the Speech true, the Actions never so just, yet if the Judgment be
missed, there is no Truth in any. An Error in the U^^^rstanding begets an Error
in the Will, in the Affections and Actions. An instance hereof we have in St.
Paul, before his Miraculous Conversion. He had a kind of Truth in Heart, For he
was Zealous toward God. And for his Speech and Actions he was unblamable,
concerning the Righteousness of the Law anrebukeable, He had no double Tongue
nor unjust Hand. At that time when he persecuted the Church, He was very
confident that that action was good and warrantable. He wanted nothing but
Truth in Judgment, and upon the account of that Want (notwithstanding all his
Honor and Proficiency in the Law) when he arrived at a true Judgment, he
despised them all. Yea doubtless (says he I account all things loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, my Lord.

But though this Truth be the prime and absolutely necessary, yet alone it is
not sufficient. Religion does not consist in Speculation. A Man may acquire a
right Judgment of things, and yet be wanting in the practice of his Duty. The
Head may be well furnished with Knowledge, and the Heart rotten and deceitful.
Judas, (whose very Name is odious for his unparrallel'd Treachery) knew much,
and doubtless Preached the Truth, and possibly did as much good thereby as
another Disciple; but he had a hollow false Heart, he wanted this second Branch
of Truth in the inward Parts, (viz.) Truth in Affection, and so got nothing by
his outward Profession, but a Sting of Conscience.

But if there be Truth in Judgment, and Truth in Heart, then the Speech will be
true, and the Actions just; For the Heart dictates to the Tongue, and prepares
the Hands, Out of the abundance of the Heart the Tongue speaks, and the Hands
act. When the Heart Indites a good matter, the Tongue will be like the Pen of a
ready Writer to express it; then the Bowels will be enlarged, the Hands open to
the necessities of the Saints, the Feet will move to the place where his Honor
dwells; in brief, all the Members of the Body will become Instruments of
Righteousness unto Holiness: Therefore King Solomon gives this excellent
advice, Keep thine heart with all diligence, for out of it proceeds the Ishews
of Life and of Death, Prove. 4.23.

Thus you see what God requires, a sound Judgment without Error, a sincere
Heart without Hypocricy, the speaking the Truth without a Lie, and Just Dealing
without Deceit.

Some render the words, Thou delightest in Truth in the inward parts, which is
according to wise King Solomon's Affirmation, Such as are upright in their way,
are his Delight. Prove. 11.2.
This we may readily assent too, when we remember that it is his own Image. I
am the Truth. Truth has made you free. There is nothing Counterfeit in him, or
from him; He is perfectly sincere in all his Proposals, and will exactly
perform his Promises and Threats, He is not a Man, that he should Lie, his
Veracity is Essential to him. And the Truth that is in him, is the Foundation
of all the Truth that is in us. Our Faith could have no ground, without his
Truth in promising: Our Hope no ground, without his Truth in performing: Our
Charity no ground, without his Truth in Loving: Our Repentance no ground,
without his Truth in Pardoning. And what is in him, he loves in his Creatures:
And he is resembled in nothing more than this Virtue, which Metaphorically is
said to yield a sweet Savor.

The Vulgar Translation expresses it thus, Thou desire Truth, etc. This
desire intimates a want, none desires what he has; desire terminates an
Enjoyment. It Is much to be lamented. Men are extremely deficient in it; God
made Man upright, but he sought out many Inventions. The Children of Men are
deceitful upon the Weights, Deceit, and Falsehood commonly lurk undiscernably
under the most specious shows of Reality. The Sons of Men are become Vanity,
the Sons of Noblemen are become a Lie. Now, God seeing that wanting in Man,
which in his Creation he bestowed upon him, desires that it might be recovered.

And we can never sufficiently admire the exceeding great love of our Lord and
Master, he deals with us as a Father, whereas he might deal with us as a Judge;
as a Judge he might punish the want, as a Father he desires the supply, and
takes more delight to see us recovered of our Miscarriages by Repentance, that
he may mercifully Pardon, than to see us perish in them according to the
severity of his Justice.

And as God delights in Truth where it is, desires it where it is wanting, so
he rewards it. All his promises are made to it. He will do good to them that
are good, and to them tha^ a^e true of Heart. He will give Grace and Glory, and
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. Grace! and
Glory! What can there be wanting where the Almighty is pleased to dispense
these? Grace here! and Glory hereafter! but to satisfy the most extensive and
unlimitted expectation, if there be any thing that can be called good, that is
not included in these two, He will give that also; No good thing will he
withold, etc. Plal. 84.11.

But as God Loves, Desires, and Rewards Sincerity; so he Hates, Loathes, and
will punish Hypocricy. He desp^seth the performance of those very Duties which
himself Commanded, if smutted and stained with Dissimulation. Bring no more
vain Oblations, Incense is an Abomination to me, I hate your Burnt Offerings,
my Soul nautiates your Solemn Assemblies. If. 1, 14, 15, Doubtless all these
were of Divine Institution, and though they were performed with the greatest
seeming Veneration and Devotion, yet because they were merely superficial, and
in appearance, without any Reality and Truth in the inward parts. The God of
Purity and Truth is so far from acceptance, that he pronounces them abominable.

To little purpose then it is to be present at Prayers in an unknown Tongue, or
to perform any outward Ceremonious Adoration wherein some Persons Religion
consists. This is not a serving God with Truth in the inward parts, as he
requires. It is (Pardon the Comparison) a kind of Complementing the Almighty,
and saying they are his Servants (which is a transcient, formal Expression in
the Mouths of Men without Intention.) When they have performed the outward Act,
can they imagine they have done enough? Alas, this cannot please the true God,
this can no more benefit their Souls, than the Picture of Ripe Fruit can
satisfy their Appetites. Such unthinking Devotion, (though never so Rompous
and Splendid in Appearance) is odious in the sight of the Omnisicent God; while
a few, unpolished, broken Expressions, proceeding from a contrite heart, are
Rethorical, Pleasing, and Effectual. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

Jehu did many Galant things, he destroyed the Worshippers of Baal, and
carefully preserved the Servants of the Lord. He executed that which was right
to Ahabs house; But his heart was not right, inclining to the sins of Jeroboam,
etc. and by reason of the want of his hearts sincerity, all his Glorious
Actions did lose their Grace in Gods sight.

There are many Inducements which may move Men to a seeming honest Deportment,
Some for the Applause of Men, as the Scribes and Pharesies. Some for Profit, as
the Shecamits. Some for Honor and Reputation, as King Saul. Some to avoid
trouble, and the danger of the Law, as in Queen Hesters days, many Heathens
pretended they were Jews. And in King Charles the Second's Reign, many
Scismaticks came to Church, and counterfeited true Members of the Church of
England. Some for Company sake, as Ananias and Zaphira, they would do as the
rest, though deceitfully, which was their Ruin. Some seem to do good, that
they may be the more capeable to do evil; and with Saint-like Actions palliate
their Wickedness. As Absol^m and Jezabel. And indeed a Hypocrite may make a
great Progress in outward Performances. He may be Baptized; so Magus. He may
Fast and Pray; so the Pharesie. He may Preach and Repent; so Judas. Nay more,
he may take Root, and bring fourth Fruit, and yet but a Hypocrite. Jerem. 12.2,
3. Thou have Planted them, yea they have taken Root, they grow, yea they bring
forth Fruit; thou art near in their Mouth, but far from their Reins. Now as our
Inward Affections should have their true Stamp from God, so should they make a
true Impression upon our Outward Actions. The increase above ground (whether
Wheat or Tares) is the same with the Seed under ground. The Fruit is like the
Tree, whether good or corrup^. And we in our Morals should not sustain one
person in our Bosom and another in our Countenance. When a Mean Contemptible
Mecannick personates an Emperor, King or Prince, we call him an Actor, Histrio
personam aliquam in Fabula sustiners.
the word in the Language our Savior spoke, is (...), one in a Vizard or
Counterfeit Face. Qui aliud pectore clausum habet, aliud ore promit.
A Heathen observed that the World was like a Stage, and that the persons that
acted upon it had scarce a true Visage They give good words (says the Royal
Prophet) with their Mouths, but Curse with their Hearts. The Jewish Hypocrites
described. Ez. 33.31. with their Religious outsides, did appear to be Gods
peculiar Servants, but the Lord says, They come as my People, (viz.) in
outward formality, but not his people in Sincerity and Truth. Apes that did
imitate his People, in some good things they did resemble them. Their Beauty
was but Painted and Meritriceous. Like Sepulchers Curiously Wrought, and richly
Gilded on the outside, having nothing but Rottenness and Putrefaction within.
So wicked Affections are covered with Saint-like Actions. Religion is not only
courted by the Virtuous; there are many who make pretentions to her; who never
will be brought to Espouse, and Cleave to her for Better and Worse, and yet
would be thought her Admirers. It Is much to be lamented, that Religion should
be made a Sanctuary to Fraud and Azilum to Villainous and Destructive purposes.

Former Ages supply us with Instances of such Counterfeits. Jezabel designing
Murder, caused a Fast to be proclaimed. Micha under the disguise of a Levite,
acts Idolatry. Judas under pretense of making Provision for the Poor, indulged
his own Covetous Temper. The Pharesies with their long Prayers commit horrid
Wickedness, devour Widows Houses. Absalom under color of distributing
Justice, would Usurp Dominion. Thus (you see) the most Bloody, Mischievous,
Barbarous, and Traiterous Actions have been committed under the specious shows
of Religion and Piety.

('It Is an unacceptable Office) I am very unwilling to tax this present Age,
Discourses of that Nature are frequent, public Evils are in every ones view,
and few so patient as not to complain. We may innocently Mourn in private, and
earnestly Pray that he who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, would by his
Holy Spirit guide us into all Truth.

I shall content my self at present, humbly to advise you in King Solomon's
words, Prove. 23.23. Buy the Truth and sell it not, (viz.) use all possible
means for the gaining and retaining of it, to pursue the Metaphor. First, the
Scripture is the Field, where Truth grows. Secondly, the place where Gods Word
is Devoutly Read, or sincerly and powerfully Preached, is the Market where you
may be furnished therewith.

The first is easily manifested; For, that the Scriptures are the ground of
Truth, St. James assures us. Of his own w^ll begat he us by the Word of Truth;
it is the Voice of God (who is Truth in the Abstract) it is the Breath of God.
All Scripture is given by Inspi^ation, etc.

But the second is more difficult. For every Profession (how distant soever
from it) pretend to Truth. And if you be not wary, you may be strangely
deluded, and let that pass current for Truth, which is indeed a Lie. Really, I
pity that sort of Ignorant (and I have Charity to believe) well meaning poor
Souls, who so inordinally admire the Persons of their Factious Teachers (having
gained upon their Credulity by their affected Canting, and Counterfeit Piety)
that they as readily embrace their ill grounded Tenets, as if they were as true
as Gospel. The overweening Opinion of the Author, rather than the Truth of the
Matter, procures their Affiance. This alas, has mouldred Protestants into many
insignificant parcels, while not only great Doctors, as Paul, Apollo, Cephas,
but Ignorant, Contemptible, Prevaricating Praters, are become the distinctive
Characters of Sects and Separate Communions. And there are another sort of
Preachers, who suffer their Judgments to stoop to their Temporal Advantage
('it is much to be lamented, that our Holy Mother the Church of England, should
be dishonored by such undutiful Sons) whose Consciences are so pliant, that
they make Religion a TRADE, a mere Diana of the Ephesians: And follow their
Occupations, because thereby no small gain is brought unto them. Acts 19.24.
They went out from us, for they were not of us. Every Division weakens, these
(in effect) strengthen the hands of our Common Enemy (I mean Popery) and if
ever it prevail (which God forbid) this is the means.

Since such dangerous Consequences proceed from Error in Judgment, and false
Teachers are the Destructive Planters and Spreaders thereof. Therefore
Christians, Try the Spirits, whether they be of God, prove all things, but hold
fast that which is good. Be industrious in the search after Truth, but humbly
acquiess in that Sense which the Word of God rightly Interpreted, affords, viz.
when one Scripture does not contradict, and dash against another.

Having obtained Truth in Judgment, we must seek for Truth in Affection: Our
Theoretical Truth must be turned into Practical. And of our Hearts Sincerity,
our Words and Actions are the Comments and Paraphrases. A good Man out of the
good Treasure of his Heart, brings forth good things, etc. Luke 6.45. And if
you desire to know how to pass a right Judgment upon your selves, whether your
Hearts are sincere or no, This is a Sign.

1. If, when you have all oppertunity of privacy, when without any Blemish of
your Reputation, you may Indulge Corrupt Nature: If then (with Joseph) you have
a desire to approve your self to God, your Heart is sincere.

2d If you prefer and embrace, what your Conscience assures you, is True, Just,
and Honest, both before God and Man, though in all probability the Profession
thereof, will expose you to Poverty, and many unhappy Disquietudes, and the
contrary (in all Humane Reason) free you from Trouble and Danger, and render
your Condition Easy, and Plentiful. If at such a time as This, neither Fear of
Punishment, nor Hope of Reward, nor any other left hand Respects, but merely a
regard to Gods Commandments, and the Comfort in your own Bosom, can influence
you, then your Heart is sincere.

This sincerity is a sort of Evangelical Perfection, whereby a Man resembles
God; For he is the Lord God of Truth. It Is our Petition in that Heavenly Prayer
our Savior taught us. Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven (that is)
That we who are here below, may imitate those Glorious Saints and Angels above,
in doing Gods Will in Sincerity.

Thus qualified, you may approach Gods Holy place, and say with good K.
Hezekiah, Remember now (O Lord) how I have walked before thee in Truth with a
perfect Heart, etc. In regard of this quality (though of no other) we may
Appeal to the Sentence of the Impartial Judge of Heaven and Earth, as the
Prophet David did. Judge me O Lord, for I have walked in mine Integrity, Psalm.
26.1.

But without Sncerity, no Grace is of any use or worth, therefore we find in
the Sacred Oracles these Adjuncts, Faith unfeigned, Love without Dissimulation;
and Wisdom must be thus qualified, St. James 3.17. The Wisdom that is from
above, is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and easy to be entreated, full
of Mercy and good Works, without Partiality, and without Hypocricy. If Faith be
not unfeigned, and so true: Love without Dissimulation, Wisdom without
Hypocricy, all is Vain and Fruitless. The Pharesies Fasted, Prayed, gave Alms,
paid Tithes: Yet our Savior (who required Truth) who knew, and alone can
punish secret Thoughts, denounced a Woe against them. A Hypocrite can expect
nothing from the true God, who requires Truth in the inward parts; But the
just desert of his Hypocricy. A Hypocrite (indeed) has one great Prerogative
above other Sinners, (viz.) that he can never be accused by Men. But withal,
it is well worthy your Observation, that in the Sacred Sc^iptures we never find
one single instance of a Hypocrites Repentance, in order to be Pardoned by the
Just God: For whereas Conversion is left as a means to Recover all other
Sinners; What means remains to restore him who turns even Conversion it self
into a Sin?

On the other hand, Happy is the Man that is Sincere; for this makes every
Action acceptable too, and himself beloved of God. If Faith be but True,
(though it come short in parts and degrees it is forceable and available,
Nothing is impossible to such. Blessed is the M^^ in whose Spirit there is no
guile! For the Lord will not impute to him sin. He will guide ^^m ^ich his
Council in this Life, and af^^^ (...) receive him to Glory. And to his
un^xp^^^table Comfort, the Sincere Person may ^y with Holy David God is my
King, and hough he cannot express his Allegiance to his King, either in his
Person or Purse, being Imprisoned by Sickness, or in a Goal, having neither
feet to approach the Courts of the Lords House, hands to lift up as a Morning
Sacrifice, Tongues to utter his Praise, nor Silver and Gold, nor so much as a
Cup of cold water to distribute to a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet. Yet this
Glorious King (being the searcher of Hearts) will accept and reward his good
inclination, and intention, as if exerted into Performance. But God be thanked,
we have all precious oppertunities tendered to us; it is therefore my Humble,
Earnest, Concluding Exhortation. Let your Words and Actions manifest the
Solidity of your Judgment, and your Hearts Sincerity. In order wereunto.

First, Abhor in your selves, utterly Renounce, Discountenance in others, not
only Downright Perjury and notorious Lying, but all Equivocating, Dissembling,
and the least tendences to Falsehood. To be esteemed a Liar, is so Base and
Ignominious a Reproach, that nothing can be more Shameful and Inglorious. To be
protected from such dangerous Society, was the Royal Prophets earnest Prayer.
Deliver my Soul O Lord from Lying Lips, and from a Decei^ful Tongue. Every Man's
Credit is dear to him, and cannot endure to be distrusted, insomuch than the
giving the Lie (you know) is thought a just ground of a Quarrel, and not to be
recompensed, without the Blood of him that offered the Affront; so that the
most Immoral and Wildest Men, have a value for Truth, and will tell you, they
Scorn to be found in a Lie. And if You b^ not directly of the Temper of the
unjust Judge in the Gospel, who neither feared God, nor regarded Man; These
considerations (I hope) will influence you to keep your Tongues from Evil
Speaking, Lying and Slandering, never, never deviate from entire Veracity in
your whole Conv^rsation.

S^c^ndly, In order to discover a sound Judg^ment, and an honest Heart, you
must be true and ju^t in all o^r Dealings. It will be ack^owledg^d, eve^ by
thos^ who do not pr^ctice i^, that clear and f^re Dealing is the Honor of Man's
Natu^^^ and that there is no Vice that does so cover a Man with shame as to be
detected False and Knavish. A Man that is known to be Fraudulent and
Persidious, is as much to be dreaded and as circumspectly avoided, as a
venomous Serpent. In the Fear of God therefore decline every occasion that may
give just suspicion of such unworthy Collusion. And let that Golden Rule of our
Saviors (for your Peace, for your Credit, and for your Comfort) be daily in
your Thoughts and constant Practice. What oever ye would that Men should do
unto you, even so do to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. And by this
Carriage, (viz) by using no Deceit in your Tongue, and doing no Evil, but Good
to your Neigbour, you will be fit to reside in Gods Tabernacle, and to rest
upon his Holy Hill (namely) to be Gracious Members of the Church Militant, and
Glorious Partakers with the Church Tryumphant, etc I shall conclude all with
our Churches Collect.

Almighty God, who show to them that be in Error, the Light of Truth, to the
intent that they may return into the way of Righteousness; Grant unto all them
that are admitted into the Fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may eschew
those things that are contrary to their Profession, and follow all such things
as are agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

October 24th. 1691.

