A true Account of the Unreasonableness of Mr. Fitton's Pretenses against the
Earl of Macclesfield.
ALexander Fitton, 23 May, 1685.
Son to William Fitton of Ireland, petitions the Right Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, assembled in this present Parliament, to set aside a
Decree of the Lord Chancellor Clarendon, made November. 27. 1662; grounded upon
Sir Edward Fitton's Devise, by Will, to the present Earl of Macclesfield;
whereby the possession of the Estate of Sir Edward, Uncle to the said Earl, and
remote Kinsman to the Petitioner, with all the Evidences concerning the same,
were decreed to the said Earl, Nov. 1662.
a certain Deed Poll set up by Fitton, and condemned in a Trial at the King's
Bench-Bar, upon a feigned Issue, to be vacated, and the Estate to be
established to the said Earl, from all farther Pretenses of Fitton, or other
the Defendents, or any claiming under him, or them, unless he or they made out
a Title upon that Deed, which was the only Pretense, within twelve months, and
the said Fitton was to pay the whole Costs. After this Fitton gives notice of a
Trial, but would not proceed; and when the twelve months were almost expired,
and he was under a necessity of trying then, or not at all, he prayed farther
time; but was justly denied it, being 'twas manifestly for vexatious Delay. And
upon Trial at the Grand Sessions of Chester, Nov. 2. 1663.
being the proper County, the Verdict going against him, the Decree was made
Absolute. Having acquiest under this for above one and twenty Years, excepting
only that he questioned the Witnesses to the Will for Perjury, of which they
were acquitted by Verdict, 20 Car. 2.
he brings his Bill of Review before the present Lord Keeper; April 16. 1684.
who at first required his payment of the Costs, before he would put the Earl
to answer, till Fitton swore his absolute inability to pay them.

Upon the Earl's Plea and Demurrer, Fitton's Bill was dismissed; Term Hill. 1684.
after this Fitton petitioned for a Re-hearing; which was granted him, but he
did not prosecute it.

The Suggestions upon which his Petition is grounded, with their Answers, are
these:
1. That he had been many Years in possession of the Estate: Whereas he had not
been in possession above four Years, and those in the Times of the Usurpation,
while the now Earl was in Exile with his late Majesty. During which time, the
said Earl refusing any Composition, though 'twas offered him, received not any
benefit of that, or of his paternal Estate: And before he was driven out for
his Loyalty, he was, by virtue of the said Will, in possession of all Sir
Edward's Estate, not in Jointure or Mortgage; and received the Rents of the
same, immediately upon the Death of Sir Edward's Mother, Grandmother to the now
Earl; excepting only one part of Gosworth, which was so infested with the
Enemy's Troops, that the Earl could not come at it.

2. That the Earl claimed, under a Will of Sir Edward's; The Petitioner under a
Settlement with Power of Revocation, and a Deed Poll releasing that Power, both
antecedent to the Will: And that though he had contested the Will, he was not
admitted to any Trial upon it; wherein he says, He had manifest Wrong and
Injustice. Whereas it appears, upon his own Answer, that he never contested it,
but wholly relied upon his Deed Poll, and says, Whether a Will or no Will is
not material. Answ. fo. 16 and 17.
And no Man can imagine, that when he had a good Title by a Settlement prior to
the Will, he would incur the Crime and Hazard of contriving the Deed Poll,
unless he had believed that there was such a Will. Nor was Fitton straightned,
as he complains, from trying the Merits of the Cause upon the Will; for the
second Trial was in Ejectment, and as Fitton had a very good Title upon the
first Settlement till the Will were proved; it is evident that the Will could
not but come in question, and in Fact was fully proved.

3. Fitton will have it, that the Earl being Plantiff in Chancery, it lay upon
him to prove his Will: which he did in that Court, but was not to be put to do
it elsewhere, unless Fitton had contested it.

4. To discredit the said Earl, Fitton affirms that the said Earl had a Verdict
against the Deed Poll, upon the Evidence of one Granger, a notorious Cheat,
whereby he would insinuate as if there were no other Evidence against it; which
is not only a reflection upon two Juries who disbelieved it, but even two
Judgments of the House of Lords, July 9. 1663
one of which censured Fitton and his Accomplices for their contrivance, to
cast their practices with Granger upon the Earl. The other condemned the Libel
to be burnt by the common Hangman, July 11. 1663.
and nothing but the Earl's Clemency, at Fitton's request upon his Knee, after
a Jury was impanelled, stopped the said Earl from having him tried, upon an
Information of Forgery.

Besides, not to mention all the Circumstances which evinced the Forgery,
(which surely one need not, after the Deed has been cancelled by order of the
High Court of Chancery, upon two solemn Trials) there were these Particulars
extremely pregnant, I may say demonstrative, against it. That he neither in
Marriage Treaties, nor Trials before with others, concerning the Estate, ever
produced such Deed. Nor did his own Father know of it till the Suit with the
now Earl, and the supposed Witnesses to it declared, a little before they
swore, that they knew nothing of any such Deed; and when they were cross
examined upon the Trial, they could give no account of Time, or Place, v. The
Decree which mentions this
or any one Circumstance in relation to the Execution of it.

Nay, one of them, Richard Davenport, at Chester, after the Verdict was over
(it having been proved at the Trial what Reward had been promised him by one
Berwick, another supposed Witness) before the whole Jury and several other
Gentlemen, begged the Earl's Pardon for swearing falsely that he was a Witness
to the Execution of the Deed, and desired the Earl not to prosecute him.

Whereas Fitton affirmed openly in Chancery, that he never knew Granger, nor
was in his company; yet the contrary was fully proved on the Trial at the
King's Bench Bar by several Witnesses.

And the Jury declared that they had sufficient Evidence of the Forgery without
Consideration of Granger; and in truth there was an Evidence in the nature of
the thing, for the Settlement to the advantage of Fitton, with power of
Revocation, was made in the Lifetime of Sir Edward's second Lady; and in that
Settlement was no Provision for any Child or Children, beyond the Heirs of his
Body, which could be but one at a time. There was indeed a Limitation before
that to the Fittons, to such Person or Persons, Estate or Estates, as he should
limit or appoint by Will or Deed. Fitton pretends to a Release of all this
Power by his Deed-Poll of April 1642, when Sir Edward was newly married to a
young Lady, himself in his full Strength and Expectation of Children, and at
the same time W. Fitton, to whom the Estate was first limited, was known by Sir
Edward to be in the Irish Rebellion; and the Estate, if Sir Edward died, must
needs have been forfeited; and by that pretended Deed Sir Edward would not only
have deprived himself of Power to provide for such Children as he might well
expect to have, but even from raising such Moneys as might be necessary to
carry on his then Majesty's Service, for which he was engaged to the utmost, or
for any other occasions; and no Man could believe this of a Man so prudent, as
all agreed Sir Edward to be.

5. He suggests that the Possession and Deeds were decreed against him before
the Cause determined, whereas it was not till after solemn Trial at the Bar;
and the second Trial was wholly in his favor, and he had all the Deeds to use
at the second Trial: Nor can he complain that his Deed-Poll was sent down with
a mark of Infamy upon it after the first Verdict; or that before that his
Deed-Poll was called a pretended Deed, in the order for the first Trial, since
several Circumstances that appeared in Chancery were strong against it.

6. That his Inheritance was absolutely concluded upon a single Trial, whereas
it is apparent that there were two solemn ones, v. Rolls ab Tit. Chancery.
nor was the right of Inheritance touched, but only the Person bound.

7. But then he would give Laws and Limits of his own to the power of the
Chancery, and says that it ought only to have set aside a Lease of 99 Years
upon the Estate, so that it might not hinder the Trial of the Right of
Inheritance; that this was a Trust properly within its power, but that the
Right of Inheritance was not.

And the Council before a Commit of Lords, being convinced of the falsehood of
his other Suggestions, seemed in their Reply to put all their Stress upon this
as a thing not answered, as if their Opinion of the Power of that Court,
contrary to the Judgment of the Lord Chancellor Clarendon, and the now Lord
Keeper, deserved an Answer. But they might have considered that the Chancery
did not, nor ever does take away any Man's Right of Inheritance, but quiets the
Possession, and gives the other Incidents to them that have the Right either
admitted, or proved upon Trial, according to the matter in Issue.

But then the Petition says, that no more than setting aside that Lease was
prayed by the Bill; whereas it as well sets forth the Will in haec verba, and
the Earls Title by it, complains of Fitton's setting up Pretenses, and having
Deeds concerning the Estate, of which, and of all Conspiracies, it desires a
discovery, and prays Relief upon the whole: And was it unreasonable, or out of
the Power of the Chancery, as a proper Relief in this Case, to give the mean
Profits, tho not particularly required in the Bill, Vid. The Decree.
but moved for by Counsel, being confessed by the Answer, and to establish the
Possession against one who would counterfeit a Title to a Man's Estate? Shall
he afterward be admitted to contest that Title, which is not to be impeached
but by a forged Deed? If indeed he had urged that the Will was forged, or that
there was no Will, then no Incident to the Right of Inheritance claimed by that
would have been given in Chancery, till the Will had been tried at Common Law;
but in this Case, the Trial of the Deed, was the Trial of the Right of
Inheritance, which being over, the Lease in trust was to be assigned to attend
the Inheritance, and could not have been duly assigned before.

But whereas Mr. Fitton thinks it hard that he should not now be suffered to
try the Will, as if he could manifestly disprove it; and he has possessed some
with the Be^^e^ that Granger, who was his Creature and Accomplice, had an hand
in the Will. It Is requisite to give some account of the Proof that there has
been to it formerly; and the stronger that Proof is, the clearer is the
Argument, that it ought not now to be questioned. For surely it is not enough
to say, Pray let me be admitted to sue for his Estate, tho I have been never so
vexatious before, because he can easily make out a good Title.

The Proofs to the Will may be divided into three Heads.
1. Sir Edward's Declarations of his Intention to settle his Estate upon the
Now Earl of Macclesfield.

2. The positive Proofs to the Will.

3. Several Circumstances subsequent, which evince that Sir Edward had made a
Will, and that they who proved the Will swore true.

1. The first was proved at large directly, and expressly, by Henry Manwaring of
Canningham in Cheshire Esquire, who married one of Sir Edward's Coheirs, and
could not be supposed to swear falsely so much against his Interest. Richard
Sneyd of Egmond in the County of Stafford, Esquire, Brother to Sir Edward's
second Lady. Vrian Leigh of St. Giles Cripple-gate, Esquire, Francis
Hollinshead of Leek in the said County of Stafford, Gent. and Leonard Watson,
Yeoman, who had been Bailiff to Sir Edward's Mother. And there was full Proof
that Sir Edward, who was a zealous Asserter of his King's Right, and the Church
of England as by Law established, was extremely displeased with Fitton, being
informed, as the truth was, that he was on the side of the Irish Rebels; as he
was, after he came into England, actually in Arms against the King, under the
Command of Col. Bradshaw: and Sir Edward frequently declared his resolution to
give the Earl his Estate (being his Sister's Son) for his signal Service to his
then Majesty.

2. That Sir Edward made his Will as aforesaid, was proved by Dr. Smallwood,
who was his Chaplain at the making of his Will, both domestic and belonging to
his Regiment; and afterward Chaplain in Ordinary to his late Majesty, and Dean
of Litchfield, a Person of known Worth and Integrity, who swore that he was
present, and a Witness to the sealing, publishing, and delivery of the last
Will and Testament of the said Sir Edward; Dated August 16. 1643. That it was
executed at Bristol, he being of sound Memory and Understanding; and was his
Voluntary Act, and according to his declared Intention, That the other three
Persons, whose Names were subscribed, were present; That Sir Edward delivered
it to his Custody with solemn Charge to be true to his Trust; And in discharge
of the said Trust, he delivered it to the now Earl since his return to England
with his late Majesty: But that the Earl knew of the Will within two days after
the making of it, was proved by Richard Sneyd aforesaid.

The aforesaid Francis Hollinshead, another Witness whose Name was subscribed
to the said Will, swore as ^ully to the execution of it as Dr. Smallwood did.

And Edmond Ashenhurst of the Old Park in Staffordshire, Gent. proved the Name
of William Ashenhurst his Nephew, another Witness, whose Name was subscribed,
and who was a Chyrurgion to Sir Edward's Regiment.

John Davenport, another Witness to the Will, died within a very short time
after.

3. Edmond Ashenhurst aforenamed, swore that when Sir Edward's Corpse were
carried to be buried at Oxford, both William Ashenhurst, and Francis
Hollinshead told him, that Sir Edward had settled all his Estate on the now
Earl; and at several other times they declared that it was by Will, to which
they were Witnesses.

Elisha Manwaring of Morton Sands in Cheshire, Gent. James Ingham of Congleton,
in the same County, Joyner, Raphael Hollinshead of Halsal, in Lancashire, Gent.
William Trafford of Swithamley in Staffordsheire, Esquire, Thomas Powel of
Hosely in Flintshire, Esquire, and Henry Manwaring above mentioned, swore to
the like Declaration of Francis Hollinshead. Thomas Green of Congleton in
Cheshire, Gent. presently after Sir Edward's Death, heard it credibly reported
at Bristol, that Sir Edward had settled his Estate in Cheshire upon the now
Earl. And William Kirk of Aleford, Yeoman, who had been a Soldier under Sir
Edward, swore to the like Report. Richard Sneyd swore that the last words Sir
Edward spoke, were of rejoicing that so worthy a Person as his Nephew Gerrard
was to succeed him.

Henry Manwaring aforesaid, deposed that Dr. Smallwood told him, as a Secret,
before the King's coming in, that Sir Edward had settled his Estate upon the
now Earl, and that he was a Witness to it.

And the aforesaid Thomas Holland swore to the like Declaration, made to him by
the Doctor.

And several Discourses of Dr. Smallwood, and Francis Hollinshead to their
Friends presently after the Death of Sir Edward, and at other times, and but
late before the King's Restoration, wherein they declared their having been
Witnesses to the Will, were proved by Richard Leving, Esquire, Recorder of
Chester, one of Fitton's own Counsel. Thomas Foster of Holt in Denbigh-shire,
Gent. and John Smallwood of Middlewich in Cheshire, Gent.

Thomas Pinfold, Clerk, or Proctor in the Ecclesiastical Court, proved, that
when the said Will of Sir Edward's of August 1643, was brought into the Office
in May 1661, the Seal thereto was fairly fixed, but was after broken off, after
one, against whose Interest it seemed, had perused it, and three Witnesses more
proved the same.

And the two surviving Witnesses to the Will having been prosecuted by Fitton
upon an Information of Perjury, for their Evidence concerning the same, were
acquitted by a Verdict.

These Reasons, among several others, seem to evince that Fitton ought not now
to have an Appeal allowed to reverse the Decree, so long since settled.

1. The Will which Mr. Fitton would now dispute, was proved in Form of Law in
the Ecclesiastical Court, before the Earl exhibited his Bill in Chancery, there
Mr. Fitton might have been admitted to disprove it if he could; All Parties
concerned, have either a particular or general Citation there, before the
Witnesses are allowed; and any Man that litigates, may have them cross examined.

2. The Will was proved in Chancery, and the Witnesses justified by Order of
that Court, notwithstanding the Exceptions which Mr. Fitton took, and is
declared a good Will in the Decree in these words, Nothing did appear, either
in proof or otherwise, to the discountenance of the Will; but the Court was
fully satisfied that the same was really signed, sealed, and published, by the
said Sir Edward at Bristol, as his last Will and Testament; and that it then
was, and for several Years before had been his full Intention to settle the
Premises upon the Complainant, in case he died without Issue of his Body.

If this Decree should be reversed, the Will will lose all that Countenance and
Authority which it has so long enjoyed from that Court; and surely that ought
not to be taken away without manifest Reason.

Besides, I take it to be a judged Case, that this ought not now to be
questioned.

There are two Resolutions in Rolls. That, Rolls ab Tit. Chancery, fol. 382.


If the Chancellor err in his Decree, upon a Matter of Fact, this Decree is
final, and cannot be reviewed, because they ought not to go to new examination
of Witnesses, for it cannot be done after publication.

If in Fitton's Case the Bill of Review were legally dismissed, there can now
be no color for his Appeal.

3. The Credit of the Witnesses to the Will, ought not to be impeached after so
solemn Justifications as above mentioned, so long since, when there have been
Marriage -- and other Settlements, never contested for many Years, and
depending wholly upon the Will, which they have proved; and they are not now
alive to evince the Matter, by such Circumstances as they might prove by
others, which cannot now be known. It has been objected, That it appears by the
Oath in Chancery of Dr. Smallwood, the principal Witness to the Will, that he
swore he knew nothing of the Will: Whereas it was in relation to another Will
made Anno 1641, to which the said Doctor was no way privy; whereby the said Sir
Edward disposed of his Personal Estate to the Coheirs, and their eldest Sons,
all but the Earl's Mother and himself, which is a further Evidence for the Will
by which he claims.

4. Besides, that all the Witnesses to the Will, which was made about two and
forty years ago, are dead; several who confirmed their Testimony by undeniable
Circumstances, are dead also.

5. It Is not reasonable that a Man should have Advantage by his own Crime.
Fitton, if not enioyn'd by Chancery might in his way have let up one pretense
after another, and when all ^a^^ed, might be let in to contest that Title,
against which he was driven to such miserable Shifts.

6. It was never known that any Decree of the Court of Chancery was set aside,
without Error apparent, or New Matter emergent, the Pretense to the last of
which, ought not certainly to be received after so long a time, for such
Practices as have already appeared, and the most seeming Errors have been
already shown to have been none, as Mr. Fitton's Petition has given occasion to
observe them. The others mentioned in his Bill of Review, are these:

(1.) That there were more concerned in the Settlement, under which the
Complainant claims, than were made Parties to the Bill. Which is no material
Objection, since they might have lawfully endeavored to support the Deed, but
cannot pretend any right upon a Deed adjudged forged: however, no Right is
taken from any Body.

(2.) That the Costs and mean Profits are awarded before the second Trial, when
it did not appear that there was cause. But surely it is not severer in the
Chancery, than in the Common Law Courts, to direct the payment of the Costs of
the first Trial, before they allow a Second; and the last being wholly in
favor to Mr. Fitton, he had no reason to complain that the Earl was to have
mean Profits as well as Costs; besides, they are here in the nature of Costs.

And the same reason justifies the decreeing the Assignment of the Lease before
the second Trial, which was another Exception.

7. It Is not reasonable that Suits should be perpetual, and Possessions always
unquiet. And if Fitton has made frequent Entries and Claims, as his Counsel
offered in his behalf, it is fitting that he should be barred, even of them,
after resting so long from legal Prosecutions. He says indeed, that by the
Decree in Chancery, he had his Deeds taken from him, and was deprived of the
Liberty of his Person, whereby he was utterly incapacitated to seek for relief
till now.

Whereas it is well known that he went at large at his Pleasure; and if the
Deed-Poll was forged, as was plainly proved, there was no reason for him to
retain the former Deed of Settlement, or any other Deeds which were Evidences
belonging to the Earl's Estate. Whatever Incapacity he lay under, was
occasioned by his own Crime; (and no Man can give a better term to the setting
up a forged Deed) if his Case had not been such as, while it was fresh in Men's
Memories, lost him all Credit, he might certainly at any time have had the like
Supply as now, were it not that he and they who now supply him, rely upon
something else besides the Merits of the Cause; and it would be hard upon Men,
that have been in long possession of their Estates, if they should not be
protected from such as are enabled to be troublesome, barely because the(...)
of their Infamy is impaired.

FINIS.

