THE ATHEIST Unmasked, OR A Confutation of such as deny the Being of a SUPREME
DEITY, that governs HEAVEN and EARTH. BY Unanswerable Arguments deduced.

1. From the received Principles of Natural Reason. 2. The Consent of all
Nations, who own and Worship a God (though some mistake the Right object.) 3.
From the certainty of Scripture History, (the most Authentic Record in the
World) And, 4. From diverse Reasons drawn from other Topic's -- All designed to
prevent the growth of Atheism the worst of Heresies.
By -- A Person of Honor.

Psalm. 14.1. The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God. see Psalm. 10.4.
and 53.1.

London, Printed for Langley Curtiss at Sir Edmondbury-Godfreys Head near
Fleet-bridge. 1685.

An ERRATA.
SEveral gross Faults are Committed by the neglect of the Press, which the
Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen, as in P. 3. l. 4. for will, read
would, P. 4. l. 6. for uncontemptible, read contemptible Fishermen, P. 6. l. 1.
for hearts read hearers, l. 13. for Jnjuries, read Enemies, P. 10. l. 3. for
satisfactions, read satisfactory, idem. P. l. 11. for Dumb, read Dimmed, idem P.
l. 18. for several, read even all, idem P. l. 23. and 24. for Andragoras, read
Anaxagoras, and for Eumerus, read Euemerus, P. 12. l. 18. for, and then Incite,
read and Cite, P. 13. l. 24. for elimate, read eliminate, P. 14. for Eumerus,
read Euemerus, idem P. l. 17. for Antioche, read Antiochenus, P. 18. l. the
Last, for bewitched, read bewildred, P. 19. l. 25. for, and has no end, read
has no end, P. 21. l. 7. for an intelligible Riddle, read an untelligible
Riddle, idem P. l. 11. for extradate, read extraduce.

THE ATHEIST UNMASKED, etc.
THat there should be any such Monster in nature, as for a Man, who pretends to
be a reasonable Creature, to deny there is a God, is an Impiety out-does the
Devils, who believe and tremble; but Historians and Writings of former times
have told us, there were such amongst the Heathens, and good Authors and sad
experience do assure us, that such have been and are in the times of
Christianity, Saint Jude tells us, that in the last times, there shall be
Mockers living after their own Lusts, ungodly Men that turn the grace of God
into wantoness, denying God our only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and I
find a Learned and Pious Bishop of Salisbury, who has written an excellent
treatise against it, sadly bewailing the growth of it, above threescore Years
since; and says, though it be a thing so necessary to be believed that there
is a God, yet least labored in by Divines to farther our belief, and though
our Church be stored with some excellent Master Builders and Learned Men, yet
few or none sets his hand to this, many work upon the walls to make them firm
and strong, many upon the roof to keep it close and light, some beautify and
adorn it, but none looks down into the ground work of it, that it be laid so
low, as to reach unto the Rock, whereby there is a space left for Pioneers and
Underminers, and such like deceitful Workers, which are not able to break
through the Walls, yet do dig under the Foundation to evert all, and complains
that this argument is the most deserted part of all Theology, and wherein
fewest Divines have bestowed their pains, the more is the pity, which puts me
in mind of the Parable in the Gospel, of the Man that sowed good seed in his
Field, and whilst he slept, the Enemy came and sowed Tares, so be the seed
never so good and well sown, yet if it be neglected and we sleep, the Enemy win
take advantage to sow his Tares, and if little or no notice be taken of him, he
will grow bold and think himself in the right: But I must not stay upon
generals, resolving to confine my discourse into a very narrow compass, for I
observe the fate of long tracts to be fruitless in a great measure, because the
price deterrs most from buying, and the length from reading, I must be forced
also, if I have hope of prevailing with or against the Atheist, to loose the
advantage of Scripture proofs in a great measure, because he denies the
Scriptures to be of God, but to be only humane inventions to cozen the People,
so that it would be to cast Pearls before Swine, to trample them under their
feet.

But by the Atheists leave, it is very unreasonable for him not to give the
Scripture so ancient an History, that Historical Faith, that he does to
Plutarch, Livie and other Historiographers, who takes for truth what they
write, because he cannot accuse the Authors of falsehood, and for him to say the
Scriptures are the contrivances of Men, unless he could by some demonstration
or probable argument make it appear so, is a pitiful shift, if they had been
such, the prying Atheist, and his spawn the Deboshee would long since have
detected it, and we should have heard of it with both Ears, all that he can
possibly object must be, either they that wrote them were deceivers, or were
themselves deceived; I Will first instance the New Testament, which the Atheist
most slights, and therein the Four Evangelists, who write the Life and Death,
and Resurrection of Christ, whosoever weighes their Writings, and considers
what good Precepts there are of Love, Charity, Meekness, Patience, Humility,
Obedience to Magistrates and Parents, and what threatenings to Wickedness;
Debauchery, Whoredom, Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, and all evil; must
certainly conclude they were not deceivers, the Jews indeed as mortal Enemies
to Christ and his Disciples, as the Atheist endeavored to make the World
believe they and their Master were such, but the Resurrection of Christ galled
them, for when they found he was risen from the Grave, and his Tomb empty, they
raged extremely, and were cut to the heart; well knowing, that if his
Resurrection should be admitted, that would justify Christ and his Apostles,
and condemn themselves for Malefactors in Crucifying him, as the Council told
the Apostles Act. 5. You will bring this Man's Blood upon us. then if the
Resurrection of Christ, which is the Foundation of all Religion can by any
probable demonstration be cleared, the Atheist must acknowledge there is a God,
and his Apostles not deceivers; therefore I Will only insist upon that, which to
prevent the World from believing, they thought the probablest way was to
corrupt the Watch that kept the Sepulcher (with assurance of indemnity) to say
his Disciples came by Night, and stole him away while they slept, this is a
very improbable tale, and carries fiction in the forehead, for it is clear
Christ was Buried on the Friday, and there was no Watch set till the Night
following, then surely, if his Disciples would have stolen him away, they
would have done it the first Night when there was no Watch set Mat. 27.62. and
indeed it is too incredible they could do it, and too too incredible they would
do it.

It Is too too incredible they could do it, after so vigilent, diligent, and
abundant Watch was set, which doubtless was of the keenest sort against Christ,
and that was enough to keep them awake, it being but one Night they watched,
and if they had been asleep, the rolling away the Stone from the Sepulcher,
which was a great one, taking of the things he was wrapped in, and carrying him
away must needs have wakened some of them, and surely if they had stolen him,
they would have stolen the Linen also with him for the more have, St. Austin
gives a clear refutation of that fiction of the Watch, for says he, either they
slept not and so it is a lie, or if they did, how could they tell who stole him
away if it had been so; besides, had they not had assurance of indemnity, they
durst not have told such a story against their lives, for we find upon St.
Peter's miraculous deliverance out of Prison, the Keepers were Examined and put
to death, though Innocent.

Secondly, it is more then too incredible they would do it, would they that
being Jews, and knew what God and Religion meant, have dared to have Fathered
such a gross Forgery on God, as the Preaching of Obedience up and down the
World to a Crucified Man, nor otherwise risen from the Dead, than by stealing
his Body out of his Grave, what hope could they ever have of any success, no
hope from him whom they Preached, whose own consciences must tell them, he was
yet in the Power of Death, no hope from God whom they so falsely belyed, no hope
from any thing in themselves, not from eloquence and excellency of speech to
persuade, they were but rude and illiterate men, not from Wealth and Riches to
corrupt, shoes on their feet, and a staff in their hand was most of what they
had, not from authority and greatness to awe or prejudice, they were but
uncontemptible Fishermen and the like, not from number or multitude to subdue,
they were but Eleven poor Snakes, that had all run away when their Master was
apprehended, nor hope therefore from any thing in themselves.

No hope farther from any docibleness or inclinableness of the Parties to be
persuaded, not any inclinableness in the Jews, not him but Barabbas, and
Crucify him, Crucify him, was the loud and joint cry of the Jews, the Jews
was hardened therefore against any such Doctrine, not any inclinableness in the
Gentiles, it was that they mocked at when they heard of the Resurrection, would
they therefore, that were no stark fools have gone about a thing of so great
folly, wherein they had no hope of success from him, they Preached as not
Risen, no hope from God as belyed by them, no hope from any thing in
themselves, as being without Eloquence, without Riches, without Authority,
without Multitude, nor hope from any inclinableness in the Parties, to be
persuaded Jews or Gentiles, as being utter Enemies, the one to the mention of
Jesus of Nazareth, the other to the mention of the Resurrection.

But suppose they had been so overseen, as not to have considered these things
at the first, would they not when the storm began to fall on them, and the
World to rise up in Arms against them, seeing the impossibility of making their
legend, their lying legend take, would they not then have desisted, would not
fair nor foul means have made of them at the least, at last to have bewrayed
the whole business, but all their life long in spite of what the World could
do, they should continue every one of them in the constant asseveration of the
Resurrection of Christ, certainly had they been nothing but deceivers, it is
not imaginable, that the World could have a pack of such, except they had been
Incarnate Devils, but their Writings and much more their Lives, show them
rather to have been Incarnate Angels.

Nor were they deceived, for first they were sure the Body was not in the
Sepulcher, their own sense, and the sense of all the Jews viewing the empty
Sepulcher confirmed them of that; secondly, they were sure none had privily
stolen the Body away, and laid it elsewhere, because of the Watch that kept
the Sepulcher, besides they were sure they several times conversed with him
after his Resurrection, and many eye Witnesses there were of it besides
themselves, this I use not as a Scripture proof, but only upon the reasons
alleged, evidently manifesting that what they wrote must needs be truth, and
then most certainly they were not deceivers nor deceived, but the Atheist
farther Cavills, at the difference there seems to be amongst them, in the
relation of some of the things they write, which is a strong argument to me of
their sincerity, for had they been a pack of Knaves intending to cozen the
World, they would surely have so contrived the matter, that not the least
seeming difference should have been, and they are indeed but seeming, and have
been reconciled by the Pens of others, and may be so by any unprejudiced
understanding Reader, Camer^ de notis verbi Dei, observes that the Scriptures
are so penned, that they that have a mind to know may know, and they that have
a mind to wrangle may take occasion of offense, and justly perish by the
Rebellion of their own reason, for says he, God never meant to satisfy Men,
perfracti ingenii of a stubborn and perverse wit; Tertullian had observed the
same long before him, that God had so disposed the Scriptures, that they that
will not be satisfied might be hardened.

If it had not been the greatest truth they preached, how came it to pass, that
so few contemptible Persons in the World, eye ignorant Men, and wholly
illiterate should within the space of about Twenty Years after Christ's
Sufferings, have converted almost all the known parts of the World to their
Doctrine, a World so captived under Satan, a World so corrupted in manners, and
so rooted and habituated in superstitious customs, was it not strange, that
without any other Sword than the everlasting Gospel, they should turn the World
upside down, as their Enemies themselves confessed, slighting the Devils works,
casting down his holds wherever they came, and overcoming those barbarous
Heathens, whom the Devil had held in his peaceable possession so many Thousand
Years, to renounce their Idolatries, in which they had been bred and trained up
all their days, to receive a new Lord, and him a Crucified Jesus, and this at
the report of a few silly Men, laden with the vilest reproaches that the wit of
Man can invent, or malice raked together to besmear their Persons, and render
the Doctrine they Preached odious to the World: This is such a kind of
Conquest, as could not be obtained by any less than the Arm of the Almighty;
especially if we consider the nature of their Doctrine, that it was not only
new, but strange, enough to make the hearts shie of it, as being quite contrary
to Man's corrupt Nature; not having one thought in the Sinners heart to befriend
it, a Doctrine pure nonsense to carnal reason, teaching to be saved by
another Righteousness, wise with another wisdom, to trust in him as a God
that was himself a Child, to rely on him to deliver us from the Power of Sin
and Satan, that fell himself under the wrath of Men, consider how little
Worldly encouragement it gave to his Disciples, 1. not to grow rich, but rather
to let what they had, 2. not to gain the Love of the World, but to be hated, 3.
not to enjoy the pleasures of the World, but the Cross, a Goal, a Dungeon, a
Gibbet or Rack, yet to see poor Creatures so far, to forget all their Worldly
interests, relations, estates, and enjoyments, so as to trample upon them, yea
joyfully welcome the bloodiest deaths their injuries could invent, and thank
their Persecutors for the favor of admitting them, to share with the torments
of their brethren, as if they had gone to divide a spoil and not to be made
one, this speaks a Heavenly Power to be in that Doctrine, which verifies what
Christ told his Disciples, John 14. He that believes on me, the works that I do
shall he do also, and greater works than these, what greater works are these,
Christ cured all diseases, cast out Devils and raised the dead, what greater
works did the Apostles, yes, the conversion of the World, and the subversion
every where of his Kingdom, that is called the Prince of the World were greater
works, a far greater work to raise up the dead World, then one dead Lazarus, to
deny then a Gospel, that has been propagated with a glorious success, confirmed
by a frame of Miracles, acknowledged by the Writings of the Heathens, that
lived in the Primitive times, witnessed by the Blood of Martyrs, and those of
the wiser and learned sort, who could not all be a parcel of Melancholy Fools,
and shall this have not better reception, than if it were a mere Romance and
impertinent Fable, but if those things, which you will not believe prove true
at last, that the Son of God has suffered by Gods appointment for the capiation
of sin, that those that believe in him, shall receive the benefit of it and
none else, what a madness then will you think your selves Guilty of.

There is nothing in the Christian Religion, can make against your real
happiness, (supposing it were not true) but if it be true, the slighting of it
exposes to an unexpressible misery, if the things revelled prove true, when it
is too late to gather the blessed fruit of them, will a bottomless Lake, or a
perpetual stinging conscience be balanced, by a few transitory pleasures on
Earth, is it not unreasonable folly, to deny a Doctrine you cannot demonstrate
to be false, and be in danger to feel a misery that you cannot demonstrate, but
it may come upon you, rather than to comply with a Doctrine which cannot do you
any prejudice, in the great concerns of your Souls, supposing they were not
true, it is a folly utterly to deny them, till you can demonstrate there is no
such thing as a Redeemer, that the Scripture is not the Word of God, that no
such condition as Faith is required of Men.

The Atheist quarrels with the Old Testament too, though he must confess it to
be the Antientest History in the World, and we use to give great reverence and
credit to Antiquity, if there be no just ground to blemish it, which the
Atheist cannot produce to weigh with the meanest understanding, that the Old
Testament is the Word of God, though it have been abundantly evidenced by other
hands to be so, I shall give but one instance amongst many, that the children
of Israel were carried captive to Babylon, and delivered again, other Authors
mention as well as the Bible, Isaiah the Prophet foretells their deliverance,
and names the Person by whom it should be effected namely Cyrus, above an
Hundred Years before Cyrus was Born, which came to pass accordingly, so the Old
Prophet denounced the destruction of Jeroboams Altar by Josiah, many Years
before Josiah was Born, 1 Kings 13. c. 2 Kings 23.16. this certainly must be
the Word of God by the Prophets, for Man of himself cannot tell what shall come
to pass hereafter, nay the Devil himself cannot, and we see in the 41. of
Isaiah, God makes it a particular privilege of his own; saying, show us the
things that are to come hereafter, that we may know you are Gods, I Will not
trouble the Reader with farther instances, surely none could be the Author of
the Bible but God, if any Creature made it, he was either a wicked Creature, or
one that was Holy, first no wicked Creature could do it, neither Angel nor Man,
surely they would never have taken so much pains to pull down their own Kingdom
of Darkness (the great Plot that runs through the Bible, from one end of it to
the other.) The implacable wrath that the Devil and his party of wicked ones in
the World, have shown in all Ages to the Scriptures, declares sufficiently it
never came from them, neither can any Holy Creature be the Author of it be it
Angel or Man, can we think that any having the least spark of Love to God, or
fear of his Majesty, dwelling in their Breast, durst counterfeit his dreadful
name, by setting it to their work, and abuse the World with such a Blasphemy
and prodigious Lie, as to say, thus says the Lord, and prefix his Name all
along, when not God but themselves are the Authors; nay farther, durst any Holy
Creature put such a cheat upon the World, and then denounce the wrath and
vengeance of God against those, that shall speak in Gods Name, but were never
sent of him, as the Scriptures mention, certainly the Earth which swallowed up
Corah and his wicked rout, for pretending to an Authority from God, as good as
the Priests to offer Incense, would not have spared Moses himself, if he had
spoken that in Gods Name, which he had not from him, but was the invention of
his own private Brain.

But the Atheist will have his frivolous pretenses, one of his Cavists is
against the long lives of Men before the Flood, some Seven, Eight, and Nine
Hundred Years, and that in few Ages after the Flood, they came to little more
than One Hundred, and his inference is, that then there must either be a decay
in the nature of Man, and a Man of Seven Years of age now must have been an
Old Man, or else the story of their former long lives must be false, but
admitting the long lives of Men before the Flood, which is a certain and
undisprovable truth, I shall make it appear, that the reason of the
disproportion of Men's lives before and after the Flood, did not proceed from
any decay in the nature of Man, but must be attributed to the difference of
their Food after the Flood, from what it was before.

It must be admitted that God made the World, which I shall manifest afterward,
and that by his Providence he governs it, then it is rational to conclude, that
he appointed to every Creature their several Food, to Man as well as Beast, we
find Genesis 1.29. That God appointed to Man for his Food every herb bearing seed,
and every fruit of a tree bearing seed, that was to be his meat, but after the
Flood Man's Food was enlarged, for Genesis 9.3. God said to Noah, every living
thing that moves shall be meat to you, even as the green herb have I given you
all things, by which it is clear, that Flesh was not allowed to Man before, and
it is agreed by all, that one Months eating of Flesh, nourishes more than six
with fruits and herbs, and then it must necessarily follow, that the sooner
nature is heightened, and brought to perfection the sooner it must decay, and as
with their diet before the Flood, Men lived usually to such an Age, so after
the Flood, Men have lived much after the same rate of Age as they do now, there
being to be found now a days, Men usually living as long as several Thousand
Years since, as several instances might be given, even in our own Age, and
though the Luxury and intemperance of later Ages, have and does daily shorten
several Men's lives, yet that concerns not the generality of Mankind; Fuller
writing the life of Paracelsus tells us, he dyed at Forty Seven Years Old, and
makes it a wonder, so great a Physician should dye so soon, but he makes it as
great a wonder so drunken a Beast should live so long, many such instances of
that and other vices might be given.

My next Reason to prove there is a God is, that it is the general consent of
all Nations in all Places and Ages, and then it is a madness for a few Men to
deny what all the World believes, no instance can be given of any one People in
the World that disclaim it, whatever disputes there have been in the World,
this of the existence of a God, was never the subject of contention, all other
things have been questioned, we find the Philosophers varying about natural
things, and divided into several sects of opposition, but there was never any
Sect of Atheists, and this universal consent is not prejudiced by some few
Dissenters, History does not reckon Twenty professed Atheists in all Ages, in the
compass of the whole World, and we have not the name of any one absolute
Atheist in the Scripture, so that the paucity of them, is enough to justify
the consent of all Nations, which by a natural instinct is implanted in them,
else how should it come to pass, that all Nations in the World so far distant
from one another, and between whom there was no commerce, some not known nor
found out till later Ages, so universally to agree in it; Cicero tells us, that
a general consent of all Nations, is to be esteemed a Law of nature, and
therefore they that ascribe all to nature, and set it in the place of God,
contradict themselves if they give not credit to it, in that which it
universally affirms.

Besides, it has been a constant and interrupted consent, it has been as
ancient as the first Age of the World, no Man is able to mention any time from
the beginning of the World, wherein this notion has not been universally owned,
in the overturning of the Governments of States, the alteration of the modes of
worship this has stood unshaken, the reasons upon which it was founded were in
all revolutions of time accounted satisfactions and convincings, nor could
absolute Atheism in the changes of any Laws, ever gain the favor of any one
body of People to be established by a Law.

The discovery of all other impostures, never made this by any society of Men
to be suspected as one, it will not be easy to name any imposture, that has
walked perpetually in the World without public control and question, and since
the World has detected many errors of the former Age, and Learning been
increased, it has been so far from being dumb, that it has shone out clearer
with the increase of natural knowledge, and received fresh and more vigorous
confirmation.

But says the Atheist, though such a general consent should be admitted, it
cannot be affirmed that all Persons have therein consented, because both
Heathen and Christian Authors, have mentioned diverse that have denied it, who
are not denied to have been Learned Men, and ranked amongst the Philosophers,
it is a pitiful argument that several the wisest and learnedest Men, and
Philosophers in the World are in an error, because so very few and not so
learned do oppose them, for if they be compared with those Learned Men, that
either lived before them or after them, their Learning will come as far short
in proportion as the light of a Candle to the brightness of the Sun, for what
comparison can Diagoras hold with Pythagoras, or Protagoras with Andragoras, or
Eumerus with Empedocles, or Theodorus with Theophrastus, or Bion with Chilon,
or Epicurus with Epicarmus to be silent of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and
Zeno, and abundance of others, which can find no Paralells amongst the Atheists
being so eminent above them.

Besides the fears and anxieties in Men's consciences, have given Men sufficient
occasion to root it out had it been possible for them to do it, if the notion
of the existence of a God had been possible to have been dashed out of the
minds of Men, they would have done it rather than have suffered so many
disquietings in their Souls, upon Commission of their wicked impieties, of
which there are many instances in all Ages.

It must be confessed by all, that there is a Law of Nature written on the
hearts of Men, which will direct them to commendable actions, if they will
attend to the writing in their own consciences, this Law cannot be considered
without a notice of a Lawgiver, for it is but a natural and obvious conclusion,
that some superior hand ingrafted those Principles in Man, since he finds
something in him twitching him upon the pursuit of uncomely actions, though his
heart be mightily inclined to them, Man knows he never planted this Principle
of reluctance in his own Soul, and cannot be the cause of that he cannot be
friends with, if he were the cause of it, why does he not rid himself of it.

But the Atheist would shift of all this by saying, that the notice of a God
and Religion, came only from Tradition, and the conspiracy of Governors to
keep People in better awe, how foolish and futile this conceit is, abundantly
appears by the impossibility of it, for how could Governors of Nations so far
distant, and not known to each other, and of so different interest possibly
agree in such a design, or how could they agree in such an universal Tradition,
that were such strangers to each other, surely there must be sometime alleged
from whom they had it, and when first began, but this fond conceit of the
Atheist I take to be a convincing argument against him, Jamblicus a Heathen
affirms, that Religion is implanted in the mind of Man, even before he has any
use of reason, and we find by sad experience, that Religion little prevails
with the generality of Men to restrain them from Wickedness, and that if the
severity of humane Laws did not scare them, there would scarce be any civility
or Government in the World, there is no humane invention necessary for the life
of Man, but a time may be assigned, either when it begun, or before it begun,
but no time can be assigned, when Religion first began or before it began.

The Atheist objects how we came to know of such a general consent; I answer,
easily both from Geographers and Historiographers, both ancient and modern, who
give not only a description of the known World, but Histories of their manners,
and have taken notice of some particular Atheists, but never branded any Nation
or Country with it, not Herodotus, nor Strubonor, Ptolomy, nor Pliny, etc.
that have marked with great curiosity the memorable things of every Country,
nor of later time Munster in his Cosmography, nor Ortelius in his Theatrum
Mundi, so that if we cannot find by authority of History, either ancient or
modern, that Atheism overspread any Nation, as other sins remarkably have
done, why should we be so light as to believe there is any such.

But because arguments from authority do not follow negatively, I shall prove
it affirmatively, and then incite two excellent Historians of good Authority
(1) Purchase his Pilgrimage, and Grimstons Estates and Empires of the World,
both most accurately describing not only each Country, but the manners,
Government, Riches, and Religions of each, so that the Atheist cannot name to
us any Nation, but we can name again to him their Religion, and that they are
not of his.

All People inhabiting the whole Earth are either Christians who worship the
Trinity, or Mahometans and Jews who worship the Creator, or pure Gentiles who
worship the Stars and other Creatures, or Idolaters who worship Images, into
these four Sects the World is Quartered, and all these to be found in every
quarter of it, though Christians do hold the predominancy in Europe, Mahometans
in Asia, Gentiles in Africa, and Idolaters in America, so that all of them be
worshippers, and all have their Gods.

And that the forementioned Writers do neither abuse us, or have been abused
themselves, we find all verified by Travelers, who have been Eyewitnesses
which is the best Authority, wherein we can have no better Testimony than those
of our own Nation, who have taken more pains in searching out the World, than
any People of the World, as appears, by Mr. Hackluit in collecting our English
Voyages, amongst whom there are two English Gentlemen mentioned, who have
compassed the whole Earth, the first Sir Francis Drake, who in his farthest
Travels to the North-west, taking Land in nova Albion saw there the Savages
busied about a sacrifice, who supposing our Men to be Gods, diverse times
offered to do their Sacrifices to them, which they never would have done, had
they not been persuaded that there is a God, and that offering sacrifice is
part of his Worship.

The other Captain Cavendish, who in his farthest Travels to the South-east,
Landing in the Isle of Capal, observed the Inhabitants to be Worshippers of the
Devil, and the like may be observed in diverse other of their Voyages, who in
the farthest and most remote parts could never find any Nation of Atheists,
which justifies Plutarchs observation, that if a Man should Travel through the
whole Earth, he might happily meet with some People without Clothes or
Governors, but none without Gods, and some worship vile and base things, but
rather them than no God, which proves the natural instinct of a deity implanted
by God in all Men, we find the Heathens differing in the nature of the true
God, but all agree there is a God, and it is Tully's observation nulla gens tam
fera quae Deum aliquem non agnoscat, there is no Nation so savage, but they do
acknowledge some God.

But it may upon probable grounds be doubted, whither those Men whom the
Heathens have branded for Atheists, were pure Atheists such as totally and
constantly denied any deity, for if he believe any one God, though he deny the
rest, or confess God in the end whom in the beginning he denied, he cannot
truly and properly be said to be an Atheist, and first for Diagoras, who in
their reckoning is the most noted Man of all of them, and the first ringleader
of their impious profession, the rest being counted but his followers, and yet
the action which the Athenians so severely commenced against him, and offering
a great sum to any that would kill him, was no more but this that he did
elimate, and divulge the Mysteries of the Gods, and by deriding them avert and
turn Men from them, so that Diagoras his crime was not that he denied all Gods,
but that he denied the Athenians Gods, which he might do upon the filthiness of
their Ceremonies, and barbarousness of their Sacrifices, and he might hereby
discover the Athenians Gods to be false, though perhaps he could not light upon
or discover the true one, but that Diagoras was not a mere Atheist, appears,
for that in the beginning of his Verses as Morney affirms he makes this
profession (which is the foundation of all Religion) that all things are ruled
by one most high God.

Next consider Protagoras whom the Athenians condemned for an Atheist, yet not
for denying God but for seeming to doubt of him, because in the beginning of
his book he propounded this Problem, de Diis Statuere nequeo, I cannot
determine whether they be or not, for which the Athenians condemned him to
Exile, and his Book to be burned, now doubting implies not Atheism, for dives
of the Prophets doubted, and Job 24.1. doubts of Gods all-seeing Providence,
this doubting may argue a weak faith in God for the present, but could not
conclude their denying of God, and no more could it do in him.

Next Eumerus was condemned for an Atheist, whose opinion Theodoret affirms to
have been profanam indeitatem a profane denying of the Gods, but yet it appears
it was not a general denying of all Gods, but denying the Heathen Gods
affirming them to be but Men, wherefore it appears, that Eumerus his Atheism
was not to divulge an untruth against the true God, but a truth against the
false Gods, and the rather may this be believed to be true, because Theophilus
Antioche thus reports, that Eumerus did hold not only animae immortalitatem,
but also Dei unitatem, not only the immortality of the Soul, but the unity of
the Deity, which may probably be thought to be his recantation, if ever before
he had denied there was a God.

For Theodorus though it should be granted, that he generally denied there was
a God, yet it cannot be affirmed that he constantly denied it, for he fell in
the end to that madness, as ridiculously to confess that himself was a God.

As for Epicurus he denied not Gods essence, but his Providence believing there
was a God, that did neither evil nor good, as Tully affirms, and so for I
hericides, Dionisius, and the rest Laertius gives a full account of them
accordingly, but suppose all those few that have been branded for Atheists were
absolute ones, wholly denying a God is it not a great madness for the Atheists
of our times, to take up their impiety that has been exploded, and hist off the
Stage of the World in all Ages, by the judgment and consent of the ablest
Philosophers, and Learned both of Heathens and Christians, to whom they are
infinitely short in number, and as much in Learning.

But as pride was the Father of Atheism amongst the Philosophers, who gloried
in opposing one another, and being the Author of some new opinion, so it is to
be feared too justly, in that the wickedness and debauchery of our later times,
as the Apostle tells us, there should come Mockers living after their own
lusts, has been the occasion of some Men's continuing, that horrid impiety being
abhorred of God, and all good Men, having no other way to give a seeming
countenance to their impiety, but to graft it upon the old dry stock of
Atheism, and so by their jollities and profaneness, make it their business to
stifle their Consciences, and hating the light, least their evil deeds should
be reproved.

But herein the Atheist is much disapointed of his great End, being not to
serve and not to fear, as for serving surely there is not greater Slave in the
World, than he that is a Slave to his Lusts, as every luxurious and debauched
Person is, endeavoring to cast off God, and set up his Lusts to rule over him,
which he readily obeys, it being most true, which Cicero says, omnes improbi
servi all wicked Men are Slaves, and therefore the Atheist is very far from
that supposed liberty (in choosing of his Atheism) he has promised to himself,
being thereby made a Servant not only of many Masters, but also of most base
and unworthy ones, whilst virtue is wholly slighted by him, accounting it mean
and base, whereas it is the greatest honor to be virtuous, and that there is
nothing so mean and base as vice, or so unworthy a Gentleman; for nobilitas
sola atque unica virtus, 'twas the resolution of Seneca that was an Heathen,
licet Deus nesciret, nec homo puniret peccatum non tamen peccarem ob peccati
vilitatem, though God did not know nor Man would not punish Sin, yet I would
not commit sin for the baseness of it, besides it is far easier for Men to be
virtuous than vicious.

And as to the servile fear the Atheist would free himself from, he rather
increases it, for there is no Man that is afraid of God, so much as they that
would seem to fear him least, none so basely fears him.. as those that seem
most to contemn him, and this slavish fear and terror often falls upon them in
their health and greatest granduieur, Suetonius tells us that Caligula that
despised all Gods, and would be a God himself and to that purpose, had a
Temple, Altars and Priests, yet if there happened any great Thunder clap, would
get under his Bed to save himself.

But this fear terrifies the Atheist most when he comesto dye not so much the
fear of Death, as what shall become of him after Death, Laertius gives us an
instance of Bion of Boristhenes one of the most obdurate Atheists, that when in
his sickness he perceived he must dye, that he would rather have endured any
Torment than have dyed, fearing he should be committed by God whom he had
denied; unto the Devil to be Tormented, and therefore put out his hand to him,
hoping to Cajole him to be kind to him with this flattering Salutation Salve
Pluto Salve, welcome Devil welcome, it seems he did acknowledge there was a
Devil, and then probably that there was a God, if not; then he made the Devil
whom he was afraid of his God, and so dyed not an absolute Atheist, And Cicero
tells us of Epicurus, that though no Man seemed more to contemn God and Death,
yet no Man more feared both the one; and the other, and we have a late instance
of one of our own Nation, the Lord, R. a Man of a Luxuriant wit and bad life
who prided himself in Atheism, and took a delight in propagating of it, who
when he fell sick of the disease whereof he dyed, how sadly he bewailed his
Impiety, seriously recanted it, and made protestation if God would spare his
life, he would be as zealous in asserting the true God, as ever he had been in
denying him, and would attest the reality of his Conversion by a pious
Conversation.

Now this inward fear which the Atheist has of God and outwardly bewrayes on
several occasions is no less an Argument, that he believes there is a God, then
if he should plainly confess it in word, and is indeed a far greater, for that
this is real, and the other but verbal, and this is the result of Conscience
which God has planted in every Man as his deputy to inform what is Good, and
what is Evil.

I question whither there ever was or can be in the World an interrupted, and
internal denial of the being of a God, or that Men (unless we can suppose
Conscience utterly dead) can arrive to such a degree of Impiety for before they
can stifle such sentiments in them (whatever they may Assert) they must be
utter strangers to the Common Conceptions of reason, and despoil themselves of
their own humanity, he that dares deny a God with his lips, sets up some thing
or other as a God in his heart, is it not Lamentable that this sacred truth
consented to by all Nations, which is the bond of civil societies, and force of
all order in the World, should not only be denied with a bare face, and
disputed against in Companies, and the Glory of a wise Creator ascribed to an
unintelligent nature or blind chance, are not such worse than the Heathens,
they worshipped many Gods, these none, they preserved a Notion of God in the
World, under a disguise of Images, these would Banish him both from Earth and
Heaven, and demolish the Statues of him in their own Consciences, they degraded
him, these would destroy him, they coupled Creatures with him, these would make
him worse than the Creature a mere nothing for that Earth is become hereby
worse than Hell, Hell that receives such persons in this point reformes them,
the Devil that rejoices at their wickedness, know's them to be in an error, for
he believes and Trembles, this must needs be a forerunner of sore Judgment
boldness in sin, is a presage of vengeance especially when the honor of God is
more Particularly concerned therein it tends to the overturning of humane
societies, and God appears not in such visible Judgments against sin
immediately committed against himself as in the case of those sins that are
destructive to humane society Atheism, is point blank against the glory of God
in Creation and Redemption, and pronounces at one breath both the Creator and
all the acts of Religion useless and in significant.

And yet it is impossible for the Atheist to demonstrate there is no God, he
cannot use any Medium but will fall in as a proof for his existence rather than
against it, the pretenses of the Atheist are so Ridiculous, that they are not
worth mentioning, as that he never saw God, and therefore knows not how to
believe such a being, and that he cannot Comprehend him, he would not be
infinite if he were Comprehensible, or to be determined by our sight, the
Atheist cannot see his own Life, and yet he believes he lives, he cannot see
his own Soul, yet he knows he has one by his thinking power, none sees the air
he lives and breaths in, but the Atheist, and all Men know there is air as well
as Earth, and Water which they continually see, though they see not the other.

It Is a cogent argument, that there is a God by the fear and dread of Man upon
the Beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Bares, etc. Which would soon destroy Man, were it
not for that restraint, is put upon their Nature, which can be from none but
God, as he promised in his word, for if Man made himself he could not have
restrained the Nature of the Beasts, if Nature had made him, it had been a
Contradiction in her to change their Nature, therefore it must be God only.

And if there be not a God, how comes it to pass, that the Sea which is agreed
to be bigger and higher than the Land, should contrary to the Nature of Water
(which is to diffuse it self) be restrained by a low sandy shore, from
overflowing the Earth, which cannot be but by that God that has set it, its
bounds, and says hitherto, shall you come, and no further, and that the Sea is
higher then the Land, is demonstrable by the Springs which under Aristotle's
favor, have another cause then what he asserts. The true cause of the Springs
being the Waters of the Sea which passes through the small Crannies, and mealus
of the Earth, which sweetens it by its passage, and breaks out into Springs,
which we see many times rise in High Hills, the reason of which is, that the
Sea being as high, or higher then those Hills, the Water is forced to rise so
high, for it would else be contrary to the Nature of Water to ascend to those
Hills, we see it manifest by leading Water from a Springhead by Pipes or
otherwise, that as high as the Springhead is so high it will force the Water
to rise whither it is carried.

I would ask the Atheist how he came into the World, whither at the beginning
of the World, for the World had a beginning, for the matter of the World cannot
be Eternal, matter cannot subsist without form, nor put on any form without the
action of some cause, this cause must be in being before it acted, that which
is not cannot act, the cause of the World must necessarily exist before any
matter was endued with any form mer, that therefore cannot be Eternal before
which another did subsist, if it were from Eternity, it would not be subject to
mutation, if the whole was from Eternity, why not also the parts, what makes
the changes so visible then, Eternity would exempt it from mutability, if the
World were Eternal, it must have been in the same posture it is now, in a state
of Generation and Corruption, and so Corruption must have been as Eternal as
Generation, and then things that do generate, and Corruption must have
Eternally been, and Eternally not have been, there must be some first way to
set Generation on foot, and reason is quite bewitched, and cannot return into a
right way of Conception till it conceive one first of every kind, one first
Man, one first Animal one first Plant whence others do proceed, the Argument is
unanswerable, and the wisest Atheist (if any Atheist can be called wise) cannot
unloose the knot.

The World could not be made by an assembly of attomes, as some foolishly fancy
for there must be some infinite intelligent cause that made them, some cause
that separated them, some cause that mingled them together For piling up so
comely a Structure as the Word, it is most absurd to think they should meet
together by hazard, and Rank themselves in that order we see without a higher
and wise agent.

Nor could Nature make the World, for before the World was made, there was
nothing for Nature to exercise it self, for Nature is but vis and Petentia a
force and power which is Implanted in every species from the Creation, and
Extra Subjectum natura nunquam subsistit.

It Is the general consent both of Christians and Heathens, 1. That there is
nothing in Nature, but it has its cause 2. That nothing in Nature is the cause
of it self 3. That amongst all the causes, there is one supreme first cause,
which is the true cause of all the rest, 4. That the first cause of all things
is nothing else but God, then God must be the Creator of the World, and all
things in it, and then of Man also.

For Man had a Beginning, there is no Man in the World but was some Years ago no
Man, if every Man we see, had a Beginning, then the first Man also had a
Beginning, if we pitch on some Man that was unborn, that first Men must either
be Eternal, that cannot be, for he that has no beginning and has no end, or he
must spring out of the Earth as Plants and Trees do, that cannot be, why should
not the Earth produce Men to this day, as it does Plants and Trees, nor came
Man into the World by chance, why has not chance produced the like in the long
time the World has stood, he was therefore made and must have some cause that
made him, which can be no other than God, who made him after his own image and
endued him with an Immortal Soul.

And as God made the World and all things in it by his Power, so by his
Providence does he rule and governs it, 'twas a brutish opinion of Epicurus,
who acknowledged there was a God, yet denied his Providence, as if he had made
the World only to look upon and not govern and take care of it, who is it that
bridles the unruly passions of Men, that else would destroy one another, who
tempers the contrary nature of the Elements, that else would ruin the World
and bring it to a Chaos, so that they are brought into such a harmony as
conduces to the Preservation of it, whence came those miracles which are
against the order of nature mentioned in the Scripture to be done by Christ,
acknowledged to be done by him, both by Heathens and the Jews his Enemies, and
that miraculous Eclipse of the Sun, at his passion quite against the rule of
nature, the Moon being then in opposition to the Sun, which the Heathens took
so much notice of and wondered at, why the Sun that heats the World being so
vast a Body compured to be 166 times bigger than the Earth, and to move a
Million of Miles every hour, should not by its so swift and rapid motion, set
the World on Fire, if God did not govern the World, Creation implies
Government, and if God did not govern the World, all his attributes would be
useless, for to what purpose should he be Omniscient, Omnipotent, Omnipresent,
Wise, Just and Good, if he did not exercise them in governing the World, so
that to deny Gods Providence is all one, as to deny there is a God.

But the Atheist will not believe he has an Immortal Soul, for as he lives like
the Beasts that perish, so he hopes he shall dye, but he will find himself
deceived in his later end, his reason against the Immortality of the Soul is
because it is says he, an impossible thing for a Mortal Man to beget an Immortal
Soul, but upon a serious consideration it will appear, there is neither
impossibility or irrationality in it, for with God all things are possible,
besides it is not unreasonable to think, that God that made Man after his own
Image, and the chiefest of the Creatures here below, for whose use they were
all made, should endue him with a faculty to beget a Man like himself, and not
leave him in a worse condition than the meanest of the Beasts, we read Genesis 5.
Adam begat a Son in his own likeness, which could not be if the Soul as well as
the Body came not from him, Generatio est totius compositi, and naturalissimum
est ut quodlibet vivens ex se similem speciem procreet, Generation is of the
whole, and it is most natural that every living thing should procreate the like
species.

But some to avoid the seeming impossibility of a Mortal Man's begetting an
Immortal Soul, have and do hold that God Creates the Souls of all People that
are Born, but this seems repugnant to his seventh days rest from his work of
Creation, and besides should we put God to the Creating so many Thousand Souls,
that are every day Born in the World, we should put him to a greater work every
day, than the whole Creation of the World was in Six days, and besides it would
be unaccountable, that if God Create the Soul, which must come pure from him,
how that Soul should be infected with Adams sin, and when it is asked when that
Soul is Created and put into Man, the answer is Creando infunditur infundendo
creatur, an intelligible Riddle, the 12 Eccles. I take to be no cogent
objection against it, which says dust returns to the Earth as it was, and the
Spirit to God that gave it (1) to Adam, and so derived from him to all his
Posterity, and therefore I see nothing repugnant, either to the word of God or
reason in holding the Soul to be extradate by Generation.

I thought to have said a word or two to the practical Atheist, who I take to
be as bad as the other, who though he confess God with his Mouth, yet in his
Works denies him, whose sin against Christ is worse than the Jews in Crucifying
him, for they knew not what they did, therefore he prays they may be forgiven,
but these by their bold and presumptuous sins Crucify him daily, and put him
to an open shame, but resolving to keep to my intended brevity, I leave both to
the farther consideration of those that have the conduct of Souls, to whom it
does more properly belong, wishing that they not only from the Press, but
oftener from the Pulpit, would make it their business to convince the People,
that there is a God, and that the People would follow the Apostles advice, obey
them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves for they watch for
your Souls, as they that must give account, and then the People being persuaded
that there is a God, and that God Eternal, Omnipotent, Omnipresent, Omniscient,
Holy and Just, and that there is a day of Judgment a Hell to punish Eternally
all wicked and obstinate Sinners, and a Heaven to reward with Eternal
Happiness, those that live soberly and piously in the fear of God, it is to be
hoped the wicked World would prove better, and Virtue and Piety become as much
invogue, as Atheism and profaneness is now.

By a lover of God and the Truth.

