A SERMON Before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, MAY 29. 1692.

By F. ATTERBURY, Student of Christ-Church.

Published by her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1692.

PSALM. L. 14. Offer unto God Thanksgiving.
AMong the many Excellencies of this pious Collection of Hymns, (for which so
particular a Value has been set upon it, by the Church of God in all Ages,)
This is not the Least, that the true Price of Duties is there justly stated;
Men are called off from resting in the Outward Show of Religion, in Ceremonies
and Ritual Observances; and taught rather to practice (that which was meant by
these things, and to which they were designed to lead,) sound, inward Virtue
and Piety.

The several Composers of these Hymns were Prophets; Men, whose Business it
was, not only to foretell Events, for the Benefit of the Church in succeeding
Times; but to correct and reform also what was amiss in the present Race of
Men, with whom they lived and conversed: To preserve a foolish People from
Idolatry, and false Worship; To rescue the Law from corrupt Glosses, and the
superstitious Uses which were made of it: And to put Men in mind of (what they
were so willing to forget) that Eternal and Invariable Rule, which was before
these Positive Duties, and would be after them, and was to be observed even Then
in preference to 'em.

The Discharge, I say, of this part of the Prophetic Office, taking up so
large a room in the Book of Psalms, has been one reason, (among many others)
why they have been always so highly esteemed of: Because we are from hence
furnished with such an Account of things, as takes off the Exceptions of those
unreasonable Men, who run down all revealed Religion, as a Pretense and a
Trick, from what they imagine they see of it, in that of the Jews. The whole of
which they first suppose to lie in Outward Performances; and then easily
persuade themselves, that God could never be the Author of such a mere Piece
of Pageantry, and Empty Formality: That it could never be agreeable to the
Divine Nature, to delight to be worshipped by a Company of wild and
unaccountable Ceremonies.

Which Objection of Theirs we should not know what to say to, unless we could
prove out of the Psalms, and other parts of Prophetic Writing, that the Jewish
Religion was something more than bare Outside and Show. -- And that Inward
Purity, and Spiritual Devotion was a Duty Then too, as well as Now.

One great Instance of this Proof is in the words now before us, which are
taken out of a Psalm of Asaph's, written on purpose to set out the weakness and
worthlessness of external Performances, when compared with more vital and
substantial Duties.

To enforce which Doctrine, God himself is brought in as delivering it. Hear, O
my People, and I will speak: O Israel, and I will testify against thee: I am
God, even thy God. The Preface is very solemn, and therefore that which it
ushers in, we may be sure, is of no common Importance. I will not reprove thee
for thy Sacrifices, or thy Burnt-Offerings, to have been continually before me.
That is, I will not So reprove thee, as if These were the Only, or the Chief
Things I required of thee. I will take no Bullock out of thy house, nor He-goat
out of thy folds. I prescribed thee not Sacrifices for my Own sake, because I
needed 'em: For every Beast of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a
thousand Hills. Mine they are, and were, before ever I commanded Thee to offer
'em to me; so that (as it follows,) If I were hungry, yet would I not tell
thee, for the world is mine, and the fullness thereof. But can ye be so gross
and Senseless, as to think me liable to Hunger and Thirst* as to imagine that
wants of that kind can touch me? Will I eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the
Blood of Goats? -- Thus does he expostulate severely with 'em, after the most
graceful manner of the Eastern Poetry. The Issue of which is a plain and full
Resolution upon the Case, in those few words of the Text. -- Offer unto God
Thanksgiving. Would you do your Homage in the most agreeable way? would you
render the most acceptable of Services? Offer unto God Thanksgiving.

The use I intend to make of these words is, from hence, to raise some
Thoughts, about that very excellent and important (but much neglected) Duty of
Praise and Thanksgiving: A Subject not unfit to be discoursed of at this Time;
whether we consider, either the more than ordinary Coldness that appears a-late
in Men's Tempers, toward the practice of This (or any other) part of a warm and
affecting Devotion; The Great Occasion of setting aside This particular Day in
the Calendar, some years ago: Or the Fresh Instances of mercy and goodness,
which God even Now has been pleased to bestow upon us. Answering at last the
many Prayers and Fastings, by which we have besought him so long for the
Establishment of Their Majesty's Throne, and for the Success of their Arms: and
giving us at length an Opportunity of appearing before him, in the more
delightful part of our Duty; in the voice of Praise and Thanksgiving, among
such as keep Holy days.

Offer unto God Thanksgiving.

Which that we may do, let us enquire first what is meant by offering Praise
and Thanksgiving unto God, and then how reasonable it is, that we should do so.

Our Enquiry into what is meant here, will be very short: For who is there,
that understands any thing of Religion, but knows; that to offer Praise and
Thanks to God is, to have a lively and devout Sense of his Excellencies, and of
his Benefits; to recollect 'em with Humility and Thankfulness of heart; and to
express these Inward Affections by suitable Outward Signs of 'em; by reverent
and lowly Postures of Body, by Songs and Hymns, and Spiritual Ejaculations:
either Privately or Publicly; either in the Customary and Daily Service of the
Church, or in its more Solemn Appointments, upon extraordinary occasions. This
is the Account which every Christian easily gives himself of it; and which
therefore it would be needless to enlarge upon. I shall only take notice on
this Head; that Praise and Thansgiving do, in strictness of Speech, signify
Things somewhat different. Our Praise is properly terminated on God, on the
Account of his natural Excellencies and Perfections; and is that, by which we
give Honor to all his several Attributes; but Thanksgiving is a narrower Duty,
and Imports only, a grateful Sense and Acknowledgment of past Mercies. We
praise God for all his glorious Acts, of every kind, that regard either us, or
other men; for his very Vengeance, and those Judgments which he sometimes sends
abroad in the Earth: But we thank him only for the Instances of his Goodness;
and for Such only of those, as We our selves are concerned in. This, I say, is
what the Two words strictly mean: but since the Language of Scripture is
generally less exact; and uses either of 'em often, to express the other by, I
shall not therefore think my self obliged, in what follows, thus nicely always
to distinguish 'em.

Now the great Reasonableness of this Duty of Praise or Thanksgiving, and Our
several Obligations to it will appear; if we either consider it absolutely in
it self, as the Debt of our Natures; or compare it with other Duties, and show
the Rank it bears amongst 'em: Or set out, in the last place, some of its
peculiar Properties and Advantages, with regard to the devout Performer of it.

Praise and Thanksgiving, considered absolutely in themselves, are, I say, the
Debt* and the very Law of our Nature. We had such Faculties on purpose bestowed
on us, as made us fit to satisfy this Debt, and to obey this Law: And they
therefore never work more naturally and freely, than when they are thus
employed.

It Is one of the oldest pieces of Reasoning, that Philosophy has acquainted us
with; and which has ever since been taught and kept up by the wisest Men of all
Ages, that the Original Design of making Man was, that he might Praise and
Honor Him that made him.

When God had finished this goodly-Frame of things we call the World, and put
together the several parts of it, according to the Skill of his infinite
Wisdom, in exact Number, Weight, and Measure; there was still wanting a
Creature in these lower Regions, that could apprehend the Beauty, Order, and
exquisite Contrivance of it:- that from contemplating the Gift, might be able
to lead it self up to the great Giver; and do Honor to all his Attributes.

Every Thing indeed, that God made, did, in some Sense, glorify its Author;
inasmuch as it carried upon it the plain Mark and Impress of the Deity; and was
an Effect worthy of that first Cause from whence it flowed: And Thus might the
Heavens be said, at the first moment in which they stood forth, To declare his
Glory, and the Firmament to show his Handy work. But this was an imperfect, and
an improper Glory: The Sign signified to no purpose here Below, where there was
no Body to take notice of it.

Man therefore was framed to supply this want; en^^ed with Powers fit to find
out, and to acknowledge these unlimited Perfections: and then put into this
Temple of God, this Lower World, as the Priest of Nature, to offer up the
Incense of Thanks and Praise for the mute and the insensible Part of the
Creation.

This I say has been the Opinion all along of the most thoughtful Men down from
the most Ancient Times: And though it carry no Demonstration in it, yet is it what
we cannot but agree to, if we will but allow that Man was made for some End or
Other; and that he is capable of perceiving that End. For then, let us search,
deliberate, and enquire never so much, we shall find no other Account of him,
that we can rest upon so well. If we say he was made purely for the good
Pleasure of God, and because He would have it so, this is, in effect, to say,
that he was made for no End; or for none that we can discern.

If we say again, That he was designed as an Instance of the Wisdom, and Power,
and Goodness of God, this indeed may be the Reason of his Being in general; For
it is the common Reason of the Being of every thing besides. But it (...) no
Account, why he was made such a ^^^ng as he is, a reflecting, thoughtful,
inquisitive Being: The particular Reason of this must be drawn from the Praise
and Honor that was to be given to God by him, if we will have any Reason at
all of it.

This therefore is the Debt and Law of our Nature. And it will more distinctly
appear to be such, if we consider the two Ruling Faculties of our Mind, The
Understanding and the Will, apart; in both which it is deeply founded: in the
Understanding, as in the Principle of Reason, that owns and acknowledges it; in
the Will, as in the Fountain of Gratitude and Return, which violently
constrains us to pay it.

Reason was given us as a Rule and Measure to value things by: by the help of
which we were to proportion our Esteem of every thing, according to the Degrees
of Perfection and Goodness that were in it. It cannot therefore, if it does its
Office at all, but apprehend. God as the best and most perfect being; it must
necessarily own and give him the Honor of his infinite Perfections. And thi^^
what is strictly meant by Praise: which ^^^^^fore is expressed often in
Scripture by confessing to God, and acknowledging him; by ascribing to him what
is his Due: And as far as This Sense of the word goes, it is impossible to think
of God without praising him. For it depends not on the Understanding (on a
sound and uncorrupted Understanding, I mean) how it shall apprehend things, any
more than it does on the Eye, how its Objects shall appear to it.

The Duty takes a further and surer hold of us, by the means of our Will, and
that strong bent toward Gratitude, which the Author of Nature has fixed
there. There is not a more active Principle, than This, in Man; and That surely
which deserves its utmost Force, and should set all its Springs awork, is God;
that Great and Universal Benefactour, from whom we received every thing, we
either are or have; and to whom we can possibly repay nothing, but our Praises,
or (to speak more properly on this Head, and according to the strict Import of
the Word) our Thanksgivings. Who has given to God (says the great Apostle in
his usual Figure) and it shall be recompensed unto him? A Gift it seems always
requires a Recompense -- Nay, but of him, (...) through him, and to him are all
things; -- Of him, as the Author; through him, as the Preserver and Governor;
to him, as the End and Perfection: To whom therefore (as it follows) be Glory
for ever, Amen!

Gratitude consists in an equal Return of Benefits, if we are able; or of
Thanks if we are not. Which Thanks, therefore must rise always as the Favors
received are in Proportion great, and the Receiver incapable in Degree of
making any other Sort of Requital. Now since no Man has benefited God at any
Time, and yet every Man in each Moment of his Life, is continually benefitted
by him; what strong Obligations must we needs be under to thank Him?

It Is true, our Thanks are really as little worth to him, as any other kind of
Return would be: In themselves indeed they are so; But his Goodness has made
'em, otherwise: He has declared he will accept 'em in lieu of the vast Debt we
owe. And after that, which is fittest for us to dispute how they come to be an
Equivalent, or to pay 'em?

It is therefore the Voice of Nature, as far as Gratitude it self is so, that
the Good Things, we receive from above, should be sent back again thither in
Thanks and Praises; As the Rivers run into the Sea; to the place (the Ocean of
Beneficence) from whence these Rivers came, thither should they return again.

We have considered the Duty absolutely, we are now to compare it with others,
and to see what Rank it bears among 'em. And Here we shall find, that among all
the Acts of Religion immediately addressed to God, this is much the Noblest,
and most Excellent. And indeed, if what has been laid down be allowed, That the
end of Man's Creation was to praise and glorify God, it must needs be so. For
That cannot but be the most noble and worthy Act of any Being, which is the
very End and Design of it. Other parts of Piety, such as Confession and Prayer;
were not Originally designed for Man, nor Man for Them: They imply Guilt and
Want, with which the State of Innocence was not acquainted. Had Man continued
in That, his Worship had been all paid to Heaven in pure Acts of Thanksgiving.
And he had had nothing to do, but to enjoy the Goods of Life, as Nature
directed, and to praise the God of Nature that bestowed 'em. But being fallen
from Innocence and Abundance; having contracted Guilt, and forfeited his Right
to all sorts of Mercies; Prayer and Confession became necessary, for a time, to
retrieve the Loss, and to restore him again to that State, where he should be
able to live without 'em. These are fitted therefore for a lower Dispensation:
before 'em in Paradise, there was nothing but Praise; and after 'em too, there
shall be nothing but that in Heaven. Our perfect State did at first, and will
at last consist in That: and therefore That is the Excellence and the Honor of
our Nature.

It Is the Same Argument, which the Apostle has used for the preference of
Charity, to Faith and Hope, and every Spiritual Gift. Charity fails not, says
he; that is, is not a Virtue useful only in this Life, but will go along with
us also into the next: -- But whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be Tongues, they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it
shall vanish away. These are Gifts of a Temporary Advantage, and shall all
perish in the using. For we know in part; and we prophecy in part -- Our
present State is imperfect, and therefore what belongs to That, and only That,
must be imperfect too. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which
is in part shall be done away.

The same Argument, we see, that sets Charity above the rest of Christian
Graces, will give Praise also the Pre-eminence over the other Parts of
Christian Worship; and we may conclude our reasoning therefore, as He does his:
And now abides Confession, Prayer and Praise; these three: But the greatest of
these is Praise.

It is so certainly on other Accounts, as well as this: Particularly, as it is
the most disinterested part of our Religious Service, such as has the most of
God, and the least of our selves in it, of any we pay: And therefore approaches
the nearest of any to a pure, and free, and perfect Act of Homage.

For, though a good Action does not grow immediately worthless by being done
with the Prospect of Advantage, as some have strangely imagined; yet it will be
allowed, I suppose, that its being done without the Mixture of that End,
recommends it so much the more, and raises the Price of it. Does Job serve God
for naught? was an Objection of Satan's, which implied, that those Duties were
most valuable, where our own Interest was least aimed at: And God seems, by the
Commission he then gave him to try Experiments upon Job, thus far to have
allowed his Plea.

Now our Acknowledgments and Requests are purely for our selves: our own.
Interest is the direct Aim of them. But Praise is a generous and unmercenary
Principle, which proposes no other End to it self, but to do, as is fit for a
Creature endowed with such Faculties, to do toward the perfectest and most
beneficent of Beings; and to pay the willing Tribute of our Honor there, where
the Voice of Reason directs us to pay it.

God has indeed annexed a Blessing to the Duty, and when we know this, we
cannot choose in the Act of Praise, but have some Regard to it. However that is
not our direct Aim in it, nor was it the first Motive that stirred us up to it.
Had it been so, we should naturally have had Recourse unto Prayer, and breathed
out our Desires in That Form which most properly belongs to them.

In short, Praise is our most Excellent Work; a Work common to the Church
Triumphant and Militant, and which lifts us up into a Communion and Fellowship
with Angels. The Matter of it is always the Perfection of God's Nature; and the
Act it self, is the Perfection of Ours.

I come now, in the last Place, to set out some of its peculiar Properties and
Advantages, which recommend it to the Devout Performer. And First --

It is the most pleasant part of our Devotions. It proceeds always from good
Humor, and a Cheerful Temper of Mind; and it cherishes, and promotes it
mightily in us. For it is good to sing Praises to the Lord, (says One, whose
Experience in this Case, we may rely upon) for it is pleasant, and Praise is
comely. Prayer and Penitence are the Languageof the Indigent and the Guilty;
the Breathings of a Sad and a Contrite Spirit: Is any afflicted? let him pray:
But -- Is any merry? let him sing Psalms.

The most natural and lively way of Men's expressing the Mirth of their Hearts,
is in a Song. And Songs are the very Language of Praise, Appropriated
peculiarly to this End in Religion, and scarce of any other Use in it. Indeed
the whole Composition of this Duty is such, as throughout speaks Ease and
Delight to the Mind.

It proceeds from Love, and from Thank: fullness: From Love, the very Fountain
of Pleasure; the Passion, which gives every thing we do or enjoy, its Relish
and Agreeableness.

From Thankfulness, which involves in it the Memory of past Benefits; the
actual Presence of them to the Mind, and the repeated Enjoyment of 'em.

And as its Principle is, such is its End also. For it procures Quiet and Ease
to the Mind, by doing somewhat toward satisfying that Debt, which it labors
under; by delivering it of those Thoughts of Praise and Gratitude; those
Exultations it is so full of; and which would grow uneasy and troublesome to
it, if they were kept in: If the Thankful refrained, it would be Pain and
Grief to him: But then, then is his Soul satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness,
when his Mouth praises God with Joyful Lips.

It is another great Effect of Praise, that it enlarges the Powers and
Capacities of our Soul; turning 'em off from little and low things, upon their
Greatest and Noblest Object, the Divine Nature; and employing 'em in searching
out all the Wonders of it. We see what difference there is between Man and Man;
such, as there is hardly greater between Man and Beast: And this proceeds all
from the different Sphere of Thought which they Act in, and the different
Objects they converse with. The Mind is Essentially the same in the Peasant and
the Prince, the Forces of it naturally equal in the untaught Man, and the
Philosopher: Only the one is busied in mean Affairs, and within narrower
Bounds; the Other Exercises himself in Things of weight and moment: And This it
is, that puts the wide distance between 'em. Noble Objects are to the Mind,
what the Sunbeams are to a Bud or Flower: They open and unfold; as it were,
the Leaves of it; put it upon exerting and spreading it self every way; and
call forth all those Powers, that lie hid and locked up in it. The Praise and
Admiration of God therefore brings this Advantage along with it, that it sets
our Faculties upon their full Stretch, and improves 'em to all the Degrees of
Perfection, of which they are capable.

It (farther) Promotes in us, an exquisite Sense of God's Honor; and an high
Indignation of Mind, at every thing, that openly profanes it. For what we value
and delight in, we cannot with Patience hear slighted or abused. Our Own
Praises, which we are constantly putting up, will be a Spur to us to procure
the Glory of God in every Other instance of it: and will make us set our Faces
against all open and avowed Impieties. Which methinks should be considered a
little by those Men, who can be silent under the foulest dishonours done to
Religion, and its great Author. For tamely to hear God's Name blasphemed by
Others, is no very good Argument that we have been used to Honor and Reverence
him in good earnest, Our selves.

It will (beyond all this) work in us a deep Humility; and a Consciousness of
our own Imperfections. Upon a frequent Attention to God and his Attributes, we
shall easily discover our own Weakness and Emptiness: Our swelling thoughts of
ourselves will abate; and we shall see and feel, that we are lighter, to be
laid in the Balance, than even Vanity it self. And This is a Lesson, which, to
the most part of Mankind, is, I Think, very well worth learning. We are
naturally Presumptuous and Vain; full of Ourselves, and regardless of every
thing besides: Especially, when some little Outward Privileges distinguish Us
from the rest of Mankind; then, it is odds, but we look into Ourselves with
great degrees of Complacency; and are wiser and better every way, without
doubt, than seven Men, that can render a Reason. Now nothing will contribute so
much to the Cure of this Vanity, as a due Attention to God's Excellencies, and
to the Praise of 'em. By comparing These with our Own, we shall learn not to
think of our selves more highly than we ought to think of Ourselves; but to
think soberly: We shall find more satisfaction in looking upwards, and humbling
Ourselves before Our common Creator, than in casting Our Eyes downward with
Scorn upon our Fellow Creatures, and setting at naught any part of the Work of
his Hands. The vast distance we are at, from Real and Infinite Worth, will
astonish us so much, that we shall have no Mind to value Ourselves on those
lesser Degrees of Pre-eminence, that Custom, or Opinion, or some little
accidental Advantages have given Us over other Men.

I shall mention but one Use of it more, and it is This; That a conscientious
Praise of God will keep Us back from all false and mean Praises, all. Fulsome
and Servile Flatteries, such as are in use among Men. Praising, as it is
commonly managed, is nothing else but a Trial of Skill upon a Man, how many
good Things we can possibly say of him. All the fine Characters that ever were
made, are heaped together, and thrown into One, for His sake. And no matter,
whether it belongs to him, or not; so there be but enough on it. Which is one
deplorable Instance (among a thousand) of the Baseness of humane Nature; its
small regard to Truth and Justice; to Right, or Wrong; to what is, or is not to
be praised.

But He, who has a deep Sense of the Excellencies of God upon his Heart, will
make a God of nothing besides: He will give every thing its just Encomium,
Honor where Honor is due; and as much as is due; because it is his Duty to do
so: but the Honor of God will suffer him to go no further. Which Rule, if it
had been observed, a Neighboring Prince, (who now, God be thanked, needs
Flattery something more than ever he did) would have wanted a great deal of
that Incense that has been paid him.

Upon these Grounds does the Duty of Praise stand, and these are the
Obligations that Tie us to the Performance of it.

It Is the End of our being, and the very Rule and Law of Our Nature; flowing
from the Two great Fountains of humane Action, the Understanding and the Will,
naturally, and almost necessarily. It is the most Excellent part of our
Religious Worship; enduring to Eternity, when the rest are to be done away; and
paid even Now after the frankest manner, with the least regard to Our own
Interest. It recommends it self to us by several peculiar Properties, that
Belong to it: As it carries more Pleasure in it, than all other Kinds of
Devotion; as it enlarges and exalts all the Powers of the Mind; as it breeds in
Us an exquisite Sense of God's Honor, and a Willingness to promote it in the
World: as it learns us to be Humble and Lowly Ourselves; and yet preserves us
from the Baseness of Flattery, from bestowing mean and undue Praises upon
Others.

A great deal more might be said for it, if This were not sufficient: For no
Subject affords more Room for our Praises, than the Praise of God it self, if
we had leisure to pursue it.

I shall now shut up the Arguing part of this Discourse, with a short
Application to Two sorts of Persons; the Careless, and the Profane. One of
which Neglects the Practice of so Important a Duty, and the other lives in
Defiance of it.

A Neglect in this Case, is certainly the Grossest that can be: It Is (we see)
the Neglect of our Duty, our Honor, our Interest, and our Pleasure all at
once. It Is to omit doing that which we were purposely sent into the World to
do: And without doing which, all the other Affairs of Life are but one
continued Impertinence. That, which we have so many Obligations to do, and no
Excuse for leaving undone: For Praise is within every Man's Reach: There is no
One but has it in his Power to be Thankful.

God commanded the Jews to acknowledge his Sovereignty and Beneficence, by
Sacrifices, a Costly and a Troublesome way of Worship. Of Us he requires only
the Cheap and Easy Offering of Our Thanks and Praises -- And shall we not pay
it? Alas! we do not! Every thing proves an hindrance to us in the way to this
our Bounden Duty and Service: We are too idle or too busy to attend upon it.

And even when we find Leisure enough; yet how cold and how insensible are we
whilst it is going forward! We draw nigh unto him with our Lips (perhaps) but
our Hearts are far from him. And do we then know what it is to praise God
becomingly? Do we remember how the great Teacher of Thanksgiving summons up
every One of his Faculties to assist him in it? Praise the Lord O my Soul! and
all that is within me, praise his holy Name! It Is a Work that will employ all
that is within us, that will call for all the Application, and Vigor, and
Warmth that we can possibly bestow upon it Cold, unmoved Praise, is no Praise!
the Sacrifice of it can be no longer acceptable than it is burning.

To those Men who live in the Contempt of this Duty, we have also something to
say, if they would but hear us. They are generally such, as pretend a high
Sense of the Dignity of humane Nature, and bear no small Respect to their own
Understandings. Now, though Other Parts of Religious Worship should happen to
be too mean and low for such great Minds to take up with; yet This, methinks,
might deserve to be thought equal to 'em.

Let Confession and Prayer go only for the Arts of Whining and Begging, and be
as much beneath 'em as they imagine, yet surely Praise has something so great
and so noble in it, that they cannot look down upon it. It Is a Subject fit for
the most enlarged Capacities to dwell on; and such an One, as even Those would
certainly find themselves raised and improved by.

If it were possible for These Men to have a Relish of any thing of this Kind,
we would desire 'em to make the Trial: To take the Te Deum into their Hands,
and to read it attentively; and then tell us truly, whether they did not find
their Minds filled, and their Affections strangely raised by the Images they
met there: Whether they did not perceive themselves to be somewhat above
themselves, in the using it. And all this done by that Majestic Plainness and
Simplicity of Thought that goes through it! Unadorned by Words! Unenliven'd by
Figures! It Is the Matter alone which supports the Expression: And because that
Matter is pure, genuine Praise, therefore is it so lofty and so moving.

But alas! we speak in vain! The Men who are bold enough to slight a Duty of
this Rank and Character, will easily slight every thing that can be offered to
bring 'em to it. All we can say to 'em is, that as God made 'em for his Glory,
so, whether they will render it to him or not, he will certainly serve the Ends
of that Glory upon 'em, one way or another. And therefore, if they will not
freely Praise him for his Goodness in this World, they shall surely, whether
they will or no, contribute to the Praise of his Justice in the Next.

Thus have I attempted to set out the great Reasonableness of this Duty, and to
stir You up to the Practice of it. And certainly, it was never more reasonable,
than on This Occasion, when we commemorate such Past Mercies, and feel such
Present Ones. The Restoration of the Monarchy, and of all those Blessings in
Church and State, that came along with it; The Re-establishment of the Beauty
of Praise in our Sanctuary; The Return of Peace and Plenty; Of Learning, and
all the Arts of Civil Life; The Reducing us from Confusion and Rage into Order
and Friendliness, and making Us a Nation at Unity in it self; Lovely at home,
and Terrible abroad: These were such sound and substantial Blessings, as will
wear well; and, though done a great while ago, will yet deserve a great while
hence a Place in our Calendars. Neither Love to our Country, nor the Honor we
bear to Those who Rule over Us; neither Our Gratitude to God, nor our Good Will
toward Men will suffer such Wonders of Providence to slip out of our Minds; or
the Day, in which they were brought about, easily to grow Old upon Us.

The Benefits we then received were indeed exceeding great, and would justly
claim a larger Share in our Present Thoughts, had not the Goodness of God taken
'em off a little from thence, by calling 'em to the Acknowledgment of New
Loving Kindnesses.

For behold what Glorious Things the Lord has again done for Us! Blessing Their
Majesty's Forces with a great and signal Victory over the most haughty and
insolent of Enemies. A Victory -- so Early, so Complete, and so Cheaply
purchased, that we have Reason to hope, it may fix the Fortune of the War, and
put an End to the Destructions of the Destroyer: To whom, we trust, God has now
said, as he did once to the Sea it self. Hitherto shall Thou come, and no
further; and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed.

Blessed be God! who did not utterly cast out our Prayers, and our
Supplications: but delaid only to Answer 'em, till a Day of Salvation, till an
acceptable Time; when the Mercy would be dearer to Us, and his Goodness more
remarkably seen in the bestowing it!

When we were Alarmed with Invasions from abroad, and Conspiracies at home;
when Men threatened to swallow us up quick: When Success was now so requisite to
preserve the Honor of the Nation, to support Their Majesty's Throne, and to
strengthen the Hands of Their Allies; Then did He appear, and own Our Cause;
Then was the God of Hosts, our Strength, and our Shield.

Surely, There is no End of that Goodness, which continues thus to pursue us!
Which vouchsafes to establish to Us, and to our Posterity those Blessings,
under which we have been so unthankful, and so ungrateful already! and to give
us fresh Opportunities of Praise, which I hope we shall make better use of!

Let us therefore, Offer unto God Thanksgiving! and not That only, but
Ourselves also, our Souls and Bodies, to be a Reasonable, Holy and Lively
Sacrifice: Let us render him the Fruit of our Lips, and the Obedience of our
Lives! that these Blessings may not prove a Curse to us; but that He may still
be Our God, and we may be His People!

To him with the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Praise and Glory,
henceforth and for Evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

