THE Whole ART OF THE STAGE. CONTAINING Not only the Rules of the Drammatick
Art, but many curious Observations about it. Which may be of great use to the
Authors, Actors, and Spectators of Plays. Together with much Critical Learning
about the Stage and Plays of the Ancients.

Written in French by the command of Cardinal Richelieu. By Monsieur Hedelin,
Abbot of Aubignac, and now made English.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold by William Cadman at the Pope's-Head
in the New Exchange; Rich. Bentley, in Russel Street, Covent Garden; Sam. Smith
at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul 's Churchyard; and T. Fox in
Westminster Hall. 1684.

The Translator's PREFACE.
SOme may wonder that this being a work of such use, and replenished with such
judicious Remarks, as well as deep learning, in the whole course of it, has
hitherto escaped the pen of our Translators out of a Language that has almost
tired our Presses with continual productions. But the reason of that may be
that it was published in a time when we were Embroiled in civil Wars here in
England, and that having laid aside all those Innocent Theatral Representations
the whole Kingdom was become the Stage of real Tragedies; So that till his
Majesty's happy Restoration, with whom the Muses seemed to have been banished
this Island, it could not be expected that a book of this nature could meet
with any kind reception in the world; but by that time I suppose the
Impressions were all sold off, and it was to be met with no where but in the
Libraries of the curious. It was by Communication from a Person of that sort
that the Translator first had the thoughts of making it English, which he
obtained leisure to do, by an unhappy confinement to a retired life for his
health sake from more solid studies and business which his profession else
involves him in. So Reader thou have here the whole Art of the Stage, of which
there needs little to be said, the Book being its own Commendation; As for the
Author he was a person of a good Family in Paris, and of Exquisite Learning in
Antiquity; much cherished by Cardinal Richelieu that great Maecenas of
Ingenious men, and by him for his deserts made Abbot of Aubignac and designed
Overseer or Super-Intendant General of the Theaters in France, if the project
of restoring them to their Ancient glory (of which you will see an abstract at
the end of the book) had gone on, and not been Interrupted by the Cardinals
Death.

The Translator has made some Alterations in the Authors method and order of
his Chapters, for the Author having promiscuously placed much of the crabbed
Antiquity Learning among the other Observations upon the Drammatick Art; and
that being likely to disgust some Readers The Translator has put it all in one
Book at the latter end, where those who love that critical Learning may have it
altogether, and the others who delight in a smoother career of Reasons and
Observations may go on in the first three Parts without too strong an
Application in matters of some Intricacy.

There is nothing more, but that thou excuse the Errata, which by the
negligence of the Printer are but too many.

THE CONTENTS.
Book I.
Chap. 1. BEing instead of a Preface to the whole Work wherein is treated of
the necessity of Public Spectacles, of the Esteem the Ancients had them in,
and in what state they are now amongst us. Chap. 2. The Design of the whole
Work. Chap. 3. What is to be understood by the Art of the Stage. Chap. 4. Of
the Rules of the Ancients. Chap. 5. How they ought to instruct themselves, who
intend to write a Drammatick Poem. Chap. 6. Of the Spectators, and how they are
to be considered by the Poet. Chap. 7. Of the Mixture of Representation, with
the Truth of the Theatral Action. Chap. 8. How the Poet must make his
Decorations, and other necessary Actions in the Play, known to the Audience.
Book II.
Chap. 1. OF the Subject of Drammatick Poems. Chap. 2. Of Probability and
Decency. Chap. 3. Of the Unity of Action. Chap. 4. Of the Continuity of the
Action. Chap. 5. Of the Subjects with two Walks, whereof one is by Modern
Authors called Episode. Chap. 6. Of the Unity of Place. Chap. 7. The Extent of
the Theatral Action, or of the time fit to be allowed a Drammatick Poem. Chap.
8. Of the Preparation of the Incidents. Chap. 9. Of the Catastrophe or Issue of
the Drammatick Poem.
Book III.
Chap. 1. OF the Actors or Persons to be brought upon the Stage, and what the
Poet is to observe about them. Chap. 2. Of Discourses in general. Chap. 3. Of
Narrations. Chap. 4. Of Deliberations. Chap. 5. Of Didactick Discourses or
Instructions. Chap. 6. Of Pathetick Discourses; or of the Passions and Motions
of the Mind. Chap. 7. Of the Figures. Chap. 8. Of Monologues, or Discourses
made by a single Person. Chap. 9. Of a Parts, or Discourses made to ones self
in the presence of others. Chap. 10. Of the Acts. Chap. 11. Of the Intervals of
the Acts. Chap. 12. Of the Scenes. Chap. 13. Of Spectacles, Machines, and
Decorations of the Stage.
Book IV.
Chap. 1. OF the Quantitative Parts of the Drammatick Poem, and particularly of
the Prologue. Chap. 2. Of Episodes according to the Doctrine of Aristotle.
Chap. 3. Of the Choruses of the Ancients. Chap. 4. Of the Ancient Actors, or
first Reciters of Episodes against the Opinion of some Modern Writers. Chap. 5.
Of Tragicomedy. An Analysis, or Examen of the first Tragedy of Sophocles,
entitled Ajax, upon the Rules delivered for the Practice of the Stage. A
Project for Re-establishing the French Theater.
THE Whole Art OF THE STAGE. The First BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Being instead of a Preface to the whole Work, wherein is treated of the
necessity of Public Spectacles, of the Esteem the Ancients had them in, and in
what state they are now amongst us.
ALL those Incomparable and Famous Genius's which, from time to time, Heaven
Designs for the Government of Mankind, do not only endeavor to make the
Nations subject to their Conduct, Triumph with victorious Arms over their
Enemies, and thereby become Formidable to the World; but also having enriched
them with all the wonders of Nature and Art, by the means of Commerce with
Foreign Nations, they do strive to soften and sweeten their Dispositions, by
all the Noble Sciences that Mankind is capable of; and considering that Nature
its self in its Noblest Productions, after having adorned them with all
Qualities necessary to their Perfection, gives them a certain Contentment and
Rejoicing in them, which is the greatest of its Favors; these great
Politicians, in imitation of her, do use to Crown all their Endeavors for the
public safety, with public Pleasures and Entertainments, making their own
glorious Labors either the means or the pretexts of all general Diversions.
Their Victories are noted by days of Rejoicing and public Games; and all the
Spoils and Riches of Foreign Nations, are brought from the extremity of the
Earth, only to compose the Pomp and Decoration of their Spectacles, as well as
the most curious Sciences are Cultivated to produce men capable of inventing
new Entertainments.

And to say Truth, what greater marks can there be of a flourishing Greatness
in any State, than to see many of these Diversions? Thereby in Peace appears
the Superfluity of its Riches, the Abundance of its People, who without being a
Charge to the Public, can spare many days to their Pleasure, from those
Employments which are necessary to the subsistence of the great Body of the
People; and besides, the Number of rare Wits busied in the public Diversion,
with all sorts of Inventions, and the greater number of excellent Artificers,
employed to execute the ingenious thoughts of the first, cannot but be a great
Ornament to a Nation.

All the Commonwealths of Greece, had each their public Games, where their
Neighbors were as it were obliged to assist, that they might all appear equal
in Magnificency, as well as in Power and Authority: And if the Commonwealths
of Italy were forced to come short of the Grandeur of Rome in that point, yet
by their particular Cirk's and Theaters they have showed the World that they
yielded only to the Mistress of it, and not to one another.

But whenever in the midst of War all these Diversions are continued in a
state, it is giving an evident demonstration, that the Riches of it are without
measure, and the People inexhaustible, when the dangers and labors of a
Campaigne passed in the toyls of War, and the prospect of one to come, does
neither change the Humor nor the Courage of those that compose the Armies, nor
of those that stay at home; that they undertake with Joy in Summer those
glorious actions, of which they see an Image upon the Stage in Winter, with so
much Pleasure; and that the Advantages their Enemies reap from the War, are so
inconsiderable as not to disquiet, or interrupt the public Joy.

Thus the Athenians, having received in the very Theater the news of an entire
defeat of their Army before Syracusa, would not so much as interrupt the
public Games, but went on with those Spectacles as they had begun; and Foreign
Ambassadors, who themselves were by, and Spectators of this undaunted
Generosity, admired it more than their real Power, as thinking it harder to
subdue. And to come nearer our times, if we consider what has passed at Vienna
and Paris, the Heads of two Rival Empires, under the Ministry of the great
Cardinal Richelieu; we must confess that these two Capitols seemed by the
Magnificencies of their Plays, Ballets, and other public Entertainments, to
try to persuade the World, that the Event of the War, which so warmly they
carried on against each other, was indifferent to them, both as to their good
or evil Fortune.

We are not nevertheless to imagine that these public Spectacles afford
nothing but a vain Splendor, without any real Utility; for they are a secret
Instrustruction to the People of many things, which it would be very hard to
insinuate into them any other way. As for Example, Those public Diversions
where there is any image of War, do insensibly make them acquainted with Arms,
and make those Instruments of Death familiar to them, inspiring them at the
same time with Courage and Intrepedity against all dangers; besides, Vanity
often prevails more with us than Reason; and that Jealous humor, of which our
Nature can hardly ever well divest it self, does continually foment within us a
certain desire of Conpuering, which often carries us to overcome all our
natural Weaknesses, and go beyond our selves in great Attempts: Thus the Glory
which one receives in public for some handsome action; and the recital or
representation of the Heroic Virtues of those who are not even in being, at
the time we hear them, does nevertheless raise in us a presumptuous belief that
we are able to perform the like; and this presumption becoming a nobler sort of
Envy, called Emulation, produces in us an insatiable desire of Honor, and
elevates our Courage to undertake any thing that may effect that Glorious
Design.

As for those Spectacles which consist as much in Discourse as Action, such as
formerly were the Disputes upon the Stage between the Epick and Drammatick
Poets: They are not only useful but absolutely necessary to instruct the
People, and give them some tincture of Moral Virtues.

The minds of those who are of the meanest Rank and Condition in a State, are
generally so little acquainted with any notions of Morality, that the most
general Maxims of it are hardly known to them; it is in vain therefore to make
fine Discourses, full of convincing Reasons, and strengthened with Examples to
them, they can neither understand the first, nor have any deference for the
latter. All the elevated Truths of Philosophy are lights too strong for their
weak Eyes: Tell them of these Maxims, that Happiness consists less in the
possession of worLdly things, than in the despising of them; that Virtue ought
to seek its recompense in its self; that there is no Interest in the World
considerable enough to oblige a man of Honor to do a base thing; all these, I
say, are Paradoxes to them, which makes them suspect Philosophy it self, and
turn it into Ridicule; they must therefore be instructed by a more sensible
way, which may fall more under their senses; and such are the Representations
of the Stage, which may therefore properly be called the Peoples School.

One of the chiefest, and indeed the most indispensible Rule of Drammatick
Poems, is, that in them Virtues always ought to be rewarded, or at least
commended, in spite of all the Injuries of Fortune; and that likewise Vices be
always punished, or at least detested with Horror, though they triumph upon
the Stage for that time. The Stage being thus regulated, what can Philosophy
teach that will not become much more sensibly touching by Representation; it is
there that the meanest Capacities may visibly see, that favors of Fortune are
not real Enjoyments, when they see the ruin of the Royal Family of Priamus; all
that they hear from the Mouth of Hecuba seems very probable, having before
their Eyes the sad Example of her Calamities; it is there that they are
convinced that Heaven punishes the horrid Crimes of the Guilty with the remorse
of them; when they see Orestes tormented by his own Conscience, and driven
about by Furies within his own Breast; it is there that Ambition seems to them a
very dangerous Passion, when they see a man engaged in Crimes, to attain his
Ends, and after having violated the Laws of Heaven and Earth, fall into
Misfortunes as great as those he had overwhelmed others in, and more tormented
by himself than by his Enemies: It Is there again that Covetousness appears a
Disease of the Soul, when they see a Covetous man persecuted with continual
Restlesness, and fears of want in the midst of all his Riches. And lastly, it is
there that a Man, by Representation, makes them penetrate into the most hidden
secrets of Humane Nature, while they seem to touch and feel in this living
Picture, those Truths which else they would scarce be capable of: But that
which is most remarkable, is, That they never go from the Theater without
carrying along with them the Idea of the Persons represented; the knowledge of
those Virtues and Vices, of which they have seen the Examples; their memory
repeating continually to them those Lessons which have been derived to them,
from sensible and present Objects.

Besides, in all Governments there is a number of idle People, Comoedias and
Tragoedias otiosis damus: nemo enim in Theatrum venit qui non libens velit id
temporis amittere.
either because they hate taking pains, or because they need not do it to live;
this idleness carries them generally to many Debaucheries, where they consume
in a very little time, what might suffice for the keeping of their Families
many Months, and are then forced upon ill actions for a supply to their present
wants. Scalig. l. 3. c. 121. poet.
Now, I think nothing worthier the care of a Great Prince, than to prevent, if
possible, his Subjects from taking these extravagant Courses; and as it would
be too severe to enjoin them perpetual labor, so I think that public
Spectacles and Entertainments would most innocently amuse those who have no
other employment; their own pleasure would carry them thither without
constraint, their hours would slide away without regret, and their very
idleness being busy, they would there lose all the thoughts of doing ill.

Thus whether out of the consideration of procuring that Joy and Content to
Mankind, which makes their greatest Felicity, and without which they can relish
no other Happiness; or whether to show the greatness of a State, either in
Peace or War; to inspire the People with Courage, or to instruct them in the
knowledge and practice of Virtue; or lastly, to prevent Idleness, (one of the
greatest mischiefs of a State) Princes can never do any thing more advantageous
for their own Glory, nor for their Peoples Happiness, than to found, settle,
and maintain at their own Charges, public Spectacles, Games, and other
Diversions, in the greatest Order, and the noblest Magnificence that their
Crown will afford.

And without doubt they have always been thought very important to the very
Political part of the Government, since the Philosophy of the Greeks, and the
Majesty and Wisdom of the Romans, did equally concern their Magistrates, in
making them Venerable, Noble, and Magnificent. They made them Venerable, by
Consecrating them always to some of their Gods, and by putting them under the
direction of their Chief Magistrates; and they were beyond measure Magnificent,
because the Expense was allowed out of the public Treasure; and the liberal
Contributions of their greatest Men in employment, who endeavored to surpass
each other in Magnificence, that they might make the time of their
Administration more memorable. Very often the Chief of the Nobility were at the
whole Expense, only to gain the Peoples Favor; and they obliged all the
Eminent Artificers in all kinds, to show their Excellency in them: they did use
to send to the remotest Nations for Men, Beasts, or any Rarity that could
increase the Pleasure of their Spectacles; and last of all, they had Crowns for
the Conquerors in all Exercises, and Statues for those, who with any
extraordinary Magnificence had been at the charge of them.

It had been nevertheless little for these two Noble Nations to enjoy these
Pleasures alone, if they had not propagated them to all the others of their
Knowledge. The Greeks filled Asia with them, and the Romans carried them all
over Africa and Europe, and after they had Conquered the best part of the known
World, to show that their Domination was Gentle, and not Tyrannical; they
received the Gods, and the Religions of all Nations into Rome, and sent them
the Games, Spectacles, and Diversions of that famous Capitol, to let them see
that they had not made War upon them to oppress them, but to increase their
Happiness, by sharing their Felicity with them. The Theater of Sardis in Asia,
that of Carthage in Africa, and those of Douay, Nismes, and Autun in France,
are convincing Testimonies of this, though ruinous ones; and when Constantine
carried the Siege of the Empire to the City of his Name, he made there such
public Buildings for Spectacles, as showed he would make it the Seat of his
Pleasures, as well as of his Power.

But the Ancients did not only aim at obliging the present Age with their Noble
Structures, but endeavored to endear Posterity to them, by making of them, as
much as in them lay, immortal: Thus their Cirques, their Theaters, and
Amphitheatres, were built with the most polished and lasting Marble, and with
so much Art, that if any thing they might resist the suppression of Time; but
alas! as if man imprinted the Character of his own Mortality upon all his
Works, these Glorious Monuments of their greatness have yielded to the same
destiny; the Torrent of Time which overwhelms and destroys all things, has
scarce left us the Image of them in some old ruins, half demolished. And
Reason and Custom seem to have joined with Time in abolishing many of the
Ancient Spectacles. Those Bloody Combats of Gladiators against each other, and
of Men against Beasts, till certain Death followed, have not been derived to
us, because they are contrary to that Humanity which the Law of the Gospel
recommends, as the Foundation of Christian Charity. Something of that
consideration made their Naumachia's or Naval Battles in which sometimes, there
were fifteen or sixteen thousand men engaged, be left of; but indeed the
Expense of that was such, as nothing but the Roman Empire could ever furnish.
The Courses of their Chariots, and the Races of their Horses, with the other
Games of the Cirque, have been neglected as useless. And the running at the
Ring in Tournaments, and fighting on Foot at the Barriere, which succeeded them
in our Ancestors Days, have been likewise laid aside; Lances being as little in
use with us in War, as Chariots: For as to the Courses of Bulls and Horses,
which yet remain in Italy, they are rather to be numbered among the ridiculous
Sights of our Age, than compared to the Spectacles of the Ancients.

The Javelin is of little use neither; and therefore* we have neglected the Art
of throwing it with slight in War.

The Discus or Coite is only a diversion of the meaner sort of People. Agonot.
Fabr. l. c. 6.
Boxing or fighting with Cudgels or Clubs, becomes the roughness of none but
Savages, and it would in my Opinion be a very scurvy Diversion in the Gallantry
of the French Court.

Tennis, or Playing at Balls, which the Ancients called Sphaeromachia, has
nothing of its first manner and glory, but is so changed as hardly to be known,
and there being no Crowns nor Rewards for the Actors, Petr. Fabr. in Agon.
passim. Sueton. in Domit. c. 4. and pugnas faeminarum dedit, etc. Mart. l. 1.
Stat. Sylv. and Juvenal. Satyr.
it is only become a voluntary Diversion.

As for Wrastlers, they are in some of our Provinces, but very few: First,
because it is against the Rules of Modesty to see not only Men, but Women
naked, try their Strength and Skill against one another, (for so both Sexes did
formerly) but now the Women are banished from that Immodest Exercise: And
besides there was a necessity of being Dieted, and living up to the strictness
of certain Rules of Health, which has made it be forsaken; and having nothing
Noble left in it, is only become the Diversion of the meaner sort.

The same thing has befallen the Amphitheatres, Nostri saeculi ludiera nihil
cum antiquis simile, quum incondite, inepte nulla in consciendi^ art, sed
tumultuarie, and sine ullo figurae artificio fiant etc. O^^. in Lud. Circ. l.
2. c. 18.
where from all Parts of the Earth were brought wild Beasts to fight against
one another: For to see, as we do sometimes, a Fellow lead a Lion about to be
Worried by a Dog of his Acquaintance, is a ridiculous sight; and so are those
other Combats of Beasts, which are yet in Italy, unworthy the greatness or care
of a State.

Bonfires and Fireworks have had a better destiny; for if ours do not observe
that Order and Art which the Ancients did in theirs, they are not at all
Inferior to them in Magnificence. I may say the same of our Balls and Balets,
of which we have happily maintained the Splendor, though our way of Dancing
has nothing in it like that of the Greeks and Romans: But still those which we
have seen at Paris, and which have deserved the Admiration and Applause of the
two greatest Kings in Europe, and of their Courts; these Balets, I say, in
which twice the whole Machine of this World, the Heavens, the Sea, the Earth,
and Hell the bottom of it, were represented, surpass in my Opinion any thing
that we can by reading observe of that kind among the Ancients.

As for the Theater, or Stage, it has not been much happier than the Cirque.
For not to speak of those other Diversions which were given the People in it,
the Art of composing Drammatick Poems, and representing of them, seems to have
had the same Destiny with those Famous Structures where they were Acted. It has
lain long buried with the Ruins of Athens and Rome: And when at last it was
restored in some small measure amongst us, it still appeared like a Carcass
taken out of the Grave, without any Shape or Vigor. All the first Pieces of
the Stage were without either Art or Learning, or any other Ornament than that
of Novelty; the Composition was without Skill, and the Verses without any
Politeness; the Actours no ways understood their business, and the whole
Representation was defective all over; insomuch that they had not a painted
Cloth to hide those who were to go off the Stage; but they were reputed absent
who did not present themselves to speak.

It Is true, Nunc in Gallia ita agunt fabulas, ut omnia in conspectu sint,
universus (...) dispositus sublimibus sedibus personaeipsa nunquam discedunt,
qui silent, p^o absentib. habent Scalig. lib. 1. c. 21. Poet.
that in our Age our Poets having recovered the Way to Parnassus, upon the
Footsteps of Eurpides and Terence, and there happening to be Actours amongst
us, who might in Rome it self have matched with Aesopus the famous Tragedian,
and Roscius the no less Renowned Comedian. the Stage has got a new Face, and
the Wrinckles that were upon that Old one have begun to grow smooth, and
altogether to look with less deformity. Happy in this, that the greatest Genius
of our Time, the great Cardinal Richelieu, smiled upon her. It was by his
Liberality that she first received new Strength, and began to challenge her Old
Rights, her Beauty, Nobility and Splendor; and it was by his care that most of
what was either Ingenious, Learned, or Magnificent among the Ancients, was seen
by degrees upon our Theater: And yet after all, we must own that the Stage was
fallen from so high a degree of Glory, into so much contempt and abjectness,
that it was impossible to heal entirely those Wounds which it had received in
its fall, nor to restore it, but after much Labor and Time. But since the same
hand, which begun the Cure, has not been able to finish it, it is to be feared
that the Drammatick Art will never arrive to its perfection, and I doubt will
hardly maintain it self in the state it is, any long time. And if so, its
relapse will be so much the more dangerous, because it is not every Age that
produces Genius's both understanding and Liberal, and accomplished with all the
Qualities necessary to so great a Design. The Life of this great man has formed
an Age of great and new things: but all those which did not arrive to
perfection, according to their Nature, in his time, will hardly meet with an
Opportunity to do it after his Death. And indeed it belonged to no body more to
adorn the Kingdom with all delightful Spectacles, than to him; who every day
increased our Victories, and Crowned us with new Laurels. 'Twas but reasonable
that he, who was in War so like Caesar and Pompey, should imitate them likewise
in the restoring of Theaters, and other Princely Diversions; and in a Word, the
magnificence of Public Spectacles could not be better derived than from him,
who was himself the most glorious and noble Spectacle in the World.

It was to please him that I Compiled this Practice of the Stage, which he most
passionately had wished for; in hopes it would ease our Poets of the great
labor, they must else have undergone, if with great Expense of Time they would
have collected these Observations, which I have made ready for them, out of the
different Authors, and from nice and accurate Remarks on the Stage it self. It
was likewise by his Order, that I made a Project of restoring the French
Theater to the Splendor of that of the Ancients, and what Remedies were to be
used against all our Impediments. He had conceived such hopes of succeeding in
this design, that he made me treat to the whole extent of the matter, upon that
which I had first but summarily touched, and was resolved to employ all his
Power and Liberality in compassing this Noble Enterprise. The Death of that
great man made those two Works miscarry, but here is the first, which as it is
I give to the public, upon the solicitation of my Friends. As for the second,
I shall only Communicate to the World the Project of it, it not being proper to
Expose any more of it, since there were not above five or seven Chapters of it
Writ, which are imperfect too, and out of Order.

CHAP. II.
The Design of the whole Work.
THE Glory to which the French Theater is arrived, may perhaps make some think
that this Discourse is useless, since our Poets, having given to the World so
many complete Poems, with a general Approbation, may be thought to be above
those Instructions, which seem to be the Remedy for Faults to which they are no
longer subject; I will not therefore be guilty of so great a Vanity, as to say
that the Scope of this Work is to inform them of things which we see they
Practice every day with success, but it is to let the World know the Excellency
of their Art, and to give People subject to admire them so much the more, in
showing what Learning, Invention, Abilities, and Care there are required to
finish those Poems* which make one of the greatest of our Pleasures, while they
only give the Players the Trouble of reciting them. And in this I shall not
only raise the Fame of our Poets, but contribute considerably to increase the
Pleasure we take in seeing and reading their Works: For it is natural to every
body to relish any agreeable object so Much the more, by how much they are
capable of discovering the Reasons that render it agreeable; and as we have
more Value for Precious Stones, when besides their noble natural Qualities, we
consider to what dangers they expose themselves, who bring them from the
remotest Parts of the Earth; so I think we shall feel so much the more
admiration and joy in the Representation of Theatral Diversions, if by the
knowledge of the Rules of the Art we are able to penetrate all the Beauties of
them, and to consider what Meditations, Pains, and Study they have cost to be
brought to that Perfection. So noble and so vast a design required, I confess,
a Genius much superior to mine, and a Body more capable of supporting the
Fatigue of study and application. But I think that this being rather a Summary,
than a complete Treatise, and as it were rather a Collection of my own
Observations, than a profound Dissertation, full of knotty Disputes and
Contestations with our modern Authors, whose Opinions are it may be more
reasonable than mine, I may be the easilier Excused. All that will be seen here
is but the Compendium of those Matters which I had once resolved to treat at
large, if many Considerations had not taken from me both the desire and power
of performing it: If by chance it be observed, that some Places are touched
with more Strength, and better Finished than others, it is because I delivered
these Memories to my Friends as they were, unequal and unpolished, according to
those Heats and Colds which accompany all Writers, who following the first
ardour of their Projects, do not review with Care the whole Product of their
Endeavors.

If any thing appear reasonable and pleasing, that will be enough to hinder me
from repenting the reprieve I have given my Book from those Flames to which I
had once resolutely Condemned it; and at least, though my matter and Order be
not approved, yet some one more laborious, finding the way open, and having the
Assistance of some Illustrious Protector, will pursue to the utmost Perfection
that which I have but hinted, and as it were slightly imagined.

CHAP. III.
What is to be understood by the Art of the Stage.
IT may seem very rash, or at least superfluous, to treat of Poetry, after that
so many Authors both Ancient and modern have given us Books upon that Subject,
full of Learning; and more particularly have taken Pains to make Observations
upon Drammatick Poetry, as being the most agreeable, and yet the hardest to
succeed in. But if we may believe, with Seneca, that all Truths have not been
yet spoken, we may assure it in the Subject which I undertake; for all I have
seen yet that concerns the Stage, contains only the general Maxims of
Drammatick Poetry, which is properly the Theory of the Art; but as for the
Practice and Application of those Instructions, I never met with any thing of
that kind hitherto; all the Discourses that are upon that Subject, being only
Paraphrases and Commentaries upon Aristotle, with great obscurity and little
Novelty.

I do not pretend here to trouble my self about satisfying the Criticisms of
Grammarians, or the Scruples of Logicians, who it may be will nor freely admit
of this distinction in an Art, whose Rules seem all to tend to practice: I am
sure all the rational and polite Learning will not oppose me in it, since it is
natural in all Arts to distinguish the knowledge of the Maxims, and the Use of
them; besides that in the Execution of all general Rules, there are
observations to be made, of which there is no mention, when one teaches only
the Theory, and which nevertheless are of great importance. Thus Architecture
teaches the beauty and symmetry of Buildings, their noble Proportions, and all
the rest of their magnificent Appearance, but does not descend to express a
thousand necessary Contrivances, of which the Master of the House is to take
care, when he puts his hand to the Work. If the Art of playing upon the Lute
were reduced into Rules, it could teach only geneal things, as the number of
the strings and touches, the manner of making the Accords, the measures,
passages, quavers, etc. but still one would be forced to have recourse to the
Master himself, to learn, in the Execution of all this* the nicest way of
touching the strings, the changing of the measures, the most graceful way how
to give a good motion to ones playing, and many more particulars, which could
not well be committed to writing, and so must either be negelcted or learned of
the Masters themselves.

The same thing has happened to the Stage. There has been ample Treatises of
Drammatick Poems, the original of them, their progress, definition, species,
the unity of action, measure of time, the beauty of their contrivance, the
thoughts, manners, language, which is fittest for them, and many other such
matters, but only in general; and that I call the Theory of the Stage; but for
the Observations to be made upon those general Rules, as how to prepare the
Incidents, to unite times and places; the continuity of the Theatral Action,
the Connection of the Scenes, the intervals of the Acts, and a thousand other
particulars, of which there is nothing left in Antiquity, of which all the
Moderns have said so little, that it is next to nothing; all this, I say, is
that which I call the Art or Practice of the Stage. As for the Ancients, if
they have writ nothing about it, as to the practical part, it is because that
perhaps in their time it was so common, that they could not believe any body
capable of not knowing it; and indeed if one look into their works, and make
but the least reflection upon the Art they use, one may perceive it almost
every where.

But for the Moderns; they for the most part have been entirely ignorant of it,
because they have neglected the reading the Poems of those great Masters; or if
they have read them, it was without taking notice of the nicest beauties with
which they are adorned; therefore it must be set down for a Maxim out of
contest, that it is impossible to understand Drammatick Poetry without the help
of the Ancients, and a thorough meditation upon their Works.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Rules of the Ancients.
I was, I must confess, extremely surpised some years ago, to see some Plays
in great esteem both in Paris, and at Court, in which there was scarce a Scene,
that did not in some measure offend the Rules of Decency and Probability; but I
was much more astonished, when going about to say something of those Rules, and
to Explain the ways how to observe them, I was taken for an Hypochondriack, who
had strange singular fancies of his own, of things that never were, nor could
be. All the Rules of the Ancients, by which I pretended Poets were to be guided
in the conduct of their Plays, were looked upon as dangerous innovations, like
those in Government, or in Religion. There was no asking, what time the action
represented took up, and in what place the things exposed to our view were
supposed to be performed, nor how many Acts a Play had? I was answered
presently, that the Play had lasted three hours, that the Action had been all
upon the Stage, and that the Fiddles had marked the Intervals of the Acts; in a
word, 'twas enough to please, to have the name of Commedy given to a great many
Verses put together, and recited upon the Stage. But at last having grown
acquainted with some of the learned men of our Age, I found amongst them many
very well acquainted with the Art of the Stage, particularly in the Theory and
the Maxims of Aristotle, and some too, who did apply themselves to the
consideration of the Practical part. All these were of my opinion, and
condemning the voluntary blindness of our times, did extremly help me to
confound the stubbornness of those, who refused to yield to Reason.

Thus by little and little the face of the Theater has been entirely changed,
and is at last come to that perfection, that one of our most celebrated Authors
has publicly confessed, and that often, that in looking over some of his own
Plays, which had been acted with great approbation of the Town, about ten or
twelve years ago, that he was much ashamed of himself, and did extremly, pity
those who had applauded him. I have nevertheless had the misfortune to incur
the disgrace of some little Authors, who having neither Genius, nor Learning
enough, to come up to these Rules in the excellency which they propounded,
sided with part of the Players, to run me down. As for these latter, their
design being only to gain by their Profession, and not to excel in it, they
thought that the strictness and severity of these Rules would frighten all the
young Authors, and deter them from writing; by which means they thought
themselves in danger of being forced to leave the Stage, to seek for some other
Employment, for want of new Plays: but the Event has confounded this piece of
Ignorance, for there were never seen more Drammatick Poems, nor more agreeable
ones, than since; although we have not for Actours such as Valeran, Veautray,
and Mondory were.

But yet since some persons of Judgment, for want of being well versed in
Antiquity, have endeavored with some appearance of Reason to maintain the
errors of our Age, I think my self obliged to answer their scruples, and to
satisfy a great number, who yet seem unwilling to be undeceived. Therefore
here are five Objections which have been ordinarily made to me, against the
Rules of the Ancients.

First, That we are not to make Laws to our selves from Custom and Example, but
from Reason; which ought to prevail over any Authority.

Secondly, That the Ancients themselves have often violated their own Rules.

Thirdly, That diverse Poems of the Ancients had been translated, and acted upon
our Stage with very ill success.

Fourthly, That diverse of our modern Plays, though quite contrary to these
Rules, had been acted with great applause.

And last of all, That if these rigorous Maxims should be followed, we should
very often lose the greatest beauty of all true Stories. Their Incidents having
most commonly happened at different times, and in different places

As to the first Objection; I answer, That the Rules of the State are not
founded upon Authority, but upon Reason; they are not so much settled by
Example, as by the natural judgment of Mankind; and if we call them the Rules
and the Art of the Ancients, it is only because They have practiced them with
great regularity, and much to their Glory; having first made many Observations
upon the Nature of Moral Actions, and upon the probability of Humane Accidents
in this life, and thereby drawing the Pictures after the truth of the Original,
and observing all due circumstances, they reduced to an Art this kind of Poem,
whose Progress was very slow, though it were much in use among them, and much
admired all the world over. But however I am very sparing of citing their
Poems, and when I do it, it is only to show with what agreeable Artifice they
kept to these Rules, and not to buoy up my opinion by their Authority.

As for the second Objection, it seems not considerable; Non omnia ad Homerum
referenda tanquam ad normam censeo, sed and ipsum ad normam.
for Reason, being alike all the world over, does equally require every bodies
submission to it; and if our modern Authors, cannot without offense be
dispensed from the Rules of the Stage, no more could the Ancients; and where
they have failed, I do not pretend to excuse them. Scalig. l. 1. c. 5.
My Observations upon Plautus, show very well that I do propose the Ancients
for Models, only in such things as they shall appear to have followed Reason
in; and their Example will always be an ill pretext for faults, for there is
no excuse against Reason. In things which are founded only in Custom, as in
Grammar, or in the Art of making a Verse with long or short syllables, the
Learned may often use a license against the received practice, and be imitated
in it by others, because Custom may often have countenanced a thing not well of
it self. But in all that depends upon common sense and reason, such as are the
Rules of the Stage, there to take a license, is a crime; because it offends not
Custom, but Natural light, which ought never to suffer an Eclipse.

I must not omit, for the Glory of the Ancients, that if they have sometimes
violated the Art of Drammatick Poems, they have done it for some more powerful
and inducing Reason, than all the Interest of the Play could amount to. As for
Example, Euripides, in the Suppliants, has preferred the glory of his Country
to that of his Art, of which I have spoken elsewhere.

The third Objection has no force, but in the Ignorance of those that allege
it. For if some Poems of the Ancients, and even those which were most in Esteem
with them, have not succeeded upon our Stage, the Subject, and not the want of
Art, has been the cause of it; And sometimes likewise the Changes made by the
Translators, which destroyed all the Graces of the Original: They have added
improbable Scenes between Princes, and have showed out of time that which the
Ancients had carefully concealed with Art; and very often changed a fine
Relation, into an impertinent ridiculous Spectacle. But That which is more
worthy our consideration, is, that there were certain Stories, fitted for the
Stage of Athens with great Ornaments, which would be in abomination upon Ours:
For Example, the Story of Thy^stes; so that we may say, that either the Moderns
have corrupted the Ancients, by changing their whole Economy, or the
Imperfection of the Matter stifled the excellency of the Art.

To destroy the 4th Objection, we need only to remember, that those Plays of
ours, which took with the people, and with the Court, were not liked in all
their parts; but only in those things which were reasonable, and in which they
were conformable to the Rules: When there were any passionate Scenes, they were
praised; and when there was any great Appearance or noble Spectacle, it was
esteemed; and if some notable Event was well managed, there was great
satisfaction shown; but if in the rest of the Play, or even in these beauties
of it, any irregularities were discovered, or any fault against Probability and
Decency, either in the persons, time, or place, or as to the state of the
things represented, they were condemned as Faults. And all the favor that was
showed the Poet, was, that out of the desire of preserving what was fine, the
Spectatours were somewhat more indulgent to what was amiss.

Therefore that success so much bragged on, is so far from contradicting the
Rules of the Stage, that quite contrary it establishes their Authority. For
these Rules being nothing but an Art to cause the finest Incidents to please
with decency and probability, it sufficiently appears how necessary they are,
since by common consent, all that comes up to them is approved of, and all that
varies from them is in some measure condemned. Examples would extremely
illustrate this truth, if I were not afraid to anger some of our Poets, by
instructing the others at their cost.

The 5th Objection is absolutely ridiculous. For the Rules of the Stage do not
at all reject the most notable Incidents of any Story, but they furnish us with
Inventions, how so to adjust the Circumstances of the Action, Time, and Place,
as not to go against all probable appearance, and yet not to represent them
always as they are in Story, but such as they ought to be, to have nothing but
what is agreeable in them. It Is That then that we are to seek, and of which in
the following Discourse I shall communicate my Thoughts.

CHAP. V.
How they ought to Instruct themselves, who intend to write a Drammatick Poem.
IN the Universities, the Drammatick Poets, as well as others, are given to
young Scholars to read and study, and they affording great variety by moral
Sentences, of which they are full, and by the Dialogues of different persons
contesting with passion, as also by the imagination of those Machines, which
one must necessarily suppose to have been employed in the representation of
them; to which may be added the sudden Turns and Events of the Stage, they
cannot but procure an Extrem delight to these young Students, and make a strong
impression in their minds; and though the whole, it may be, is both ill
explained by those that Instruct them, and as ill understood by Them; yet they
have infinite satisfaction in the thing.

It may be after this, they see some Play composed by their Master, and acted
in the same Schools; and though that be done by very ill Actors, and carry with
it in all its circumstances the true Character of pedantry, nevertheless this
is performed with so much noise, bustle, and preparation, that they conceive a
mighty Idea of it, having seen nothing better, and being incapable of finding
out the faults of the piece.

If then there happens to be amongst these Youths a fiery Lad with Fancy, and
some Inclination to Poetry, finding himself at leisure to employ his parts his
own way, he fixes upon Drammatick Poetry; and out comes a piece of his. To make
which he generally follows this method; he pitches upon some story that pleases
him, without considering, whether it be fit for the Scene or no, or ever
reflecting what is to be avoided in it, or what Ornaments may be added; he is
resolved to hide under the Curtain any thing that shall incommode him, to put
France at one corner of the Stage, Turkey at the other, and Spain in the
middle, his Actours shall be sometimes in the Louvre, then in a Wood, or
Highway, and then in a Garden full of Flowers, and no body knows how they came
there; and if any body is to pass by Sea from Denmark to France, it is done with
the drawing of a Scene. Having thus filled every thing with ridiculous
Imaginations, and things opposite to all probability, he makes his first Scene;
which he was no sooner done, but finding himself at a stand, he repairs to some
of the Theaters, to see if he can steal any Invention from them, that shall
please him. Then he gets into the company of some celebrated Poet or Critic,
and from them he is supplied with some new thought, or passionate incident, or
some slight of the Art, which he immediately employes quite contrary, and out of
all time; and having thus with the help of some Songs and Elegies, made
formerly for Cloris, mustered up three or four hundred Verses, he resolves to
call it an Act. Thus going on in the same method, he gets to the death or
marriage of some Prince, and then it is privately whispered among his Friends,
that he has made a very pretty Play: The Ladies desire to see it, and it is by
the Author red to them in secret, they are charmed with some Florid
Expressions, or smart Repartees, and call in the Gentlemen of their
acquaintance to hear it. Every body applauds and flatters the Author, reserving
to themselves the privilege of laughing at him, as soon as his back's turned;
and in short, he acquires thus the honorable title of a Poet.

Without doubt, Extat illius Comaedia, q^a nihil aversum magis a comitate; adeo
enim insulsa est, ut misericordiam ^otius quam risum excitet. Scal. l. 6. c. 3.
not only one must have prodigious good fortune, but more than that, an infused
science, like Adam's, to make at first and by such methods a piece (not
comparable, I say, to those whom twenty Ages have reverenced) but to make a
thing like that of the Poet Rhodophilus, of whom Scaliger says, that his
Comedy rather excited pity than mirth. To say truth, the Complaisance or
Ignorance of the Spectatours is extreme, when they condemn others, as too
severe, who cannot applaud such stuff, as this is. There is no Mechanic trade
in the World that does not oblige to a long Apprentiship under a Master, and
when the Artists set up for themselves, they are examined by the Company, to
whom they must produce some Masterpiece of their own making. And shall we then
think, Diu non nisi ^^^imus quisque, and qui credentem sibi minime fallat,
legendus est; sed diligenter aut pene ad scribendi solicitudinem, nec per
parts modo scrutanda omnia; sed perlectus liber utique ex integro resumendus.
that to succeed in the greatest Art that is, in which the mind has all the
share, and which is not only the hardest, but the least understood Art that we
have, there needs nothing, but to have the Impudence to undertake it; no
certainly, there goes a great deal more to it, and therefore I will now
counsel, as well as I can, any body that undertakes to be a Poet, and tell him,
what he is to do.

In the first place, let our Poet suppress all those impetuous desires of glory
and applause, Quintil. l. 10. cap. 1.
and leave thinking, that to make a good Play, it is enough to have a vein for
Poetry. He must begin with applying himself to the reading of Aristotle's
Poeticks, and those of Horace, and he must read them attentively, and meditate
upon them; then he must turn over those that have made Commentaries upon them,
as Castelvetro in Italian, who in his Jargon says very fine things, Hieronymus
Vida, Heinsius, Vossius, la Menardiere, and a great many more; and let him
remember, that Scaliger alone says more than all the rest; but he must not lose
a word in him, for all his words are of weight and importance. As for the book
of Boulenger, he must value him only for his Collection of Passages out of
other Authors, and not mind the Consequences he draws from them; for I believe
for my part that the things he has writ, came into his head just as he was
writing them, and without any precedent Meditation.

I add to these Authors Plutarch, Horat. de art. poet. verse. 268. Vos
exemplaria Graeca Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
Athenaeus, and Lilius Giraldus, who all in many places have touched the chief
Maxims of the Stage; in a word, he must not let slip any thing of the Ancients,
without examining every period of them; for very often a word thrown out by the
by, and out of the subject of the Stage, contains in their books some important
secret, and the resolution of some great difficulty.

Having thus studied the Theory, he must read all the Greek and Latin
Drammatick Poems, which by good fortune have been preserved to our times, as
likewise their old Scholiasts or Commentators, but still take the liberty to
examine them impartially, for they are subject to a great many Errors, and
delight in false and vain subtleties of no use at all; and all along one must
be sure to make constant reflections, and examine why a Poet has rather done one
thing than another, and he may observe that often a word ingeniously cast out
by an Actour, to prepare some Incident, or to explain the Circumstances of
place or time, is not a thing slightly to be passed over; and if after all, I
durst be so vain, as to make one amongst his Masters, I could wish he would
join the Precepts of this practical part of the Art, to what he may discover in
the Ancient or Modern Poets; for though I cannot brag of giving him
considerable and important succors in his Design, yet I am sure I shall not be
useless or incommodious to him, and though it should appear that I am mistaken,
yet I am sure he will thank me for the very means I afford him of instructing
himself better.

Our Poet having thus acquired a perfect Notion of the Art of the Stage, may
much more certainly, and with greater success undertake some noble design.

As for me, without repeating here what may be learnt in Aristotle, and his
Interpreters, both Ancient and Modern, I will only endeavor to treat of new
matters, or at least to give new Instructions upon those things, which have
been treated of by others.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Spectators, and how they are to be considered by the Poet.
MY Intention is not here to teach the Spectators of a Play, the attention that
they ought to have, nor the silence that they ought to keep, no more than the
caution they ought to observe in judging of the Play; nor what they should do
to avoid those Errors which Complaisance, or a Prejudice against the Author,
often runs them into; though all this might be usefully enough, and to good
purpose, treated of here.

But I only mention the Spectators in reference to the Poet, that is, how he
ought to consider them when he is making a Play.

I borrow here the Comparison of a Picture, of which I shall often make use in
this Treatise; and I say that my Picture may be considered two ways.

First, as a Picture; that is, as the work of the Artist; where there are
Colors, and not real things; shadows, and not substances; artificial lights,
false elevations, prospective distances, or lontananzas, deceiving shortnings;
and in a word, appearances of things that really are not in the Picture.

Secondly, It may be considered as containing a Story painted, whether a true
one, or supposed to be so; whereof the Place is certain, the Qualities natural,
the Actions undoubtedly true, and all the Circumstances of them observed
according to order and reason.

This may be all applied to Drammatick Poems: One may at first consider the
Show and Representation of things, where Art gives you Images of them which
really are not. There are Princes in appearance; Palaces upon painted cloth,
dead men in show; and it is for this that the Actors carry all the Marks of
those whom they represent. The Decoration of the Stage, is the Image of those
places where the thing is supposed to be transacted. There are Spectators, and
the persons that appear upon the Stage talk in the Mother Tongue of the
Audience, all things being to be made sensible and plain to them. It Is to
arrive to this Representation of the thing, that the Poet causes sometimes one,
sometimes another Actor to appear, and discourse upon the Stage: making
recitals of things that ought to be known, and yet ought not to appear; and
Employing Machines, and other Contrivances, for the appearance of those things
which are to be showed to the Audience.

Thus Eschylus makes the Palace of Clytemnestra open, that the bodyof Agamenon
may be seen upon the Step of the inward door, where a dead man lies along upon
the Threshold. In Ajax, Tecmessa opens his Tent to show his madness, by the
number of the dead sheep which lie round about him. In Euripides, Hecuba swouns
away upon the Stage, to express the greatness of her Misery: And in Plautus,
the Captives express their condition of slavery, by being bound, and having an
appearance of Guards about them; and after this the discourses made by the
Actors, upon these different Appearances, perfect the Representation.

Or else we may consider in these Dramatick Poems, the true History, or that
which is supposed true, and of which all the Adventures have really come to
pass, in that order, time, and place, and according to those Intrigues which
appear to us. The persons are there considered according to their different
Characters, of their Condition, Age and Sex; and the things they say, as having
been really pronounced by them, as well as performed in their actions; and in a
word, all things as we see them upon the Stage.

I know very well that the Poet is the Master, and that he disposes the order
of his Poem as he thinks fit; taking the time, which he lengthens or shortens
as he pleases; choosing likewise what place he will in the whole world; and for
the Plot he Invents it according to the strength and fineness of his own fancy;
and in a word, he gives what form he pleases to the matter he has in hand; but
still it is certain, that all these things must be so adjusted, as to seem to
have naturally both the rise, progress, and end which he gives them; so that
though he be the Author, yet he must write the whole with such Art, that it may
not so much as appear that it was by him Invented. So in Eschylus's Tragedy of
Agamemnon, all things appear as if really Agamemnon had been murdered; and in
Sophocles, as if Ajax were really furious; and so of all the other Pieces of
the Ancients. And likewise when we judge of any Play on our Stage, we suppose
the thing either true, or that ought to be so, and might be so; and upon that
supposition we approve of all the Words or Actions that are done or said by
those who speak or act; and of all those Events which might probably follow the
first Appearances; because that in this case we believe that things might
really happen as they seem, nay that they have happened, and ought to happen
so. And on the contrary, we condemn all that ought not to be done, or said,
according to the qualities of the persons, the place, the time, and the first
appearances of the Play.

Now to understand how the Poet is to govern himself, with regard to the
Spectators, and when they are to be considerable to him, or not so, we need but
reflect upon what we have said of a Picture; for looking upon it only as the
Work of the Artist, the Painter does what he can to make it Excellent, because
it will be seen, and that he expects to be known and admired by it; but if he
consider it as a Story painted, he keeps as close as he can to the Nature of
the thing he represents, and does nothing but what will seem probable in all
its Circumstances, because it is all to be considered as true, and supposed so.
For example, if he will draw Mary Magdelen in her penitent retirement, he will
not omit any of the most important parts of her Story, because if he should do
otherwise, they that should see it would hardly know it. He must place her in a
decent posture, else she will be a disagreeable Object. He will not draw her
prostrate and grovelling with her face upon the ground, because that would hide
the finest part of her, but rather he must set her upon her knees. He ought not
to cover her all over with a Cilice, or haircloth, but leave her half naked,
that the Charm of her beauty may appear the more. He must not place her in the
bottom of a deep Cavern, for then she cannot be supposed to be seen, but at the
entrance of it, with so much light as is just necessary; and this he must do,
because he considers his work as a Picture which ought to fall under the
Senses, and please at the same time.

But when he considers this Picture the other way, that is, keeping to the
truth of the Story, he must give her a Complexion pale and wan, because it is
not credible it could be otherwise in the midst of so much austerity; she shall
not have a Crown before her, but a Cross; she must not be placed upon a rich
embroidered Bed, but upon the ground; there shall not be a Palace near her, but
a horrid Wilderness; he must not environ her with Pages, and Women Attendants,
but rather with wild Beasts, but they must be in a quiet posture, that she may
be supposed to live among them; the Cave shall be covered with Moss, not gilded
and finely set out. The very trees are not to be made full of Flowers and
Fruits, but rather half-dryed, and withered; and all the Country about them
barren and wild. And in a word, he shall adorn his work with all those things
which probably might become the state of penitence, according to the person,
place, and other dependencies of the Story, because here he considers the truth
of what he is to represent.

In the same manner, the Poet considering in his Play the Representation or
Spectacle of it, does all that he can to make it agreeable to the Spectators;
for his business is to please them. And therefore he shall preserve all the
noblest Incidents of his Story, he shall make all his Actors appear with the
best Characters he can, he shall employ the finest Figures of Rhetoric, and
the Moving'st Passions, observing to hide nothing that ought to be known and
please, and to show nothing that ought to be hid, and may offend; and in fine,
he shall try all means to gain the esteem and admiration of the Audience.

But when he considers in his Play the true Story of it, or that which is
supposed to be so, he must particularly have a care to observe the Rules of
probability in every thing, and to make all the Intrigues, Actions, Words, as
if they had in reality come to pass; he must give fit thoughts and designs,
according to the persons that are employed, he must unite the Times with
Places, and the Beginning with the Consequences; and in a word, he follows the
Nature of things so, as not to contradict neither the State, nor the Order, nor
the Effects, nor the Property of them; and indeed has no other Guide but
Probability and Decency, and rejects all that has not that Character upon it.
He must contrive every thing as if there were no Spectators; that is, all the
Persons in the Play are to act and speak as if they were truly (for example) a
King, and not Mondoroy or Bellerose; as if they really were in the Palace of
Horatius in Rome, Two famous Players.
and not at Paris in the Hostel de Bourgogne; and as if no body saw them, or
heard them, but those who are acting with them upon the Stage. And by this Rule
it is that they often say that they are alone, that no body sees them, nor
hears them, that they need not fear being interrupted, or disturbed in their
Solitude, no more than hindered in their designs; though all this is spoken in
the presence of it may be two thousand persons; because in this the Nature of
the Action is followed according to truth, for then the Spectators were not by;
and this ought to be strictly observed, for all that is affected in favor of
the Spectators is false and faulty.

I know very well that the Poet does not work upon the Action as true, but only
so far as it is fit for Representation, and therefore it may seem that there
may be some mixture of these two Considerations, therefore I shall propound the
way how he shall distinguish them. He examines first all that he designs to
make known to the Audience, either by their Eyes or their Ears, and accordingly
resolves either to let them see it, or to instruct them by some recital of the
thing which they ought to know. But he does not make these Recitals or
Spectacles only because the Spectators ought to know or see. How then? Why he
must find in the Action, which is considered as true, some motive, color, or
apparent Reason, for which it may appear that these Shows or Recitals did
probably happen, and ought to come to pass; and I may say that the greatest Art
of the Stage consists in finding out these Motives or Colors. An Actor must
come upon the Stage, because the Spectator must know his Designs and Passions.
There must be a Narration made of things past, because else the Spectator being
ignorant of them, would not understand what is present, and under
representation. There must be a Show or Spectacle, to move the Audience with
pity or admiration; and that is working upon the action as represented; and it
is his duty as well as his chief design; but he must hide this under some
color drawn from the truth of the Action it self; insomuch, that the person
who is to instruct the Audience, must come upon the Stage upon the pretext of
looking for some body there; or to meet one who had given him an Assignation.
So the person who is to make a Narration of things past, must do it so as it
may seem necessary, and done to advise about something in agitation at present,
for which there is some help wanting. If there be a Spectacle, it must be to
some end, as to excite some body to be revenged, or so; and this called working
upon the truth of the Action, without minding the Spectators; because it is
probable, that, taking things only in themselves, all this might fall out so.

Let us come to the Examples alleged before. Aeschylus causes Agamemnon to be
murdered in his Palace; but the Audience must know this, and how does he inform
them of it? He makes that Unfortunate Prince cry out like a man that expires
under the violence of those who murder him. Sophocles observes the same thing
in the murder of Clitemnestra by the hand of Orestes. And I cannot but admire
at some who tax both those Poets of having defiled the Stage with blood, when
it is apparent that they are killed in the Houses represented upon the Stage,
and out of the sight of the Spectators, who only hear their cries and
lamentations, and see the body afterward when it is dead.

In the same Sophocles, Ajax is outragiously furious, and yet there is a
necessity of his appearing upon the Stage with Ulysses, without hurting him,
and to that end Minerva brings him out of his Tent, and suspends for a while
his fit of madness.

In Euripides the Spectators must know that Polydorus is dead, that Hecuba may
receive a new heightning to her afflictions; and to do it with appearance of
reason, one of her Women goes to fetch water at the Sea side, to wash and
purify the dead body of her Daughter Polyxena, whose Funeral she was to
perform, where she finds, as it were by chance, the body of the unhappy young
Prince, which she brings to his more unhappy Mother, and so discovers very
handsomely the series of all that sad Adventure. (And by the by it appears, how
much they are mistaken, who think that the Poet sends Hecuba her self to the
Sea side, and that there she had found the Body of her Son). But we should be
bound to too tedious an enumeration, if we would by Examples show the conduct
of the Ancients in this point.

For upon their Stage there is not a Recital, a Passion, nor an Intrigue, that
has not its color; if you take the Story as true, though it be a Fable
invented by the Poet only for Representation. In a word, the Spectators are not
considerable to the Poet in the Truth of the Action, but only in the
Representation; and upon this Maxim, if we examine the best part of our Modern
Poets, we may easily perceive, that they go against all probability, even in
those things which have been esteemed the most; Because the Authors, when they
exposed them to the people, did it without any color that might make us
suppose them reasonable. Thus in the truth of the Action it happens that a man
makes a necessary Narration, that is well, for the Spectators ought not to be
ignorant of it; but this man could not know the very thing he tells, then it is
against probability for him to make this recital. A Lover appears upon the
Stage in a violent passion to please the Spectatours; but he could not
naturally make these complaints in the place represented by the Stage; there
must then some color be found out for his being there extraordinarily, or else
you go against probability: As much may be said of a thousand other Adventures
which appear upon our Stages, where every day we have Images of things that
never were, never can be, and by consequent ought not to be.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Mixture of Representation with the Truth of the Theatral Action.
I Believe the Title of this Chapter will be at first sight severely censured,
because it may be it will not be understood; but when I shall have explained my
meaning, I hope all the judicious will be reconciled to the Terms, as well as
to my Sentiments about the thing.

I call Truth of the Theatral Action, the whole Story of the Play, so far as it
is considered as a true one, and that all the Adventures in it are looked upon
as being come to pass. But I call Representation, the Collection of all those
things which may serve to represent a Drammatick Poem, considered in themselves
and in their own Nature, as the Players, the Scenes, the Music, the
Spectators, and a great many other things. As for Example, in the Play of
Cinna, made by Monsieur Corneille; that that Cinna, who appears upon the Stage,
speaks like a Roman, that he loves Aemilia, counsels Augustus Caesar to keep
the Empire, conspires against him, and is pardoned by him; all this I say, is
the truth of the Theatral Action. That the same Aemilia hates Augustus, and
loves Cinna, that she desires to be revenged, and yet apprehends the Event of
so great an Undertaking; all this too is of the truth of the Action. That
Augustus proposes his thoughts of leaving the Empire to two perfidious Friends,
and that one advises him to keep it, and the other to leave it, is likewise of
the truth of the Action. In a word, all that in the Play either is considered
as a part, or has a necessary dependence upon the Story, ought to be of the
truth of the Action; and it is by this Rule that one ought to Examine the
probability of all that is done in the Play; as the fitness and decency of the
Expressions, the connection of the Intrigue, the patness of the Events, etc. And
one naturally approves of all that ought to have been don according to the
truth, though it be a supposed Story, and one condemns all that one thinks
contrary to truth, or not becoming the actions of life.

But that Floridor or Beauchasteau act the part of Cinna, that they are good or
ill Actors, well or ill dressed, that they are separated from the people by a
Stage, which is adorned with painted cloth, representing Palaces and Gardens,
that the Intervals of the Acts are marked by ill Fiddlers, or excellent Music;
that an Actor goes behind the Stage, when he says he goes into the Kings
Closet, and speaks to his Wife, instead of speaking to a Queen, that there are
Spectatours, and those either from the Court, or the City; that they are silent
or make a noise, that there are quarrels in the Pit, or none, all these things
are, and do depend on the Representation.

Therefore Floridor and Beauchasteau are to be looked upon as representing, and
that Cinna or Horatius, whom they represent, are to be considered as real and
true persons, acting and speaking as Cinna, and Horatius, and not as those who
represent them, and Floridor and Beauchasteau must be looked upon as
transformed into those men, whose names and concerns they take upon them, so
that part of the Hostel de Bourgogne which is raised and adorned for a Stage,
is the place representing, and the Image of another place which is represented
at that time, whether the Palace of Augustus or Horatius; and it must in the
Play be looked upon as the true place where all things pass, so the time which
is employed in the Representation, being a part of our natural current year, is
but a representing time, but the day represented, and in which one supposes the
action of the Stage to come to pass, ought to be taken for a real true time in
regard to the Action.

I say then that one ought never to mingle together what concerns the
Representation of a Play, with the true Action of the Story represented.

It would not be well liked off, that Floridor, while he is representing Cinna,
should talk of his own domestic affairs, or of the loss and gains of the Play
house; or that while he is repeating the Speech made by Cinna to the
Conspirators at Rome, he should address himself to the People of Paris, and
make some Reflections upon them; or that while he is examining the hatred and
haughtiness of Aemilia, he should go about to talk of the sweetness and good
breeding of our Ladies; In a word, he would not be endured to confound Rome and
Paris, nor actions passed so many years ago, with present Adventures; because
that is not only offending against all the Rules of decency, but those of
common sense.

I know very well that our Modern Poets have not hitherto been very guilty of
this fault, but because the Ancients, whom I generally propose for Examples,
have been so indulgent to the Peoples pleasure, as not to take care to avoid
this Error, I thought it would not be amiss to say something of it, lest our
Poets should follow their Example, after the rate of that scurvy Orator, whom
Cicero speaks of in Brutus, for never imitating the great men in any thing, but
such things where they were faulty. Aristotle says that ill Poets fall into
Errors, because they are ignorant of the means of doing better, and that good
ones do the same thing out of Complaisance to the Players, and for the
Diversion of the Audience; but I think that a true Poet ought not to seek any
other way of being profitable to the first, nor of pleasing the last, but by
the excellence of his Play.

Comedy in its rise, and when it first begun to be acted, as Tragedy was, by
set Actors, was nothing but a Satirical Poem, which by little and little, under
pretext of instructing the People, by inveighing at their Vices, came at last
to be so bitter and scandalous, as not only to expose the most Eminent
Citizens, but not to spare the Magistrates themselves, nor the most Illustrious
Persons of the State, whose Names, Faces, and actions were brought upon the
Stage; and this was that the Authors call Old Comedy.

Not but that at first even this was much more innocent than afterward; for
under Epicharmus, and first Comicks who succeeded him, Comedy was merry and
laughing, but not injurious and affronting; it had Salt and Railleries, but not
Gall and Vinegar; but at last that liberty degenerated into so much
libertinisme, that Aristophanes's Plays did not a little contribute to the
death of the famous Socrates by exciting the People against him. The
Representation in those days was so confounded with the Truth of Action, that
they were almost the same thing; and that which was said against the Socrates
upon the Stage, was often applicable to the Socrates who was in the Pit. It Is
but reading Aristophanes's first Plays, and you shall see that all along he
confounds the interest of the Actors with those of the Spectators, and even the
History represented with the Public Affairs of the State, upon which he founds
his Jests and Railleries; In a word, his Plays are downright Libels,
containing the Names, Qualities, Actions, and visible Portraicts of those whom
the Poet undertook to expose; and that without any other conduct or rule, but
that of his Satirical wit and passion; so far were they from being ingenious
rational Poems, regulated by Art; and the Magistrates foreseeing the dangerous
Effects of such license, forbid them any more naming particular persons in
their Plays.

But as one is always Ingenious in mischief, the Poets found means, though they
left out the Name, to represent the Person so livelily, that every body knew
presently, who they meant; and this was since called Middle Comedy; and such
were the last Plays of Aristophanes.

But this way of Satyr, though somewhat milder than the other, was still
thought to be of as ill Consequence, and by the Magistrates accordingly
prohibited. This put the Poets to some stand, and forced them at last to invent
not only the Names, but likewise the Adventures of their Stage, and then
Comedy, being an ingenious Product of wit and Art, was regulated upon the model
of Tragedy, and became (to define it rightly) the true Picture and Imitation of
the Common Actions of life. Then the Representation was no longer confounded
with the Truth of the Action, and all that was done upon the Stage was
considered as a true Story, in which neither the State, nor the Spectators,
were supposed to have any part. The Adventures were generally taken from some
remote Country, with which the place where they were represented had little
communication, and the Actors seemed to act only by the consideration of those
things, which were represented. Thus that which came to be called New Comedy
was made, of which Terence was one of the first that gave us a Model, and that
so good a one, that it is never seen that he ever confounds the Representation
with the Truth of the Theatral Action. Parum serio res agividetur, si Actores
ipsi populum compellent.
Plautus who went before him, and was nearer the time of Middle Comedy, is not
so regular, but does so often fall into that inconvenience, Voss. lib. 2. c.
26. sect. 15. Poet.
that the reading him becomes tedious, and not seldom his Plays are confused
and obscure by it.

In his Amphytrion, Act. 3. Sc. 1.
Jupiter is supposed to be at Thebes in the time that Hercules is born, Nunc
huc honoris vestri venio gratia, ne hanc incboatam transigam Comoediam, simul
Alcumenae quam vir etc.
and when he appears under the form of Amphytrion, he tells the Spectators, I
am Jupiter, and I am changed to Amphytrion when I please, which I do, (says he
to the Spectators) to oblige you by Continuing this Play, and for the love of
Alcmena that she may appear Innocent. Where we see he mingles the concerns of
the Actors with the Interest of the Spectators, and makes an Interfering of
Romans who were present, with those who were supposed to act in Greece, which
certainly cannot be but very ridiculous, and must confound the understanding of
the Spectators, by forcing them to imagine a man double, and to distinguish in
him both words and sentiments very different, without any necessity or reason
for it. Certainly when a man appears before us with the Clothes, Countenance,
Words, and Gesture of a person, whom he represents, he is not to be considered
otherwise than according to that Image, which from our Eyes we imprint in our
mind; and therefore all that unmasks him, to show him, as he really is, such a
Player, whose Name is so or so, confounds the Attention of the Audience, who
expect nothing from that Actor, but things proper to the person whose
Appearance he takes.

In his Aulularia, Euclio is at Athens, where he has been robbed, and while he
is seeking the man that ran away with his Treasure, he says such things to
express his despair, that the Audience falls a laughing; upon which Euclio
turning to them, says, why do you laugh, I know you all well enough, and know
that amongst you there are Thieves enough. Now Euclio is supposed to be at
Athens, where no Romans could be for Spectators, much less could they be
suspected to conceal among them the man that had stolen his Money. He is so full
of these faults, that there is scarce a Play of his without them; but in two
places the raillery is so ingenious, and so placed at the end of the Play,
without being interwoven in the Story, that it may very well be excused.

The first is at the end of Pseudolus, where his witty Slave having invited
Ballio to drink with him, Bal. Te sequor, quin vocas Spectatores simul?
he answers, Why don't you likewise invite these Gentlemen? Ps. Hercle me isti
haud solent vocare, neque ergo ego istos; verum si voltis appl^udere atque
approbare hunc gregem and fabulam, in crastinum vos vocabo. Pseudol.
pointing to the Spectators; to which Pseudolus replies, I don't use to invite
them, nor they me; but Gentlemen, if you will say that our House and Play
pleases you, I invite you again to morrow.

The other is at the end of his Rudens, where Daemones having invited Labrax to
Supper, tells the Spectators, Act. 5. Sc. 2.
I would invite you too, Gentlemen, but I have little to give him; and besides
I hope you are all engaged; but if you please to give your approbation to this
Play, I will Invite you all to sup with me this day sixteen year. Spectatores
vos quoque ad coenam vocem, ni daturus nihil sim, neque sit quicquam pollucti
domi, neue adeo vocates credam vos esse ad caenam for as. Verum si Vole(...)sum
fab(...)olarum dare, Comissalum omnes venitote ad me ad annos sexdecim.


In these cases, the Action of the Stage being over, the Railleries that are
made can no longer confound the Ideas of the Spectators.

As for Tragedies, as their subject is more noble and serious, they are seldom
infected with this corrupt way; except in Euripides's Prologues, where often
the chief Actor, or a God in some Machine, makes a Narration of things happened
before the the opening of the Stage. Which I must confess I cannot approve of,
because often these things are clear enough in the thread of the Story; and
when Poets do not explain their Subject, by the Mouth and Actions of their
Actors, it is a fault without excuse, and Prologues are but ill shifts to repair
such a neglect. Sophocles never does it, and I cannot but advise all Poets to
follow him in this.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Poet must make his Decorations, and other Necessary Actions in the
Play, known to the Audience.
THE most remarkable and indeed an essential difference between Epick and
Dramatick Poems, is, that in the first, the Poet speaks alone, the persons that
he produces all uttering themselves by his mouth; it is he that says, that such
and such people made such and such discourses, and not they that come and make
them themselves. But in the Dramatick Poem, the Poet is silent, and none but
the persons introduced by him, do speak; and during all the Theatral Action, he
appears no more than if the persons were really those whom they represent.

Therefore in the Epick Poem, the Poet makes all the descriptions that may
grace his work, when and where he pleases. If he has a mind to show a Temple or
a Palace, he frames the Architecture of it according to his own fancy. If there
be a shipwreck, he expresses as he pleases the horror of the Tempest, the fear
of the Seamen, the cries of those who are cast away, and the constancy of his
Hero, and for all this he chooses that place in his Poem, which he thinks
fittest for these or other Descriptions. But in a Dramatick Poem, the Poet must
speak by the mouth of his Actors, he cannot employ any other means, and what
they omit, can no ways be supplied by any industry of his; if there be a
Shipwreck, the Actors must explain it, and speak of the misfortune of those who
have been cast away; and so for any Ornament or Action extraordinary: They must
all be explained by those whom he brings upon his Stage. The Ancient Poets have
been very exact and judicious in this particular, but our Modern Authors have
committed such faults in it, as have much disfigured their Plays.

A Play may be regarded two ways; it is made to be acted by persons, who are to
do every thing, as if they were the true persons represented; and likewise
Plays are made to be read by people, who without seeing them acted, can by
their imagination, and the strength of the impressions the Poet gives, make
those persons as it were present to their Idea. Now whether a Play be acted or
read, it must be understood by the Spectators, and by the Reader; it cannot be
known to the Spectators, but just as the Actors shall make it so; and the
Reader can understand no more of it, than the Verses or Expressions do inform
him, so that either way all the Decorations, Clothes, or necessary Motions, for
the understanding the Play, must be had in the Verses, or other expressions in
Prose, which are by the Actors recited.

To this may be said, that our Poets use to be by at the Rehearsals, and so
tell the Players every particular that they are to do; but besides the
negligence of the Players in the execution of this, how shall any body do, that
would act the Play without the Poet? how shall they know where the Scene lies?
what Decorations belong to it, and what Clothes the Actors have, and so in any
other Circumstances necessary to the understanding and Ornament of the Play?
Eschylus his Tragedies have been often acted at Athens, after he was dead.

The same thing was done by Plautus's Comedies at Rome; and is done every day
at Paris by our old Plays; all which could not well have been performed, if the
Poet had not been careful to explain all things by the Actors. I know indeed
that to help the dullness of some Readers, many of our Poets have made Marginal
Notes in their printed works, which express that which is not said in the Play;
As here appears a Temple open, here a Palace adorned with diverse Columns of
noble Architecture, here the King whispers his Favorite, and the like. But in
all these Notes it is the Poet that speaks, which he is not allowed to do in
this sort of Poems, and it cannot be done without interrupting the Reader in
the midst of passions, and dividing his application, and so dissipating some of
those Ideas which he had received already for the understanding and relishing
the Play.

But I say more than all this, a Play ought to be made with so much Art, and
the Actors are to speak so, that it shall not be necessary to mark the
distinction of the Acts, nor Scenes, nor so much as to put the Names of those
that speak, and to prove what I say, we need only to consider, that when an
Actor comes upon the Stage, the Poet does not come to tell his name, it must be
known by himself, or some other of the Actors; and the failing in this has
made, that in some Plays, that I have seen, three Acts were over, before the
Audience knew the Name of the chief Actor, and that without any apparent
necessity of hiding either That or his Quality; for sometimes it is necessary
he should be Incognito, but then it is as necessary that it should be known he
is so.

In this particular the Ancients have been so accurate, that I dare boldly say,
that let one have a Tragedy, either of Sophocles, or Euripides, or a Comedy of
Terence, or Plautus without Title, Distinction, Names of the Actors, or any
Character particular, to make either Them, or the separation of the Acts and
Scenes known, I would presently discover both the Name, Quality, Equipage,
Clothes, Gesture, and Interests of all those who speak; the place of the Scene,
its decorations, and in a word, all that can make any part of the Theatral
Action; and all Plays, which cannot in the same manner make all things known to
the Reader, are certainly defective. But to do this well, there are many
Ingenious Artifices to put such words in the mouth of an Actor, as may be a
reasonable pretext for him to explain what is necessary for the understanding
of the Subject; and these following Contrivances may serve for an Example.

Sometimes the surprise of an Actor is a very agreeable way of doing it; so in
Plautus's Curculio, Palinurus, is surprised to see Phaedromus come out of his
House before day with Flambeaux and Servants laden with Bottles of Wine.

Sometimes one employs the compassion which he ought to have of the miserable
state of some other Actor, as Electra in Euripides does, to make it known that
her Brother was before the Gates of his Palace, laid all along wrapped up in his
Cloak, and tormenting himself with his own disquiets.

It may be done likewise by way of raillery; as in the Trinummus of Plautus,
where Charmides, to describe the great broad brimm'd Hat of a Cheat, disguised
like a Soldier, says, I believe this fellow is of the race of the Toadstools,
for he is all head.

Or else it may be contrived, that two Actors shall show one another some thing
extraordinary; as in the first Act of the Rudens of Plautus, where by that
Artifice one is informed, that there has been a Shipwreck, that there are some
persons yet alive swimming to the shore, that two women are alone in a small
Bark, and are by the Waves carried upon the Sands, where they fall into the
Sea, and then getting up again with much ado gain the shore.

Sometimes by the Actions themselves the Actors are sufficiently known, as in
Euripides, Polyphemus and the Satyrs drinking and growing drunk.

Very often an Actor by a choleric word or action makes known what another
Actor is doing; as in the Casina, Cleostrata seeming angry, makes it appear
that her Husband is chucking of her with his hand, to bring her into good humor
again. These may serve for Examples, many such being obvious to an ingenious
Fancy.

Not that a Poet need be very particular neither, he is not bound to make an
Exact description of all the Columns, Portico's, or other Ornaments of
Architecture in a Temple or Palace; it is enough that he mention in general
terms, the Decoration of his Theater: And yet when any Circumstance is to have
an Effect in the Play, then not only he may, but he must stay upon it a little;
as in the Io of Euripides, where it not being permitted to the Women to go into
the Temple of Apollo, they stay without and talk of the painting, which made
the Ornament of it on the outside; and in the Mostellaria of Plautus, where
Tranio desirous to persuade his Master Theuropides, that he had purchased the
House of one of his Neighbors, only to get some Money upon that pretext out
of the old Man, he shows him the Avenue of it, and makes him observe it is
Vestibule, Pillars, and other Singularities, which must be supposed necessary
in the decoration of the Stage, when the Play was acted.

There is no necessity neither that many particulars should be explained, which
are sufficiently understood by natural Consequence; as when a Poet shall make
Horatius a Roman speak, he need not tell us what dress he is in, nor endeavor
to make us admire the Generosity of his Sentiments; for it is of Necessity, that
he should be dressed and speak like a Roman.

Two things, which must never be forgot for the understanding of the Play, are
the Time, which the Poet gives to the Theatral Action, and the Place where the
Scene is laid. The Ancients have Practiced this with so much Art, that often
they that read their Plays hardly take Notice of it at first; Plautus opens the
Stage in his Amphytrio, at the end of that long night which Jupiter had made on
purpose to come and visit Alcmena in, before she was brought to bed; which
appears clearly by the discourse of Sosias, who complains in the very first
Scene of the length of the night, and says, that he believes Aurora has a Cup
too much, and cannot wake soon enough; and the Play ends before Dinner, as it
appears again by the Order which Jupiter, under the shape of Amphytrio, gives
to Sosias, to go and invite Blepharo to Dinner, as soon as he shall have
finished his Sacrifice; for after this Order given, all the Events are so
quick, that it is plain that all the Intrigues which perplexed Amphytrio are
first solved and made open.

The same Author has been as careful to express the place of his Scene, as has
been already showed in his Rudens and Curculio; and the same is observed in the
Frogs of Aristophanes, and the Ajax of Sophocles.

Very often it happens, that things are not explained just as they are done,
but a good while after; as the Poet thinks most convenient, and where he can do
it with the least Affectation. I shall give no other example, but that of
Corneille in his Andromeda, where when the winds carry her away, Phineas is
thrown to the ground by a Thunderclap, of which at that time no further notice
is taken, but it is made known in the second Act, where Phineas complaining of
the violence of the Gods against the endeavors he made to save Andromeda,
says, That they were forced to strike him to the ground, to take that occasion
to carry her away.

And since I am fallen upon this Play, which is adorned with so many Machines, I
cannot but observe, that all the Decorations and extraordinary Actions which
are in the third and fifth Act, are very dexterously explained, and with an Art
worthy of a Grecian Theater; but for that great Palace, which makes the
Decoration of the first Act, and that Magnificent Temple, which does the same
in the 4th, I think there is not one word said by which it may appear that they
are there; and I was forced, when I read the Play, to have recourse in those
places, to the explanation which is before each Act, or else I had never known
what the Decoration had been; and to say truth, one may put the Temple in the
first Act, and the Palace in the 4th, and it will do altogether as well,
without being obliged to any change in the Verses, or order of the Subject; by
which it appears, how requisite it is to explain the Decorations in the Play it
self, to join judiciously the Subject with the Place, and Actions with Things,
and so make a Total full of symmetry and ornament in all its parts*

The End of the First Book.
THE Whole Art OF THE STAGE. The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of the Subject of Dramatick Poems.
SUpposing here what the Poet ought to know of that part of a Drama, which the
Ancients called the Fable; we, the Story or Romance; and I in this place, the
Subject: I will only say that for Subjects merely invented, and of which one
may as well make a Tragedy as a Comedy; if they do not take, it is perfectly the
Poets fault, and a fault without excuse or pretext, which he can never clear
himself of; for being Master as well of the Matter as of the Form, the
miscarriage of the Play can be attributed to nothing, but to his want of
Conduct in the thing, and to the Errors of his own Imagination. But as for
Subjects drawn from Story, or from the Fables of the Ancients, he is more
exc^s^ble if he misses of success in the Representation of them, for he may be
many ways constrained; as if a great man command him to preserve certain
Circumstances, not so fit for the Stage, or that he does it himself out of some
consideration more important to him than the Glory of being a good Poet would
be. But if he be free in his choice, he may be sure that he shall be blamed if
his Play does not take, it being certain, that Art out of an ill Story may make
an excellent Drama; as for Example, if there be no Plot, the Poet must make
one; if it be too intricate, he must make it looser and easier; if too open and
weak, he must strengthen it by Invention, and so for the rest. On the other
side, there is no Story so rich in it self, but an ill Poet may so spoil the
beauty of it, that it will hardly be known to be the same Story.

Besides, one is not to think, that all fine Stories are fit to appear with
success upon the Stage; for very often the beautifullest part of them depends
upon some Circumstance, which the Theater cannot suffer; and it was for this,
that I advised one who had a mind to undertake the Loves of Antiochus and
Stratoniea, to let it alone; for the most considerable incident in it, being
the cunning of the Physician in discovering the Prince's Passion, by causing
all the Ladies in the Court to pass one by one before the Princes Bed, that so
by the emotion of his Pulse, he might judge which of them it was, that caused
his Disease; I thought it would be very odd, to make a Play where the Hero of
it should always be a bed, and that it would be hard to change the Circumstance
so, as to preserve the Beauty of it; and that besides, the Time and Place of
the Scene would be difficult to bring together; for if Antiochus be supposed
sick a bed in the morning, 'twould be improbable to lay much action upon him
all the rest of that day; and to place the Scene in a sick man's Chamber, or at
his door, would be as unlikely.

'Twas for the same Reason, that the Theodora of Corneille had not all the
approbation it deserved: It Is in it self a most ingenious Play; the Plot being
well carried, and full of variety; where all the hints of the true Story are
made use of to advantage, the Changes and Turns very judicious, and the
Passions and Verse worthy the Name of so great a man. But because the whole
business turns upon the Prostitution of Theodora to the Public Stews, it could
never please; not but that the Poet, in that too, has taken care to expose
things with great modesty and nicety; but still one is forced to have the Idea
of that ugly Adventure so often in ones Imagination, particularly in the
Narrations of the 4th Act, that the Spectators cannot but have some disgust at
it.

There are a hundred Stories like these, and harder yet to manage for the
Stage; and likewise on the contrary there are lucky ones, which seem to have
happened on purpose; as that of Sophonisba, who is a Widow, and married again,
loses her kingdom, and recovers it all in a day.

The way therefore of choosing a Subject, is to consider whether it be founded
upon one of these three things; either upon Noble Passions, as Mariamne and the
Cid; or upon an intricate and pleasing Plot, as Cleomedon, or the Disguised
Prince; or upon some extraordinary Spectacle and Show, as Cyminda, or the Two
Victims; and if the Story will bear more Circumstances of this nature, or that
the Poets imagination can fitly supply the Play with them, it will be still the
better; provided, he observe a just moderation, for though a Poem ought not to
be without a Plot, nor without Passions, or noble Spectacles, yet to load a
Subject with any of them, is a thing to be avoided. Violent Passions, too often
repeated, do as it were numm the Soul, and its Sympathy; the multitude of
Incidents and Intrigues distract the Mind, and confound the Memory; and much
Show takes up more time than can be allowed it, and is hard to bring on well.
It Is for this reason, that some of our Poets who had contrived in every Act a
memorable Incident, and a moving Passion, did not find that the success
answered their Expectation.

If I am asked, what is the measure of employing those things? I shall answer,
it is every ones natural judgment; and it may happen that a Drama may be so
luckily contrived, that the preparation of the Incidents, and the variety of
the Passions, shall correct the defect of the abundance of them; and that the
Art of the Machines shall be so well understood, that they may easily be made
use of in every Act, as I formerly propounded to Cardinal Richelieu, but
hitherto they are little in use in our ordinary Theaters.

It Is besides most commonly asked here, how far the Poet may venture in the
alterations of a true Story, Arist. c. 15.
in order to the fitting of it for the Stage. Upon which we find different
Opinions among both the Ancient and Modern Critics; Quis nescit omnibus Epicis
Poetis historiam esse pro argumento? quam illi aut adumbratam, aut illustratam,
certe alia facie quum ostendunt, ex historia conficiunt Poema. Nam quid aliud
Homerus? quid tragicis ipsis faciemus? Scal. l. 1. c. 2.
but my Opinion is, that he may do it not only in the Circumstances, but in the
Principal Action it self; provided he make a very good Play of it: For as the
Dramatick Poet does not much mind the time, because he is no Chronologist; no
more does he, nor the Epick Poet, much mind the true Story, because they are no
Historians; they take out of Story so much as serves their turn, and change the
rest; not expecting that any body should be so ridiculous as to come to the
Theaters to be instructed in the truth of History.

The Stage therefore does not present things as they have been, but as they
ought to be; for the Poet must in the Subject he takes reform every thing that
is not accommodated to the Rules of his Art; as a Painter does when he works up
on an imperfect Model.

'Twas for this Reason that the death of Camilla by the hands of her Brother
Horatius was never liked of upon the Stage, though it be a true Adventure; and
I for my part gave my Opinion, that to save in some measure the truth of the
Story, and yet not to offend against the decency of the Stage, it would have
been better that that Unfortunate Maid, seeing her Brother come toward her
with his Sword drawn, had run upon it of her self; for by that means she would
still have dyed by the hand of Horatius, and yet he might have deserved some
compassion, as unfortunate but innocent, and so the Story and the Stage would
have been agreed.

In a word, The Historian ought to recite matter of Fact, and if he judges of
it, he does more than he ought to do; the Epick Poet is to magnify all Events
by great Fictions, where truth is as it were sunk and lost; and the Dramatick
Poet ought to show all things in a state of decency, probability, and
pleasingness. It Is true, that if Story is capable of all the Ornaments of
Dramatick Poetry, the Poet ought to preserve all the true Events; but if not,
he is well grounded to make any part of it yield to the Rules of his Art, and
to the Design he has to please.

Many against this do allege the Authority of Horace, Hinc Horatius cum
dixisset, Famam sequere, quod pertinent ad (...). Voss. lib 1. c. 5.
who says, that he ought in Story to follow the common received Opinion, or at
least to invent things that may be as conformable to it as possible. But I
answer, that Horace in that place does not treat of the Subject of the Play,
but of the Customs and Morals that ought to be given the Actors; who ought not
to be represented different from what they were believed; as it would be to
make Caesar a Coward, or Messalina chaste; and this Vossius has well observed
in his Poetic Art, and I wonder that people should be abused by Citations
applied quite contrary to the Sense of the Author; and yet I am not of opinion
that a known Story, yet fresh in the minds of the People, can suffer to be
considerably changed, without great caution; but in such a case I should advise
the Poet rather to abandon such a subject, than to make an ill Play of it, out
of a humor of following truth; or at least to manage it so, as to check
directly the received Opinion among the Vulgar. If we examine well the Sense of
Aristotle, I believe he will be found to be of this Opinion; and as for the
Ancient Poets they have always taken that Liberty, the same Story having hardly
ever been treated the same way by different Poets. As for example, The
Adventures of Polydorus are very different in Euripides and Virgil. Sophocles
kills Emon and Antigone, but Euripides, who has made the same Story in two
Plays, marrys them together in one, contrary to what he himself had done before
in the other called, The Phaenician Ladies. The same Sophocles in Oedipus makes
Jocasta strangle her self, and Euripides makes her live 'till the combat of her
Sons Eteocles and Polynices, and then kill her self upon their dead bodies.
Orestes and Electra are very different in many Circumstances, though both Works
of the same Poet. In a word, the four Tragic Poets of the Greeks, whose Works
we have, are all different in the disposition of the same Stories, and I
believe that they were the cause of that grand disorder and confusion there is
in Story and Chronology in those old times, because that they having changed
both the Times and Events for their own ends, they have influenced some
Historians, who thought to pick out of them the truth of Story, and so made all
things uncertain; any body that will read the Electra of Euripides, that of
Sophocles, and the Caephores of Aeschilus, will easily see that they made no
difficulty of contradicting one another, and themselves.

As for the different kinds of Subjects, letting alone those ordinary divisions
of Aristotle, and his Commentators, I here propose three sorts of Subjects.

The first consists of Incidents, Intrigues, and new Events, when almost from
Act to Act there is some sudden change upon the Stage, which alters all the
Face of Affairs; when almost all the Actors have different Designs; and the
means they take to make them succeed come to cross one another, and produce new
and unforeseen Accidents, all which gives a mavelous satisfaction to the
Spectators, it being a continual diversion, accompanied with an agreeable
Expectation of what the Event will be.

The second sort of Subjects are of those raised out of Passions; when out of a
small Fund the Poet does ingeniously draw great Sentiments and noble Passions,
to entertain the Auditory; and when out of Incidents that seem natural to his
Subject, he takes occasion to transport his Actors into extraordinary and
violent Sentiments, by which the Spectators are ravished, and their Soul
continually moved with some new Impression.

The last sort of Subjects are the mixed or compound of Incidents and Passions,
when by unexpected Events, but Noble ones, the Actors break out into different
Passions; and that infinitely delights the Auditory, to see at the same time
surprising Accidents, and noble and moving Sentiments, to which they cannot but
yield with pleasure.

Now it is certain, that in all these three sorts of Subjects the Poet may
succeed, provided the disposition of his Play be ingenious; but yet I have
observed some difference, according to which they take more or less.

Subjects full of Plot and Intrigue are extreme agreeable at first, but being
once known, they do not the second time please us so well, because they want
the graces of Novelty, which made them charm us at first, all our delight
consisting in being surpised, which we cannot be twice.

The Subjects full of Passions last longer, and affect us more, because the
Soul which receives the impression of them, does not keep them so long, nor so
strongly, as our Memory does the Events of things; nay, often it happens, that
they please us more at second seeing, because that the first time we are
employed about the Event and Disposition of the Play, and by consequent do less
enter into the Sentiments of the Actors; but having once no need of applying
our thoughts to the Story, we busy them about the things that are said, and so
receive more Impressions of grief of fear.

But it is out of doubt, that the mixed or compound are the most excellent
sort, for in them the Incidents grow more pleasing by the Passions which do as
it were uphold them, and the Passions seem to be renewed, and spring afresh, by
the variety of the unthought of Incidents; so that they are both lasting, and
require a great time to make them lose their Graces.

We are not to forget here (and I think it one of the best Observations that I
have made upon this Subject) that if the Subject is not conformable to the
Customs and Manners, as well as Opinions of the Spectators, it will never take,
what pains soever the Poet himself take, and whatsoever Ornaments he employs to
set his Play off. For all Dramatick Poems must be different, according to the
People before whom they are represented; and from thence often proceeds that
the success is different, though the Play be still the same. Thus the Athenians
delighted to see upon their Theater the Cruelties of Kings, and the Misfortunes
befalling them, the Calamities of Illustrious and Noble Families, and the
Rebellion of the whole Nation for an ill Action of the Prince, because the
State in which they lived being Popular, they loved to be persuaded that
Monarchy was always Tyrannical, hoping thereby to discourage the Noble Men of
their own Commonwealth from the attempt of seizing the Sovereignty, out of fear
of being exposed to the the fury of a Commonalty, who would think it just to
murder them. Whereas quite contrary among us, the respect and love which we
have for our Princes, cannot endure that we should entertain the Public with
such Spectacles of horror; we are not willing to believe that Kings are
wicked, nor that their Subjects, though with some appearance of ill usage,
ought to Rebel against their Power; or touch their Persons, no not in Effigy;
and I do not believe that upon our Stage a Poet could cause a Tyrant to be
murdered with any applause, except he had very cautiously laid the thing: As
for Example, that the Tyrant were an Usurper, and the right Heir should appear,
and be owned by the People, who should take that occasion to revenge the
injuries they had suffered from the Tyrant; but Usurpation alone, against the
will of the People, would not justify without horror the death of the
Sovereign by the hands of his rebellious Subjects: We have seen the trial of it
in a Play called Timoleon, whom no consideration of State or common Good, no
love nor generosity toward his Country, could hinder from being considered as
the Murderer of his Brother and his Prince; and for my part I esteem that
Author who avoided to have Tarquin killed upon the Stage, after the violence he
had offered to Lucretia. The cruelty of Alboin inspired horror into the whole
French Court, though otherwise it were a Tagedy full of noble Incidents and
lofty Language.

We have had upon our Stage the Esther of Mr. Du Ryer, adorned with great
Events, fortified with strong Passions, and composed in the whole with great
Art; but the success was much unluckier at Paris, than at Rouen; and when the
Players at their teturn to Paris told us the good fortune they had had at
Rouen, every body wondered at it, without being able to guess the cause of it;
but for my part I think that Rouen, being a Town of great Trade, is full of a
great Number of Jews, some known, and some concealed, and that by that reason
they making up a good part of the Audience, took more delight in a piece which
seemed entirely Jewish, by the Conformity it had to their Manners and Customs.

We may say the same thing of Comedies; for the Greeks and Romans, with whom
the Debauches of young People with Curtizans was but a laughing matter, took
pleasure to see their Intrigues represented, and to hear the discourses of
those public Women, with the tricks of those Ministers of their Pleasures
countenanced by the Laws. They were also delighted to see old covetous men
over-reached, and cheated of their money, by the circumvention of their Slaves,
in favonr of their young Masters; they were sensible to all these things,
because they were subject to them one time or another; but amongst us all this
would be ill received; for as Christian Modesty does not permit persons of
Quality to approve of those Examples of Vice, so neither do the Rules by which
we govern our Families allow of those slights of our Servants, nor do we need
to defend our selves against them. It Is for the same Reason that we see in the
French Court, Tragedies take a great deal better than Comedies; and that on the
contrary, the People are more affected with the latter, and particularly with
the Farces and Buffooneries of the Stage; for in this Kingdom the persons of
good Quality, and Education, have generous thoughts and designs, to which they
are carried either by the Motives of Virtue or Ambition, so that their life has
a great Conformity with the Characters of Tragedy; but the people, meanly born
and durtily bred, have low Sentiments, and are thereby disposed to approve of
the meaness and filthiness represented in Farces, as being the Image of those
things which they both use to say and do; and this ought to be taken notice of,
not only in the principal part of the Poem, but in all its parts, and
particularly in the Passions, as we shall say more amply in a Chapter about
them; for if there be any Act or Scene that has not that conformity of manners
to the Spectators, you will suddenly see the applause cease, and in it is place
a discontent succeed, though they themselves do not know the cause of it. For
the Stage and Eloquence are alike in this, that their Perfections and Faults
are equally perceived by the Ignorant and by the Learned, though the cause is
not equally known to them.

CHAP. II.
Of Probability and Decency.
HEre is the bottom and ground work of all Dramatick Poems; The French word is
vraysemblance, for which we have not an English word Expressive of all its
Sense.
many talk of it, but few understand it; but this is the general touchstone, by
which all that comes to pass in a Play is to be tried and examined, and it is
the very Essence of the Poem, without which nothing rational can be done or
said upon the Stage.

It Is a general Maxim, that Truth alone is not the Subject of our Theaters,
Synes in Caluit. encom. p. 72. edit. Paris. an. 1612.
because there are many Truths which ought not to be seen, and many that cannot
be represented publicly; therefore Synesius has said very well, that Poetry
and other Arts, founded in Imitation, follow not Truth but the common Opinion
of men. It is very true, that Nero caused his Mother to be murdered, and then
had her cut up to see the place, where he had lain nine Months before he was
born; but this Barbarity, though pleasant to him that executed it, would yet be
not only horrible to those, to whom it should be showed, but incredible because
such a thing ought not to have come to pass: I believe that amongst the great
number of Stories, from which the Poet may take Subjects, there is hardly any
one which in all its true Circumstances is fitted for the Stage, so as to be
represented without altering something of the Event, the Time, the Persons, and
many other particulars.

That which is simply possible is left a Subject for Plays, for many things may
come to pass by the recounter of Natural Causes (or the adventures of humane
Life) which yet would be ridiculous, and almost incredible, to be represented.
It Is possible that a Man may dye suddenly, and that happens often; but That
Poet would be strangely laughed at, who to rid the Stage of a troublesome
Rival, should make him dye of an Apoplexy, as of a common Disease; and it would
need exceeding ingenious and artful preparations.

There is nothing therefore but Probability, Res esse oport in ipsis etia*
Comoedijs adm^dum verisimiles ut tametsi ficta representari magis quam fingi
videantur Scal. lib. 6. cap 3.
that can truly found a Dramatick Poem, as well as adorn and finish it; not
that True and Possible things are banished off the Stage, but they are received
upon it, only so far as they are Probable; and therefore all the Circumstances,
that want this Character, are to be altered so as to attain it, if they hoped
to appear in public.

I shall not here expatiate upon ordinary and extraordinary Probability, the
Masters of the Art have made ample Treatises about it; and no body is ignorant,
that things naturally impossible become possible, and even probable, by the
Power of God Almighty, or That of the Devil; and that the Probability of the
Stage does not oblige to represent only those things which happen according to
the common course of Humane Life, but likewise gives leave to launch into the
wonderful Accidents of it, which makes the Events so much the more surprising,
if they are still probable; but that which I have observed in this matter, is,
That few have understood, how far this Probability ought to reach; every body
indeed believing that it ought to be observed in the principal Action of the
Poem, and likewise in the most sensible Incidents of it, but they went no
further. Now is it most certain, that the least Actions, brought upon the
Stage, ought to be probable, or else they are entirely faulty, and should not
appear there. There is no Action of Humane Life so perfectly single, as not to
be accompanied by many little Circumstances, which do make it up; as are the
Time, the Place, the Person, the Dignity, the Designs, the Means, and the
Reasons of the Action; and since the Stage ought ot be a perfect Image of
Action, it ought to represent it entire, and that Probability and Decency be
observed in all its parts. When a King speaks upon the Stage, he must speak
like a King, and that is the Circumstance of his Dignity, against which nothing
ought to be done with Decency; except there be some other reason to dispense
with this last, as that he were in disguise. Besides, without doubt a King
speaking according to his Dignity must be supposed to be somewhere, and
therefore the Stage must carry the Image of the place where he then was, for
there are things which in Probability ought not to be done or said, but in
certain places. It ought also to appear, in what time he spoke, for one ought
to speak differently in different times, as a Prince before he gives Battle,
will speak otherwise than after he has won it, or lost it.

Therefore to preserve this Probability in the Circumstances of the Treatral
Action, the Poet must be Master of the Rules of the Stage, and Practice them,
for they teach nothing else, to make all the parts of an Action appear with
Probability and Decency, and to represent a whole and entire Image of them.

To this some have said, That Reason and Common Sense are sufficient of
themselves to Judge of all these things. I grant it, but it must be Reason and
common Sense, instructed in the affairs of the Stage, and in what is designed
to be represented: For suppose, that a Man of good Sense should have never seen
nor heard of a Play, and be brought to see one, without being told what it is
he is carried to; it is certain that he will hardly know, whether the Players be
true Kings and Princes, or only the Images of them; and when he does know, that
all that is but a Fiction, yet will he scarce be able to judge of the Faults or
Perfections of the Play, without making many Reflections to consider, whether
what is represented be profitable or no? For to judge perfectly of a Dramatick
Poem, our Natural Reason must be instructed and inured to that kind of Images,
which are made use of by men to represent any Action, and know precisely, how
Probability is to be preserved in all the strokes of this animated Picture; and
that cannot be attained to, but by a great number of Observations made by
length of time and different Persons. The Art of the Stage was by these
Observations framed by the Ancients, and had so slow a Progress, that from
Thespis, who first added an Actor to the Chorus, who before that acted
Tragedies alone, to the time of Aristotle, who reduced these Rules into an Art,
there passed two hundred years: He therefore that, on a sudden without study or
reflection, will pronounce his Judgment of a Play, will often find himself
mistaken; because it is very hard he should have before his Eyes on a sudden all
those Considerations, which are requisite to examine the Probability of what
has been represented; and it has often happened, that People of very good
understanding have at first commended some Actions of the Stage for well
invented things, which upon being better informed, they have found contrary to
all Probability and Ridiculous.

But it is a much stranger thing, and yet very true, that I have seen People,
who had for many years composed Plays themselves, read a Play of another, and
that over and over again, and yet never find out the length of time, nor the
place of the Scene, nor many of the Circumstances of the most important
Actions, so as to judge whether they were probable or not. Heinsius himself,
though very Learned, Plautus novem menses uno Dramate complexus est, ut vix
mayor ampliorque Homericae Iliados quam Amphitryonis sit periodus: Alcumena
autem concipit and parit; quod si fieret, iam nullo episodio opus esset,
ideoque nec ars esset comoediam scribere.
and who has published the Art of composing Tragedies, is so far mistaken in
the Amphitryon of Plautus, as to think it contains nine Months, though it do
not really contain above eight hours, and at least is comprehended between
Midnight and Noon the day following. Vossius, one of the most Learned of our
time, and very understanding in the Art of Poetry, writes as He does, that
Plautus in his Amphytrion makes Hercules be conceived and born in one Night,
though it is certain he supposes him Conceived seven Months before; and Mercury
says it twice expressly in the Play; therefore I think my self bound to give my
Readers warning, Heins. in Horat.
that of all that that excellent man has made, Voss. lib. 2. c. 3.
there is nothing to be so carefully avoided, Ridicule se dat Plautus, cum in
Amphitry^ne fingat eadem die Alcumenam and concipere and parere.
as his Third Chapter of his First Book, where he treats of the Errors of
Poets, and pretends to Correct the Ancients* for he himself falls into much
greater. Scaliger has said in two places, that in Aeschylus, Prometheus is
killed by a Thunderbolt, Hodie illa pariet filios geminos duos, alter decumo
post mense nascetur puer quam seminatus est; alter mense septumo. Amphitry.
and yet it is certain that he is only carried away in the storm, and that
appears by the words of Prometheus, and those of Mercury, who both say it
clearly enough. There are those who have read Aeschylus over and over, and yet
have been so negligent in observing of him, that they believe (and amongst
them, Act. 1. sc. 2.
the Author of the Argument of his Agamemnon is one) that he makes Agamemnon be
murdered upon the Stage, Lib. 7. c. 4. Poet. and lib. 3. c. 97.
though it be said by the Chorus, that they hear the Cries and Lamentations he
makes in his Palace, and are ready to break in, to see what is the matter; from
which Resolution they are diverted by the Arrival of Clytemnestra, (...).
who comes and tells, how she had with her own hand committed that Cruel
action. Many Learned Men have said, That the Third Comedy of Terence contained
two days; Scaliger, Muretus, Arg. Agam. Aeschyl.
Vossius, F. Membrun, and others have been of that Opinion; but it does not
contain above ten hours, as I have made it appear, in my Dissertation of
Terence Justified. And Monsieur Menage, who writ upon this Subject, only to
contradict Truth out of Malignity, has not dared to allow it above 14 or 15
hours, and to compass that, he has been fain, to pervert the Order of the
Athenian Months, that he might shorten the day, and lengthen the night, and so
overthrow the Economy of Nature, to find some Fault with the Disposition of
the Play.

I have seen some others, whom I had much difficulty to persuade, that in the
Phoenicians of Euripides, the Electra of Sophocles, and the Clouds of
Aristophanes, the Unity of place was observed; so much do old Errors sometimes
blind us: And so true it is, that in this Art, as well as in all others, our
natural Reason needs the knowledge of the Rules of the Art, to judge well of
the Perfection or Faults of the product of the Art, and I dare boldly say, that
whoever shall read this Treatise, shall condemn many things which they formerly
thought very Rational.

CHAP. III.
Of the Unity of Action.
IT IS one of Aristotle's Rules, and without doub^ a very Rational one, that a
Dramatick Poem ought to comprehend but one Action; and he does very pertinently
condemn those, who make a Play of the whole Story, or Life of a Hero. For
though we speak but of one principal Part, on which all the other Events, bad
and good, do depend; yet there are diverse subordinate Actions. But to explain
this more particularly, I will here give the Reason of this Rule, as I
apprehend it; and how likewise one may comprehend upon the Stage diverse
Incidents in one Action.

It Is certain, that the Stage is but a Picture or Image of Humane Life; and as
a Picture cannot show us at the same time two Originals, and be an accomplished
Picture: It is likewise impossible that two Actions, I mean principal ones,
should be represented reasonably by one Play. Let us consider what the Painter
does, who is to make a Picture of some Story; he has no other design, but to
give the Image of some Action, and that Action is so limited, that it cannot
represent two parts of a Story together, and less all the Story upon which he
has fixed; because it would be necessary that the same Person should be
Painted, and appear in different places, which would make a strange Confusion
in the whole Picture, and it would be hard to distinguish any Order amongst so
many different Actions; and by consequent, the Story would be very obscure and
confused: Therefore instead of that, the Painter would choose, amongst All the
Actions which made up the Story, the most important One, and the fittest for
the Excellency of his Art, and which in some measure should contain all the
others; so that with one look one might have a sufficient knowledge of all that
he designed to express; and if he desired to express two parts of the same
Story, he would make in some corner of the Picture a Lontananza, where he would
paint that other Action, which he had a mind to represent, that he might make
it be understood, that he designed the painting of two different Actions, and
that it was two Pictures, and not one.

As for Example, Suppose he designed to draw the Story of Iphigenia, it would
be hard for him to comprehend in one Picture, all the Adventures of that
Princess; therefore he would choose that of the Sacrifice, which the Greeks were
going to make of her to Diana, to appease her Anger, and the storms of the Sea;
for in this Action her whole Story would in some measure be comprehended. The
storms of the Sea, which kept the Fleet in the Port of Aulide, would be
considered as the Cause; the Grief of her Father, and the Compassion of the
other Grecian Princes, would be the Circumstances; and her being carried away
by that Goddess her self, as an extraordinary Favor, by which she was to be
saved; and then if he had a mind to express that Diana carried her to Tauris,
where she was upon the point of Sacrificing her Brother Orestes, he would put
her in one of the Corners of his Picture, in the particular dress of Diana's
Priestess, with some other marks of this second Adventure, and so make two
Pictures of two different Actions of the same Story.

The Dramatick Poet must imitate the Painter, and when he undertakes the
Composition of a Play, he must reckon that he undertakes to make a living
speaking Picture, and that therefore he cannot comprehend in it a whole
History, or the Life of an Hero, because he would be necessitated to represent
an infinite number of Events, and employ a vast number of Actors, and mingle so
many things, that he would make up a work of perfect Confusion, and would be
forced in most places to offend against Probability and Decency, and to go
beyond the time and extent, ordinarily allowed to Dramatick Poems; or if he
would keep within the limits of the Rules of his Art, he would be forced to
hasten all the Incidents, and as it were heap them one upon another, without
either Graces or Distinction, and so be obliged to stifle and suppress all the
Passionate strokes; and in a word, show such a Monstrous Extravagant Image, as
They have done, who have represented in the First Act of a Tragedy, the
Marriage of a Princess; in the Second, the Birth of her Son; in the Third, the
Amors of that young Prince; in the Fourth, his Victories; and in the Fifth,
his Death; in all which there was matter enough for above twenty Plays. Our
Poet therefore, amidst this vast extent, shall pitch upon some one remarkable
Action; and as one may say, a point of Story, notable by the Happiness or
Misfortune of some Illustrious Person, in which point he may comprehend, as
Circumstances, all the rest of the Story, and by representing one chief part
make the whole known by some slight to the Spectators, without multiplying the
principal Action, and without retrenching any of the necessary Beauties to the
perfection of his Work; and if by chance he should meet in the same Story with
two or more Actions, so considerable, that they each of them deserved a Play,
and so independent or opposite to each other, as not to be reconciled; he ought
to make Two or More plays of them, or choose the most Important, and
particularly, the most Pathetick for his Subject.

Thus the Suppliants of Euripides do not contain the whole War of Thebes, but
only the Burial of the two Princes of Argos. Hecuba contains not the taking of
Troy, but the last misfortunes of that Queen in her Captivity. The Ajax of
Sophocles, shows not all the Exploits of War of that Hero, nor his Disputes
with Ulysses for the Arms of Achilles, but only represents his madness, which
was the cause of his Death; and so we may say of most of the ancient Plays. But
in all these the Poets have showed so much Art, as to instruct the Spectators,
either by Narrations, Discourses, Complaints, or other sleights of the Art, in
all the Circumstances of those Stories which they treated.

As likewise, when the Subjects, that fell into their Hands, were of too great
an Extent to be comprehended in one Play, and having in them many Actions of
equal importance, they have made different Pictures of that, which could not be
comprehended under one Image.

Euripides has not confounded the Sacrifice of Iphigenia in Aulis, with the
Adventures of the same Princess in Scythia. Aeschylus in one Play causes
Agamemnon to be murdered by Clytemnestra; and in another brings her to
punishment for it; and from thence it comes amongst the Ancients, many Plays
have the same Name, and often many Events of the same Story are represented in
different Plays, which indeed was some ways necessary in Athens; for as their
Poets were to work for the Solemnity of the four great Feasts or Holy Days, and
to have four Plays for each of them; of which there were three to be Serious,
and the fourth Satirical or Comical, which made up the Tetralogy. I am of
Opinion, they took all their Subjects from the same Story, as I have showed
more at length in my Terence Justified.

Now, as to the manner of bringing many different Incidents into one Action,
and to make a Poem of them, which shall naturally contain many Acts, and
different Scenes; to explain this well, I return to the comparison of Painting,
which I have so often used already.

We have said that a Picture can represent but one Action, but it ought to be
understood one principal Action, for the Painter may very well place in the
same Picture many Actions, which depend upon that chief Action, which he
pretends principally to represent. And indeed there is no one action of Life so
single, but it was preceeded, accompanied, and followed by many others, all
which do compose it, and give it its Being: Therefore the Painter must, whether
he will or no, draw these subordinate Actions, or else his principal one is
imperfect. If he paints the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, he cannot place her all
alone at the foot of Diana's Altar, or without any body, but Chalchas who is to
sacrifice her; but rather, following the Example of the Painter Tim^ntes, he
will place there all the Grecian Princes with sad Countenances; Menelaus her
Uncle shall be extremely afflicted; Clytemnestra, her Mother, shall be
expressed all in Tears and despair; and Agamemnon, her Father, with a Vail upon
his Face, to hide the weakness of his Nature to the chief of the Greeks, and
yet allow something by this slight to the excess of his Grief; he will not
forget to make Diana appear in the Sky, ready to stop the Arm and Sword of
Chalchas, because all these Actions do as it were wait upon, and make up this
doleful Religious Action, which else would be weak and naked of all its
Ornaments, without all these ingenious Circumstances.

It Is in the same manner, that a Dramatick Poem ought not to contain above one
Action, but it must be brought upon the Stage entire, with all its
Dependencies, and nothing must be forgot of those Circumstances, which
naturally are appropriated to it: And of this I think I need not propose any
Example; but it will not be amiss to give our Poet one Advertisement, which is,
That if the principal Action be in the Story loaded with too many Incidents, he
must reject the least important, and least pathetick ones; and on the contrary,
if the Story want those Incidents, he must supply that want by his own Fancy,
which he may do two ways.

First, either by inventing some Intrigues, which naturally might make a part
of the principal Action: Thus the Author of the Tragedy of the Horatius's has
very well invented the Marriage of Sabina, Sister to the Curiatius's, with the
Eldest of their Enemies, that so he might introduce the Passions of a Wife, to
mingle with those of Camilla, who was a Maid, and in love with one of the
Curiatius's.

Secondly, He may seek out in Story, things that have happened before or after
the Action, which makes the Subject of his Play, and with Art join them to his
Plot, saving still the differences of times and places, according as we shall
show in the following Chapters. This has been observed by the Author of
Cleopatra, who makes Octavia, Antony's Wife, come privately to Alexandria, and
so has the pleasure of showing so great a Lady with all her generous Sentiments.

But we are to observe here, that the Poet, as near as he can, ought to take
his Action as single as possible; because he will still be so much the more
Master of the Passions, and other Ornaments of his Play, which by that means he
can show to the best advantage; whereas, if he meets with them in Story, they
will still be clogged with some Circumstances, which will constrain the whole
Design, and give him a great deal of trouble; and in short, little and single
Subjects in the hands of an ingenious Poet, who knows how to work them,
Argumentum brevissimum sumendum, idque* maxim varium multiplexque faciendum.
l. 3. c. 97. Scal.
cannot miscarry. It Is Scaliger's advice, and we have seen the proof of it in
Alcionea, a Play of Mr. Du Ryers, which though it had no fund in Story,
nevertheless ravished the Audience, by the force of the Passions, and richness
of the Style. And on the contrary, all those, who in the same Poem, have
brought in diverse illustrious important Actions, have stifled the Beauty of
them all, in not giving room enough to the Passions, as we have experienced in
some Plays, where all the Actions, though in some measure depending on a
principal one, yet were so strong in themselves, that they hindered each other,
and were every one of them capable of being the subject of a Play.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Continuity of the Action.
AFter the Poet has chosen the Subject or Story, which he thinks capable of the
Ornaments of Dramatick Poetry, (...).
and that he has fixed upon the point, Arist. Poet. cap. 11.
in which he will make the Unity of his Theatral Action consist; Gouean. in
Terent. Heaut.
he must remember, that his Action ought to be not only one, but continued,
that is, Scalig. lib. 6. cap. 3. Poet.
That from the opening of the Stage, to the very closing of the Catastrophe,
from the first Actor, that appears upon the Scene, to the last that goes off;
the principal Persons of the Play must be always in Action; and the Theater
must carry continually, and without any interruption the face of some Designs,
Expectations, Passions, Troubles, Disquiets, and other such like Agitations,
which may keep the Spectators in a belief, that the Action of the Theater is
not ceased, but still going on. This is one of the Precepts of Aristotle, as
well as of Reason; and his Interpreters have always observed the Cessation of
Action for one of the greatest Faults of the Drama; it is of this fault, that
some People, but impertinently, do accuse Terence in his Third Comedy, called
Heautontimoreumenos; but I have sufficiently justified him elsewhere. The
Ancient Tragedians could hardly fail in the observation of this Rule, because
they had Choruses, and the business of those Choruses being to represent those
who were present upon the Scene at the time of the Action, it is probable they
would have gone off as soon as they should have seen the Action cease, as
having no pretext to stay there any longer. It Is besides certain, that if upon
our Stages the Action should cease in the middle of the Play, or about the
Second or Third Act, all the Intrigues being finished, nor no preparation for
any new Incident or Passion to come, the Spectators would be in the right to
rise and be gone, since they would have reason to believe the Play done, and if
they stayed any longer, knowing there were two or three Acts to come, it would
be only by the knowledge they had of what the Poet ought to do, and not by any
hint of his, to prepare them for it; as if a man happened to be there, who had
never seen a Play, it is certain he would be lieve it at an end, as soon as he
had nothing new to expect; and in this case, I have seen sometimes Ladies ask,
if the Play were done, though they had often been at Plays, and knew they were
generally of greater length; so much does the Cessation of the Action upon the
Stage surprise the Spectators, and persuades them that there is nothing more to
come. If we seek the reason of it, it is because the Action would not be one,
if it were not continued; for Moral Actions, such as are those of the Theater,
come to be divided and multiplied, whenever they break off; and are interrupted
for then, if they begin again, they are two Theatral Actions, both of them
Imperfect. It Is for this that the best Dramatick Poets always use to make their
Actors say, where they are going, and what is their Design, when they go off of
the Stage, that one may know, that they are not idle while they are absent, but
are acting something of their part, though one sees them not.

But when we say, that the chief Persons in the Play are always to be in
Action, we do not mean by that, the Hero or Heroine of the Play, for they often
Act the least, and yet suffer the most in the whole Business; for in regard to
the Continuity of the Action, the Principal Actors are those who carry on the
Intrigue or business of the Play, it may be a Slave, a waiting Woman, a Cheat,
or some such Person; and for the Continuity, it is enough if the least Actor is
but doing, provided it be necessarily, and that the Spectator from his working
may naturally expect some important change or adventure in the Subject.

It Is worth observing too, that often in appearance the Action of the Stage
ceases, though it be not really so; which happens when the Poet prepares an
Incident, which is to appear afterward, and of which one of the Actors speaks
slightly, and en passant, which is an Artifice of the Poets.

The Example is very ingenious in the Ajax of Sophocles, where the Action seems
entirely to cease in the beginning of the Third Act, but is continued by a
Messenger, who comes and tells of Teucers Arrival in the Camp, and of all that
had been done there since his coming, concerning his Brothers Fury, and the
Cure of it, by which means the Action is not only well renewed, but continued;
because in the precedent Acts, Ajax often speaks, and complains of the length
of his Brothers absence, which makes all the Spectators wish his return, as a
means to save Ajax himself, so that when the news of his Arrival is brought, it
appears that the Action had not ceased at all, for Teucer was acting in the
Camp for his Brother according to the expectation of the Audience; of all which
nevertheless there comes nothing to pass of what they hoped, and it is in that
that consists the Poets chief Art, to promise that which never comes to pass,
and to bring that to pass which he does not promise.

It Is necessary to observe here besides, that the Theatral Action does not
always cease, though all the Actors be in Repose, and as it were without
Action; because that sometimes it is a necessary Action of the Play, that they
all should be so; and the Spectator expects some Event from the Actors doing of
nothing. This we shall make clear by Examples, and particularly by the Plutus
of Aristophanes, where we see that after the Second Act, the Actors carry
Plutus to the Temple of Aesculapius, to cure him of his Blindness, where they
go to Bed to sleep, and remain without Action; for this Sleep and Repose was
the Natural state, in which they were to be, to receive from that God, the
favor of being cured, and is by consequent a necessary Action to the Stage. By
which it appears, Resp. au discourse sur l'Heautont. p. 7. ed. 2. p. 102.
how much Monsieur Menage has been mistaken, to believe that the Action of the
Stage ceased as to those who were asleep, and was only continued in the Person
of Carrion who was awake; for it is quite contrary, he that is awake is a Slave
who eats and steals the remainder of the Sacrifice without any regard to the
Subject of the Play; and they who sleep do that which Custom prescribed to
those, who were to expect a Cure from Aesculapius, and as Plutus and his
Companions did: One might say, perhaps, that the Action of Aesculapius, who
cures Plutus and what Carrion saw, as he tells it afterward, are enough to
continue the Action; but still there would be a breach and some time lost in
it, from that in which the Actors lie down to the time of Aesculapius's coming,
if it were not true, that their very lying down and going to sleep, continues
the Action of the Comedy.

This Chapter may receive some more light by the Treatise I have made upon the
third Comedy of Terence, where I have touched this matter, and by what I have
done upon that Author, it will be easy to find, how to examine the Ancients,
if one would discover the Artifices, which they use to observe in this
Continuity of the Action of the Theater.

CHAP. V.
Of the Subjects with two Walks, whereof one is by Modern Authors called
Episode.
OUR Modern Authors do now by an Episode mean a Second Story, which comes as it
were cross the principal Subject of the Play, and some for this Reason call it
a Play with two Walks; but the Ancient Poets have not known, or at least have
not practiced this Multiplicity of Subjects: Aristotle makes no mention of it,
and I know no Example of it, except some will say that the Orestes of Euripides
is of this kind, because there are two Marriages concluded in the Catastrophe;
but there is not in the Body Body of the Play any mixture of Intrigues, to
carry on those two Amors, and bring them to this Conclusion.

Comedy has been otherwise managed, for having received many more Changes than
Tragedy, from what they Both were at first; it has admitted of this mixture of
two Stories in the same Play: And we have yet some in Plautus, and a great many
in Terence, who may afford an Instruction how to compose with Art and Grace
that sort of Plays better than Plautus.

But however, not standing here upon the word Episode, which amongst the
Ancients signified quite another thing. I am content the signification of the
Word should be according to our Modern Authors; and do allow that Tragedy may
have some Episodes, as well as the Epick Poems, and not unlike them; but in
Tragedy there are two things to be observed. First, That these Episodes, or
Second Stories be so incorporated into the chief Subject, that they cannot be
separated from it, without spoiling the whole Play; for else the Episode would
be looked upon as a superfluous and troublesome part, which would but hinder
the Union of the chief Adventures, and slacken the motion of the Incidents,
which tend to a Conclusion; as indeed in the Play, of our time the most
applauded, the Episode of the Princesses love has been condemned by all, The
Cid.
because it was absolutely useless. Therefore to avoid that Inconvenience, it is
necessary that the Person engaged in the Episode, be not only concerned in the
Success of the Affairs of the Stage; but besides, the Adventures of the Hero or
Heroine ought to be of that concern to the Persons of the Episode, as that the
Audience may rationally apprehend some mischief, or hope some good out of those
Persons for the whole concern of the Stage; and for the interest of those who
seem strangers, and are not then unusefully so.

The other Observation to be made about these Episodes, is, That the second
Story must not be equal in its Subject, nor in its Necessity, to that which is
the foundation of the Play, but it must be subordinate to it, and so depend
upon it, that the Events of the principal Subject cause the Passions of the
Episode; and that the Catastrophe of the first produce naturally and of its
self the Catastrophe of the second, or else the principal Action would be no
longer so. These are the two Reflections, which I have made upon the Episodes
of our Modern Poets, which may give hints to better understandings than mine,
to make some more considerable ones.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Unity of Place.
AFter the Poet has ordered his Subject according to the Rules we have given,
or it may be Better, which his own Industry and Study may furnish him with; he
must reflect, that the best part of it must be represented by Actors, which
must be upon a Stage fixed and determinated; for to make his Actors appear in
different places, would render his Play ridiculous, by the want of Probability,
which is to be the foundation of it.

This Rule of Unity of Place begins now to be looked upon as certain; but yet
the ignorant, and some others of weak judgment, do still imagine that it cannot
but be repugnant to the Beauty of the Incidents of a Play; because that they,
happening often in great distance of place, cannot but lose by this constraint;
and therefore whatsoever Reason you oppose against their imaginations, they
fancy a false impossibility in the Execution, and reject stubbornly all that is
said to convince them; on the other side, those that are but half read in
Antiquity, do well perceive the strength of what it alleged for this Rule, but
yet they make Objections so unbecoming a literate thinking man, that they have
often moved pity in me, though I had more mind to laugh at them. It Is the
property of little Genius's not to be able to comprehend many things at the
same time, so as to reduce them to a point; their judgment not being able to
assemble so many images as they must have present all at once; and therefore
they make so many difficulties, that it is easy to see, they would be glad that
there were Reasons wanting to convince them.

As for the truly Learned, they are thoroughly convinced of the necessity of
this Rule, because they see clearly that Probability can no ways be preserved
without it; but I may boldly say, that hitherto no one of them has explained
this Rule, and made it intelligible, either because we do not take the Pains of
making all the necessary reflections upon the Works of the Ancients, to discover
the Art which is most commonly hid in them, and which always ought to be so,
without an apparent necessity of the Subject or the Interest of the Actors; or
else because no body strives to go beyond the first great Masters, and what
They have neglected is given over most commonly by their Followers.

Aristotle has said nothing of it, and I believe he omitted it, because that
this Rule was in his time too well known; the Chorus's, which ordinarily
remained upon the Stage from one end of the Play to the other, marking the
unity of the Scene too visibly to need a Rule for it; and indeed, would it not
have been ridiculous, that in the Play called the Seven before Thebes, the
young Women who make the Chorus, should have found themselves sometimes before
the Palace of the King, and sometimes in the Camp of the Enemies, without ever
stirring from the same place; and the Three famous Tragedians of the Greeks,
whose Works we have, are so punctual in the Observation of this Rule, and do so
often make their Actors say, where they are, and whence they come; that
Aristotle must have supposed too much Ignorance in his Age, and in those who
should read these Poets, if he had gone about to Explain so settled a Rule. But
since the Ignorance and Barbarity of some past Ages have brought such disorder
upon the Stage, to make people in the Play appear in different parts of the
World on the same Stage, it will not be amiss to give here at length the Reason
of this Rule, so well practiced by the Ancients, and that in honor of some of
our Modern Poets, who have very handsomely imitated them.

To understand it then, we must have recourse to our ordinary Principle, which
is, that the Stage is but a Representation of things; and yet we are not to
imagine, that there is any thing of what we really see, but we must think the
things themselves are there of which the Images are before us. Loci ficti vera
Loca imitantur. Scal. l. 1. cap. 13.
So Floridor is much less Floridor, than the Horatius of whom he acts the Part,
for his dress is Roman, he speaks, acts, and thinks as that Roman did at that
time; but as that Roman could not but be in some place acting and speaking, the
place where Floridor appears does represent that where Horatius was, or else
the Representation would be imperfect in that Circumstance.

This Truth, well understood, makes us to know that the place cannot change in
the rest of the Play, since it cannot change in the Representation, for one and
the same Image remaining in the same state, cannot represent two different
things; now it is highly improbable, that the same space, and the same floor,
which receive no change at all, should represent two different places; as for
Example, France and Denmark; or within Paris it self, the Tueilleries and the
Exchange; at least to do it with some sort of color, one should have of that
sort of Theaters which turn quite round and entire, that so the Place might
change as well as the Persons acting; and to do this, the Subject of the Play
ought to furnish some Reason for this change, and as that cannot well happen,
but by the Power of God Almighty, who changes as he pleases the Face of Nature,
I doubt it would be hard to make a reasonable Play without a dozen Miracles at
least.

Let it then be allowed for a certain truth, that the Place, where the first
Actor, who opens the Play, is supposed to be, ought to be the same place to the
end of the Play; and that, it not being in the ordinary course of Nature, that
the place can receive any change, there can be none likewise in the
Representation; and by consequent, that all your other Actors cannot rationally
appear in any other place.

But we must remember, that this Place, which cannot be supposed to change, is
the Area or floor of the Stage, upon which the Actors walk, and which the
Ancients called by the name of Proscenium; for as that represents that spot of
ground, upon which the persons represented did actually walk and discourse,
which could not turn about or change on a sudden, or without a Miracle, so when
you have once chosen the place where you intend your Action to be begun, you
must suppose it immovable in all the rest of the Play, as it was in effect and
really.

It Is not the same with the sides and end of the Theater, for as they do but
represent those things which did actually environ the Persons acting, and which
might receive some change, they may likewise receive some in the
Representation, and it is in that that consists the changing of Scenes, and
other Ornaments of Decoration, which always ravish the People, and please the
best Judges, when they are well done; so we have seen upon our Stage a Temple
adorned with a Noble Front of Architecture, which coming to be set open showed
the inside of it, where in Perspective were descryed Pillars and an Altar, and
all the other Ornaments of a Church extremly well done; so that the place did
not change, and yet had a fine Decoration.

We are not nevertheless to imagine, that the Poets Capricio is to rule these
Decorations; for he must find some color and appearance for it in his Subject.

So for Example, he might feign a Palace upon the Sea side, forsaken, and left
to be inhabited by poor Fishermen; a Prince landing, or being cast away there,
might adorn it with all the rich Furniture fit for it; after this by some
Accident it might be set on fire; and then behind it the Sea might appear, upon
which one might represent a Sea Fight; so that in all the five changes of the
Stage, the unity of Place would still be ingeniously preserved; not but that
the very floor or Proscenium may change too, provided it be superficially, as
if some River should overflow it, as the Tyber did in the time of Augustus; or
if Flames came out of the Earth and covered the face of it, in all these cases
the unity of place would not be broke. But as I have said already, the Subject
of the Play must furnish probable Reasons for these changes, which I repeat the
oftener, because I am still afraid, that it will not make Impression enough in
the Reader.

It Is not enough neither to say, that the Floor or Stage should represent a
place immovable; it must besides be a place supposed open in the reality, as
it appears in the Representation; for since the Actors are supposed to go and
come from one end of it to the other, there cannot be any solid body between,
to hinder either their sight or motion; therefore the Ancients did use to choose
for the place of their Scene in Tragedies some public place, as that before
the gate of a Palace; and in their Comedies some part of a Town, where
different Streets met, and where the Houses of the principal Actors were
supposed to be; because these places were most fitly represented by the empty
Stage, adorned with the Figures of those Houses. Not that they always followed
this, for in the Suppliants, and in the Ion of Euripides, the Scene is before a
Temple; and in the Ajax of Sophocles, the Scene is before his Tent, pitched in
the Corner of a Forest; in the Rudens of Plautus, it is before the Temple, and
some scattered Houses, from whence one sees the Sea. And indeed all this
depends upon the Poets Invention, who according to his Subject chooses the
place, the most convenient for all that he has a mind to represent, and adorns
it with some agreeable Appearance.

One may judge from all this, how ridiculous was the Wall in the Thisbe of Poet
Theophile, it being placed upon the Stage; and Pyramus and She whispering
through it, and when they went out, the Wall sunk, that the other Actors might
see one another: For besides that the two places on each side of the Wall
represented the two Chambers of Pyramus and Thisbe; and that it was contrary to
all appearance of Reason, that in the same place the King should come and talk
with his Confidents, and much less that a Lion should come and fright Thisbe
there; I would fain know, by what supposed means in the action it self, this
Wall could become visible and invisible? and by what enchantment it was
sometimes in being, and then ceased quite to be again? The fault is not less in
those, who suppose things done upon the Stage, which have not been seen by the
Spectators, it not being probable they could have been done without being seen,
or else things must be supposed to have been invisible in the reality of the
action; upon which I think one of our Modern Poets fell into a great Error of
this kind, having placed a Bastion upon the Stage, and having afterward caused
the Town to be taken by that Bastion, which was never seen to be either
attacked or defended.

As for the Extent which the Poet may allow to the Scene he chooses, when it is
not in a House but open, I believe it may be as far as a man can see another
Walk, and yet not know perfectly that it is he; for to take a larger space would
be ridiculous, it being improbable that two people being each of them at one
end of the Stage, without any Object between, should look at one another, and
yet not see one another; whereas this distance, which we allow often,
contributes to the working of the Play by the mistakes and doubts which a man
may make by seeing another at a distance; to which the Theaters of the Ancients
do very well agree; for being, as they were, threescore yards in front among
the Romans, and little less among the Graecians, it was pretty near the
proportion we allow them.

I desire the Reader besides to consider, that if the Poet did represent by his
Stage all the Places and Rooms of a Palace, or all the Streets of a Town, he
should make the Spectators see not only all that happened in his Story, but
all that was done besides in that Palace, or in the Town; for there is no
Reason to hinder the Spectators from seeing all that, nor why they should see
one thing sooner than another, particularly considering, that since they can
see at the same time into the Garden of the Palace, and into the Kings Cabinet,
according to the Subject of the Play, they must likewise hear and see all that
is done there, besides the Theatral Action; except there were an Enchantment to
show only that which the Poet had a mind to, and to hide all that was not of
his Subject; besides the Stage would never be empty of any of the Actors,
except they went out of the Palace or Town, for since the place represents the
Palace with its Garden, Court, and other Appartments, one cannot forbear seeing
any one who should go from any of those Appartments into the Court or Garden;
and by consequent, as long as any of the Actors were in the Extent represented
by the Stage, they cannot avoid being seen: To which it cannot be answered,
that to mark the different Appartments, there may be Curtains to shut and draw;
for these Curtains are fit for nothing, but to toss their Inventors in them,
like Dogs in a Blanket.

I have spoken so clearly of this in my Terence Justified, that I have nothing
more to say against this gross Piece of Ignorance.

If it be said besides, that the Poet has the liberty of showing and hiding
what he pleases; I grant it, provided there be a probability that one thing be
seen, and another not; but there would need a singular Invention to contrive,
that ever and anon the same Persons, acting and speaking in a Palace, should be
seen, and not be seen; for that would be making of the Walls to sink and rise,
go backwards and forwards every moment. This may be enough to show the error of
those, who upon the same Scene represent Spain and France, making their Stage,
not only almost as big as the Earth, but likewise causing the same Floor to
represent at the same time things so far distant from one another, and that
without any apparent cause of so prodigious a change.

We may likewise observe, how they are mistaken, that suppose in one side of
the Stage one part of the Town, as for example, the Louvre, and on the other
side another part, as the Place Royal; thinking by this fine Invention to
preserve the unity of Place. Indeed if two Parts or Quarters of a Town, thus
supposed, were not far from one another, and the space between were really
empty of Houses, such a thing were not improper; but if between the two places,
there are many Houses and solid bodies, I would then ask, how it comes to pass
that those Houses do not fill up the empty place of the Stage; and how, if they
do, an Actor can see another Place at the other end of the Stage, beyond all
these Houses; Perparvam partem postulat Plautus loci devostris magnis atque
amoenis moenibus, Athenas quo sine Architectis conferat. Prolog Trucul.
and in a word, how this Stage, which is but an Image, represents a thing of
which it has no resemblance?

Let it then be settled for a constant Maxim, That the Proscenium, or floor of
the Stage, can represent nothing but some open place of an ordinary extent,
where those, that are represented by the Actors, might naturally be in the
truth of the Action; Ibi Samuel Petit.
and when we see it written, The Scene is at Aulis, Eleusis, or Argos, Non
totas Athenas sed Athenarum regionem illam deformabat haec Plauti scena, in qua
res istae quae hoc Dramate repraesentace bantur gestae dicebantur, etc.
it is not that the place, where the Actors appear, is all that Town or
Province, but only that all the Intrigues of the Play, as well what passes out
of the sight of the Spectators, as what they see, are treated in that Town, of
which the Stage takes up but the least part.

Thus in the Prologue of the last Comedy of Plautus, the Poet, explaining the
Place of the Scene, says, Et en suite id est Plotheensium regionem, eamque non
totam, sed extremam illius partem in qua habitare fingitur Phronesion meretrix.
that he begs of the Romans a little space in the middle of their noble
Buildings to transport thither the Town of Athens, without the help of
Architects; upon which Samuel Petit observes, that we ought not to imagine that
Plautus pretends to place all the City of Athens in that of Rome, but only a
small part of it, where the things represented in the Play did come to pass, to
wit, the Quarter of the Plotaeans, and of all that Quarter only the place,
where Phronesion lived, Athenas arcto, ita ut hoc est proscenium tantisper dum
transigimus hanc Comediam, hic habitat mulier nomine quae est Phronesion etc.
Prolog. Truc.
and he confirms this by the mending of two Greek words, of which he pretends
one Latin one was made by a mistake, and by a Verse, which he mends by some
Manuscripts which he had seen, making the Prologue then speak thus, I abridge
here the Town of Athens, upon this Stage, during this Play, and in this House
lives Phronesion.

These are the only Authorities of any either Ancient or Modern Authors, that I
have found concerning the place of the Scene. Castelvetro indeed says, that
Tragedy requires but a small space; but since he has not explained himself
better, we are not bound to guess in his favor.

These things then once settled for the Doctrine or Theory; I have thought of
what follows for the Practical part. The Poet does not desire to represent to
his Spectators all the particulars of his story, but the principal and most
moving circumstances, and thus he is obliged to some part out of the sight of
the Spectators; and indeed he ought not to do it, Paralipsis est, cum res
omittitur, quae adeo necessaria est, ut etiam non relata intelligatur: and per
annos december quot parts quot arma mente restituenda sint: sic non semper
legimus quoties cibum capiant aliaque naturae necessaria expediant. Id quod
sane sigura est, nam plebeia oration, nihil omittere. Scal. lib. 3. c. 77.
there being many things fitter to be hid then showed, he must then first of
all consider exactly, what persons he most wants and cannot well be without,
then let him choose a place where they may probably meet; for as there are
places which certain persons cannot leave without extraordinary motives; so
there are others, where they cannot be without great Reason. A Nun cannot leave
the place of her retreat but upon some pressing motive, and a woman of Honor
cannot accompany Messalina to the place of her infamous debauches.

Besides, he must observe, whether or no in his Subject there be not some
Circumstances or notable Incident, which it will be necessary to preserve for
the beauty of his Play, and which cannot happen but in a certain place, for
then he must accommodate to that the rest of his parts; so he that would show
Celadon half dead upon the Shore and found there by Galatea, must of necessity
place his Scene upon the bank of a River, and accommodate to it the rest of the
Theatral Action. Plautus followed this method in his Rudens, where he desired
to show the relics of a Shipwreck, and therefore was forced to place his Scene
on the Sea side, where all the rest of his Adventures are very dexterously
brought to pass.

The Poet, having chosen the place, must examine next, what things are fittest
to be showed with delight to the Spectators, and be sure to represent them; as
for the others not so fit to be seen, they must be told some way, that they may
be supposed done, and that in places so near the Stage, that the Actor who
tells them, may be supposed to have been there and back again, from the time he
has been absent from the Stage, or else he must be supposed gone before the
Play began, for then he may come as far off as you will. All which Terence has
observed in his third Comedy, where the two Slaves, Syrus, and Dromo, had been
sent a great while before for Clitophon's Mistress; and by consequent, all that
Syrus tells of their Negotiation is very credible, what time so ever there
needed for the dressing of the Lady, and the doing of all the rest.

And if the things or places to be spoke of in the Play, have been done too far
from the Scene, or are in themselves too remote, Nunc adest ubi opus est
Poetae: and vide hanc causam fuisse cur non ad villam diverter it, omnes villas
comicas suburbanas esse, commoditatem ipsam nunc explicat and ostendit. Donat.
in Euunch. Terent.
one must bring them nearer in the Representation; which may be done two ways;
either by supposing that they happened in other places nearer, when it is all
one to the Story, as Donatus observes, that in Plays, Country Houses are
always supposed to be in the Suburbs: Or else by supposing the places nearer
than they really are, when it is impossible to change them, but in this last,
one must observe not to bring known places so near, that the Spectator cannot
follow the Poet in his belief: As for example, if a man should bring the Alps,
or Pyrenoean Mountains in the place of Mount Valerian, that so he might bring
an Incident to Play, which else he could not; the Scene being at Paris; truly
the rigor of the Rule would be followed, as to the Unity of the Scene and its
Decencies, but the Beauty of the Art, which is to please and persuade, would be
lost: It Is therefore that I cannot approve of this force upon Nature, as to the
distance of places, which we see done in the Suppliants, and the Andromache of
Euripides, in the Captives of Plautus and some other pieces of Antiquity. I
speak not here of our Modern Poets, for all the World knows, there never was
any thing so monstrous in this point, as the Plays we have seen in Italy,
Spain, and France, and indeed except the Horatius of Corneille, I doubt whether
we have one Play, where the unity of the Scene is rigorously observed, at
least, I am sure I have not seen any.

It is necessary to give one advertisement more to the Poet in this place,
which is, that none of his Actors ought to come upon the Scene without some
apparent Reason, since else it is not probable they should be there; and he
must avoid to follow the Example of a Poet, who made a Princess come a purpose
out of her Tent upon the Stage which was before it, to say some passionate
complaints of a secret Misfortune of hers, for it was much more probable that
she should make them in her Tent: Therefore he ought to have feigned either
that the Company of some people in the Tent, was importunate and troublesome to
her, and that to avoid them she came out, or else he ought to have given her
some sudden impatience to look out, and then, as naturally upon reflections of
our Misfortunes we are carried to expressions of them, he might have put in her
mouth what words he had thought necessary for his Subject. Thus when the
passion of some person upon the Scene is to be showed by some Narration, which
the Spectator has had already, and which cannot be repeated without disgust,
one must suppose the thing to have been told that Person in some place near the
Scene, and make him come in near toward the end of it with words in his mouth,
expressing the knowledge of the thing, and causing the passion he is to show
afterward upon the Stage. The Examples of this are frequent among the
Ancients, and the imitation of them cannot but succeed well.

CHAP. VII.
The Extent of the Theatral Action, or of the time fit to be allowed a
Dramatick Poem.
THERE is no question more debated than This, which I am now treating. The
Poets make it their discourse, and the Players scarce talk of any thing else,
as well as those who frequent the Theaters; nay, the Ladies in their Ruelles
undertake to decide it, and all this while the thing is so little understood,
that I have a great deal of Reason to endeavor to explain it carefully. To
talk with some knowledge then of this Matter, one must consider that a
Dramatick Poem has two sorts of Time, each of which has a different and proper
lasting.

The first is the true Time of the Representation; for though this sort of Poem
be but an Image, and so ought to be considered as having a representative
Being; nevertheless one ought to consider, that there is a reality in the very
Representation, for realy the Actors are seen and heard, the Verses are really
pronounced, and one suffers really either pleasure or pain in assisting at
these Representations, and there is a real time spent in amusing the Audience,
that is from the opening of the Stage to the end of the Play: This time is
called the lasting of the Representation.

Of this time the measure can be no other, but so much time as will reasonably
spend the patience of the Audience, for this sort of Poem being made for
pleasure, it ought not to weary and fatigate the mind; and it must not likewise
be so short, as that the Spectators go away with an opinion of not having been
well nor enough diverted. In all this, Experience is the faithfullest Guide,
and tells us most commonly, that a Play cannot last above three hours without
wearying of us, nor less without coming short of pleasing us. I have seen a
very learned Gentleman, who was present at the Representation of the Pastor
Fido in Italy, who told me, that never was any thing so tedious, it having
lasted too long, and that this Play, which ravishes the Reader, because he can
lay it by when he will, had most horridly disgusted the Spectators.

There is another observation to be made here, which is, that the time, which
we allow the Representation, may be spent many other ways.

The Ancients had in their Tragedies many different mixtures, as Mimes,
Pantomimes, and other Buffoons. These Diversions pleased the people, and yet I
do not believe they made the Representations longer than those of our time; for
besides that these Interludes were short, their Tragedies themselves were not
of above a thousand Verses, and those Verses much shorter than our Heroic
ones. Therefore the Poet must take great care, that if his Play be of the
ordinary length, his Interludes be not too long, for let them be never so
pleasing they will disquiet the Spectator in the Impatience, which he will
naturally have to know the Event and Success of the Story.

The other Time of the Dramatick Poem, is that of the Action represented, so
^ar as it is considered as a true Action, and containing all that space which
is necessary to the performing of those things, which are to be exposed to the
knowledge of the Spectators, from the first to the last Act of the Play.

Now this Time is the chief Time, not only because it is natural to the Poem,
but because also it all depends on the Poets Invention, and is made known by
the Mouth of his Actors, according as his Ingenuity can suggest him the means
of doing it, and this is the Time so much talked of in our days. The three
Greek Tragicks, Aeschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles allow but a few hours to
the lasting of the Theatral Action in their Poems; but their Example was not
followed by the Poets who succeeded them; for Aristotle blames those of his
time, for giving too long an Extent to the lasting of their Plays, which makes
him set down the Rule, or rather renew it from the Model of the Ancients,
saying, That Tragedy ought to be comprehended in the Revolution of one Sun. I
do not know, whether this Rule was observed by those that came after him, as by
the Authors of those Tragedies which carry the Name of Seneca, which are
regular enough in this Circumstance: But for all those that I have seen, which
were made at the re-establishment of Learning in Spain and France, they are not
only irregular in this point, but in all the other most sensible Rules,
insomuch that one would admire, that Men of Learning should be the Authors of
them: When I first had the Honor to be near Cardinal Richelieu, I found the
Stage in great esteem, but loaded with all these Errors, and particularly with
that, of exceeding the Time, fit to be allowed in Tragedy; I spoke of it in
those Plays which were acted at Court; but I was generally opposed, and most
commonly turned into Ridicule both by the Poets, the Actors, and the
Spectators; and when I, to defend my self, began to allege the Ancients, I was
paid with this Answer, That what they had done was well for their time, but now
a days they would be laughed at, if they were here: As if the general Reason of
Mankind could grow old with time; and accordingly we see, that at last it has
prevailed over Prejudice and Ignorance, to make all the World confess, that the
Time of a Tragedy ought to be short and limited: But because, even in this,
there are different Interpretations given to Aristotle, and that some Poets do
believe, to circumscribe too narrowly the lasting of the Theatral Action would
be to spoil most of the Incidents; I will here give the true Explanation of the
Rule, and ways of practicing it with Success. Aristotle has said, that one of
the principal differences, which is between an Epick Poem and a Tragedy, is,
That the First is not limited in any time, and that the Second is comprehended
in the Revolution of one Sun. Now, though Aristotle does express himself in few
words, yet I cannot understand, how there was ground for so much Dispute: For
since he says, the Revolution of one Sun, it cannot be meant, the Annual
Revolution, for that is the time generally allowed to an Epick Poem, and there
is none of the most Indulgent, that have offered to extend the Rule to that
excess in Tragedy. It remains then to say, he means the Diurnal Revolution; but
as the day is considered two ways, the one with regard to the Primum mobile,
which is called the Natural day, and is of twenty four Hours, and the other by
the Suns presence upon the Horizon, between his rising and setting, which is
called the Artificial Day. It is necessary to observe, that Aristotle means
only the Artificial Day, in the extent of which, he makes the Theatral Action
to be comprehended. Castelvetro and Picolomini, upon Aristotle's Poetic, are of
this Opinion against Seigni, who extends the Rule to the Natural day of 24
hours.

The Reason of this is certain, and founded upon the Nature of Dramatick Poems;
for this sort of Poem ought to carry a sensible Image of the Actions of Humane
Life; now we do not see, that regularly men are busy before day* nor much
after night, and accordingly, in all well governed places, there are
Magistrates to watch those, who employ the night naturally designed for rest,
in the Actions of the day.

Besides, we have said, and it cannot be called in question; that the Theatral
Action ought to be one, and not comprehend any other Actions, which are not
necessary to the Intrigue of the Stage. Now how can that be observed in a Play
of 24 hours? would it not be a necessity, that the Persons Acting should sleep,
and eat, and busy themselves in many things, which would not be of the Subject
of the Play, and though the Poet should say nothing of it, yet the Spectators
must needs conceive it so.

But besides, the Action of the Stage is to be continued, and not interrupted
or broken. Now that could not be in a Play of twenty four hours; Nature could
not, without some rest, endure so long an Action; since all that Men can
commonly do, is to be in Action for the day time.

Moreover, we cannot omit a Reason of the Ancients, which originally is
Essential to Tragedy, which is, that the Choruses, which they used, did not
regularly use to stir off the Stage for the whole Play, or at least from the
time they first came on; and I do not know with what appearance of Probability,
the Spectators could have been persuaded, that People, who were never out of
their sight, should have staid twenty four hours in that place; nor how in the
truth of the Action, they could imagine, that those, whom they represented, had
passed all that time without satisfying some necessities of Nature.

After all, we can never better understand Aristotle, than by those three
Excellent Tragic Poets, whom he always proposes for Examples, who have
regularly observed, not to give above 12 hours to their Plays: And I do not
think, that there are any of their Works which do comprehend the whole space
between the rising and seeting of the Sun.

It being most certain, that their Stage generally opens after Sunrise, and is
shut up before Sunset, as one may observe in the Comedies of Plautus and
Terence. Scen cum negotium totum sex ^ctove horis peragitur l. 3. c. 97. Poet.
It Is therefore that Rossi, an Italian, allows but eight or ten hours. And
Scaliger, more rigorously but more reasonably, would have the whole Action
performed in six hours. It were even to be wished, that the Action of the Poem
did not take up more time, than that of the Representation, but that being
hard, and almost impossible, in certain occasions the Poet has the Liberty to
suppose a longer time by some hours, in which the Music that marks the
Intervals of the Acts, and the Relations of the Actors upon the Stage, while
the others are busy off of it, with the natural desire of the Spectators to
see the Event, do all contribute very much, and help to deceive the Audience,
so as to make them think, there has passed time enough for the performance of
the things represented.

What we have said hitherto of Aristotle's Rule might suffer some difficulty in
those Plays, which represent Actions that happened in the Night, if we did not
own, (...).
that he has foreseen the Objection, when he says, That Tragedy endeavors to
comprehend its Action in the Revolution of one Sun, Poet. c. 5. aut parum
variare. Vict p. 52.
or in changing that time a little; for by that means he lets us know, that the
Poet is not always bound to place his Action between Sunrising and
Sunsetting, Aut paulisper variare. Riccoboni in Poet Arist.
but may take a like time out of 24 hours, and place his Action in the night,
as in the Rhesus of Euripides, and some other Plays of the Ancients, of which
we have nothing but Fragments in Athenaeus. Nay, he may take some of his time
in the day, and the rest in the night, as Euripides has done in his Electra,
and Plautus in his Amphitryon; they that, upon this of Aristotle, have said,
that he gave leave to exceed the Revolution of a Sun, and go some hours beyond,
did not well understand him, having taken the word Changing for Exceeding.

But without standing upon this scrupulous niceness, I must tell the Poet, that
he need not fear to spoil his Play, by straitning his Incidents in so small a
compass of time; for quite contrary, it is that, which shall make his Play
agreeable and wonderful; it is that, which will afford him the means of
introducing extraordinary surprises and passions, which he may carry, as far as
he will; let him consider well Horatius, Cinna, Polyeuct, and Nicomedes, the
latter works of Mounsieur Corneille, and I believe, he cannot but agree to it.

Now to contribute for my share to the necessary means of practicing this Rule,
I here deliver my thoughts.

First, Let the Poet be very careful in choosing the day, in which he will
comprehend all the Intrigues of his Play, and that choice ought generally to be
made from the most Noble Incident of the whole Story, that is, from that
Incident, which is to make the Catastrophe, and to which all others do tend,
like Lines to their Center; and if he be free to take what day he will, his
best will be to pitch upon that, which will most easily bear the Assemblage and
Concurrence of all the Incidents of the Stage. So Corneille, being to represent
the Death of Pompey, took the last day of his Life, because he could not do
otherwise; but when he was to make his Cinna, he chose what day he pleased for
to facilitate the bringing in of the Conspiration of Cinna, with the
deliberation of Augustus, whether he should forsake the Empire or no.

The choice being thus made, the next slight is, to open your Stage, as near,
as it is possible, to the Catastrophe, that you may employ less time in the
negotiation part, and have more Liberty in extending the Passions and
Discourses which may please; but to Execute this luckily, the Incidents must be
prepared by ingenious Contrivances, and that must appear upon occasion in the
whole Conduct of the Action.

This we may observe in the Jo^ of Euripides, the Amphytrion of Plautus, and
the Andria of Terence. Corneille practices it likewise well in Horatius and
Cinna. The Stage in Horatius is opened but a moment before the Combat of the
three Horatius's against the three Curiatius's, who are told of their being
chosen to fight against each other, as soon as they come upon the Stage. And
Cinna had already made his Conspiracy, before the opening of the Stage, which
opens just before the Sacrifice, which was to be the pretext of the Execution
of it.

Things being thus disposed, the Poet must next study to bring together the
Incidents all in one day, so Artfully, that there appear no Force nor
Constraint in the effecting of it: And to succeed in this, he must rectify the
time of those things, that happened before the opening of the Stage; and
suppose, some of them to come to pass that day, though they really happened
before; but he must join them with so much Art, as they may seem to be
naturally connexed, and not put together by the Poets Invention.

Thus Sophocles makes, that Creon, who was sent to Delphos to consult the
Oracle, comes back just at the same time that the news comes to Thebes, of the
Death of Polybius King of Corinth, though these two things did not happen on
the same day. So Plautus makes Amphitryon return victorious that very night
that Alcmena is brought to Bed of Hercules. But that which one must
particularly have a care of, is, not to conjoyn the time of the Incidents with
so much ^^cipitation, that Probability be destroyed by it, as in the Suppliants
of Euripides, the Captiv's of Plautus and some other pieces of the Ancients,
which I cannot approve of, though for some other Considerations they are not
unexcusable. They are indeed according to the Rule of time, but without any of
the Graces of the Art. In a word, we must still remember, that Aristotle in
giving his Rule of the confining Tragedy to the Revolution of one Sun, means,
that the Poet ought so to press his imagination, as to order all the Events of
his Theater in that time, but so, as not to offend Probability, which is always
the principal Rule, and without which all the others become no Rules at all.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Preparation of the Incidents.
IT may be some may Imagine, that the Instruction we are going to give the Poet
in this Discourse, will be injurious to him, and, contrary to our promise,
destroy all the Graces of the Stage: for say they, if the Incidents must be
prepared some time before they happen, without doubt they will likewise be
prevented, and so be no longer surprising, in which consists all their beauty,
and without which the Spectator has no pleasure, nor can the Poet pretend to
any glory in his Art.

To this I answer, That there is a great deal of difference between preparing
an Incident, and preventing it, for an Incident is then prevented, when it is
foreseen, but it ought not to be foreseen though it be prepared.

To explain our selves better upon this matter, we are to understand that there
are some things in the Composition of a Theatral Action, which do carry the
minds of the Spectators naturally and almost necessarily, to the knowledge of
some others; so that as soon as the first are either said or done, one may
conclude easily those that depend upon them, and that is called an Incident
prevented; and we do allow all these Preventions to be faulty in a Dramatick
Poem, because they spoil the Events, and make them of no effect in the
Imagination of the Spectators, who most commonly expect things contrary to what
they see, and seem to be promised.

But there are another sort of things, which are to be laid as a foundation to
build others upon, Arist. c. x. poet.
according to the Rules of Probability, In multis oeconomia Comicormn Poetarum
ita se habet, ut casu putet Spectator venisse quod consilio Scriptorum factum
sit. Donat. in Terent. Andr. and in Eunuch. Idem aliis verbis.
and yet nevertheless do not at all discover these second ones, which they are
to produce; not only because there is no necessity they should come to pass in
consequence of the first; but also because the first are showed with colors
and pretexts so probable, according to the state of the Affairs of the Stage,
that the Minds of the Spectators pass them over, not thinking that from thence
there can spring any new Incident, so that the preparation of an Incident, is
not to tell or do any thing that can discover it, but rather that may give
occasion to it without discovering it; and all the Art of the Poet consists in
finding Colorus and Pretexts to settle these Preparations, Vbique vero aliquid
jacit seminum ad futuram messem, ut auditorem quasi praegustatione alliciat ad
epulas. Similis praeparatio in prime, cum enim recipiendus esset Aeneas
proponit hoc intelligendum ex pictura, in ea namque ipse quoque pictus erat.
lib. 4. c. 26.
so, that the Spectator may be convinced, that that is not thrown into the Body
of the Play for any other design, than what appears to him. Scaliger has owned
this to be necessary, even in the Epick Poems, and calls it, The, Seeds of a
future Harvest; as if he would say, that just as the Grain or Seed contains in
it self the force and virtue of producing in its time Flowers and Fruit; and
yet Nature has so framed it, as that one cannot discover any likelihood of such
a Production, by the sight of the Seed; so must the Discourses and other
considerations to prepare an Incident, enclose it so secretly, and hide it so
well, as nothing can be guessed of the Event from them. This Excellent Man
brings diverse Examples of this, and particularly, that taken from the Aeneid of
Virgil: For he observes, that to make way for the kind reception, which Dido
gives to Aeneas and his Trojans, Virgil tells us, how Queen Dido had caused the
Story of the War of Troy to be painted in a Temple, where Aeneas himself was
represented, fighting in the midst of the Greeks; for then this painting seems
only an Object for the admiration of Aeneas, to see that the Trojans
misfortunes were already known all the World over; but the secret is, that it
serves to give a foundation in the Mind of Dido to the kind welcome she makes
to those, to whose ill fortune in all probability she had already given some
compassion.

As for the Dramatick Poem, Reprehensus est Poeta, quia semina nulla hujus
fabulae exitus antea iacta erant, nec quicquam ipsum adiuuant superi^^res
parts Tragoediae. Victor. in Arist. Poet. p. 149.
I have not met with any Examples in all the Authors that I have seen, except
in one Victorius in his Commentaries upon Aristotle's Poetic; and neither there
does he do it by way of Instruction, but simply by way of Remark upon the
Tragedy of Medea, made by Euripides, of which he says, that the Catastrophe is
defective, because the Poet unfolds the Plot by the flight of Medea in an
Enchanted Chariot, of which before hand he had not given the least hint or
preparation, the preceding Events contributing no ways to this last. These two
passages of Scaliger and Victorius came not to my knowledge, till after I had
made all the necessary Observations upon this Subject; but as I never affected
to be thought the Inventor of any thing, so am I never better pleased, than
when having by my Meditations attained to a certain knowledge, I discover that
others more able, and of greater reputation, had said the same things before I
thought them; and for that very reason I have not dissembled these two passages
which make to our Subject, and if the esteem due to these Excellent Authors
deprives me of the honor of having said the first thing, of which I thought I
was the only Inventor, I shall draw that advantage at least from them, that
they give Authority to my thoughts; and the Poet cannot refuse the Counsel I
give him, of preparing ingeniously his Incidents, when Scaliger esteems Virgil
for having done it with prudence, and Victorius condemns Euripides for having
failed in it. I shall give two Examples of both these out of Monsieur
Corneille, the first is in Rhodogune, and the other in his Theodora.

In the first Example, he kills Cleopatra by the violence of a Poison, so
strong, that Rhodogune discovers the effect of it, before Antiochus has
pronounced ten Verses. Indeed, that Cleopatra was wicked and enraged enough to
poison her self, that she might poison her Son and Rhodogune, That is very well
prepared in all the precedent Acts, where her hatred, ambition, and fury appear
to the height, having killed her husband with her own hand, and destroyed one
of her Sons to preserve her self upon the Throne; but that the effect of the
poison should be so sudden, as to be discovered in so small a space of time,
That is not prepared enough, because, the thing being rare in it self,
Cleopatra should have said, when she hopes by it to destroy Antiochus and
Rhodogune, how strong a Poison she had prepared, and how sudden its Effect
would be, and should have expressed joy at it; by which means, she would have
prepared the Incident, without preventing it. The Event, I say, would have been
prepared; for so sudden a Poison, as she had mentioned, would have been
expected to work that Effect it did upon her self; but withal it would not
have been prevented, because the Audience would have thought, that she had said
it as designing it for the destruction of the Innocent, and so there would not
have been any means of foreseeing, that she should have suffered by it her self.

The other Example is in all the Exactness that a Dramatick Poem can wish,
which must needs make us confess, that when Monsieur Corneille has well
meditated upon the conduct of an Incident, there is no Author, either among the
Ancient or Modern Poets, that executes it better.

In his Theodora, there are five notable Incidents, to wit the death of Flavia;
the deliverance of Theodora from that infamous place, to which she had been
condemned; the death of Didymus and Theodora by the hands of Marcella; the
death of Marcella by her own hand; and the wound of Placidus endeavoring to
kill himself; all these Incidents are so well prepared, that there is not one,
which might not probably come to pass in consequence of those things which
preceded it.

That Flavia should dye that day, is not strange; since it is often said that
she is desperately ill; but when that is said, it is only to give a pretext to
the fury of Marcella, and to those violent means she uses of being revenged of
Theodora, without giving an Impression that her Daughter should really dye so
soon,

That Didymus should expose himself to save Theodora, in giving her his
Clothes; that might well be, since he appears very passionately in love with
her, and that Theodora did not reject his love but only out of Religion; but
when this passion is talked of upon the Stage, it seems in appearance to be, to
foment the Jealousy of Placidius, without any likelihood of foreseeing so
Extraordinary an Action.

That Marcella should with her own hands kill Didymus and Theodora, that is
probable, she knew the love of Placidius, and the resolution he had taken to
save the two Lovers, she saw him armed, and followed by a great number of his
Friends, all these are preparations enough to make that Woman revenge the death
of her Daughter, and all the injuries she had received by one furious transport
in an occasion so precipitated; and nevertheless, though one could not from all
these things expect this Event, yet they have all their necessary Colors, when
they appear upon the Stage.

The same happens in the death of Marcella; she had persecuted Placidius, and
injured him in the person he most tenderly loved; she sees him with his Sword
drawn, and being animated with nothing but furious Sentiments, she was resolved
not to fall under the power of her Enemy, from these Circumstances it follows,
that probably she might kill her self, and that she was pressed to make that
desperate end.

As for Placidius, who endeavors to kill himself, after having seen his
Mistress murdered by the hand of his Enemy, it is an Incident well prepared,
because of the Excessive love he bore her, and by the disposition he appears to
be in, to forsake all the Grandeur of the World to possess her, who was his
Sovereign felicity; and nevertheless, of all these Considerations one could
presume naturally nothing more, than that he would do all he could to save her.
Thus so many different Events arise from one another, and without any
precipitation in the Body of the Story. I know not how Mr. Corneille may value
this Play, but I say that in my mind it is his Masterpiece, for though in the
Subject, the punishment, to which Theodora is condemned, does something ossend
the modesty of the Spectators; yet all the rest is in so much regularity, and
there is so much Art and Conduct showed by the Poet, that if the choice of the
Subject had answered the skill of the Author, I believe we might propose this
Play as a most perfect Model.

He that would cite here all the Plays of the Ancients, where the Incidents are
well prepared, would be obliged to copy whole Poems, for they have always done
it with great Art and Judgment. See the Curculion of Plautus, there is a Ring,
which serves to find out Planasion, to be a freeborn Woman and the Sister of
Terapontigonus, when 'twas no ways possible to foresee this Event; but it is so
well prepared in all the Play, where this Ring is employed in a great many
other Intrigues, that it is not at all forced, though much against the
Expectation of the Spectators: And when this Ring is stolen from the Soldier,
and that from thence it runs through a great many hands, it is for some present
action, which has no regard to the Catastrophe, the event of which could not
thence be foreseen.

And when in the 4th Act, Cappadore says, that he had paid but ten Mines of
Silver for that Maid, it is probably, only to explain the profit the makes by
selling her for thirty; but it is in effect to prepare the Narration which
Planesion makes her self of her own Adventure.

So in his Trinummus, Carmides arrives at a nick of time, from a long Voyage,
for a very diverting Incident, meeting with a Cheat which was supposed to come
from him, but That is very well prepared by the discourse of Calicles in the
first Act, and by that of his Slave in the second. And nevertheless when
Calicles speaks of the absence of his Friend, it is only to make known the
fidelity he owes him; and that which the Slave says of his return, is only to
make his Son Telesbonicus be afraid of his Fathers just severity.

In a word, I deliver here all that I can say of this matter, which is, that
the Events are always precipitated, when there has been nothing said before,
from whence they might probably proceed, as when a man appears expressly in the
end of the Play, of whom there has not been one word said all along, and yet
this man comes to make the winding up of the Plot. Or when toward the end,
there is some important Action done, which has no coherence with all that
passed before; for though the Spectators love to be surpised, yet it is still
with probability; and they are not bound to suppose any thing, but what follows
naturally these things which the Poet shows. The Theater is a world by it self,
where all is comprehended in the notions and extent of the Action represented,
and has no communication with the great World, only so far as the Poet himself
extends it, by the knowledge which with Art he dispenses abroad. But the main
thing to be remembered, is, that all that is said or done as a Preparative or
Seed for things to come, must have so apparent a Reason, and so powerful a
Color to be said and done in that place, that it may seem to have been
introduced only for that, and that it never give a hint to prevent those
Incidents, which it is to prepare.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Catastrophe or Issue of the Dramatick Poem.
I Do not think it necessary here to trouble my self much about the explication
of this word Catastrophe. It Is taken ordinarily, I know, for some sad
calamitous disaster, which terminates some great design, for my part I
understand by this word a sudden change of the first Dispositions of the Stage,
Catastrophe conversio negotij exagitati in tranquillitatem non expectatam.
Scal. l. 1. c. 9.
and the return of Events, which change all the Appearances of the former
Intrigues, quite contrary to the expectation of the Audience. Comedies have
generally happy Catastrophes, or at least they end in some buffoonry or
fooling, as the Stichus of Plautus; but as for serious Tragedies, they always
end either by the Misfortune of the Principal Actors, or by a Prosperity such
as they could wish for; we have Examples of both in the Poems of the Ancients,
though that latter way, of terminating their Tragedies, was not so common with
them, as it has been in our time. But now, I come to the Observations, which
may be useful in all sorts of Poems, as they are common to all sorts of
Catastrophes.

The principal Observation has a dependence on what has been said in the last
Chapter, which was, that Incidents, not prepared, offended against Probability,
by being too much hastened at last: For this fault appears no where so much as
in the Catastophe. First, the Catastrophe is the term of all the Affairs of the
Stage, by consequent they must be disposed by times, that they may arrive there
easily. Secondly, it is the Center of the Poem, therefore all the other parts,
like lines, cannot be drawn straight to any other point. Thirdly, it is the last
expectation of the Audience therefore all things ought to be so well ordered,
that when they fall out, it may not be asked, by which way they came to pass,
and therefore there needs for it, as for the most considerable Event, the
greatest and most judicious Preparations. Aristotle, and all his Followers,
would have the Catastrophe drawn from the very middle of all the business of
the Stage, and that the very knots, which seem to embarrass the whole Subject,
should at last serve for the opening of it, as if they were laid for that
purpose. Therefore they always valued this way of ending a Tragedy, much more
than That which was founded upon the presence or favor of some God; and when
they did make use of Gods in Machines, they always desired, that in the Body of
the Play, there should be reasonable Dispositions for it, either by the
particular care that That God took of that Hero, or by the interest the God
might take in the Theatral Action, or by a natural and rational expectation of
the assistance of some God, or some such Inventions.

Yet this first Rule may seem useless in those Plays, where the Catastrophe is
known either by the Story or Title, as the Death of Caesar, and such like,
Therefore in this Case, without omitting any of the necessary preparations we
have mentioned, one may do thus.

The Poet must so manage all the Affairs of the Stage, that the Spectators may
be inwardly persuaded, that That person, whose life and fortune are threatened,
ought not to die: For by this Art he keeps them in sentiments of pity and
commiseration, which increase and become very tender at the last point of his
Misfortune, and the more one finds motives to believe, he should not die, the
more one is concerned, when one knows he must, the injustice of his Enemies
raises a stronger aversion in us for them, and his disgrace is pitied even with
tears. We have seen the Examples of this in Mariamne, and the Earl of Essex,
though, in many other things, they were very defective Plays.

But if the Catastrophe be not known, and that the Poet designs, that, for the
greater Ornament of his Play, it should unfold all the Intrigues of it by a
suprizing Novelty; he must be very careful not to discover it too soon, and
particularly order it so that none of his preparations do prevent it, for not
only then it would become useless and disagreeable, but as soon as ever it
should be known, the Theater would grow dull, and be without Charms for the
Audience: And we are not in this Circumstance to govern our selves by what
happens in a Play, that we have seen, or of which the Catastrophe is known; for
they do still please, because the Spectators in that case consider things only
as they pass, and give them no greater extent, than the Poet would have them.
They confine all their understanding to the pretexts and colors, which he
advances, without going any further, and being all along satisfied of the
Motives of the chief Actions, they do not prevent those, which are not made
known to them, so that, their imagination being deceived by the art of the
Poet, their pleasure lasts still. Whereas in the other Case, when the
Catastrophe is prevented by the want of Art in the Poet, the Spectators are
disgusted, not so much that they know the thing, as because they are persuaded,
that they ought not to know it, and their discontent in these occasions
proceeds less from their knowledge, though certain, than from the imprudence
and ill conduct of the Poet.

The last Rule is, that the Catastrophe do entirely finish the Dramatick Poem,
that is, that there be nothing left of what the Spectators ought to know, for
if they have reason to ask, What became of such a one concerned in the
Intrigues of the Stage? or if they have just Subject to enquire, What are the
Sentiments of one of the chief Actors, after the last event which makes the
Catastrophe? Then, I say, the Play is not well finished, and wanted yet a
stroke or two, and if the Spectators are not yet fully satisfied, the Poet
certainly has not done his duty. 'Twas a considerable fault in Panthea, who by
her death leaves a reasonable desire to the Spectators, to know what became of
Araspes, who was so passionately in love with her: Whereas on the contrary, in
the Earl of Essex, Queen Elizabeth speaks as she ought, after the death of the
Earl, and so finishes the Catastrophe perfectly.

But to avoid this inconvenience, the Poet must not fall into another, that is,
to add to the Catastrophe superfluous Discourses and Actions, of no use as to
the concluding the Play, which the Spectators neither look for, nor are willing
to hear; such is the Complaint of the Wife of Alexander, Son of Herod, after
the death of her Husband, of which I shall speak in the Chapter of Pathetick
Discourses; and such is likewise the Explication of the Oracle in Horatius, for
that having had nothing to do with the Plot, the Spectators never think on it,
nor care to have it interpreted.

I might lengthen this Discourse with many more Remarks, as well upon the
Tragedies as the Comedies of the Ancients; but since all Catastrophes turn upon
these Principles, which I have laid down, it will be easy in reading their
Works to see which are well or ill finished. The Tragic Poets have generally
taken more care than the Comic, and amongst the Comic, Terence is the most
exact; for Aristophanes and Plautus have left the best part of theirs
unfinished. I leave our Modern Authors to themselves, they generally are
willing to be believed infallible, and when any body shows them that they might
have done better, they are so much the more angry, as they find themselves
convinced, and not able to oppose the strength of reason.

The End of the second Book.
THE ART OF THE STAGE. Book the Third.
Chapter the First.
Of the Actors or Persons to be brought upon the Stage, and what the Poet is to
observe about them.
I Do not design here to instruct the Players, but the Poet, who will find in
this Chapter some Observations for the better disposing of the Drammatick Poem,
as to the persons that are to appear upon the Stage.

But before we begin them, it will not be amiss to observe to the Reader a
thing which will make us make a wish in favor of our Stage, when we reflect
upon the Magnificency of the Representations of the Ancients, which is, that in
many places of their Poems, where we see but one Actor named, he did not appear
alone upon the Stage; but on the contrary, when it was a Prince, or Princess,
or some Person of Eminent Quality, he was followed by a very great Retinue,
suitable to his Dignity; sometimes of Courtiers, sometimes of Soldiers, and
always of Persons proper to the Subject of the Play: Nay, a rich Citizen
appeared with a great many Servants, and a public Curtizan, if she were of
free condition, and Mistress of her own actions, had always a great many Maids
and Servants about her; and in short, Persons of Quality were always well
accompanied, except some particular reason required they should be alone, which
may be easily perceived by the Verses, or the Nature of the Action. So Ajax in
Sophocles is alone when he kills himself; and this the Ancients did for two
Reasons; first to fill their Stage, which was much bigger than ours, and the
other to make their Representation more magnificent; whereas now five or six
People fill our Stage, and besides, the Players cannot be at the charge of more
for pure Ornament sake.

The truth of this appears in most of the Ancients Plays, but particularly in
the seven before Thebes, where Eteocles, who opens the Scene, seems to be
alone, because there is no body speaks but he, but it is clear that he was
followed by a very great number of Persons, to whom he addresses himself, and
gives them different Orders for the Defense of the Town.

Orestes seems to be alone in the Electra of Euripides, and yet one may see
that he speaks to a great many Servants who followed him, whom he commands to
enter his Sisters house, who did not know him, and is angry with her Husband
for letting so many People of Quality come into his house. I cannot omit here
the mistake that some Authors have made in interpreting Euripides; for having
not observed that Hyppolitus is followed by a company of Hunters, with whom he
comes back singing a Hymn in the honor of Diana, they have taken him to be
alone, and that they who sung were the Chorus of the Tragedy; whereas the
Chorus in that Play is composed of Women, followers of Phoedra, who only come
upon the Stage after Hyppolitus and his Company have sung their Hymn, and one
of them Entertains him some time about the respect due to Venus; after which
Dialogue Hyppolitus commands his People to go and prepare his Dinner at his own
house, out of which they follow him again, when by his Fathers command he is
forced to withdraw.

But Plutarch affords us a proof of the state with which the chief Actors used
to appear upon the Stage, in a pleasant Story he tells in the life of Phocion;
for a Player being to represent a Queen and his Attendance, which was to be
numerous, not being ready, he refused to come upon the Stage, whereupon
Melanthius Choragus, whose Office it was to see all things well in order,
thrust him by force upon the Stage, with these words, Do not thou see that
Phocion 's Wife, whose Husband governs us all, is seen every day in the Street
attended but with one Maid: At which all the People fell a laughing, and by
that Railery he excused the defect of the Representation; which by the by may
serve our Poets for an Advertisement, to Read carefully the Works of the
Ancients, and not trust to the Printed Glosses or Interpreters; but now let us
come to our other more necessary Observations.

And to begin, it has been often asked how many Actors may be brought on at
once, speaking and acting upon the Stage, in the same Scene. Some have confined
us to Three, taking their Rule from Horace's Art of Poetry; but Experience is
the best Judge in these Cases; and Horace, I believe, is not so well understood
as he should be. It Is true, that the Stage having attained to have Three Actors
in the time of Sophocles, who brought Drammatick Poetry to its perfection; the
Greeks seldom bring any more than Three Actors at a time upon the Stage, if
there be a Fourth, he generally is silent; and indeed a Scene is not ill filled
when Three chief Actors are discoursing at once upon the Scene. But the Answer
to this Question depends not so much upon the number of Persons, as upon the
order or confusion that would follow if too many were speaking in the same
Scene; and therefore I am of Opinion, that the Poet may bring on as many as he
pleases, provided neither their number, nor their discourses do confound the
Spectators Attention; and there will be no confusion if the Actors Names, and
their Concerns be so known as to give a true understanding of what is in
Action: Three Actors indeed seldom bring any confusion, because there is no
Spectator so simple, but he can easily distinguish their words and designs; but
still the Poet must consider what necessity he lies under; for if his Subject
requires that Four or Five should appear and discourse in the same Scene, if he
performs it with distinction, and without obscurity, I don't believe any body
will say he goes against the Rules, there being nothing there against
probability. The Examples of this are frequent in the Comic Poets, both Greek
and Latin; and as for Horace, Ne quarta laboret.
his Advice is only that the Poet do not bring a Fourth Person upon the Stage
so as to embarass or confound the business in hand, or perplex the Discourse of
the other Three.

Our second Observation is, that the Poet must bring no Actor upon the Stage
that is not known to the Spectators as soon as he appears, and that not only as
to his Name and Person, but also as to the Sentiments he brings upon the Stage,
else the Spectator will be puzzled, and the Poets fine Discourses will be lost,
because the Audience will not know how to apply them; and I have seen often 20
or 30 noble Verses thrown away because the Spectator knew not him that spoke
them, nor how to apply them. The Ancients never failed in this, to which the
Choruses were a great help to them; for they never leaving the Stage, generally
as soon as a new Actor came on, they named him with some expressions of fear,
astonishment or joy, according as the Subject required; but if he were a
stranger, and unknown to the Chorus, then he named himself, giving some account
of his good or bad Fortune, or some confident of his, declared it without
affectation, either by pitying him, or seeming to be concerned for the doubtful
success of his Enterprise.

As for us who have no Choruses, we must, instead of them, make some of those
Actors speak who are already upon the Stage, and known; and if we open an Act
with Persons unknown, they must themselves declare their condition, or some of
their Followers must by the by, and without affectation insinuate it: But if it
be necessary that an Actor should be incognito both as to his Name and Quality,
in order to his being known with more pleasure toward the end of the Play,
then the Spectators must at least know that he is incognito; and in a word all
confusion must be avoided, and it will be well if the Spectators conceive
something in general concerning the Inteterests of this new Actor; not indeed
so far as to discover or prevent an Incident, but so much as is necessary to
facilitate their easier comprehending all that is to be said afterward.

The Third Observation is, That the Actors do always come on, and go off of the
Scene with some probable reason, which makes it more proper for them to do so
than otherwise, and yet that must not be done grossly, but by nice and natural
pretexts. For any Art that discovers it self too much, loses its grace; and yet
it is not necessary that the reason which makes the Actors go on and off should
always take effect; quite contrary, the less things succeed according to their
first appearance, the more pleasing and surprising they are. It Is one of the
beauties of the Stage, that things cross one another, and so produce unforeseen
Events; and when an Actor is upon the Stage, his good or bad Fortune is in the
Poets hands, though the reason that brought him on be not at all conformable to
what he meets with there.

As for the Practice of this Rule, I must desire our Poets to have recourse to
the Ancients, and to observe with what Art they govern themselves; for the
Reading of one Poem of theirs, particularly of Sophocles, will give them more
light in this matter, than all the Allegations with which I might swell this
Treatise.

The Fourth Observation is about a Dispute which I have often been witness to,
which is, Whether or no in the same Act the same Actor may appear more than
once? First, To answer this Question right, it is necessary to distinguish the
Plays; for in a Comedy, the Subject whereof is taken from the meaner sort of
People, it would not be amiss that the Persons concerned should appear more
than once in an Act, because they are People whose business is not weighty,
their actions quick, and the manner of their life unquiet, and their Intrigues,
most of them happening in the Neighborhood, so that they need but a little
time to go and come; but in a Tragedy, where they are most commonly Kings and
Princes, where their manner of living is very different, their actions all full
of gravity and weight, it does not appear easy nor reasonable to make them
appear more than once in an Act; for their Intrigues are generally with Persons
remote, their Designs great, and which are not to be brought to pass but by
slow means, and with great circumspection, so that more time is regularly
required to move all the Springs of their Affairs.

Secondly, In both these sorts of Poems, one must consider the condition of the
Persons; for in a Slave or Servant it would be nothing to see him often in an
Act, but it would be something strange in a Man or Woman of Quality, if some
very extraordinary reason did not oblige them to precipitate their Actions.

Thirdly, We are to consider how far an Actor went, and if the thing he went
about required much time; or if he had some reason to return so soon; for the
place he went to being near, and having but a short business, and being obliged
to return immediately, all these are circumstances which may bring an Actor
upon the Stage twice in an Act, without offending against the Rules. Plautus
does it very ingeniously in many of his Comedys, but I know no Example of it in
any Tragedys of the Ancients. Monsieur Corneille indeed in his Horatius brings
his Hero twice on in the same Act, because he went but from the Hall of his
Palace to his Fathers Chamber, to take his leave of him before he engaged in
the Combat between the Six Brothers. But for my part, I should counsel the
Poet to do it as little as possible, and with great circumspection; for,
methinks, it is a little undecent to see a Person of Quality go and come so
suddenly, and Act with so much appearance of precipitation.

The Fifth Observation is about a thing which the Ancients never failed in, and
the Modern Writers often have, which is, to bring their Principal Actors on,
upon the opening of the Stage, and indeed with a great deal of reason, because
their Persons being considered as the Principal Subject of all the Adventures
of the Play, and as the Center to which all the other Lines are to be drawn,
the Spectators desire to see them at first, and all that is said or done before
their Arrival gives them more impatience than pleasure, and is often reckoned
for nothing: And besides, they often take the first Actor of Quality for the
Hero of the Play, and when they are undeceived, find themselves in confusion
and perplexed; therefore those Authors who bring not on their Chief Actor till
the Third or Fourth Act, are much to blame, for that causes in the Audience so
much impatience and uncertainty, that it is afterward very hard to satisfy
them; not but that in some occasions one may luckily defer the bringing on a
chief Actor for a while, but then that must give some extraordinary grace to
the Play, and be ordered so, as not to confound the Spectators Application.

The Sixth Observation is, That the chief Actors ought to appear as often, ans
stay as long as possible upon the Stage; First, because they are always the
best Actors, and so satisfy most; then they are the best clothed, and so
please the Spectators, who are taken with their Dress: And lastly, because they
have the finest things to say, and the noblest passions to show; in which, to
say truth, consists the greatest charm of the Stage; and besides, the whole
Event being to turn upon them, the Spectator rejoices and grieves with them,
fears and hopes as they do, and always has some inward concern according to the
present state of their Affairs. This makes me not approve of Seneca, who in a
Play where Agamemnon is the chief Hero, and is killed, makes him say not above
two and twenty Verses in all. The best Advice I can give the Poet in this
matter, is not to have any thing told by way of Narrative, which may be any
ways decently performed by the chief Actors themselves; but if the Subject
cannot suffer that the chief Actors should appear every Act, he must endeavor
that that Act where they do not appear, be filled with some great circumstance
of the Story, and that the second Parts may repair the want of the first by
some noble and majestic Adventure, else it is certain the Play will pall and
languish.

The Seventh and last Observation of this Chapter is particular enough, and it
may be at first will not be rellished by all our Poets; but I desire them to
examine it in the practice, before they judge of it here upon the Paper. To
explain my self rightly, we must observe, that where an Actor appears first
upon the Stage, he may come on in one of these Three Dispositions, either in a
moderate, calm temper, or in a violent passion, or in a disposition something
moved, but not raised to the high pitch of Transport; and that may be called a
half-passion. Now in the first case an Actor may easily acquit himself, for it
comes so near our natural temper, that few fail to personate it well. In the
second case likewise of violent Transport, good Actors seldom fail to represent
it well, because Experience has taught them how far their Voice and Action is
to be strained in such a case; but as it is much easier to go from one
Extremity to another, than to stop with discretion in the middle; so the
Actors, though they can easily represent these two Sentiments directly
opposite, they do not always succeed when they are to come upon the Stage with
the Sentiment of a half-passion, which passes a little our natural
Tranquillity, and yet rises not to the extremest violence; and the reason is,
that not being stirred of themselves, and yet not daring to rise to the highest
pitch of violence, it is hard for them to find that just temper to enter into
this half passion; from hence it comes, that they often provoke the laughter of
the Audience, by delivering with an ill grace, and unconcernedly, that which
requires some Emotion, or appearing overallarm'd at that which does not in its
nature so highly affect the Spectators. Therefore my Observation to the Poet
is, that he first put some more moderate words in his Actors mouth, before he
raises him to that half-passion, that he may grow warm by little and little,
and that his Voice may rise by degrees, and all his gestures acquire more and
more motion with his Discourse; and as for the Actor, I will tell him what in
this case I have seen Mondory, the best Actor of our days do, which was, that
in these occasions having taken a turn or two upon the Stage, and with some
posture suitable to his Part, as lifting up his Hands and Eyes, or the like;
having begun to move himself, he brought himself to the true point of a
half-passion, and so came sensibly out of the natural state of Indifferency in
which he came on upon the Stage; withal, retaining his motions so as they
should not go too far. All this will be better understood by both Poets and
Actors, if they please to make some Reflections at Reheasals, and have the
Comedians own Opinions who are best Judges, having often experienced this, and
other Methods of performing a half-passion.

Chapter the Second.
Of Discourses in general.
IF we consider Tragedy in its own nature, it implies so much Action, that it
seems not to have any room left for Discourse: It Is called a Dramma, which
signifies an Action, and the Persons concerned are called Actors, as those that
are present are named Spectators, or Lookers on, not Hearers. And indeed all
the Discourses of Tragedy ought to be as the Actions of those that appear upon
the Stage; for there to speak, is to act, there being not there any Speeches
invented by the Poet to show his Eloquence. So we see that the Narration of the
Death of Hyppolitus in Seneca, is rather the action of a Man frightened at the
Monster that he saw come out of the Sea, and at the sad Adventure which befell
Hyppolitus. In a word, all Discourses upon the Stage are but the Accessaries of
Action, though the whole Play in its Representation consists in Discourses.
It Is they that are the chief work of the Poet, and in which he Employs all the
strength of his wit; all that he invents, is in order to have it well delivered
upon the Stage, and he supposes many actions that they may serve for Subject of
those Discourses. Thus he seeks all ways to make love, joy, hatred, grief, and
the rest of our passions speak upon the Stage; and yet if we examine rightly
this Poem, the best part of the actions are but in the imagination of the
Spectator, to whom the Poet by his Art makes them as it were visible, though
there be nothing sensible but the Discourses. And we may observe in two of the
Greek Poets, that though Euripides's Tragedys are filled with more Incidents
and Actions than those of Sophocles, yet they had not so good success upon the
Stage of Athens; neither are they now so pleasant to read; the reason whereof
is, that the Discourses of Sophocles are more Eloquent, and more Judicious than
those of Euripides. Nay, those Dramma's which carry the name of Seneca,
howsoever irregular and defective they are in other things, do nevertheless
pass very well, by reason of the sense and force of some Discourses that are in
them. And we have still a greater proof of this in the Works of our Corneille;
for that which has so clearly set him above all the Poets of his time has not
been the Plot, or Regularity of his Plays, but the Discourses, and the noble
ways of Expressing those violent passions which he introduces, even so far,
that we see very irregular actions in them so accompapanied with ingenious and
pathetick Expressions, that the fault could not be perceived but by the Learned
Observers, the beauty of the Thoughts and Language dazzling the understanding of
all the rest of the Audience, and taking away from them the liberty of judging
of any thing else. For Example, it was not very probable that Rodrigues, all
bloody with the Murder of his Mistress's Father, should go and make her a
Visit, nor that she should receive it, and yet their conversation is so
pleasing and full of such noble Sentiments, that few have observed that
Indecency, and they that did were willing to suffer it. Again, when Don Sanche
brings his Sword to Chimene, he ought not to let her run on in those mistaken
Complaints, since with one word he could undeceive her; but that which she says
is so agreeable, that the Spectator cannot wish Don Sanche had been more
prudent.

All the Learned men in the Drammatick Art tell us, that those Plays which they
call Polymythes, that is, loaded with many Incidents, either are bad, or at
least none of the best; but they have not given the reason, which in my
judgment is, because they are all taken up in action, and so leaving no room
for Discourses, the Subject is as it were stifled for want of Air; and on the
contrary, a Play which has but few Incidents, and a small Intrigue, but filled
with Excellent Language, and thought, can seldom fail of pleasing.

We must nevertheless observe some difference in this Point between Comedy and
Tragedy; for Comedy, whose business lies among the common sort of People, not
so capable of gravity and thought, as the Tragic Actors, is much more in
action than in Discourses; there is required there little Eloquence, and much
Intrigue. Terence is pleasanter to read than Plautus, because he is more
Elegant, but Plautus took better with the Romans, because he is fuller of
action. Terence has many serious Moral sayings, which is not the proper work of
Comedy, where the Spectators design is to laugh. Plautus is full of Intrigues,
from which many Jests, and ingenious Raileries are created, and that is the
thing we wish for in Comedy.

I could wish therefore that our Poets would excel in the Art of Rhetoric, and
study Oratory and Eloquence to the bottom; for we are not to imagine, that it
consists in some puns and quibbles, to make the Citizens and Country Gentlemen
laugh, nor in some Antitheses, or other Figures often ill employed; no, the
Poet ought to know all the passions, the springs, that bring them on, and the
way of expressing them with Order, Energy, and Judgment.

He may see many Examples of this amongst the Ancient Poets, who best can show
him the way of pleasing, and acquiring Reputation. I, for my part, pretend to
nothing here, but to give him my particular Observations, which at least may
serve him to make better of his own. But to do this with order, I consider
there are generally in a Play Four sorts of Discourses, Narrations,
Deliberations, Didactick Discourses or Instructions, and Pathetick Discourses,
or the motions of passions. This is the Method which I establish to explain my
self, to which any body may add what they think necessary, and take away all
that they shall judge superfluous; and in a word, change all that shall not
please them, and have my free consent to do it.

Chapter the Third.
Of Narrations.
THese Narrations which happen in a Drammatick Poem, do generally regard two
sorts of things; either those which have happened before the opening of the
Stage, wheresoever they came to pass; nay, though it be long before; or else
they regard those things which happen off of the Scene in the Contexture of the
Theatral action, after once the Stage is open, and within the Extent of time
that it requires. As to the first sort which are brought into the body of the
Poem, for the better understanding of things which happened before the opening
of the Stage, they may regularly be used in the beginning of the Play, that
they may give a Foundation to the whole Action, and prepare the Incidents, and
by that means facilitate to the Spectator the understanding of all the rest; or
else they may be made use of toward the end of the Poem, and serve to the
Catastrophe, or the untying and opening of all the Plot.

Not but that they may be made in other parts of the Play, as we see it done in
a Play called Virginia, where the chiefest Narration is in the Fourth Act, and
is performed with great grace* and equal success; but in that part of the Play
it is very dangerous to use them; for they run a hazard of either discovering
the Catastrophe, which is near at hand, or else they leave the Stage in some
obscurity, and the Spectators ill informed of many circumstances, for having
too long delayed the opening of them; so that to avoid both these
Inconveniences, the Poet must have a very steady hand, since he must order it
so as his Narration do not in the least prevent the beauty of the Catastrophe;
nor his first acts be less intelligible for having kept back his Narration.

As for those things which happen in the course of the Action, the recital of
them is to be made as they happen; or if it be thought necessary, or more
pleasing to delay them, there must be used some Art to feed the Spectators
desire of knowing them without impatience; or else you must quite stifle his
Expectation, that he may be the better surpised when they come to pass. But we
must remember besides, that these Recitals or Narrations are introduced only to
instruct the Spectator about what passes off of the Scene; for to relate either
those things that have been seen, or might have been seen, as being supposed to
have been done upon the Stage, would certainly be very ridiculous; and besides,
those things that give ground to these Incident Narrations, ought to be very
considerable, or else they are to be avoided, and the thing to be insinuated
into the Audience by some words scattered here and there either before or after.

Now all these Narrations do enter into the Composition of the Drammatick Poem,
for two ends, either to make it clear and intelligible, or to adorn and set it
out; but against both these ends the Poet often falls into Errors, which
destroy his first Intention.

The first is, when his Narration is obscure, and loaded with circumstances
hard for the Audience to retain distinctly; such are Genealogical ones (which
Scaliger blames in Homer; or a great number of Names, with a Chain of actions
embroylu'd one in in another; for the Spectator will not give himself the
trouble to observe and retain all these different Idaea's, he coming to the
Stage only for his pleasure, and in the mean time for want of remembering all
this, he remains in the dark as to the rest of the Play, and is disgusted for
all the time he stays. Such a Story might be that of the three Brothers, and
three Sisters, which is described in Astraea, and that of the two Children born
of two Women, who had each of them married one another Sons; if any body
should upon such Stories found the whole Intrigue of a Play, he might be sure
no body would understand it, and by consequent it would have few Spectators.

The Second fault of Narrations is when they are taedious, and they are always
taedious when they do not contain things necessary or agreeable; as also when
they are made with weak and faint Expressions, such as do not captivate the
Spectators favor or attention, which by consequent must pall, and make him
give over minding the Play; and this happens likewise when they are too long;
for variety being the life of the Stage, and that being wanting, the best
things grow dull, and weigh upon the Spectator, who takes it ill to be fixed to
one Subject without diversity for so long a time; and though it may be the
capacity of some would carry them through to comprehend it all, yet being come
for diversion, they will not take the pains to do it, which joined with the
incapacity of others to hearken to so long a Story, causes at last a general
disgust in the whole Audience.

We may moreover make this distinction upon the length of Narrations, for they
may be so either for the matter, when they are filled with too great a number
of Incidents, and Persons, of Names and Places; or they may be so out of the
form for the many words they contain, as when the circumstances of an Action
are too much exaggerated and particularized in minute and insignificant things;
and when the Expressions are too full of Epithets, Adverbs* or other
unnecessary terms, with Repetitions of the same thing, though in a different
way.

And indeed, to examine the difference of these two sorts of lengths in
Narrations, we may say, that the first is vicious in any place of the Play
wheresoever it is placed: For first, at the opening of the Stage, the
Spectator, who thinks all that Recital necessary for the understanding of the
Play, endeavors to retain it all in his memory; but finding his Imagination
confounded, and his Memory distracted with so many things, he is first vexed
with himself, and then with the Poet, and at last gives out, without minding
any more of the whole Poem.

These long Narrations are not better placed in the course of the Action, for
those things which come to pass after the opening of the Stage, because it will
never be thought probable that so many things should have come to pass in so
little a time; (as for Example, the Interval of an Act seems to be) not but
that it is ordinary to suppose in that time a Battle, a Conspiracy, or some
such other Event; but to do it with probability, the Poet deceives the
Spectator, and busies him with something else that is agreeable, that so he may
be insensibly persuaded that there has been time enough for all the rest; but
that which is particularly to be heeded in that place is, that at that time the
Stage is in all the hurry of Action, and in the turns of Incidents, which these
long Narrations do cool and pall, whereas a true Narration ought to quicken the
Stage, and lay the foundation of some new passion, which to obtain, it must be
short, pithy, and full of life and warmth. The contrary of this appears in that
Narration, which the Rich in Imagination makes in the Play called the
Visionaires.

When these long Narrations happen toward the Catastrophe, they are then
absolutely insupportable; for the Spectator, who is impatient to see which way
the Intrigue turns, has all his pleasure spoiled just in the time when he ought
to receive the most, which is so much the more dangerous for the success of the
Play, because the Audience is already tired and disposed to give out.

In a word, I think it may be a kind of General Rule, that Narrations may be
longer at the opening of the Stage than any where else, because the Spectator
is fresh, and willing to give attention, and his memory receives agreeably all
those new Idaa's, in hopes they are to contribute to the pleasure which is
prepared for him; and also that they are as much to be avoided at the
Catastrophe, where they do so chock the Audience, who is then impatient to know
the Event, that no Figures of Rhetoric can make him amends. See, amongst
others, how dexterous Plautus is in the Narration of the knowing of Planesia,
at the end of the Curculio; it is one of the most regular Narrations that he has.

Besides these Cautions, it will not be amiss to observe, that these Narrations
may be made in two manners; either all of a piece, where a Story is told that
is to give a foundation to all the Plot of the Play; (though they that among
the Poets do it best, have some Pathetick or other ingenious Interruptions) as
the Orestes of Euripides, and in the Comical kind, the Hecyra of Terence, and
the Pseudolus of Plautus in the first Acts do sufficiently illustrate: Or else,
these Narrations are made by piece-meals, according as the Poet thinks fit to
hide or discover any part of his Subject, to frame the different Acts with more
Ornament, as one may see in the Sphigenia of Euripides, and in the Oedypus
Tyrannus of Sophocles, where the Story is told by different Persons, and at
different times; which may be performed, when he that makes part of a Narration
knows not all the Story, or when for some other necessary reason which must
appear so to the Audience, he will not tell all he knows; or when he is
interrupted by some body else (which must be done with great Art, and not by
bringing on a purpose a man who has nothing else to do in the rest of the Play,
but to interrupt that Actor;) Or lastly, when those things that are necessary
to be known, are not yet come to pass, as Corneille has most ingeniously
practiced in his Horatius; for by opening his Stage after the Truce concluded,
he has found a way to bring ( uriatius to Rome, and there has reserved to
himself to make different Narrations of the Combat of the three Brothers in
such places of his Play as he thinks the fittest to change the state of Affairs
upon his Stage.

I may assure our Poets, that a Narration thus ingeniously divided, requires
great Art and Meditatution to consider how far one may carry each part of it,
and to give all the necessary grounds and colors to the Audience, for leaving
off in such a place, and beginning again in such another; and indeed such a
Narration well managed, produces an admirable Effect; for leaving the Spectator
always in the expectation of some Novelty, it warms his desire, and entertains
his impatience; and then the new discoveries that are made in the rest of the
Narration furnish the Stage with Subjects to vary all the Motions and Passions
of the Actors.

Narrations may besides be considered as simply and plainly telling the Tale,
or as exaggerating pathetically the circumstances of the Adventure. In the
first case they ought to be short, because they are without motion or ornament,
and yet they are often necessary, as when some important Advice is to be given
to obviate some pressing mischief.

Pathetick Narrations are always the finest, and the only indeed fit to come
upon the Stage, when they are contained within the bounds of a reasonable
Exaggeration; then the mixture of fear, astonishment, imprecations, and the
like, according to the circumstances of the Story is fit, and produces a good
Effect. But particularly, these passions ought to be mingled in the Narration,
when the person to whom it is made is not at all ignorant of the whole Story,
and yet there is a necessity of informing the Audience by him; and I believe
that I first found out this slight, to avoid absurdity in doing of it; for in
this case it would be ridiculous to make to him a plain Story which he knows
already; therefore to avoid that one must bring in natural passions growing
from the Story it self, and the present state of the Affairs of the Stage,
either by Complaints, or Sentiments of joy, or fear; for by this means the
Story is told* and yet no affected cold Narration brought on against all the
Rules of probability. Such is the Narration of the Death of Clitemnestra in the
Electra of Euripides, and such is the discourse of Tecmessa in Sophocles in his
Ajax, where the Poet makes her make an ingenious Narration of all that the
Spectators were ignorant of under pretext of complaining of her own
misfortunes, and the Narration of Sosias. In Amphytrio is one of the most
ingenious ones, where the Poet, that he may instruct the Audience about
Amphytrio's Voyage, and the War, makes that Slave meditate to himself what News
he shall tell his Mistress, for by that means, though the Narration be made to
himself, and very pleasant things in it, fit for a Slaves wit to say, yet at
the same time the Spectator is informed of every thing, without any apparent
affectation. But in these Narrations the Poet must be very careful to keep up
the humor, so as nothing of a studied Recital do appear, for then it is faulty,
as done on purpose for the Spectators. Therefore I can never advise him to use
a certain way, common enough now adays, which is when an Actor knows some part
of the Story, though the Spectators are not informed of any part of it; in this
case I say Poets do often make another Repeat that which the Actor knows
already, saying only, You know such a thing, and then adding, p. 393. the
middle.
Now here is the rest which you do not know. To say truth, this appears to me
very gross, and it were better to let that which the Actor knows already, be
expressed to the Audience by some motions of passion, and then find some
ingenious pretext to tell the rest in an ordinary Narration.

That which remains now to be done upon this Subject, is to explain some Rules,
from which, without absurdity the Poet cannot depart.

The first is, that he who makes the Narration be rationally supposed to know
perfectly the thing he tells, or else he cannot be thought to tell it with any
probability.

Secondly, That on his side, there be some apparent and powerful reason for him
to tell it, either by the necessity of giving notice to some other person, or
by some well-grounded curiosity, or by the Authority he has over the person
that speaks with him, or some such considerations.

Thirdly, He that hears him must have some just Subject to be informed of the
thing that is told him, and I for my part cannot bear that a Varlet should out
of simple curiosity be entertained with the Adventures of a great Prince, as
the Poet has done in Rhodogune; for Narrations are always flat that are not
made to a person concerned for want of passions to animate both the Audience,
and the Man that makes the Recital.

Besides, a Narration ought to be made in a fit place, where probably both he
that hears, and he that speaks, might be supposed to meet; wherefore I cannot
approve that in the Hall of a Palace, where probably People go and come
continually, there should be a long Narration made of secret Adventures which
ought not to be discovered without great precaution for the danger that attends
their being revealed; and therefore I never could conceive how Mr. Corneille*
can bring to pass with decency that. In the same place Cinna tells Aemilia all
the circumstances of a great Conspiracy against Augustus, and yet in that very
place Augustus holds a secret counsel of his two intimate Favorites; for if it
be a public place, as it seems to be, since Augustus sends away all his
Courtiers and Attendance to talk alone with his friends, what probability is
there that Cinna should there visit Aemilia, with a Discourse of about 130
Verses, and a discovery of the most dangerous Affairs in the World, which might
be overheard by some body going or coming; and if the place be private, and
supposed the Emperor's Closet, who dismisses those he would not have
participant of his secret, how is it possible that Cinna should come there to
talk all that to Aemilia? And how is it probable that Aemilia should break out
into outrageous Complaints and Invectives against Augustus? This is my
Objection, to which Monsieur Corneille may be pleased to give an Answer when he
thinks fit.

It Is not less necessary to choose a fit time to make a Narration probable; for
there are some times which will not bear a long Discourse: p. 398.
It Is a fault which Scaliger does not scruple to charge Homer himself with,
when he makes his Hero's make long Narrations in the middle of a Battle or
Engagement. A Poet of ours has committed the same fault in the Scipio, while in
the midst of the storming of a Town, a victorious Army is abandoned to all
License, and the People in the disorder of a place taken by assault. A young
Maid disguised, makes a long Narration to discover her self, whereas in such a
time she ought not at most to have spoke above four Verses.

But I do not take heed that insensibly I am discovering the faults of our
Modern Writers, who, it may be, will not allow them to be so, or at least will
not be pleased with the discovery; let the Poet then seek out of himself
Examples of ill Narrations, and not expect from me that I should discredit the
best part of our Plays, many of which have been so favorably received either
by the too much complaisance, or the ignorance of those who did not understand
their faults.

Chapter the Fourth.
Of Deliberations.
MY design is not here to teach that part of Rhetoric which they call the
genus deliberativum, by which is showed the Art of saying ones Opinion floridly
in all matters, in which counsel is asked. Our Poet ought not to stay till he be
upon the Stage to be instructed in those Principles which are all comprehended
under the name of the Theory of the Stage.

Drammatick Poetry is a kind of Quintessence of all the Precepts of Eloquence
that are found in Authors, because they must be used in it, but with so much
Judgment and Art, and so nicely, that it must often seem that one has quite
laid them aside, the genius of the Stage being such, that a thing that does not
appear, contains in it very often the greatest Artifice, and a Sentiment that
shall imperceptibly have been conveyed into the mind of the Audience, an
imperfect Narration, an Adventure, begun in appearance without design, are
capable alone of making a Play take, by giving a foundation secretly to the
strongest passions, and by that means preparing a noble Catastrophe; and
without doubt there is much skill required for any body to perform this,
without which one cannot pretend to true glory in the Art.

I begin therefore with this Advertisement, which I think very considerable in
matter of Deliberations, which is, that they in their own nature are not fit
for the Stage, because the Theater being a place of Action, all things ought to
be in agitation, either by Events which cross one another, or by Passions born
out of those Incidents, as Lightning and Thunder from the Clouds. In a word,
it is a place where every body is disquieted and in disorder; and as soon as
ever the calm and quiet succeed, the Play is at an end, or grows very dull all
the while that the Action is suspended; how is it possible then that
Deliberations should have any part in the business? They are sedate and quiet
things where Moderation and Temper ought chiefly to appear. He that asks
counsel does it with tranquillity, at least in appearance, and they that are
called to counsel ought less to be troubled either with Passion or Interest,
they must speak with all the clearness of Reason, and argue upon the discovery,
and not in the Clouds, and darkness of Passion; and if they grow but warm, they
are presently suspected of some secret Interest; so that without very great
Art, it will be hard to reconcile them to the Scene, without making the Stage
lose its grace, and grow dull.

It may be answered, that the Stage abounds in Deliberations, and that the
Ancients have them in most Acts of their Plays; and for the Moderns, Monsieur
Corneille excels in them, and has scarce any thing in his Poems so moving, and
so much admired, witness his Stanzas in the mouth of Rodrigues in the Cid.
Aemilia in Cinna deliberates pleasingly between the danger she exposes Cinna
to, and the revenge she covets. Cinna deliberates between the Obligations he
has to Augustus, and the love he bears his Mistress; and Augustus deliberates
what to do in this last Conjuration, in which his Favorite was the chief man
to murder him.

To all this I answer, That these are not the true sort of Deliberations which
I am treating of, though they do show Irresolution, and a dispute between
opposite Considerations; they are rather to be placed in the rank of Pathetick
Discourses, which make the best Actions of the Stage. You see minds agitated by
different Passions, and still carried into extremes, of which the Spectator
cannot foresee the Event; all their Discourses have the true Theatral
Character, they are impetuous and figurative, and show you rather the Image of
a Soul tormented in the midst of his Executioners, than one consulting in the
midst of his Friends.

It Is not therefore this sort of Deliberations that I exclude; on the contrary,
I exhort all our Poets to bring them upon the Stage, as much as the Subject
will afford, and to examine carefully with what variety and Art they are
managed by the Ancients, and in the Works of Monsieur Corneille, for if he be
well considered, 'twill be found that it is in that principally that consists
that which in him is called Admirable, and the thing which has made him so
famous.

I only speak then of those Deliberations which are made designedly, and are
Representations of the like Consults made in Courts upon some important Affair.
We have two Examples remarkable in Corneille, that in the Play called Cinna,
where Augustus deliberates whether he shall leave the Empire or no; and the
other in a Play called The Death of Pompey, where King Ptolomeus deliberates
what he shall do with so great a Man, newly arrived in his Country; and these
two Deliberations have succeeded likewise very differently, for that of
Augustus pleased the Audience to a wonder, and the other of Ptolomaeus passes
for a very common, ordinary Discourse; and that very difference of the success
of these two Deliberations, confirms me in my Opinion, that they are dangerous
upon the Stage, and have afforded me likewise the occasion of making some
Reflections which may contribute to make them please.

The first is, That the Subject of the Deliberation ought to be great, noble,
and extraordinary, and not of such things as fall every day in debate in
Princes Councils, and it is in this for one, that the Deliberation of Augustus
carrys it from that of Ptolomaeus, for it is not ordinary that a Monarch should
have the thought of laying down the Sovereignty, and bring so important a Point
to be debated by two Friends. There was but one Example of such a thing before
Augustus's time, and we have had but three since, of which the Queen of Sweden
makes still an Illustrious Remembrance. But it was not a thing so rare to see
Ptolomaeus deliberate about the Life and Liberty of Pompey; 'twas an important
Affair, but no extraordinary one, which made the difference in the success of
the thing. Ptolomy might deliberate upon such a Subject, but the Spectators
receive no pleasure from the thing, being done in their hearing* because it
contributes nothing to their Intrigues, nor the untying of the knot of the Play.

Secondly, The Motive of a Deliberation that is brought upon the Stage, ought
to be necessary and urgent, not only in the Person of him that deliberates, but
in relation also to all the Persons concerned in the Action. The Deliberation
of Augustus in Cinna may serve here for an Example: For it seems necessary that
it should be brought upon the Stage, that the Audience might see the goodness
of the Emperor, and the passionate transports of Fury that Cinna was guilty of,
and all that happens afterward between Cinna, Aemilia, and Maximus, has its
force and beauty from what Cinna himself had given in counsel to Augustus.

Thirdly, In these Deliberations the Discourses must be noble and
proportionable to the greatness of the Subject, that is, that they come from a
profound meditation, and be expressed with great strength of thought, for not
being capable of any great figures, they must be upheld by strong sense and
reasoning. This likewise is observed in the Deliberation of Augustus, where
Maximus and Cinna do say very surprising things.

Fourthly, One must observe never to stay till the Stage is in the heat of
Action, and the depth of Intrigues, to bring on these Deliberations, because
they cool the Stage, and so defeat the Expectations of the Audience, and yet I
would not place them in the beginning neither, as that of Ptolomy is in
Corneille, because then there has not been any passion agitated which might
produce such a Deliberation; but I would place them in the beginning of the
second or third Act, that they may have some foundation upon what is already
done, and some influence upon what remains to do.

They ought likewise not to be made all of a breath, without interruption from
some of the Counselors, for that gives at least a little warmth to the
coolness of the Stage. But above all, I think they ought to be as short as
possible, for they cannot be long without being tedious in prolix reasonings
void of figures, which nevertheless I would have the Poet strive to bring in as
Apostrophes, Prosopopoeas, Hypotyposes, and such like; in which much Art must
be used, because regularly these figures do not enter into Deliberations.

But that which above all things I think necessary is, that the Persons advised
with, be concerned in the thing proposed, because then it is not a plain Advice,
but it has something of the Theatral Action; then the Spectator too is much
more concerned, as appears very well in the case of Augustus, who being made to
advise about the most important thing of his Life, with two treacherous
Friends, and the Audience being already informed of the hatred of Aemilia, and
the love of Cinna, they are all attentive to what they say, every Spectator
having a curiosity to know how they will come off, so that all that they say is
hearkened to, and not a word of it lost; and when after all the Emperor is yet
kind to both these Traitors, the Spectators begin to think they will relent of
their Treason, and particularly when they see Maximus and Cinna afterward a
little in suspense, and then when at last they see them persevere in their
design, they cannot imagine how the thing will turn, nor what will be the
Event; so that this Deliberation is upheld by the Interest of those who advise,
and does it self influence all the other Affairs of the Stage.

I have nothing more upon this Subject, but one general Observation, which is,
That few People that go to Plays do approve of the Examining and Condemning of
Criminals upon the Stage, which nevertheless we see frequently represented
there, and the reason is, because that when it comes to that formality, it is
generally performed by the worst Actors, who being seated and out of action,
and having a few scurvy Verses (which in such an occasion can hardly be made
better) to recite. The Audience can hardly forbear laughing, so far are they
from being concerned. I know no remedy for this but to endeavor to order the
Story so, as it shall not require such a dull piece of Pageantry, so little
capable of deserving any applause from the Audience.

Chapter the Fifth.
Of Didactick Discourses or Instructions.
THis is a new Subject in our Drammatick Art, I not having found any thing in
those Authors who have composed great Volumes about it; and I am the first that
have made observations upon it, such as I may boldly say ought not to be
despised by our Poets.

I understand then by Didactick Discourses those Maxims and general
Propositions which contain known Truths, and are only applied in the Play,
according as the Subject will allow, tending more to instruct the Audience in
the Rules of Morality, than to explain any part of the Intrigue a foot. An
Example may illustrate the thing better. Suppose then the Poet had a mind to
treat this Proposition.

The Gods are just, and were they not so, they would cease to be Gods. Or this;
A general Instinct cannot be suspected of Error.

Or this; A Subject that Rebels against his Prince is Criminal.

I say, That a Poet often endeavors to set out some of these Maxims by a great
number of Verses, upon which he demurs a great while, leaving all that time his
Subject, and the Intrigue of the Stage, and keeping himself still upon general
Notions.

Now as to these Didactick Discourses, I distinguish them into two sorts, some
I call Physical, and the others Moral ones.

I call those Physical or Natural, which make a deduction or description of the
Nature, Qualities, or Effects of any thing without distinction, whether it be
in the rank of natural or supernatural things; or of the number of Artificial
Compounds.

Under the notion of Moral Discourses, I comprehend all those Instructions
which contain any Maxim of Religion, or Politics, or Oeconomicks, or that any
ways regard humane Life

To come after this to my Observations, we must lay it down as a Maxim, That
all these Didactick Discourses are of their own nature unfit for the Stage,
because they are cold, and without motion, being general things which only tend
to Instruct the mind, but not to move the heart, so that the action of the
Stage, which ought to warm our affections, becomes by them dull and
indifferent. Young People who come to read Euripides and Sophocles, admire the
first much more than the latter, and yet Sophocles almost always carried the
prize from Euripides upon the Stage, and that by the Judgment of all the
Athenians. This mistake of the young Reader proceeds from this, that they being
themselves not thoroughly instructed in those Maxims, and finding a great many
of them in Euripides, as well about Religion, as Politics and Moral ones, they
are charmed to see such Truths so nobly expressed, and the things themselves
being new to them, please them beyond measure. It Is for this that Quintilian in
his Precepts of Rhetoric advises young People to the Lecture of Euripides
before Sophocles. In all which they do not observe that Sophocles makes the
groundwork of his Plays, of those very Truths, as well as Euripides; but he
does it with so much Art, that he utters them in a Pathetick manner, as well as
in a Didactick one, whereby the People of Athens departed almost always pleased
and charmed by the high passions which Sophocles fills his Stage with, but were
more used to Euripides's Maxims, which he so often beats over to them, and by
that means did not consider them as any thing rare and extraordinary: And from
thence it proceeds, that in our Modern Plays, those very places in which the
Poets have labored by noble Verses, and high words to express, some great
Maxim, have least succeeded, because that falling into the Didactick way, they
forsake the business of the Stage, and let the action cool. From thence it
comes likewise that all Actors that appear with the Pedantick Character of
teaching, such as are the Governor of a young Prince, a Doctor, a Governess,
or the like, are still ill received by the Audience; the very presence of them
displeases and imprints the Character of Ridicule upon the most serious Piece.
I am confident that if the Linco in Pastor sido appeared upon our Stage, he
would be hissed off of it, notwithstanding all the good counsel he gives
Sylvio; and that which makes me believe it the sooner, is that one of our best
Modern Plays lost half its due applause, by there being a Governor to a young
Prince, who was giving him Advice in the midst of most violent passions, with
which he was tormented, that being neither the Time, nor the Stage the Place
for such Instructions.

We do not see neither that either Astrologers, Conjurers, High Priests, or any
of that Character, do much take, for the very reason that they can hardly speak
without pretending to teach, or else talk in generals of the power of the Gods,
the wonderful Effects of Nature, and such things which cannot fail of being
tedious, when they are prolixely expressed. Scaliger will not allow them in the
very Epick Poems, much less can they be received in the Drammatick, but ought
to be quite banished the Stage.

We must observe besides, that Physical Instructions about Nature, and its
Effects, are yet less welcome than Moral ones, because that it is hard an Actor
should speak so long as to explain the nature of a thing, without disgusting
the Audience, which soon grows weary of being ill taught the thing the Poet
would have him learn; which, together with the little concern the no passion of
the Stage raises in him, makes the whole very disagreeable. We have a notable
Example of this in Mariamne, where a long Discourse is made of the Nature of
Dreams, the thing is very fine, and the nature of them well explained; but it
interrupts an agitation of the Stage, begun by Herode's trouble at his waking;
the Audience would fain know the cause of his disturbance, and the particulars
of his Dream: But instead of that, there is a long Discourse of the Nature of
Dreams in general, to which the Spectator gives but little attention, as being
thereby disappointed of his chief expectation.

To all this it may be objected, That the Stage is a place of public
Instruction, and that the Drammatick Poet is to instruct, as well as please;
and therefore that Didactick Discourses may be proper enough, or at least ought
not to be condemned.

I confess that the Stage is a place of Instruction* but we must well
understand how that is meant. The Poet ought to bring his whole Action before
the Spectator, which ought to be so represented with all its circumstances,
that the Audience be fully Instructed; for as Drammatick Poetry does but
imitate humane actions, it does it only to instruct us by them, and that it
does directly, and properly: But for Moral Maxims, which may incite us either
to the love of Virtue, or stir us up to hate Vice; it does it indirectly, and
by the Entermise of the Actions themselves; p. 418.
of which Sentiment Scaliger is so much, as I dare quote him for my Warrantee
in this Opinion. Now this may be done two ways; the first, when the Action of
the Stage is so judiciously managed, that it shows the force of Virtue
triumphing in the midst of Persecutions, after which it is often happily
rewarded; but if it is totally overwhelmed by them, it remains glorious even in
its death. By this all the deformities of Vice are discovered; it is often
punished, but when even it triumphs and overcomes, it is in abomination with
the Audience, who thereupon are apt to conclude with themselves, That it is
better to embrace Virtue through the hazard of Persecution, than to follow Vice
even with hopes of Impunity*

It Is thus principally that the Stage ought to be Instructive to the Public by
the knowledge of things represented; and I have always observed, that it is not
agreeable to the Audience, that a Man who swerves from the way of Virtue,
should be set right, and repent, by the strength of Precepts and Sentences: We
rather desire it should be by some Adventure that presses him, and forces him
to take up reasonable and virtuous Sentiments. We should hardly endure that
Herod should recall his Sentence against Mariamne, upon a Remonstrance of one
of the seven Wise Men of Greece; but we are pleased to see, that after the
Death of the Queen, his Love becomes his Tormentor; and having opened his Eyes,
drives him into so sincere a Repentance, that he is ready to sacrifice his Life
to the regret he has for his Crime.

As for the other way of Teaching Morality, it depends much on the
ingeniousness of the Poet, when he strengthens his Theatral Action with diverse
pithy and bold Truths, which being imperceptibly worked into his Play, are as
it were the nerves and strength of it. For, in a word, that which I condemn in
common Didacticks, is their style and manner of expression, not the things
themselves, since those great Truths which are as it were the foundation of the
conduct of humane actions, I am so far from banishing them off the Stage, that
quite contrary, I think them very necessary and ornamental, which to attain, I
give these following Observations.

First, These general Maxims must be so fastened to the Subject, and linked by
many circumstances with the Persons acting, that the Actor may seem to think
more of that concern of his, he is about, than of saying fine things, that is,
to speak in terms of Rhetoric, he must reduce the Thesis to the Hypothesis,
and of universal Propositions, make particular Applications; for by this means
the Poet avoids the suspicion of aiming to Instruct pedantickly, since his
Actors do not leave their business which they are about. For Example, I would
not have an Actor spend many words to prove that,

Virtue is always persecuted; but he may say to the Party concerned,

Do you think to have better measure than Virtue has always had? and can you
expect to be priviledg'd from Persecution more than Socrates or Cato?

And so continue a little speaking still to the Party present, and upon the
Subject in hand, by which means these Discourses seem a little to keep off from
being too general Precepts, and so disgust the less.

Secondly, In all these occasions the Poet must use figurative Speech, either
by Interrogation, Irony, or others that his fancy shall suggest; for these
Figures, by not circumstancing minutely the general Propositions, make them
more florid, and so by ornaments free them from the Didactick Character. As for
Example, if there be a design of advising a young Woman to obey her Parents;
instead of Preaching downright obedience to her, I think an Irony would do
better* As thus;

That Is a fine way indeed, for a virtuous young Lady to attain the reputation
of a good Daughter, to be carried away by her own passions, and neglect not
only the censure of the best sort of People, but break through all the fences
of duty and honor.

My third Observation is, That when any of these great Maxims are to be
proposed bluntly and in plain words, it be done in as few as may be; by that
means they do not cool the Stage, but add something to the variety of it; but
there must be care taken that this do not happen in the midst of a violent
passion; for besides that in those cases men do not naturally speak sentences,
the Actour cannot then appear with that moderation which those reflections
require. Seneca is very guilty of this fault in all his tragedies where most
commonly in the heat of passion all his fine Common places are bestowed upon
the Audience.

We have nevertheless some Examples of Didactick, Propositions made in direct
terms, and at length not without some success in Corneille, which to attain as
well as he, requires the same Ingenuity and Art* The Expressions must be
strong, and seem to have been said only for that particular Subject to which
they are applied, and that requires a particular genius, and much study to
accomplish.

I have observed besides, that common Truths, though in a Didactick style, yet
do very well upon the Stage in the mouth of a Rogue or a Cheat* when his
Character is known; for the Spectator is delighted to see him cunningly use all
the Maxims and Discourses of a good man to intents and purposes quite contrary,
so that by that means it is all figurative, and moves the Attention of the
Audience.

One may likewise successfully enough burlesk all these common Truths, but that
can be performed no where but in Comedy, where by that means they forsake their
natural state, and are disguised under a new appearance, which causes both
variety and ornament. But Tragedy in its own nature is too grave to admit of
any thing so low and buffoon as this would be; neither do I remember to have
met with any thing of that kind in any serious Tragedy; I say serious Tragedy,
because that in Satirical Tragedy there was admitted a mixture of Heroic
Actions, and low Buffooneries; and therefore this disguizing of serious
Precepts might have room among the rest in them.

Chapter the Sixth.
Of Pathetick Discourses; or of the Passions and Motions of the Mind.
I Do not undertake in this Chapter to teach the Nature of Passions, nor their
different Species, nor their extraordinary Effects; all Moral Authors do that
sufficiently. I do not think neither that it is necessary to show here the Art
of using them in order to persuade, after all that Aristotle has said upon that
Subject in his second Book of Rhetoric; so that I will avoid all Repetitions
of that nature, and not so much as touch upon any thing that is contained in
his Poeticks, or his Interpreters Commentaries, where may be seen which are the
Passions fittest for the Stage, and how they are to be managed. Monsieur de la
Menardiere had made two Chapters in his Poeticks on this Subject, so learned
and so proper, that they alone would silence me, if I offered at this matter,
they being able to satisfy the most curious in that Subject.

I consider therefore here the Passions, as they are placed in Discourse, and
thereupon I bring my Observations toward employing of them with conduct upon
the Stage. In a word, I only intend to show with what Art a Pathetick or Moving
Discourse ought to be regulated so as to make it agreeable to the Spectators,
by the impression it is to make on them.

First then, The Cause which is to produce a Motion in the Actors themselves,
and then in the Audience, ought to be something true, or believed to be so, not
only by the Actor who speaks (who would be ridiculous to make a great Discourse
of Grief or Joy for a thing he should know to be false) but also by the
Spectators, who probably would not be concerned if they knew that the Subject
he had to complain or rejoice were fictitious; and if it so fall out, that by
the rest of the Story, the Spectator must know a thing contrary to the belief
of the Actor: As for Example, that a Princess is alive, though a Lover believe
her dead: I say, if in that case one would have the Passion take with the
Audience, there must not be a long Complaint mingled with Sentiments of
kindness and grief; but the Actor must be presently transported into Rage, that
the Spectators may be touched by his violent despair, and feel a great deal of
compassion, if in that Error he happens to kill himself, as we see it falls
out in Pyramus and Thisbe in both kinds; for the long Discourse he makes upon
the suspicion he is in, that a Lion has killed his Mistress, does not much
affect the Audience; but when he draws his Sword to sacrifice his Life to the
Manes of his dead Mistress, and so expiate his negligence in his own blood,
there is hardly one of the Audience that does not shake with horror; and upon
this occasion I remember I saw a young Lady, who had never been at a Play
before, cry out to her Mother, that Pyramus ought to be told that his Mistress
was not dead, which made me make this Judgment, that the Poet ought not to have
deferred so long bringing his Actor to the moving part; three or four Lines had
been enough to have explained his belief of her death, and then all the rest
ought to have been pronounced, his Sword drawn, and in the nearest disposition
to death, which would certainly have produced immediate horror and compassion
in the Audience.

Not but that it happens often that the Actor may lament or rejoice at
something he thinks true, while the Audience nevertheless must know that it is
false. As for Example, if the Story requires that in the Person of that Actor
there be feigned a Passion, of which the Cause is false, with a design to have
it believed true by another, and by that means discover some secret; it is good
that the Spectators should be informed that he who feigns the Passion has no
true Subject for it, because then they have the pleasure of the Contrivance, to
see the Disguise well acted; but he that is deceived, ought not to make any
long Pathetick Discourses, because that would not move the Spectators. It will
suffice that in few words he show the impression the fiction has made upon him,
and what Event may be from thence expected. In a word, in all such cases the
Poet is to examine which of the two will best please the Audience to see a
circumventing design well Executed, or to be concerned for the Complaint made
by an innocent, unwary person; for if they are pleased in the Cheat, they must
be informed of it, if in the Complaint, the falseness of the Grief must be
concealed from him, that they may believe as well as the Party grieved, that he
has reason to be afflicted.

Secondly, It Is not enough that the Cause of some extraordinary Motion of the
Mind be true, but it must also (to be agreeably represented upon the Stage) be
reasonable and probable, according to the received Opinions of Mankind; for if
any Actor should fly into a passion of Anger, without reason, he would be
looked upon as a Madman, instead of being pitied; not but that there are some
passions whose Subject is false, which nevertheless are very agreeable, though
they are not reasonable in their grounds, for Example Jealousy; but the nature
of this passion is to be without any foundation in truth or reason, for else it
would not be Jealousy, but a just Indignation which would inspire the
Spectators with hatred against the Woman, and compassion for the Husband;
whereas quite contrary, we have naturally aversion for a jealous Man, and
compassion for a poor Woman innocently persecuted by him. The same may be said
of Covetousness, which will still be so much the more diverting, if the cares
and fears in keeping of a Treasure, with distrust of all sorts of People, be
without grounds; or rather, we may say that the Discourses which are made to
express these passions, do not so much please the Spectator, by making him
concerned for those that speak, as they do it by giving him a sort of
compassion mingled with Sentiments of scorn and derision for the misery and
folly of those that are tyrannized over by them; at least those are the
thoughts which I had in reading the second Comedy of Plautus, called Aulularia.

Thirdly, To make a Complaint that shall touch and concern the Audience, the
cause of it must be just, for else no body will enter into the Sentiments of
the grieved Person. For Example, if an Actor should express great affliction
for not having been able to Execute a Conspiracy against a good Prince, or some
great piece of Treachery against his Country, he would be looked upon as a
wicked, and not an unhappy Person, and all that he could say would but increase
the Peoples aversion to him.

Besides all these Considerations, if the Pathetick Discourse be not necessary,
that is to say, expected and desired by the Spectators, it will be very
nauseous to them, let the Poets Art be what it will. That a Husband should be
grieved for the loss of his Wife, is so natural, that we need not be brought to
the Stage to see Examples of it; but that Herod should first condemn his Wife
in a transport of Rage, in spite of all the tender thoughts inspired by his
love; it excites our curiosity to know what his thoughts are after such an
Action. That Masinissa, forced by the Romans, should send his Wife Poison,
though passionately in love with her, and she die of it, one cannot but desire
to know what that unfortunate Prince can say or do after so desperate an
Adventure. But that for Example. The Wife of Alexander, Son to Mariamne, should
come and make great lamentations upon the Body of her Husband, whom Herod had
put to death without any other motive, that because she was his Wife, that was
very superfluous, and did not prove very agreeable to the Audience, who knew
well enough that she had reason to grieve, but not upon the Stage, the
Spectators knowing already all that she could say upon that Subject; and from
thence we must likewise infer, that all Confidents and Attendants of Princes,
though they are very necessary Persons upon the Stage, for the union of all the
Intrigues, yet they cannot be supposed to carry their lamentations and
reflections on their Masters misfortunes very far, because every body knows
that they are things of course in true Friends, and faithful Servants, and so
not extraordinary enough for the Stage.

The same thing may be said of the chief Actors, when their Interests are not
grounded upon sensible Motives. For Example; If a Rival having sought his
Mistress only for her Fortune, and not out of any Inclination from his heart,
should complain of having lost her, it would produce no Effect in the Minds of
the Audience, his lamentations having no ground in nature or reason.

But one of the chiefest Observations of all is this, That all passions that
are not founded upon Opinions and Customs conformable to those of the
Spectators, are sure to be cold, and of no effect, because they being already
possessed with an Opinion contrary to the Action of the Player, cannot approve
of any thing he says or does in another sense. For Example; The grief of one
who had undertaken to kill a Tyrant, and failed in his design, would not move
us in France, so much as it would have done the People at Athens, because we
living in a Monarchy, look upon the Persons of Kings as Sacred, be they never
so unjust; whereas the Athenians, bred up in a popular State, hated all
Monarchs, and could not endure the name of them.

Thus, for the same reason, those Pathetick Discourses, which we read in the
Greek and Latin Comedys, will never take with us, as they did upon the Stages
of the Ancients, because we have but little Conformity to the Rules of their
Lives, in many things more abominably licentious than ours; and in others,
their Customs were so various; as that which was a Jest and a Concern to them,
can be none to us, who have not so much as the same things, to wit, the Cheats
of their Slaves, nor the Hunger of their Parasites; which made Rotron, one of
our Poets, miscarry in a Play of Plautus's, where his Parasite talks of nothing
but eating, and is so horrible a Glutton, that we could not bear him, having no
such People amongst us; all our Debauche lying rather in drinking than eating;
and in that too we mingle Songs and Catches.

It Is for this reason too I imagine that Tragedys taken out of the Stories of
Scripture, are not so agreeable, for all the Pathetick Motions are founded upon
Virtues that have not much Conformity with the Rules of our Life, to which may
be added, that being scarce pious enough to suffer Devotion in the Churches
themselves, it cannot be expected we should love it upon the Stage; and none do
but those who are touched with a true Christian Piety, and they are infinitely
pleased at such Representations.

Having thus observed what concerns the Cause and Motive of Theatral Passions,
I have likewise made some Reflections upon the manner of managing of them in a
Pathetick Discourse.

The first Observation is, That it is not enough to raise a passion upon a good
Incident, and to begin with strong Lines, but it must be carried to the point
of its fullness. It Is not enough to have shaken the Minds of the Audience, you
must ravish them; and to do it, you must seek matter, either in the greatness
of your Subject, or in the different Motives and Colors which environ it; but
particularly in the strength and richness of your own Imagination, which ought
to be warmed, and elevated, and as it were, be in labor to bring forth
something worthy of admiration. In this particularly Monsieur Corneille does
excel, for he has a most discerning Judgment to distinguish between rich
passions, and the common ones, and then he drives them to their just period,
with the greatest felicity imaginable, but which cannot be but the Effect of
strong and lasting Meditations. The difficulty here lies in the exactness of
measure; for as you are not to starve your Hearers appetite, so you must have
as great a care not to cloy him; you must give him the height of satisfaction,
without over-powering him with satiety. He that in this case will do more than
he can, does often less than he should.

This is a fault observed not only in Lucan's Pharsalia, but in most of
Seneca's Tragedys, and particularly in his Hercules Oeteus, where the Author
has given up himself to the fecundity of his own wit, not considering that the
excess of it might sometimes be insupportable; and yet I could wish our Poets
rather guilty of this noble fault, than of that mean one of sterility: For we
have seen often upon our Stages, passions begun and forsaken half way, or at
least pursued with so little Art and warmth, that they had been less defectuous
if they had stopped in the beginning of their career. To give this measure
exactly, is impossible; the Poet must examine what his Subject, the force of
his Discourse, and the beauty of the Passion will afford; let him consult his
Friends, and use all his Judgment in so nice a point.

But he must be very careful not to spend all the strength of a passion at
first; he must reserve some thoughts for the continuation of it; for the same
passion continued and held up by diverse Incidents, with a change of
appearances, must certainly be much more agreeable than a new passion in every
Scene; and it is in that Monsieur Corneille is admirable in the Cid, for being
to show the state of a generous Mind distracted by the Sentiments of Honor,
and the tendernesses of a violent Love, he produces the Monuments of these
passions by degrees, keeping still, till the end many of his noblest Thoughts
and Expressions, which if he had not been very judicious, he might have used at
first; he has done the same thing in Horatius, and most of his Plays. It Is
true, that to imitate him requires a great deal of felicity and conduct; but
whosoever shall carefully study the Ancient Drammaticks, and apply himself to a
diligent understanding of the Morals of Life, will always be rich enough to
answer these Intellectual Expenses.

Secondly, To guide these Pathetick Motions to the point of their true Extent,
it must be done with order, and by following the Motions of Nature, with a
regard to the quality of the things that are said. The order of Nature is very
different, for sometimes the Mind breaks out into violent Transports, which not
being able to hold, it returns to some Moderation, or rather some Relaxation of
its own Excess, the passion remaining still very sensible at other times, the
Soul moves slowly, and agitating it self by degrees, arrives to the highest
Transport, even to sounding away. Now to regulate a Pathetick Discourse upon
these different orders, there is no Advice can be given, the Poets prudence
must guide him according to the Characters of the persons, and the present
state of the Stage.

Yet he must always remember that Pathetick Discourses are not to end just as
they begin; but after the greatest violence he may bring the passion to some
moderation, so far as to doubt and debate; and as those who understand suiting
of Colors, never place two Extremes together, because that would be too harsh.
One must not likewise in the passions of the Stage fall from one extremity to
another; nor of a sudden calm into some great agitation, without some precedent
reason to arrive at that Tranquillity. Yet it may happen that even in those
Extremes some very ornamental passage may be placed, but great circumspection
is requisite. As to the order of the nature of the things that are to be said,
the Mind is not to be hurried from one Motion to another, without connection or
dependence upon what has been said; nor is it to leap from one consideration to
another, and then back again to the first; the Subject of which the Actor is to
speak, ought to be carefully considered; the place, time, and other
particulars, which may contribute to the passion, and then of all that make up
the most judicious and moving discourse that may be: For Example, if an Actour
is to make imprecations against any one, he ought to observe the order in which
they naturally may happen, for it would be absurd to see him wish to his Enemy
at last a curse which would be but the consequent of his first imprecation.

To order must be added Figures, I mean those great Figures which express the
things themselves, not those little boyish ones which play in words, such as
Antitheses, which always spoil a pathetick discourse because they seem affected
and Scholar like, showing rather a quiet then a troubled mind.

The Figures too ought to be very various, and not staid too long upon, because
a mind that is in agitation cannot talk long the same way; the Figures of
tenderness and grief ought to be mingled with those of fury and rage: a man is
to complain and sigh, and not to roar or scold, and he is seldom to break out
into the highest violence, but when there is enough to make him rave, for that
agitation of the mind has no limits and goes much further, then the motions of
grief, anger or despair.

To all this may be objected, that a pathetick discourse thus managed and
governed by rules cannot fail of appearing affected, and show the very art it
is made by not representing naturally by consequent the state of the humane
mind, which acts according to its Idea's and motives without any rule but
confusion and disorder. To Answer this we must say, that this disorder in the
words of a man is a fault which weakens even the impression which else his
passion would make, and therefore ought to be reformed upon the Stage, which
suffers nothing imperfect; but in doing of it there ought to be a mixture of
the greatest figures, that still the Image of the Motions of a troubled Mind
may remain. Thus by an orderly Method one reforms the defect of Nature in her
Transports, and by a sensible variety of figures, one keeps some resemblance of
the disorder of Nature. This is all that I can say, that is any ways singular
upon so common a Subject.

Chapter the Seventh.
Of the Figures.
ALL those ingenious Varieties of Speech which the Learned have invented,
whereby to express their thoughts in a nobler way than the vulgar, and which
are called Figures of Rhetoric, are without doubt the most notable ornaments
of Discourse; for by them every thing appears to a greater advantage: It Is they
that give the grace to Narrations, probability to all other reasonings, and
strength to the passions, and without them all our Discourses are low, mean,
and popular, disagreeable, and without effect. Therefore the best Advice one
can give to a Poet, is, that he should be perfect in the knowledge of the
Figures, by studying carefully what the Professors of Rhetoric have writ on
that Subject, and which we shall not here repeat: Yet let him remember, that
it is not enough to read and know their names and distinctions, but let him
diligently examine their Energy, and what Effect they are like to produce upon
the Stage: Neither ought that to suffice without knowing, and that
particularly, how to apply them, and vary them, to produce the Effect we have
observed in the precedent Chapter; he must know when to use the impetuous ones,
and when to employ the milder, such as Ironies, according to the diversity of
his Subject, and the Effect he desires they should produce. For Example; If it
be necessary that an Actor should leave the Stage in a great rage, then he must
be moved by degrees, beginning by the softer Figures, and at last be raised to
the highest Transports a Soul is capable of; but if on the contrary an Actor is
to grow calm before he goes off, then it is best beginning with violent Figures,
and such as most express the impetuosity of a disturbed Mind, till by little
and little he becomes more moderate, and gives room to use gentler Expressions.
To make our Poet expert in this, he ought, besides reading of the Ancients, to
frequent the Stage much; for there, much better than in Books, he may observe
good or ill Figures, and when they are well or ill placed, and to help him a
little, I will communicate those Observations I my self have made.

First, He will discover that which I have said elsewhere, which is, that
nothing is to be expressed without Figures upon the Stage: And if the simplest
Shepherds are clothed in Silk, and wear Silver Sheephooks, every thing they say
ought likewise to be adorned, and have its grace, even so much, that those very
things which seem least capable of that Imbellishment, must be ordered with so
much imperceptible Art, that no Figures appear, and yet be there secretly and
nicely applied; for if Poetry is the Kingdom of Figures, the Stage is its
Throne, from whence it conveys by appearances well managed by him that speaks,
Sentiments into the Soul of the hearers, which are not really in his.

But let him observe likewise, that as there is great difference between
Tragedy and Comedy, they have also their different Figures. Tragedy, as it is
always serious and great, employs none but noble Figures, which draw their
force from the Sentiments of the Stage, and when we mingle Allusions, or
Antitheses, or Equivocal, Proverbial ways of speaking, it degenerates
immediately, and loses all its Majesty. It Is quite otherwise with Comedy, which
having none but vulgar Sentiments, it rejects not Proverbs, nor any thing that
may contribute to make a Jest, that being its Character, and the best part of
its Ornaments; nay, it is hard Comedy should rise without a fall, for no sooner
does it aim at solid Discourses, or Figures fit for Tragedy, but we laugh it
out of doors, as we would do a Chambermaid that should talk nothing but
Romance; therefore it is hard that the Figures for one of these Poems should be
aptly used in the other without great wariness, and that Plautus has done in
some of his Plays with success.

Besides, among those Figures which are great and serious, the Poet may observe
some to be fitter for the Stage than others. For Example, Apostrophes, which I
have always observed to do very well; for they suppose either a true person who
is absent to be present, or some feigned person which is but in the Idaea of
Fiction, such as Virtue, ones Country; and thereupon the Actor talks to them as
present, which is extremely Theatral, because it makes two persons where there
is but one; and though the deceit is visible enough, yet being an effect of the
passion of the Actor, it carrys along with it the Imagination of the Audience,
and that particularly when he that speaks is alone; for then there can be no
mistake in the Mind of the Spectators; for it is plain, that the person to whom
the Actor speaks, is a Fiction of his own brain, his Discourse not being
applicable to any other. Monsieur Corneille uses this Figure frequently, and
Stiblinus esteems extremely the complaints of Hecuba in the Troades of
Euripides, by reason of this Figure, which is there frequently and beautifully
made use of. But in the practice of this there are two faults to be avoided;
the first is not to have it too often, for then, besides the want of variety,
which argues want of Invention to please; it grows likewise troublesome, by
making too many imaginary persons, and in this kind one of our Authors was
faulty, who in the same Play, and that a piece of no great length made an Actor
speak at least a dozen times to Heaven. The other fault to be avoided is, that
an Actor speaking to a King, a Father, a Judge, or some person to whom respect
is due, ought not to fall into a long Apostrophe to an Imaginary person,
because it is against the Rules of decency, that a man should leave addressing
to a person of Authority, to talk to a thing absent, or a Chymera of his own
brain; not but that if it were extreme short, and the Discourse presently
continued to the person present, it might very well pass; as in this Example.

O Nature! who know how true I have always been to thy Sentiments, speak
here in my defense.

And then continuing and addressing to his Father, say,

It Is she, O my Father, that must justify what I have done, etc.

By this slight the Figure brings force and variety to the Discourse, and yet
does nothing against the Laws of Respect, so small a Transport being very
allowable to a man passionate and innocent, and the quick return brings all
things in order again.

Prosopopaea's quite contrary are very unlucky upon the Stage; for though, as
well as Apostrophes, that Figure supposes persons that are not, and makes dumb
things speak, yet it generally creates confusion, because the Actor already
represents a person that is not, and this person represented makes another
feigned person speak by his mouth, which makes a double Fiction, and much
obscurity; for very few of the Audience are either able, or attentive enough to
observe the Actors passing from his own Discourse, to that of the supposed
person in this Figure, the least noise, or other diversion at that time being
enough to make them lose the Chain, and so confound the Discourses attributed
to the feigned person by Prosopopaea, with those that the Actor makes in his
own person.

I dare affirm besides, that to the people the beauty of this Figure is not
sensible upon the Stage, but rather troublesome, because of their want of skill
and application to distinguish things. For Example; They see an Actor who acts
the King, and are possessed that all that he says is the Discourse of the King he
represents; so that if he comes to make a Prosopopaea, by supposing that either
Virtue, or Love, or such like things speak to him, they are mightily puzzled;
for, though they have sense enough to know that this speech of Love or Virtue
does not properly belong to the King, yet they penetrate not the Mystery of
that double Fiction of a King represented, and speaking by the mouth of an
Actor, and of Virtue likewise speaking by the mouth of the same King; therefore
this Figure is to be avoided, and cannot well be brought upon the Stage, or if
it is sometimes, it must be in Narrations, and then it must be very short, or
in Soliloques, otherwise called Monologues, where the Poet must use much
Industry to show what the thing is he feigns, and makes speak in the
Prosopopaea, that so there may be no obscurity nor room for mistake, neither is
he to judge of the use of this Figure by its being employed in Epick Poems and
Orations; for they being generally designed to be read at leisure, it is easy
upon any obscurity to look back and discover where the difficulty lies; but in
the Stage where the best part of the Audience is made up of the unlearned, and
where the thing passes in Discourse of a sudden without repeal, there is no
remedy for those who are once fallen into obscurity, but to remain in it; and
in Orations, the obscurity cannot be so great, because there the person that
speaks makes no double Fiction, and so is easily understood.

Irony is a Drammatick Figure, and of its own nature very Theatral; for by
saying in jest or scorn the contrary of that which it really means, it carrys a
kind of disguise, and makes an agreeable Effect.

Exclamations are extreme proper for the Stage, as being the marks of a Mind
much moved with passion.

Hyperbole is of the same rank, because the words there carrying ones
Imagination further than their natural sense, it is fittest for the Stage where
all things are to be magnified, as if it were continual Enchantment and
Illusion.

Interrogation, which Scaliger says is only a Figure by use, and not of its own
nature, is likewise the mark of an agitated Mind, and by consequent Theatral.

And amongst them all, certainly Imprecation will be judged Theatral, as being
the Effect of a violent Transport, and its Discourse ought to be impetuous,
with bold expressions, and words full of Extremes.

This I think may suffice for our Poet, without making an unnecessary
repetition of what the Rhetoricians may have taught him, and which he may read
with great profit in Scaliger's Poeticks.

Chapter the Eighth.
Of Monologues, or Discourses made by a single Person.
THough I have not met with the word Monologue amongst Ancient Authors, who
have treated of the Stage; and that Scaliger himself, who has not forgot any
curiosity upon this Subject, has nothing of it; I shall not nevertheless
forbear to say something of it according to the meaning of our Modern Poets.

To being therefore by a necessary Observation we must not confound the Monodia
of the Ancients with that which we call now Monologue; for though the first is
some piece of Poetry, sung or recited by one man alone, yet custom has fixed its
signification to those Funeral Songs which were sung by one of the Quire, in
honor of the Dead; and it is thought that the Musician Olympus was the first
that used it, in memory and favor of Python, as Aristoxenes affirms; which
makes me wonder at one of our Modern Authors, who says, that the Monodia was a
Poem composed under the name of one person, such as the Cassandra of Lycophron.

Besides, there are among the Learned some who will not receive the Greek word
for a Discourse made by one man by himself, but say it means a Discourse in
every thing one and like its self without variety.

For my part I believe that in our time we have called Monologues that which
the Ancients called the Discourse of a single person Monoprosopon, as many
Eclogues both Greek and Latin, and many Discourses of the Chorus's in Plays,
which Stiblinus calls Monodias, as the Discourse of Electra alone in Euripides,
and another of the same in Sophocles, though she speaks in the presence of the
Quire.

I confess that it is sometimes very pleasant to see a man upon the Stage lay
open his heart, and speak boldly of his most secret thoughts, explain his
designs, and give a vent to all that his passion suggests; but without doubt it
is very hard to make an Actor do it with probability.

The Ancients could not bring in these Monologues, because of the Chorus, which
never, or very seldom left the Stage; and except that Monologue which Ajax in
Sophocles makes at the corner of a Wood upon the point of killing himself while
the Chorus was gone out to look for him; I do not believe there is any other in
the Five and thirty Greek Tragedies which are left. I know very well that in
many Scenes there is but one Actor named; but if we observe narrowly, we shall
always find that he is not alone upon the Stage, and that his Discourse is
directed to some that follow him, though they are not set down at the beginning
of the Scenes.

As for Prologues, they are indeed made by one single Actor, but not in the
nature of Monologues; it is a thing by it self, which indeed among the Ancients
was one part of the Drammatick Poem, but not of the Theatral Action; it is a
Discourse made to the Spectators, to instruct them of the Story which begun
amongst the Ancients as soon as the Chorus came on.

The two Latin Comic Poets have many Monologues in all their Plays, some of
them are brought in properly and according to reason, others not. I shall not
here make any Criticism upon them, but give my Opinion what Rules are to be
observed to make a Monologue with probability.

First of all, an Actor must never make a Monologue, while he addresses himself
to the Audience, with a design to inform them of something they are to know;
but there must be found out something in the Truth of the Action that may be
colorable to make him speak in that manner. Else It Is a fault in the
Representation, of which both Plautus and Terence are guilty.

Secondly, When he that thinks he speaks alone is over heard by chance, by some
other he must then be reputed to speak softly, because it is not probable that
a man by himself should speak so loud as Players must do to be heard by the
Audience. I confess indeed with Scaliger, that this is one of the faults of the
Stage, which must be excused only by the necessity of Representation, it being
impossible to represent the thoughts of a man otherwise than by his words; but
that which makes this fault the more apparent, is, when another Actor hears all
that that man says, who speaks alone; and though it may happen that a man may
speak aloud of that which he ought only to think, and which he intends only to
say to himself, yet that being a gross Imprudence, ought not to be represented
upon the Stage.

Therefore in these Cases one must either find out a probable reason to make
the Actor speak aloud, which is very hard to do, or else the Poet ought to use
such Art in the Composition of the Monologue, as that the Actor should
sometimes raise his voice in saying certain words only, and speak with a low
voice in others, that so the Actor who is within hearing might be supposed to
hear some spoke with passion, and not the others, as being spoke softly, and in
the mean time the other Actor upon what he does hear might make some
Exclamations, and seem concerned that he could not hear the rest. Nay, when the
Actor, who should speak the Monologue, should speak softly, then the other
Actor should observe all his Actions, as of a man much taken up with his own
thoughts, and in a deep study; and it may be this way the probability of the
Stage might be preserved with some addition of ornament to the Scene in hand;
but to execute this well, one must not meet with proud, impertinent Players,
who taking no Advice but from their own Ignorance and presumption, think they
perform all things admirably well; for a Scene of this nature would hardly
succeed, except as docile Actors as those of the new Company of the Marest were
wont to be, undertook it.

The third Observation about Monologues, is to make them so, as not to chock
the probability of the circumstances of time and place: For Example; It would
be absurd to put a Monologue in the mouth of a General of an Army, who should
be in the middle of a Town just stormed by his Army. There would be likewise
little probability if a Lover should hear of some great danger his Mistress
were in, and instead of running to her relief, should stand still and make a
long complaint against the Stars, he would be as little forgiven in the
Representation, as in the Reality; so that in a word, all that can be done, is
still to keep to the Rules of probability and decency as the only Guide of the
Stage.

Chapter the Ninth.
Of a Parts, or Discourses made to ones self in the presence of others.
IT often happens upon the Stage, that one Party speaks in the presence of
another who hears and sees him, and that nevertheless his words represent some
thought known to no body but himself.

There are very few of those to be met with in the Greek Poets, and except a
Verse or two that the Chorus speaks after some long Discourse of an Actor; or
when a new Actor comes upon the Stage, I do not know of any other Example, and
this may serve to give us a hint how cautious we are to be in observing the
probability of the Stage, since in a matter of forty Poems they have so rarely
taken the liberty of representing a man's secret thoughts by words spoke aloud.

The Romans have taken much more license in this kind; Terence not quite so
much as Plautus, who makes a parts very frequently, and often intollerably
absurd. Seneca the Tragedian is not more regular in this, than in any other of
the Rules of the Stage; for in his Agamemnon, Clytemnestra makes an a part of
seventeen Verses. Our Moderns, who have imitated the Ancients much more in
their faults, than in their Excellencies, make likewise such absurd a parts,
that the most gross among the common people can hardly bear them.

I know that those a parts do sometimes make very good sport upon the Stage,
and it is often necessary to introduce them to make known to the Spectators some
secret thought of some Actor, without which they would be in the dark: As for
Example; When an Actor dissembles, but at the same time it seems a little hard
to conceive (though Scaliger by a great Indulgence for the Stage allows it)
that an Actor shall speak loud enough to be heard by the Audience, and yet not
be overheard by another Actor who stands by him; and that which is worse is,
that to feign he does not hear him, he is forced to make twenty ridiculous
Grimaces. Let us see therefore if by Art we can any ways render these a parts,
if not entirely probable, at least supportable to the Stage.

In order to this I divide them into three sorts; the first, when two Actors,
each of them at one corner of the Stage speak as it were to themselves of their
own concerns, making as if they did neither see nor hear one another.

The second sort is, when one Actor speaks, supposing the other Actor whom he
sees and hears, not to see nor hear him.

The third sort is, when both Actors hearing and seeing one another, one of
them for some sudden consideration, speaks as if he were not heard by the other.

Now, to order it so in all these occasions, that the Spectators Judgment shall
not be chock'd by any improbability, I have bethought my self what might be
done.

First then, an a part ought to be very short, and contain very few words;
particularly, when in all the rest of the Action both Actors see and hear one
another; and indeed about half a score, or a dozen words, or one Verse, are the
measure of a just a part; the best of all is an a part of one word, because
even in the nature of things, one word may slip from us, and not be overheard
by him that speaks to us: But long a parts, such as Plautus makes, are
unexcusable, because they put the other Actor quite out of countenance, and
make him, that he knows not at last what posture to be in, to make the Audience
believe he does not hear the other, who speaks aloud so long, and so near him.

Besides, one must take ones time very well to make an a part. An Actor who is
serious in talking, not being lightly to be interrupted by another, without
some probable color for his stopping in the middle of a Discourse, which must
give the other who is to make the a part, an opportunity to make it handsomely;
and if he that is speaking does as it were interrupt himself, by saying
something softly, which ought not to be overheard, he that hearkens must
wonder at his ceasing to speak, and either know or think he ghesses the true
reason of it, for else it would be unnatural that a man should speak and be
silent by fits, and they that stand by, neither be surpised at it, nor ghess
at the cause. The Poet therefore must take either the time of an Exclamation,
or some such other Figure, whereby an Actor may be supposed to be in a
condition not to speak for some moments, nor to hearken to what another says,
and at that time a few words, or half a Verse may be put in another Actors
mouth, to make a reasonable a part. If it happens so that the time in which
one Actor makes his a part, is sensible to the other, he must say some word
that marks his astonishment of the others distractfulness, either feigning that
he did not hear him well, or mistook him, or so. We have an Example of this in
Plautus's Mostellaria, where Tranion having made an a part, Theuropides asks
him what it is he mumbles to himself, which shows the Slave to have spoke
softly. The same Poet does the like in his Aulularia, p. 337.
where Staphila having said aside, that she had rather be hanged than serve any
longer such a covetous, mad Fellow as Euclio: Euclio answers, See how this Jade
murmurs something to her self.

When two Actors see not one another, and each of them make an a part, one of
them must still be supposed to be sometimes silent. For Example; If a Lover be
to make a complaint in some solitary place, where another Lady comes to look
something she has lost, I think the Lover ought to be in some great Extacy of
grief to give the Lady time to speak, and then the Lady ought to be employed in
looking what she came for, to give the Lover time to continue his complaint,
and then these a parts may be longer than the ordinary ones.

There are some occasions where they may be yet longer; as if one of the Actors
does not see the other, and is doing something which requires some time, he
that sees him, without being seen, may make a Discourse that shall last as long
as his Action. For Example; If a covetous man tell his money, the Thief that
sees him may make an a part, that shall last all that time; nay it is
necessary there should be one then, there being no greater fault upon the Stage
than to have it silent; and whatsoever is doing, some body or other must speak,
and there is to be no cessation of that, but in the Intervals of the Acts; nay,
if something falls out in the Play, that may seem naturally to strike them all
dumb, yet one Actor ought to be kept on purpose to say something of their
silence, lest the Action should cease in the middle of an Act or Scene.

From these general Observations, the Poet may easily govern himself so as to
make a judicious a part; but if he desires more light upon this Subject, let
him read Monsieur de la Menardiere, in his sixth Chapter of his Poeticks, where
he makes many judicious Remarks; only I cannot agree to two Observations he
makes; the first is, when he says that Poets might make more reasonable a
parts, if it were written on one side of the Stage. For Example; This is the
Louvre, and on the other side, This is the Palace Royal; for the Stage cannot
comprehend two places so far distant from one another. I thought at my first
reading him, that it was a raillery he made upon our Modern Poets absurdities,
but having afterward observed that in the eighth Chapter he makes his Stage
contain a whole City, I saw he was in earnest. The other thing in which we
disagree is, that he cites Scaliger in the one and twentieth Book of his
Poeticks, to show that he condemns all a parts upon the Stage; for Scaliger in
that place does not say one word of it; he describes in that Chapter the
Theater of the Ancients, and having spoke of the Scene, which represented the
Actors Houses, and of the Proscenion, or Forescene, where they appeared; and of
the Orchestra designed for the Music and Dancers, he reproaches the French
Nation with so gross an Ignorance in his time, that they had not so much as a
Painted Cloth or Hanging to hide those Things and Actors which were not to be
seen: Nunc in Gallia it a agunt fabulas, ut omnia* in conspectu sint, universus
apparatus dispositis sublimibus sedibus; Personae ipsae nunquam discedunt, qui
silent pro absentibus habentur. At enim vero perridiculum ibi spectatorem
videre te audire, and te videre, teipsum non audire quae alius coram te de te
loquatur: quasi ibi non sis ubi es. Cum tamen maxima Poetae vis sit suspendere
animos, atque eos facere semper expectantes. At hic tibi novum fit nihil, ut
prius satietas subrepat, quam obrepat fames. Scal. l. 1. c. 21. Poet.
And these are his Words.

In France, says he, they Act Plays so, that all things are exposed to the Eyes
of the Spectators; all the Decorations appear upon the Stage, the Actors never
disappear; only those that are silent, are reputed absent: But certainly it
must be very ridiculous, that the Spectators should know that you hear and see,
and yet you your self should not hear nor see what is said of you in your own
presence, as if you were not where you are: Whereas the true Art of the Poet is
to suspend the Attention of the Audience, and make them always expect some
Novelty; but there, far from that, Satiety is upon one, before ones Appetite is
raised.

Thus it is that Scaliger describes the old French Stage; which I have alleged
elsewhere, to prove the difference between that and our Stage, as it is brought
to Perfection at this time, and to what Splendor it might be brought, by
following the Example of the Ancients. But Scaliger's Design, as it appears,
was not here to speak of ill Apartes, as may appear to any who shall carefully
read what he writes there of the Fabric of the Ancient Theaters.

Chapter the Tenth.
Of the Acts.
WE call Act that Fifth part of a Drammatick Poem which is begun and ended with
Music, and consists, in our Plays, of about Three hundred Verses, or
thereabouts. The ancient Greek Poets knew not the Name, though they had the
Thing; for their Episodes (which, according to Aristotle, were that which was
contained between two Singings of the Chorus) was the same thing, and our
Music answers their Chorus. The Romans have had the Word, (as we from them)
but not, I believe, always; for at first it signified a whole Play, as the Word
Dramma did among the Greeks: but, I believe, when Comedy came to lose its
Choruses, and had nothing left but Dancing, Music, and Buffooning, for
Interludes, then the Poets bethought themselves to distinguish their Plays by
Acts, for to take off the Confusion that must else have been in reading of
them. And this, I think, happened but late neither; for we see nothing of it in
those who were Contemporaries with Terence. Neve minor, n^ve sit quinto
productior actu Fabula, quae posci vult and spectata reponi.
Horace is, I think, the first that has given us any Precepts about it, as well
for the Distinction as Number; and it is wonderful that Athenaeus, who cites so
many Greek Drammatick Poets, does not give us the least hint, from which we
might conjecture, that this Distinction was known in his time. But since the
Greeks have had the Thing, I will treat of it under the name of Acts, without
examining in what time, or how it came by that Name.

First then, we must know, that Poets have generally agreed, that all Drammas
regularly should have neither more nor less than Five Acts: And the Proof of
this is in the general Observation of it; but for the Reason, I do not know
whether there be any founded in Nature. Rhetoric has this advantage over
Poetry in the Parts of Oration, that the Exord, Narration, Confirmation, and
Peroration, are founded upon a way of Discoursing natural to all Men; for every
one always makes some little Preface, then passes to the thing he has to say,
which he confirms by Reason, and, as he makes an end, endeavors to gain the
Favor of those that hear him. But for the Five Acts of the Drammatick Poem,
they have not been framed upon any such ground; only they owe their being to
the many Observations of the Poets, who have studied to find out what would be
most agreeable to their Spectators. First then, having perceived that it was
not possible for their Spectators to have a continued Attention to the Reciting
of Fifteen or Sixteen hundred Verses, without interruption, they used Choruses,
whose Singing and Dancing eased the Impatience of the Spectators, and put them
in good humor to hear the Remainder of the Dramma: and for the same reason
they divided it into Five Parts, which happened so well, that whether it be that
that is a Proportion that just hits the Weakness of the Audience, or that by
Custom we are made Friends to it, it is certain, that we do not naturally like a
Play that has more or less than Five Acts, which divide the Time of so many
Hours as we can well spare to a Diversion, without making it a Toil. We see by
experience, that the Italian Comedians, who fail in this, by making only Three
Acts, according to their ill-received Custom, make the First Act so very long,
that it is most importunately tedious. I should therefore advise the Poet to
make Five Acts, and each of them of about Three hundred Verses, or little more,
having always observed, that the Patience of the Audience seldom reaches beyond
Sixteen hundred Verses; and every body knows, that two of the most Ingenious
and Magnificent of our Plays have miscarried for having been too long: For it is
an ordinary thing to see the Spectators applaud a Play of a good just Length,
though with some Faults, rather than admire an exact accomplished one, that is
too long. We can find Excuses for the Poet in any thing else; but Weariness and
Satiety have that particular to them, that they make even the best things
insupportable to us.

Let the Poet then seek among the Ancients the Observation of this Rule. The
Greeks have both known and practiced this Division of the Drammatick Poem, but
not all alike. It is pretty apparent in Sophocles: Aeschylus had not attained
in his time the exactness of the Rules; and as for Euripides, he always does so
embarass himself with Prologues, that his Plays seem often to have Six Acts,
and sometimes Seven. Besides, it seems that in some Plays the Chorus sings in
the middle of an Act, and so interrupts the Sequel; which is confirmed by
Horace, who gives it for a Rule, That the Chorus should sing nothing in the
middle of the Acts, that is not proper to the Subject. But this regards a
Criticism not useful in our days, by which perhaps we might doubt of the
Choruses singing in the middle of an Act: For either the Chorus did not sing,
or the Verses are ill placed in our Impressions, as we can make appear by
diverse Plays of Aristophanes, and in the Bacchants of Euripides.

As for the Latin Tragedies, which we have under the Name of Seneca, I think
our Poet may forbear imitating them in the Structure, as in all the rest,
except in the Refinedness of the Thoughts? for to me nothing seems so
ridiculous, and withal so tedious, as to see one Man alone make an Act, without
any Variety; and that a Ghost, a God, or some Hero, shall make at the same
time the Prologue, and, according to Euripides, an Act too.

It is not so easy to give Advice about Aristophanes's Comedies; for they have
all of them a Prologue, after the way of the Greek Tragedy; but the Plays are
not all alike: some of them are very regular, and others so full of confusion,
that it is very hard to name the Acts distinctly; as in that called The Birds,
where it is hard to say which is the first Singing of the Chorus, nor how many
Acts there is, nor where the Second begins: And we see that the Interpreters
have not marked the Acts in our Impressions, finding them too much out of order
to be easily methodiz'd. Though, I think, the greatest difficulty has been,
either out of the License of old or middle Comedy, or by the Corruption of the
Copies, which Time partly dispersed, and the Ignorance of the Compilers and
Printers has ill reestablished.

Plautus's Comedies have been liable to the same Misfortunes in many places,
where there are whole Scenes lost, others added, and Acts confounded, as in the
Mostellaria, of which the Scene which is reckoned the Third of the First Act,
ought to be the First of the Fourth: For after the Second Scene of the Third
Act, the Stage is empty, and without Action, Theuropides and Tranion entering
into Simon's House to visit him, and no other Actor remains upon the Stage; so
that the Music or the Mimes ought to have marked the Interval of an Act in
this place: but the Scene which is counted for the Second of the Fourth Act,
ought to be added to this, which is put for the First of the Third Act; for
there is no distinction neither of Time nor Action between them, the Stage
having still the same Persons present, and the same Discourses going on; and so
these two together must make the First of the Fourth Act, since between that
which is put for the last of the Third Act, and these two, there is no
separation; for Theuropides is still upon the Stage, being neither gone off,
nor come on again: so that the Interludes have no time wherein they may be
inserted to distinguish the Acts.

As for Terence's Comedies, they may be a Model for a great many things, to
those who have a mind to gain Reputation, and excel in this Art.

It has been asked sometimes, When one may say properly, that an Act is
finished? And it has been answered by Donatus, Est igitur attente
animadvertendum, Vbi, and quando Scena vacua sit ab omnibus personis ut in ea
Chorus vel tibicen audiri possit, quod cum viderimus, ibi actum finitum esse
debemus agnoscere, etc.
That it is when the Stage is empty, and without any Actor. But if it were so,
we might object, That it would be in the power of the Players to shorten or
lengthen any Act at their pleasure; for if they did but take away the Music,
they might appear one after another, without ever leaving the Stage empty: And
besides, when the Scenes are broken, as they are frequently enough in our
Plays, the Music might play, since the Stage would be empty. Donat. in Andr.
Terent.
Therefore, I think, that the Act ends not when the Stage is without an Actor,
but when it is without Action. And that which makes me say so, is, that I have
observed, that among the Ancients the Chorus does both sing and dance, and the
Music play, though there be an Actor upon the Stage, which happens two ways;
the one, when an Actor remains upon the Stage, but incapable of Action, as
Hecuba in Euripides, who falls in a swoon between the First and Second Act; and
the Amphytrio of Plautus, surpised by a Thunderbolt, between the Fourth and
Fifth Act. The other Case is, when the Actor which appears at the end of an Act
does mingle with the Chorus, as Electra in the Intervals of the Acts of the
Orestes of Euripides; and other Actors in the second Iphigenia, and in the
Bacchantes; this being common enough to Tragedy, Now in the first Case, the
Actor which remained upon the Stage without Action, stopped the Course of the
Theatral Action, and so finished the Act: And in the second Case, the Actor
making part of the Chorus, gave easily to understand, that the Theatral Action
was ceased, and by consequent the Act ended. Therefore I am not of Donatus's
Opinion, when he writes, That the Reason which obliged Menander to take away
the Chorus from Comedy, and likewise forced Poets to confound their Acts, so as
no body could distinguish them, was, that the Spectators were grown so
impatient, that they withdrew as soon as the Actors disappeared from off the
Stage, to make room for the Music, which was to mark the Interval of the Acts.
For, I think, he spoke as a Man not thoroughly instructed in the Matters of the
Stage. For the Impatience of the Spectators must needs be greater, if their
Attention had no ease; and still more, if the Acts were not broken, nor
distinguished, as that must be, if the last Scene of an Act was immediately
racked to the first of the next; for then the Theater being never without Actor
or Action, you could not naturally part that, which was not separated by any
Interval of Time. Besides, the Music among the Ancients was very agreeable,
and did not, as now a days, consist of two or three scurvy Violins, but was one
of the greatest Diversions of their Comedies; and the Masters of those Musical
Compositions had their Names graven in all Public Inscriptions, with those of
the Poet, and Chief Histrio or Player.

To which, if we add the other Interludes, of Mimes, Dances, and Buffooning, we
may easily judge, that there was less reason to be impatient in the Intervals
of the Acts, than in the Acts themselves; particularly, if some scurvy Actor
were to come on to spoil a Part, such as formerly was Pellio, who acted so ill
in Plautus's Epidicus, that the Poet affronted him publicly the next day, when
the Bacchides was represented.

Besides, we do not see any where but in Plautus, that the Acts are not well
distinguished; (and in him too it is the fault of the Printers.) Neither do I
think that his Plays were so little diverting, as to need such a scurvy
Contrivance to fix the Spectators Attention; for his Plays have more Action,
and are not so serious as Terence's, and always succeeded better in the
Representation, though Terence's pleased the Reader better, as having Passions
better governed, more elegant Expressions, and modester Characters. But to come
to Donatus; he shows himself that he was not very sure of what he writ, when he
adds, That the Learned were not all agreed, that it was for this reason that
Menander took away the Chorus from Comedy, and confounded the Acts. Besides,
that which makes me think that he speaks as a man that did not very well
understand the Stage, is what he says of Terences Eunuchus, That the Acts are
there more confounded, than in any other of his Plays, and that none but the
Learned can distinguish them well. In which (says he) the Poet has made but one
Act of all five, that the Spectator might scarce have the time to breathe, and
to hinder him by the continuation of the Events from rising before the Scenes
were taken away: For it is most certain, that this Comedy is one of those in
which the Acts are best distinguished, though the Scenes are also best knit
together; for at the end of every Act the Actors say precisely where they are
going, and what they are going to do; and they that begin the next Act tell
whence they come, and why they come on upon the Stage; so that there is not the
least suspicion of that imaginary confusion, of which Donatus speaks. Nay, the
Latins are generally so careful to make the distinction remarkable, that
Plautus having made Pseudolus go out the last man in the first Act, and come in
the first man in the second, because that is against the Rules, and that it
might cause some confusion, he makes him say these words as he goes out; While
I retire to my house there to call the great Council of all my Cheats, the
Music will divert you. And for this reason in the Heautontimorumenos of
Terence, Menedemus, who makes an end of the fourth Act, and begins the fifth,
says precisely, That he had been some time absent, that he had been in the
remotest part of his house, where he had seen Clitipho shut himself up with
Bacchide; so that there is no room to believe that confusion of Acts, as
Donatus would have it, and indeed may say, that in most of the Latin Comicks,
it is only by the ignorance of those who have marked the Acts, that there is
any confusion, as in the Amphytrio of Plautus, where the fourth Act ought to
begin by that Scene which is put for the last of the third Act; and in the
Heautontimorumenos of Terence, where the fourth Act should begin at the Scene
cited for the second, that which is marked for the first belonging properly to
the third Act, it is then much more reasonable to believe what we have said,
which is, that the Actor in these occasions where he seems to continue an Act,
did mingle with the Mimes, and other Interlude Actors, as in Tragedy with the
Chorus, or that the Copys are corrupted, and Scenes lost; or at least some
Verses which might have justified the Poets Art; as it has happened to Plautus
in many places, of which I speak more at length in my Observations. But let us
come now to the Instruction of the Poet about the division and structure of his
Acts.

Having then chosen his Subject, he must remember to take the Action he has a
mind to represent in its last point, Perspecto argumento, scire debemus hanc
esse virtutem poeticam ut a novissimis argumenti rebus incipiens, etc. Donat.
in Terent. And.
and he must believe, if he be not very sterile indeed, that the less matter he
shall borrow, the more liberty he shall have for agreeable Invention; therefore
let him so strengthen himself, as in appearance not to have wherewithal to make
above one Act; things passed will furnish him with matter to fill up the
others, either by bringing the Events of the Story somewhat nearer, or by
Recitals, or other ingenious Inventions. Thus Furipides in his Orestes opens
his Stage with the very moment in which those that were guilty of
Clitemnestra's death, were to be judged. One would think that there were not
matter for one Act, and that the Catastrophe must presently follow; but he
prepares all so dexterously by the coming of Menelaus, and Hermiones absenting
her self from the Palace, that this Tragedy is one of the most Noble and
Excellent ones of all Antiquity. Corneille does so in his Horatius; he begins
his Story just after the Truce agreed upon by both Armies, and the Gombat of
the three against three resolved upon for the decision of the Cause; then he
furnishes his Stage with those passions which he draws from Sabina's Marriage.

After this, he must consider that which Aristotle says of Episodes; for the
Drammatick Poem has three things differing from each other, which are the
Constitution of the Fable or Story, the Composition of the Tragedy, which is
properly, the disposing of the Acts and Scenes, and the versification or Poetry.

The constitution of the Fable is the Invention and Order of the Subject,
whether from Story, or received Fables, or the Imagination of the Poet.
Aristotle, by the Constitution of the Fable, means only that part of the Story
or Subject which comprehends the Theatral Action, that is, which happens after
the opening of the Stage, and is of Opinion, that all that is done before, is
out of the Constitution of the Fable; and for this reason, speaking of
probability, he says, That it is lawful for the Poet to suppose something
against probability, provided it be without the Fable, that is, in those things
which are done before the opening of the Stage, and are to be made known
afterward by some Actor; and he brings for Example Sophocles in his Oedypus,
in which he supposes in the part which happens before the overture of the
Stage, that Oedypus did not know how King Laius died, which was not at all
probable.

But for my part, I am of Opinion that the Constitution of the Fable ought to
comprehend the whole Story of the Stage; for that which happens before the
opening, is as much of the Subject, as that which happens when the Stage is
open; and I cannot consent that the Poet should suppose any Incidents against
probability in those Adventures which precede the Action represented, because
that they being a foundation for things which happen afterward upon the Stage,
it breaks all the Chain of Events, it being against all order that a thing
probable should be built upon an improbable one; and the Poet is less to be
excused in this, than in any thing; for the Incidents which are before the
opening of the Stage, are in his power, whereas often in the sequel of the Play
the Events constrain each other, and take away some of the Author's liberty.

The Composition of the Tragedy is the disposition of the Acts and Scenes, that
is, of the Episodes, which are to be added to the Constitution of the Fable, to
give it its just proportion, in which often consists the greatest beauty of the
Poem, as it is the greatest Art of the Poet; for the same Subject, that is, the
same Constitution of Fable, without altering the Fund or the Events, may have a
Disposition of Acts and Scenes so differing, that is, the Episodes so diversely
ordered, that there may be a very good, and a very bad Tragedy made of it. For
Example, that Cinna had resolved to kill Augustus, and engaged diverse of his
Friends in the Design, is of the Constitution of the Fable, but that he comes
and tells the Design to Emilia, repeating to her the very words he had used to
excite the Conspirators, that is of the Composition of the Tragedy, or
Disposition of the Acts; for without changing either the Fund of the Events of
the Fable, another besides Cinna might have related the Conspiracy, and to
another person than Emilia; but such a Narration would not have had the same
Effect; and it is in that that Mr. Corneille does particularly excel; for he has
an Art of placing in his distribution of the Acts and Scenes, such Incidents as
afford him most lively, moving passions, and another man, without changing any
thing in the Subject, would place the same Incidents so as to draw little of
beauty from them. This has made me often wonder at some Learned men, and well
read in Aristotle, who have confounded the Constitution of the Fable with the
Disposition of the Tragedy. For the Philosopher says in express words, That
after having constituted the Fable, you must insert the Episodes, that is, all
the Pathetick Discourses, Narrations, Descriptions, etc. and take care that
they naturally flow from the Fable or Subject. As to the versification, which
is the last part, that depends upon the Talent the Poet has received, and his
study in the Art, which will help him to cultivate and polish Nature. To come
then again to our Subject, the Poet must examine if the Constitution of his
Fable can suffer Episodes; and if so, of what kind, which will be the most
taking, and in what place they will appear, and have their best Effect; and
after this he must divide his Acts so, as if possible, they may not be very
unequal, and that the last Acts have still something of strength and ornament
more than the first, either by the greatness of the Passions, the singularity
of the Events, or the rarity of the Show and Decoration.

To do this well, we must have a full Idaea or Prospect of his whole Subject,
and have it entire before him; for he that comprehends the whole, can easily
examine the parts, and range them; but he that knows his Subject only as he
divides it, runs the hazard of dividing it very unequally.

Some have maintained, that every Act is to be opened by a new Actor that has
not appeared before. I should not dislike this if it could be done so as that
the new Actor brought no confusion upon the Stage, and that his coming on be so
prepared, as that this variety may seem natural to the Subject, and not appear
to be the bare Invention of the Poet, for Art that discovers it self, is
against the Rules of Art upon the Stage. Yet I do not think it necessary to be
always thus practiced, the Poet having other ways of diversifying his Acts by
Incidents, Passions, or some such thing; not that I would confine the Poet
neither to one Episode in an Act, but if he produce more, he must be careful
that they do naturally, and without affectation, create one another; and one of
our best Plays was condemned for being too richly various in this kind, so as
the Audience had not time to breathe after the impression of a moving Passion;
the Graces of the Stage must have time to be rellish'd, and like other humane
pleasures, we lose the Enjoyment of them, if we are either cloyed with them, or
have not the leisure to taste them thoroughly.

Sometimes it happens that there are in a Story such circumstances, that they
are not agreeable, nor decent in the Representation, and yet they might give
rise to noble Narrations, and produce Sentiments, of which the Expressions
would be admirable. In these occasions there is nothing to be done, but to use
the Ancients Artifice, which is to suppose the things done. For Example; It
would have been hard and ridiculous to represent Ajax upon the Stage killing of
Sheep, which he mistook for the Greeks in his rage, and whipping a great Ram
whom he thought to be Ulysses, and yet it was fitting to give some Image of
this to the Spectators; therefore Sophocles does not only make the recital of
it, but supposing this Massacre, arrived in the night, he opens Ajax's Tent,
where appear these creatures slaughtered, and that poor Prince overwhelmed with
grief and madness. Where we may take notice, that the Poet avoided to open the
Stage by the beginning of Ajax's fury; for he could not so well have governed
his Subject, neither would he let it quite pass over, because then he should
not have raised compassion in the minds of his Spectators. Euripides likewise
is very ingenious, when he avoids making Phaedras Nurse corrupt Hyppolitus upon
the Stage (as Seneca and our French Poet Garnier have done) because he must
either have made her say things weak, and of no effect to her design, or have
made her use expressions against the Decency and Majesty of Tragedy; therefore
by making that young Prince appear angry at the old Woman's Discourse to him, he
preserves to the Stage all its Sentiments of Virtue, and yet informs the
Audienee of the thing that was necessary for them to know.

In a word, the most general Precept is so to cast your Subject, as to throw
between the Acts all that can be troublesome to the Poet, or disagreeable to the
Spectators. That which I have said before, that the same Actor ought not to
finish one Act, and begin the next, in strict regularity is true, because that
the Actor that goes off, is supposed to do it upon some important business,
which requires some reasonable time, for the Execution of it; and if he come in
immediately upon the playing of a Tune or two, the Spectators are surpised to
see him come back so soon; but yet there are some Exceptions; for if the Actor
have but little to do, or go but a little way, he may begin the next Act; and
it is ordinary for Plautus so to do; and Terence does it sometimes: But Comedy
suffers this better than Tragedy, because that the Actors in the first being
but of mean condition, they may do any thing hastily, without indecency; but in
Tragedy, the persons being all Ladys, and great Men, their Actions must be more
grave and serious. If the Ancient Tragic Poets begun an Act by the Actor, that
had just ended the preceding Act, it was when he stayed upon the Scene, being
mingled with the Chorus; a thing pretty ordinary with the Women, and of which
the Examples are frequent.

Above all things, Principium debet esse illustre.
methinks the first opening of the Stage ought to be magnificent, either by the
number, the Majesty of the Actors, or by the Pomp of the Decoration. Voss. lib.
1. cap. 7. Poet.


The Greek Tragedys begun generally by a Machine, Sumendum principium ex
illustri re, eaque tum cognata, tum proxama.
which brought on a God or Goddess; that is very noble, but must be but seldom
practiced amongst us, they had a veneration for their Gods, and Plays were a
part of their Religion; Scal. lib. 3. cap. 95. Poet.
but we are ignorant of those Mysteries, and despise them; and I for my part
should rather approve of any other Invention or Contrivance, which should raise
some great Expectation, or a strong desire of knowing something that were past.

The Orestes of Euripides begins very finely, by exposing that unhappy Prince
lying upon a Couch, wrapped up in his Cloak, sleeping with disquiet and starts;
his Sister at his Feet weeping, the Chorus scarce daring to tread for fear of
waking him, and so raise his Fury: all that is pleasing, and raises an
expectation of something extraordinary. The waking of Herod in the Mariamne,
is a fine opening of the Stage. These are things not to be neglected; for they
are to the Poet what an Exordium is to the Orator, to gain the Attention of the
Audience, and the Good Will of his Judges.

Chapter the Eleventh.
Of the Intervals of the Acts.
PAinting and Drammatick Poesy, besides many other Points that they meet in,
do also agree in this, that they cannot possibly give the entire Image of that
which they design to represent, and can comprehend but the least part of their
Design. A Picture cannot show any Person entire, nor any Story but by halves,
and by the visible Parts only. So the Stage cannot represent an Action in all
its Circumstances: Battles of Armies must be supposed, which cannot be seen;
and many other things, either undecent, or frightful. But likewise as the
Excellence of the Painter consists in finishing so rarely well all that he does
show, that by that the Spectator may judge of what he hides; so the Poet must
work with so much Industry, that those things which he shows upon the Stage,
may lead the Spectator to an easy comprehending of those which he either
cannot or ought not to show. It Is for this reason that the Drammatick Poets
have made use of the Intervals of the Acts, to perform those things which could
not so well be done upon the Stage: And the Ancients filled up that space of
time with Choruses, and other Interludes, as we do now with Music. Some may
say, perhaps, That these Intervals are not so very necessary, because one might
so continue the Scenes of a Play without Interludes or Music, that the Actors
who should disappear, should be reputed to do off of the Stage, all that either
could not, or ought not to be done there, while other Actors should appear and
act their Parts. This in it self may be true; but Experience teaches, that
Mankind has not Attention enough to support the reading of one entire Play,
without interruption: for even one Act too long is a most insupportable
trouble; and, as Cicero says, That no Man would make an Oration of one Period,
though he had Breath enough to recite it; so no Auditor would be content with a
Dramma without any pause or stop, though he had an Attention strong enough to
mind it. Variety is our greatest Charm; and by that means Beauties will pass
upon us more agreeably, than a great and excellent one, always the same. But
besides, it happens sometimes, that all the Actors are to be busied for some
time off of the Stage, which then remains empty; and so that time must be
filled up, that the Audience may not expect with disgust and tediousness.
Moreover, if there were always some Actor present upon the Stage, the
Spectators could not naturally imagine that an Actor had employed any more time
in what he had been about, than while the other Actor was speaking; and yet, it
may be, that first Actor must be supposed to need two or three Hours to do his
business in, which cannot be thought to have passed away in half a quarter of
an Hours Talking by another, whom the Audience has seen all the while. But the
Intervals make this probable enough; for the absence of all the Actors, with
the Musicks playing, and the cessation of the Audiences attention, do all
contribute to deceive the Imagination; so as we may take a few Moments for
whole Hours: and then when the Actors return, and say what they have been
doing, we do not wonder that they have performed so much in so little a time.
Besides, the impatience we are in to see the Continuation of the Story, makes
us think we have staid a great while, and so give the more allowance for the
things we hear have been done in that time.

The Poet then must consider well in his Subject what things cannot well be
exposed to view, and throw them in the Intervals; but if they are to afford
Matter to any great Passion or Narration, there the Poet's whole Art will be
necessary, and the Reading of the Ancients to boot, who will afford him great
light in managing those Contrivances.

Sometimes the Beauty of an Action lies in its beginning only, and then you
must show the first Strokes and Preparations of it, and finish it in the
Intervals, and behind the Stage: So we see that Eteocles and Polinices dispute
their Pretensions before their Mother; but they do not fight and kill one
another before her. Otherwhile it happens, that an action has nothing but the
latter part of it fit for Representation, and then the beginning must be
supposed to be done in the Intervals, and the last Touches only made sensible,
and present to the Spectators. Sophocles, as we have observed in the preceding
Chapter, has done this in his Ajax; not that the Poet is bound to do this
always at the end of an Act; for sometimes the thing may come to pass somewhere
further than the Place represented by the Stage, and then the Business may be
related in the next Scene.

The greatest Advantage the Poet has from the Intervals of the Acts, is, that
by that means he can throw off all the troublesome Superfluities of his Subject.
But he must have a care not to fall into one Error, common enough among our
Poets, which is to suppose a thing done in the Interval of an Act, which in all
probability could not have been done without having been seen by the Audience.
And this must happen when it is supposed to have come to pass upon the Place
represented by the Stage; for that being open and exposed to the Spectators
Eyes, nothing can probably be performed there, that shall not be seen. I
remember, upon this Subject, that I was once at a I lay, which otherwise was no
ill Drammatick Poem, in which there was a Bastion of a besieged Town, upon
which were armed Men for its defense; and then in the Interval of an Act this
Town was supposed to be taken by Assault, and yet this Bastion was neither
attacked nor defended upon the Stage; and so the Spectators remained with an
imagination that the Town was not taken. Whereas the Poet might at least have
said something of the probability, if he had found a way to let the Audience
know that the Town had been carried by an Assault in another Place, and so
there had been no need of defending it there.

I shall not here enter into a particular deduction of the Kinds of Interludes
with which the Romans marked the Intervals of the Acts in new Comedy, after
having taken away the Chorus's. I shall not neither say at what time it was
that the Mimes and the Embolarii took possession of the Stage, nor what their
Dancing, Music, and Buffooning was; why they made use of Flutes, and of what
sort they were that are named in ancient Inscriptions of Comedy equal and
unequal, right or left: all that concerns only the understanding the Stage of
the Ancients, and not the Art of making a Drammatick Poem. I had undertaken to
treat of all this in a Book which I should have called The Restoring of the
Theater in France, to show what Ornaments might be added to ours from
Antiquity; but I should here go too far from my Subject, if I should lanch into
this Matter. I will only say, That much of it may be learned out of Scaliger,
Vitruvius, Julius Pollux, Vossius, and others, though they speak of these
Matters with ill Methods, and not much Application.

Chapter the Twelfth.
Of the Scenes.
I Was in some doubt whether I should explain here all the different
Significations of the Word Scene, because the Learned will meet with nothing
but what they know already; however, having considered, that others may have by
it some Instruction about the Matters of the Stage, I thought it not amiss to
do it,

First then, the Word Scene, in its original and proper Signification, is taken
for a Covering of Boughs made by Art, from whence the Feast of the Tabernacles
of the Jews was called Scenopegia; and from thence too some People of Arabia
were called Scenites. Sometimes too it signifies a natural Shade of some
Grotto, or solitary place; so Virgil has it, Tum Sylvis Scena coruscis --
Desuper horrentique atrum nemus imminet umbra.


But because the first Comedies, or rather the first Buffooning, was under some
green Shade, the name of Scene was given to all Places where Comedy was
represented; and Tragedy too, though transferred into great Cities, yet
preserved the name of Scene, with that of Theater, which signifies a place for
Spectacles. But then the Word Scene, even in Drammatick Poetry, was taken in
different Significations; for sometimes it signified the Place of Acting, as we
say, to be upon the Scene; and Pliny has it, That Lucia, an old buffooning
Woman, recited upon the Scene at the Age of a hundred years.

Sometimes it signifies that which we call the Decoration of the Stage; that
is, all the Ornaments of painted Cloth which represent the Place where the
thing is acted; and according to the three kinds of Drammatick Poetry,
Vitruvius teaches how to make three sorts of Scenes or Decorations of the
Stage, fit for Tragedy, Comedy, and Pastoral; and from this Signification is
come the Word Proscenion, or Forescene, attributed by the Greeks to that part
of the Stage where the Histrions or Actors did both act and speak. At last its
Signification became so extended, as to express at once the Place where the
Actors acted, and that where the Spectators were. And it is in this sense that
the Jurisconsult Labeo defines the Scene, according to Vlpian. Sometimes
likewise it signified all that pompous Structure of Buildings, Galleries,
Walks, Seats, and other places, where the Romans used to represent their Games.

From these different Significations have proceeded many Mistakes amongst the
Modern Writers, because they did not rightly understand the Ancients, and so
have confounded the Proscenion with the Decoration, and that again with the
whole Building.

The last sense in which the Word Scene has been taken, and which we
particularly need here, is, when it signifies that part of an Act which brings
any Change upon the Stage, by the change of Actors.

The Greeks never used it in this Signification, Fabulae quidem in Actus
divisio vetus est and a Poetis ipsis: Actus autem in Scenas distributio est a
Grammaticis and a vet. T^rentii and Plauti cod. abest. Vossius, l 2. c. 5. Poet.
tho they had the same distinction of Acts which we have. The Latins first
brought it in use, with the Word Act, in New Comedy, having taken away the
Choruses. I do not find any thing about this, in any Author ancienter than
Donatus; but since we have received it, it will not be amiss to put here some
Instructions to correct the Irregularities of Scenes.

The Ancients, who had no Division of their Acts into Parts, have always very
exactly observed the Union or Dependence of Scenes upon one another; for
knowing that the whole Act could not contain above one sensible Action upon the
Stage, they judged very reasonably, that there was no need of separating the
Parts that should compose it. But when our Poets begun to write for the Stage,
they hardly knew what an Act or a Scene was; they placed a Man upon the Stage,
to recite there what they had composed for him, and they took him away again
when the Capricio of their Muse pleased, and then brought on one or more, which
went off too with as little reason; so that one might have transposed any of
their Scenes, without any injury to the Play, every one of them making as it
were an Act by it self. We have seen upon our Stage a Captain, a Poet, and a
Visionary Lover, all without having any thing to do with one another; and what
they said, was more like so many Scholars Declamations, without any dependency
upon each other.

Now I have observed, that there are four ways of uniting the Scenes together;
to wit, an Union of Presence, another of Seeking, a third of Noise, and a
fourth of Time.

The Union of Presence is, when in the following Scene there remains upon the
Stage an Actor of the preceding Scene; which may be done three ways: Either by
bringing on at once all those that are to be employed in that Act, and make
them retire one after another, according to the diversity of their Interests;
for still those who remain make a new Scene, which is united to the precedent
Scenes by the Presence of those who rest. And this is a noble manner for a
First Act. The second is, when the Actors come upon the Stage one after
another, and none of the first go off; for then all the new Actors make new
Scenes, which are united to the preceding ones by the Presence of those who
were already upon the Stage. And this manner is very good for a last Act. The
Third Way is, when the Actors go and come according to their Interests and
Business: As when two Actors meet upon the Stage, if there goes off but one,
the second who remains makes a new Scene, and knits it with the first, by other
Actors who are to appear; and this way is capable of as much variety as the
Poet pleases.

The Second Way of uniting the Scenes is, by seeking when an Actor who comes
upon the Stage, looks for him who went off; and the Examples are very frequent
among the Latin Comic Poets; but one must be very careful that the reason for
which one Actor looks after the other, be a reason taken from the Subject in
hand, and sensible to the Spectators, or else it would be a false Color
affected, and of no effect; and we must remember besides, that if the Actor who
was upon the Stage goes off, for fear of being seen by him that comes on, that
does not make an union of Scenes, except he that comes on, comes with an
Intention to look for him that goes off. Some of our Moderns have failed in
this, in withdrawing their Actors for fear of being seen by the comers on, when
the New Actor had no Intention to look for him that went off; for in this, far
from being an union of Seeking, it is rather one of avoiding, and so the Scenes
would be united by the very Actor who broke them.

The Union of Noise is, when upon some Noise which is made upon the Stage, an
Actor, who probably might hear it, comes to know the cause, and finds no body
upon the Stage, that Scene made by him is very well united to that which was
made by those who went off, since the Stage does not remain without Action, and
that a Chorus or Music could not be brought in without interrupting the Sequel
of the Story. Plautus has many Examples of that.

As for the last which is made by Time, it is when an Actor, who has nothing to
do with those who go off the Stage, comes on, but in such a nick of time, that
he could not reasonably be supposed to do it sooner or later. We have a precise
Example of this in the Eunuchus of Terence, in the third Act where Antipho, who
has nothing to do with Chremes, nor those who go off the Stage, says, That he
is in much trouble not to find Chaerea, who was that day to take care of the
Dinner for a Club of young men, that the hour of the Assignation was passed,
and that he is going to look him, and so popt upon him. Now it is most certain
Antipho comes on naturally at the due time, and that Chaerea had failed by
being taken up in the Intrigue, in which Parmeno had engaged him by making him
pass for an Eunuch, with a young Woman that he was in love with. Yet I must say
this, that this Union of Scenes, except it be done with very natural Colors,
and great Exactness, is not to be much practiced.

Some have put the Question, What ought to be the number of Scenes in each Act?
The Poet must use in that his own Judgment; if there be very few, the Act will
want variety; if there be many, and short, the Act will be perplexed; there
will be little said, and much confusion. But we must observe that Comedy
endures many more Scenes than Tragedy, as being more active, and less engaged
in great passions which take up time. The Ancients have sometimes made up an
Act of one single Scene, but I do think that taedious, and much more when as in
Seneca there is but one Actor for that Scene. I think in Tragedy there ought to
be at least three Scenes in an Act, and that if there be above eight, it cannot
please; I believe experience will justify this ghess of mine.

I shall now add here a thing, which it would be difficult for me to place any
where else with more order, which is a difficulty which has often puzzled our
best Poets; and I shall at the same time show them how to avoid it. It happens
then very ordinarily in Drammatick Poems, that to give a foundation to some
things which are to be spoke, or to clear some others which have been said
already, there is a necessity of doing it in a Theatral way, and by consequent
by an Actor, but as often some other of the Actors are not to know or hear of
it; it is then necessary to make a new Scene, to drive off those who are to be
ignorant of the thing, and to bring on others who may speak of it; and this I
call a Scene of Necessity, when it precedes what is to be done; and a Scene of
Esclaircissement, or clearing, when it follows, and takes away any mistake or
confusion that might have been: But it is good to observe, that such Scenes,
being as it were independent and loose, they break the Union of the others, and
often make the Stage dull; both which to avoid, I think we may take this Method.

First, To choose the person that is to speak upon this occasion, and the place
where the Speech shall be; all that depends on the Poets Judgment, who to gain
Observations, may read Plautus and Terence; both which have many of these
Scenes; and for those of Necessity, sometimes they are in the beginning of the
Play, as Sosia in Andria, and Geta in Hecyra, where both these Slaves are of
those Actors whom we call Protatick, who appear only at the opening of the
Stage, to give intelligence about the Subject of the Play; and this way is not
to be used without great dexterity.

As for that dullness which such Scenes bring along with them when they are not
in the beginning, but in the body of the Poem, it must be corrected, by making
the Discourse of him that speaks eager and quick, which cannot be done but by
great Figures, such as Admiration, Exclamation, etc. or by some motions of fear
or joy strongly expressed; for else, though the thing which is expressed be
necessary, yet it will be cold and dull, without any grace, because there will
be a plain affectation, which is the greatest fault a Poet can fall into. As
for the coming off of such Scenes, which is often very troublesome, he may avoid
it by introducing in the beginning of an Act the person whom he intends to
employ in any such Scene, provided that may appear probable, and consist with
the following Scenes; or else he may retain at the end of an Act one or two
persons to this end. But the most refined way of performing this is, to do it
in the middle of an Act by some body retained on purpose to unite the following
Scene; and who in that interval of time makes alone a Scene of Necessity, or of
Esclaircissement, by taking occasion to speak of the different concerns of the
Actors, who are gone off, or of those who are to come on; for this way neither
the person, nor the thing, are affected, and the Scenes are not broken, and the
Stage being warmed by the passions of those who are gone off, is kept so easily
by those who are to come on next. In all this nevertheless I leave the
Judicious Poet his liberty, only I have thought fit to warn him of these
Inconveniences.

Chapter the Thirteenth.
Of Spectacles, Machines, and Decorations of the Stage.
HAving treated at length in my Terence justified about the construction of the
Theaters of the Ancients; together with the Decorations, Ornaments and
Machines, which were employed in the Representation of their Drammatick Poems,
I can say little here that is new upon that Subject; therefore I shall not
repeat any of it here, my design being only to instruct the Poet, and not the
Decorator; but some Advertisements may not be amiss to the first, to teach him
some ways how to add some external Ornaments to the Inventions of his Brain, to
make them appear with more grace and perfection.

It Is certain that the Ornaments of the Stage with the Scenes. Machines, and
Decorations, make the most sensible delight of that ingenious Magic which
seems to make Hero's live again in the world after so many Ages; it sets before
us a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and many other wonderful appearances of
things which we imagine present, though we know at the same time that they are
not so, and that we are agreeably deceived: These Ornaments make the Poems
themselves more illustrious; the people takes them for Enchantments, and the
men of understanding are pleased to see the dexterity of the Artists (who
deservedly attract admiration) with the concurrence of so many Arts and
Professions employed in the Execution of these contrivances, to which all run
with joy and delight. It was for this that the People of Greece and Rome,
though as Martial as Learned and Ingenious, did bestow the richest Decorations
upon their Theaters; there one might see the Heavens open, where appeared their
Imaginary Gods descending to converse with Men; the Air was often full of the
noise of Thunder and Lightning; the Sea showed Tempests, Shipwracks, Men of
War, Gallys, and Battles: The Earth did not only produce Gardens, Deserts, and
Forests, with magnificent Temples and Palaces, but it often opened, and
showed flaming Abyssus's, Mountains came out of its bosom, Furies, Demons, and
all the Prodigies of their fabulous Hell: In a word, the Objects of the
diversion of these People were taken from all the supernatural Effects of the
Divinity, the Miracles of Nature, the Masterpieces of Art, and all the
beautiful contrivances that Imagination could form for the adorning their
Theater. Their Magistrates always strove to surpass one another in these
magnificencies, and the People gave the highest dignities of their Government
at this price: therefore the Poets, who saw that in the fortune of great Men
there always was, and would be a fund for these Illustrious Expenses, did not
spare to fill their Poems with Incidents, where the richest Artifices were
employed; and the Workmen were pleased in adding their labor and contrivance
to acquire those riches and fame which certainly attended the success of their
undertakings.

But for our times, though the Court does not dislike these Ornaments, and that
the People crowd to see them, yet I would not advise our Poet to busy himself
much in these machine Plays; our Players are neither Rich, nor Generous enough
to make the Expense of them, and their Decorators want ability in the
performance; I must add that our Authors themselv's have been so negligent in
acquiring the knowledge of the Ancients ways in this matter, and in their means
of Execution, that we need not wonder if we see so many ill Invented
Embellishments of this kind. Yet one would think that our Age, as soon as any
might recover the pristine glory of the Theater, considering the Liberality of
our Princes, the Application of our Poets, the Ingenuity of our Workmen, and
the Care of our Comedians, and that which we have seen already performed in
this Kingdom, is, it may be, but a pattern of what we may expect in the plenty
of Peace. Therefore that we may not be wanting to any thing that may contribute
to the accomplishment of so great a work, I shall here communicate some
Observations upon public Spectacles and Machines, which I hope will be of some
use. I consider all public Spectacles and Decorations of the Scene three ways.

Some are of things; when the Spectacles are permanent and immovable; as a
Heaven open, a stormy Sea, a Palace, or the like Ornaments.

Others are of Actions; when the Spectacle depends principally upon some
extraordinary Fact; as that one should throw himself headlong from a Tower, or
from a Rock in the Sea.

The Third sort is of those that are mingled with Things and Actions, as a
Sea Fight, where at the same time is the Sea and Ships, and Men acting upon it.

These may be all further distinguished into natural, artificial, and
mavelous.

The Natural ones are those which represent the most agreeable things in
Nature, as a Desert, a Mountain on fire, etc.

The Artificial are those which show us the most magnificent works of Art, as a
Temple, a Palace.

The Mavelous are those which suppose some Divine Power or Magic Production,
as the descent of some God from Heaven, or the rising of some Fury from Hell.

And of all these, the least considerable are the last, because there goes
little contrivance to the inventing of them, there being hardly any wit so
mean, who by this may not bring in, or carry off a great Intrigue. I saw once a
Play, in which the Author having brought on a Rival, and concerned him so
deeply in his Subject, that he did not well know how to bring him off,
bethought himself to kill him with a Thunderbolt; the contrivance was pretty
sure; but if this sort of Invention be admitted in Dramma's, we need not much
trouble our selves to wind up the Plot any other way; therefore all these
Machines of Gods and Devils are to be used with great discretion, and great
care to be taken that in the Execution they play easily, for else the people
are apt to laugh, and make Railleries of a God hanging in the Air, or coming
down too fast.

I should not likewise advise our Poet to use frequently those, where Actions
are to make the greatest Effect, because that all the success depends upon the
Exactness of the Comedians, who are often so negligent in the performance, that
they will neither study the manner, nor time necessary; or else they are so
possessed with an Opinion of their Abilities, that they think it beneath them
to be informed; so that either their Idleness, or their Vanity, most commonly
spoils that which was well invented, and ought to have made the beauty of the
Play. That which remains then is the permanent Decorations, of what nature
soever they are; and to these I would confine the Poet, but still with many
Precautions: For,

First, They are to be necessary, insomuch as the Play cannot be acted without
these Ornaments; or else they will not take, though never so ingenious. And in
this, I think, our Andromeda has not all its Regularity; for in the First and
Fourth Act there are two noble Buildings, of different Architecture, and no
mention made of them in the Play; since these two Acts might be represented
with any of the Decorations of the other three, without offending the Poet, or
spoiling any Incident of his Dramma.

Secondly, These Ornaments must be agreeable to the Sight; for it is for that,
that the People flock to them. Not that I would absolutely forbid the Poet to
put in things monstrous or horrible; but at least then the Painting must be
exquisite, that the Art may be admired.

They must likewise be modest, and not against that Pudour which the most
dissolute love the appearances of. I believe that the showing of Mars and Venus
surprised in a Net by Vulcan, would not be allowed for a fine Decoration.

They must, besides, be easy to put in execution; that is, that the Machinists
do dispose their Machins to play so well, that there may be no need of great
numbers of Hands, but they do of themselves perform to a Minute; for the People
cannot endure to expect long the Effect of a Machin, and when they do not hit
the Minute, they do not agree with the Motion and Pretense of the Actor upon
the Stage, and so spoil his Part.

It will likewise be reasonable to consider, whether the Place represented by
the Scene, will bear in truth that which is to be showed in Image; for else it
would be a gross Fault against Probability: For example, If the place of the
Scene were a Palace, and that close to it were a Prison, or some noisome place;
for Princes and Great People do not live near such places.

There must not likewise be any Decorations made which are not agreeable to the
Unity of Place; as to suppose the Scene the Palace or Chamber of a Prince, out
of which there should be an immediate Passage to a great Forest: For all these
Fictions, though pleasing to the Eye, yet are otherwise, to our Reason, which
knows them to be false, impossible, and ridiculous.

But particularly, the Poet must so order it, as that out of this Show and
Decoration some notable Event may result in the Body of the Play; that is,
something that may contribute either to the perplexing of the Plot, or the
easier unweaving of it; for if all this Show is only for show, and not of the
Essence of the Piece, the Men of Understanding will value the Decorator for
executing, but not the Poet for inventing so useless an Ornament. In the Rudens
of Plautus, the Shipwreck that is there represented, makes both the Knot and
the Unweaving of the Intrigue. The Frogs of Aristophanes have a vast
Decoration, which serves to all the Acts, and almost to all the Scenes. And we
shall find few among the Ancients, but what agree with our Rules.

I cannot omit here to advertise the Poet of two important Considerations: The
first that regards himself, which is, That when the Spectacles are of Things,
that is, of Permanent Objects, they must, if possible, appear at the first
opening of the Stage, to the end that the Surprise and Applause of the People,
which generally attends such Sights, may be over, before the Actors begin to
speak: or, that if there be any necessity of changing the Decorations, let it
be done in the Interval of an Act, that the Workmen may have the time necessary
for their Machins moving, and the Actor that is to appear, that of dressing
himself at leisure. But if, by the necessity of his Subject, some great Change
is to be in the middle of an Act, let him contrive his Actors Part so, as he
have but little to say at that time, and those too Words of Admiration, Grief,
or Astonishment, to give some time to the Murmur of the Spectators, which is
always raised upon some such new Appearance.

The other Consideration regards the Comedians; which is, when the Spectacles
consist of Actions: that is, when the Actors are to be in some posture
extraordinary: The Actor, I say, must study this Posture with care, before he
comes to act it upon the Stage; or else it is odds but he performs it very ill
and not without danger sometimes to himself: all which does not a little
trouble the Beauty of the whole Piece.

THE ART OF THE STAGE. Book the Fourth.
Chapter the First.
Of the Quantitative Parts of the Drammatick Poem, and particularly of the
Prologue.
THE Drammatiek Poem is so changed since the time of Aristotle, that though we
should make an Allowance for his Translators and Intepreters Errors, yet we
think we have great reason not to be altogether of his mind, particularly in
the Matter of which we are going to treat.

He writes, That Tragedy has Four parts of Quantity, to wit, the Prologue, the
Chorus, the Episode, and the Exode; and to make them the more intelligible, he
defines three of them thus. The Prologue (says he) is that part of the Tragedy
which is before the Entrance of the Chorus. The Episode is all that is between
the two Cantos of the Chorus. And the Exode is that part after which the Chorus
sings no more. This I cannot conceive to be true, according to the present
state of the Greek Tragedies; neither can I allow, that Aristotle has well
distinguished the parts of Tragedy as it was in his time, at least according to
the Works of those three excellent Tragic Poets which have been transmitted to
us.

To understand this aright, let us begin with the Prologue, and consider how
many sorts of Prologues there were among the Ancients.

The first sort was of those which were made for the Interest of the Poet,
either in answering the Invectives of his Adversaries, or in expounding his
Proceeding in the Play. Many of this kind are to be found in Plautus and
Terence, particularly in the last; which made some say, as he himself relates,
That without the Reproaches and Cavils of the old Poet, Vetus si Poeta non
lacessisset prior, nullum invenire Prologum potuisset novus. Prolog. in Phorm.
the new one would not have known what Subject to have taken for his Prologues.

There were other Prologues that regarded the Interest of the Comedians, either
to obtain the Judges or the Peoples Favor, or to bespeak their Attention. Such
is that of the Pseudolus of Plautus, and some others.

There are some likewise which make a Mixture of the Subject of the Play, with
the Poets or Comedians Interest; and this was indeed the most ordinary one with
Plautus, as appears in his Captives, his Paenulus, and his Menechmes.

Now these three sorts of Prologues were particular to Comedy; for we meet with
none such among the Tragic Poets; neither do I think, that if they had used
them, that Aristotle would have reckoned these sort of Prologues amongst the
Parts of Quantity of a Tragedy; for they are things by themselves which may be
omitted, without injuring the Poem, or otherwise lessening its true Proportion.
It Is for this reason that the Learned Vossius says, That the Prologues of
Comedy and Tragedy are very different, because in Comedy the Prologue is as it
were alien to the Subject; but in Tragedy it is incorporated with it, and makes
a part of it. And yet I must say, That I think he is mistaken in both; for
sometimes in Comedy the Prologue is fixed to the Body of the Poem, as in the
Cistellaria of Plautus, where it contains three Scenes: and, on the other side,
the Tragedian Prologues are not always so twisted with the Subject, as to make
a part of it.

The first and most ordinary Prologues of the Greek Tragedies were made by one
of the Chief Actors, who came and explained to the Spectators all that had
passed in the Story before the opening of the Stage. We have of this sort
diverse in Euripides, where the Actor having done this, ends with some Verses
which give a beginning to the Action of the Poem.

But it cannot be said, that these Prologues make a part of the Tragedy; first,
because they are Discourses made to the Spectators, and by consequent, faulty,
by mingling the Representation with the Theatral Action: Neither are they
necessary, because those things which precede the beginning of the Play, ought
to be dexterously told in the Play, in different parts of it; and this
Aeschylus and Sophocles always observe. So that it is most certain, that these
Prologues, which contain the Argument of the Play, are useless, defective, and
may be easily separated from it. And therefore we do not see that Monsieur
Corneille, whom I always cite as a great Master for the Stage, has ever used so
ill an Artifice; and I cannot but condemn those French and Italians who have
had recourse to it.

Euripides makes another sort of Prologue, more faulty and defective still; to
wit, when he employs some of the Gods to explain, by his Omniscience, not only
all that was passed, but things to come in the Play, even to the Catastrophe;
by which means all the Events were forestalled, than which there could not be a
greater Fault, since it destroys all that Expectation and Suspension which
makes the Surprise and Novelty of the Play. Now I do not think that Aristotle
means this sort of Prologue neither, when he says it is a Quantitative part of
the Dramma.

The two sorts of Prologue which remain for us to consider, seem to agree
better with Aristotle's Definition: The Prologue, says he, is that part of the
Tragedy which precedes the arrival of the Chorus upon the Stage: By which he
seems rather to teach us the Place of the Prologue, than its Nature: And
according to this Definition, those Tragedies that begin with the Chorus, have
no Prologue: Such are the Rhaesas, the Persians, and the Suppliants of
Euripides; and by consequent, according to this Doctrine, they have not their
due Proportion, being deprived of their first Quantitative part: (And by the
by, we may by this discover the Mistakes of those who have given us Arguments
and Preambles upon these Greek Tragedies) for they say at the beginning of
these three Plays which I now mentioned, That the Chorus makes the Prologue;
for since the Prologue, according to Aristotle, ought to contain all that is
said before the Chorus comes on; it is impossible for the Chorus to make the
Prologue; or if the Chorus could make the Prologue, then Aristotle's definition
is good for nothing: But now let us come to these two last sorts of Prologues.

One of them did use to contain in three or four Scenes made before the coming
on of the Chorus, some things which concerned the Theatral Action, but which in
truth were not necessary parts of the Poem. We have two Examples of this in the
Phoenicians, and in the Medaea of Euripides. In the first Antigone appears upon
the Walls of Thebes, with her Governor, who shows her the Army of the
besieging Princes, with some Discourses about the Commanders of it, and this in
some sort does regard the Dramma, but does not in rigor make a part of it; and
the Author of the Argument says expressly, that all that Antigonus does upon the
Walls of the Town, is absolutely out of the Theatral Action.

In the other Tragedy Medaea's Children appear with their Governor, to whom
Medaea's Nurse recommends them, expressing some fear for them in the fury and
rage of Medaea against Joson their Father; and this at first seems to belong to
the Subject, but yet it makes no part of the Dramma; for if you begin the Play
just after the first Chorus, you will not miss any thing in it; and therefore
in both these Plays the Prologues are not inseparable from the body of the
Dramma; and that which may still contribute to convince us of this is, that in
these Prologues the Poets often put things which were inconsistent with the
Rules of the Stage; as in the Agamemnon of Aeschylus, where one of the Guard
that speaks the Prologue seems to see things which could not come to pass in
the time prescribed by the Drammatick Poem; and if this Prologue were to be
supposed part of the Play, it would make it defective, and against all the
Rules.

The other sort of Prologue placed before the Chorus, contained not only such
things as regarded the Poem, but such also as were proper, and incorporated
with its Subject, making a true part of it; as in the Sphigenia in Aulide,
where the disquiet of Agamemnon, and the Narration he makes to an old Man, whom
he sends his Letters by, to his Wife, do certainly begin the Play, and make an
inseparable part of the Subject; and if the definition that Aristotle gives of
Prologues can be reduced to any rational meaning, it must be to this sort of
Prologue; but yet I cannot understand neither why this must be called a
Prologue sooner than any other part of the Play; it is properly an Episode, and
its being before or after the Chorus changes nothing in its nature, but only
alters its place; and this, in my Judgment, is not enough to make a just and
true distinction of the parts of a Dramma, who ought to have more Essential
difference between each other. My Conclusion then is, that that which is
properly Prologue, cannot be reckoned a part of the Play; and that which is a
part of the Play can no more be named a Prologue, than the other Episodes that
compose the Play.

If in opposition to this any one shall say, that in the beginning of all the
Tragedys of Sophocles and Aeschylus, we meet with the same word that is in
Euripides (and which signifies to speak a Prologue) though neither of these
Poets designed a Prologue, except Sophocles in his Electra, and Aeschylus in
his Agamemnon) I say, that is not so much to be minded, because the words
signify likewise to speak first, and are so translated in the Latin Version;
and this may serve to avoid a mistake upon this Subject.

As for the Chorus, of which Aristotle makes the second part of Tragedy, it
must be considered in two different states; the first is, when the Chorus
speaks with the other Actors in an Episode, or the continuation of an Act, for
then the Chorus is perfectly an Actor concerned, and working in the Intrigues
of the Stage, according to the Doctrine of Aristotle and Horace; and in this
sense the Chorus can in no wise be counted a distinct part of the Play.

The other state in which we are to consider the Chorus is, Chorus pars fabulae
post actum vel inter actum and actum. Voss. l. 2. c. 5. Inst. Poet.
when it sings to mark the Intervals of the Acts, and therefore is defined by
Vessius a part of the Fable after an Act, or between two Acts. Now I will not
deny but Chorus's may have been true parts of Tragedy, as long as they sung
things concerning the true Subject of the Poem upon the Theater; but they were
not necessary parts, since they have been so easily omitted, no more than our
Music that plays between the Acts can be said to be an Essential part of our
Plays.

Aristotle's Exodus, or last part of Tragedy, is not, in my Opinion, any whit
better distinguished; for if the Exodus contains all that is said after the
Chorus gives over, L. 2. cap. 5. Inst. Poet.
it is no more than our fifth Act; and therefore Vossius would have the
Catastrophe and the Exodus to be the same thing; but in that he does not agree
with Aristotle, for according to him the Catastrophe often begins toward the
end of the fourth Act, and sometimes it does not begin till toward the middle
of the fifth Act, so that then you would be obliged to cut off from the Exodus
all that should be said after the Chorus gives over, or else according to
Vossius it would be cut in two by a Chorus; both which are against Aristotle's
Doctrine. But besides, what will become of this Exodus in those Tragedys that
end with a Chorus, as all Euripides's, and the best of Sophocles and
Aeschylus's do; for the last Verses of their Tragedys were according to the
most received Opinion sung by the Chorus, and so there could be no Exodus in
those Plays, who by consequence, according to Aristotle, must want that part of
quantity. It will not be amiss to observe here by the by, that Exodus, and
Exodion are not the same things; for the Exodus is the last part of the Play,
and the Exodion was a piece of Buffoonery, as the Mimes and Embolimes were and
were acted when the Play was done, by those they called Exodiarii, which may
prevent a mistake, apt else to be made in reading the Ancients.

From all this that we have said, it appears that either Aristotle did not
explain himself well in his Definitions, or that those Plays which we have of
the Greek Poets, did not serve him for the Rules of his Poeticks; so that of
those four parts of quantity of Tragedy, of which Aristotle makes mention, we
have but one left, which alone makes up our whole Tragedy, and that is the
Episode; for since the Episode contained all that was between the Ancient
Chorus's, and that our music with which we begin and end our plays is to us in
the place of the Ancient Chorus's, it is manifest, that five Episodes make our
five Acts; but because we divide our Acts into Scenes, and that we separate our
Acts by a considerable distance of time, necessary to the Theatral Action, I
therefore think that a Drammatick Poem can be properly said to have but two
parts of quantity, to wit, Five Acts subdivided into Scenes, without any
limited number; and the four Intervals of those Acts. If any one else has more
light to show us other parts, I shall easily subscribe to this Opinion.

Chapter the Second.
Of Episodes according to the Doctrine of Aristotle.
TO understand this matter well, Hygin. l. 2.
we must look back to some things that have been said already, Astronom. in
Actoph. Ex Eratostene.
and know that Tragedy and Comedy begun thus. Virg. Georg. 2.


Bacchus having found out the Art of cultivating the Vine, and making Wine,
taught it Icarius, who then was Master of a little Territory in Attica, to
which he gave his name. Icarius having presently put his Skill to trial, met
with a Goat in the Vintage time, that was eating his Grapes, therefore looking
upon him as an Enemy to Bacchus, sacrificed him to him; and having called his
neighbors to this Sacrifice, they all together fell a dancing and singing
something in the honor of Bacchus, Cassiod. li. 4.
whom they had thus revenged of his Foe. Var. Varr. l. 1. de vit. pop.
This appeared to them both so religious, Romans Plutar.
and so pleasant, Symposion. 19. qu. 1.
that they continued it every year at the same time, and called it Tragoedia,
that is, a Vintage-song.

The Athenians having in process of time transferred this Ceremony to their
Town; their best Poets began to be concerned in the Hymn to Bacchus, and to
strive with one another for the honor of excelling in it. They brought in
besides great Chorus's of Music and Dances, with many turnings and windings,
and so transferred it from the Temples to the Theaters, without any
irreverence; nevertheless, because those very Theaters were dedicated to
Bacchus, and the Victim that was sacrificed to him, was a Goat, as destructor
of the Vine; from whence this Hymn was called Tragedy, Athen. l. 2.
as who should say, the Goat-Song, Cassiodor. l. 1.
and so much of it as remained among the Country people in Villages, Plut.
Sympos. l. 1. q. 1. Suidas.
was called Comedy, as who should say a Country Song: Initium Tragaediae and
Comedy a rebus Divinis Incensis Altaribus, and admoto hirco id genus carminis
quod sacer Chorus libero patri reddebat Tragedia dicebatur. Donat. in Terentium.
All this appears clearly from many famous Authors of Antiquity.

Thus were distinguished these two Poems, though they had the same beginning in
the same Country of Icaria, and by the same adventure, according to Athenaeus,
of whose Opinion are Donatus Maximus of Tyr, and Eustathius.

Now it happening that by little and little the Subjects that the Poets took to
praise Bacchus, being exhausted, they were forced to add little Stories or
Fables, which they handled merrily at first, in honor of Bacchus. To confirm
this, Aristotle writes, that from little Fables made with mirth and fooling,
Tragedy rose by degrees to that perfection it acquired in Sophocles time. Some
are of Opinion that Epigenes the Sycionian was the Author of Tragedy, whether
it were that he first brought the Song from the Vintage to the Town, or that he
first instituted the Dispute between the Poets, in which the Conqueror
received for reward the Goat that was sacrificed to Bacchus, after a formal
Procession; the Ceremony of which described by Plutarch, was simple enough at
first, though much altered in his time: However, Tragedy remained a great while
in the same state; for between this Epigenes and Thespis, who first added an
Act to this Hymn, there are reckoned fourteen famous Tragic Poets, almost all
Successors to one another; and it is of the Tragedies of that time that Diogenes
Laertius is to be understood, when he writes in the Life of Plato, that the
Chorus formerly acted the whole Tragedy. These words at first did extremely
puzzle me, because the neglect of Chorus's in our days, hindered me from
penetrating the true sense of the Author. I considered Tragedy as I found it in
Sophocles, and there I could not see any conformity with Laertius's mind; and
all I could then imagine in order to make something of it was, that they that
made the Chorus were likewise the Histrions and Actors of the Tragedy: But
besides that thereby I made no distinction between the Histrions who were
Actors, and the Thymelicks, who were Musicians, against all truth of Antiquity.
I found the difficulty still grow upon me, when I read in Athenaeus, That
anciently all sort of Tragedy was composed only of the Chorus, and had no
Histrions or Actors at all: For these last words did entirely destroy all my
first thought, neither could I any ways relieve my self by any of the
Interpreters of these two Authors, though so many Learned men have commented
them, without saying one word of this; therefore I began to go back to the
first Original of things, and considering that Tragedy at first was nothing but
an Hymn of the Pagan Religion, danced and sung by Chorus's of Music, I easily
found the solution of all my difficulties; for it is most certain, that in that
time, and for almost six hundred years after Tragedy was represented only by
the Chorus, as Laertius has it, and had no Actors, as Athenaeus truly affirms.

At last Thespis bethought himself of putting in an Actor, who should recite
without singing, that the Chorus might take breath, and rest themselves; not
that I think that Actor spoke alone, but he made a Dialogue with the
Coryphoeus, or some other person of the Chorus, who answered him something to
the purpose, to give him Subject to continue his Discourse, as we may yet see
in some fragments of Epicharmus, who lived in that time. We must not think
nevertheless, that Thespis was the Inventor of Tragedy, as Horace seems to
believe, but only that he introduced the first Actor without singing. And Plato
tells us, that Tragedy was in great credit in Athens long before Thespis's
time. And as for what is said also of him, That he carried his Actors about in
a Cart, from whence they spoke many Railleries and witty Jests against
passengers, that must not be understood of serious Tragedy, for which there
were already public Theaters, but of Satirical Tragedy, in which they
represented the Dances, and grossest postures of Satyrs and Silenes, who were
supposed to have accompanied Bacchus in his Voyages, (for this Satirical
Tragedy was at first without Actors, as well as the serious one, according to
Athenaeus) and came at last to that perfection, that it was one of the four
Poems which made the Tetralogy of Dramma's, in which the Poets of Athens
disputed the Prize at their four great Holidays.

Thespis likewise added to his Jests and Railleries the dawbing of his Actors
with Lees of Wine, as Horace has it; Quae canerent agerentque peruncti facibus
ora. Horat. de art. Poet.
or with Ceruse and Vermillion, as Suidas reports: And this was done to imitate
so much the better the Satyrs, who were always represented with red Faces,
Virgil in Silen.
as Virgil paints Silenus's, daubed with the Juice of Elder berries and
Mulberries. Sanguineis frontem moris and tempora pingit.


At last Tragedy having received a total alteration, by Recitals in the
Intervals of the Music, it acquired shortly after its utmost Perfection; for
Aeschylus, who lived fifty years, or thereabouts, after Thespis, added one
Actor more, and so made up two Actors: and indeed we never see more than two,
in any Scene of his, talking together, except it be for a word or two put in by
a third, and that too very seldom, whatever Scaliger says to the contrary;
Diogen. in Plat. and Philost. in Sophist. Et de vit. Apollon. l. 6. c. 6.
he invented likewise a convenient Dress for his Actors with Cothurnes, or High
Shoes to make them appear tall like Heroes. Sophocles who was born Ten or
Twelve years after the Death of Aeschylus, increased the number of the Chief
Actors to Three, and caused the Scenes to be painted with Decorations fitting
for his Subject. So that in less than Fourscore years Tragedy attained to its
highest perfection, with all the Glory of which it was capable.

As for Comedy, Donatus seems to think it was invented by Shepherds and Country
People, who used to dance about the Altars of Apollo surnamed Nomian, and sing
at the same time some Hymns in honor of him; but I had rather believe
Athenaeus, who makes it take its rise with Tragedy, and they were both
consecrated to Bacchus, and not to Apollo: Except Donatus would judge of all
Theatral Actions by the Apollinary Games, which indeed were Scenick, and
celebrated in the Honor of Apollo.

I say then, That Comedy and Tragedy were born together; Clem. Alexand.
Stromat. lib. 1. (...).
and accordingly we find in Clemens Alexandrinus, that the Invention of Comedy
was attributed to one Sisarion of Icaria; it may be, because he was the first
that composed the Hymns of Bacchus, after the Sacrifice of the Goat by Icarius.
And this may suffice to appease the Quarrels of the Learned upon the Origin of
Comedy, since they are not agreed neither in Times, Places, nor Persons.

But Comedy had not the same progress with Tragedy, it being long detained in
Confusion and Disorder: Nay, even in Aristophanes's time, which was after
Sophocles and Euripides, it was full of satirical Reflections and scandalous
Slanders. It will be hard for us to mark the degrees of its progress, from the
time that it was a Rural Hymn, to that of its perfection upon the Stage;
because, as Aristotle says, it being not so noble as Tragedy, there has been
less care to make Observations upon it; and the Magistrates were a great while
before they concerned themselves in giving the Choruses, but used to leave them
to the Discretion of those who made the Comedy. Nevertheless, if I may venture
to bring to light things buried in so long an Obscurity, I think that it begun
to have Actors about the same time as Tragedy did, that is, under Epicharmus
the Sicilian, the Contemporary of Thespis; and before that time I have not
observed any Speakers. And it is from this, that the Sicilians do maintain, That
Comedy was invented at Syracusa, because Epicharmus was that Countryman: not
that they can pretend that there was no Comedy before him, (for we have yet the
Fragments of Alcaea, a Comedy two hundred years before his time) but because he
first introduced an Actor with the Chorus. We may say as much of Sannyrion, who
was the first that added Masks and Buffoons, according to Athenaeus; and the
same of Cratinus, who settled three Actors, and made the whole Composition
regular; the same of Aristophanes, who gave Comedy a further perfection; and so
of all those whom Diomedes calls the first Comic Poets, though they came a
great while after Comedy was invented.

Now we are to take notice, that the Recital of that Actor or Player introduced
by Thespis in Tragedy, and the number of which was since increased by other
Poets, received the name of Episode, as who should say, an additional
Discourse, thrown as it were across another; therefore Suidas says expressly,
that Episode signifies a thing which is besides the Subject of another, and to
which nevertheless it is joined. So when Aeschylus and others did insert into
their Tragedies Actors that recited a Story which was nothing to the Praises of
Bacchus, the Priests of Bacchus began to complain of that neglect, and said,
that in those Episodes there was nothing that was proper either to the Actions
or Mysteries of their God; which gave occasion to that Greek Proverb, (...),
Nothing to Bacchus. And this Explication of the Proverb, which is according to
all the Ancients, seems most reasonable: For to think, as some do, that in
Drammatick Poetry they called Episodes all the Descriptions, Narrations, and
pathetick Discourses, as things not belonging to the Subject, seems very
absurd, since without those things the Episodes themselves could not be.

These Complaints of Bacchus's Priests did not at all stop the Progress of
Tragedy, which by little and little went its Course, and at last grew to such a
distance from its Originals, as that the Episodes became the Tragedy it self.
Therefore now all the Doctrine and Precepts of Aristotle about the Episodes,
how to make them successfully, is no more than the Art how to make a Drammatick
Poem; for we have neither Prologue, Chorus, nor Exode to make the Parts of our
Tragedy: so that having none but the Episode left, that alone must be called
the Dramma; and when we read in Athenaeus, That Alexander, at the last Feast he
made before his death, recited an Episode of the Andromeda of Euripides, we
must not understand it as Natalis Comes does in his Marginal Note, calling it a
Piece added to make Mirth; but rather in the sense of Aristotle, that it was
some part of that Tragedy, either a fine Description, or some pathetick
Expression in some Act of the Play.

It being then agreed, that the Episodes contain all that is between the
Choruses, that is to say, Five Acts, distinguished by five Concerts of Music,
Aristotle gives three principal Instructions in composing of these Episodes.

The first is, That having chosen your Story, and resolved how much of it you
will bring upon the Stage, you must then cast your Episodes, that is, the
Descriptions, Discourses, Passions, and other things that are to entertain the
Stage. And this is one of the greatest Dexterities of the Poet.

The second is, That the Episodes be proper and natural to the Story or Fable;
that is to say, drawn from the very Essence of the Subject, and s fit, as to
seem to jump naturally, and of themselves, with the whole Concourse of other
Events. And it is out of the secret Knowledge Men have of this Precept, that we
have often seen them blame upon the Stage Narrations that were not necessary,
superfluous and vain Descriptions, Complaints, and other Passions, introduced
out of order, and without which the Dramma might not only have been, but have
been better.

The third Rule is, That the Episodes ought not to be too long. And that is it
which even the Common people every day condemn upon our Stages; for the finest
Discourses, and the most necessary ones, have a Measure, after which they
become tedious.

To these three Precepts of Aristotle, I add two Observations of my own; That
the Drammatick Poet must have a care in these Episodes not to enter too much
and too strongly into the particular of things; but he must only touch the
beutiful places of his Subject, by some strong Thoughts; because else there
will appear an Affectation, and be too unlike a Natural Discourse, which in all
things he is to imitate.

The other Observation is, That often the Business of the Stage does not suffer
that the Actors should make long Discourses, not even of a thing necessary; as
if they were to go in haste to succor some afflicted Person, or to avoid their
Enemies. I should therefore advise the Poet, in sch occasions, to use some
other Means to instruct the Spectators of that which they are not to be
ignorant of, or to do it at least in very few Words, so as to keep the Rules of
Probability. One great slight in these sudden Occasions, is to explain some
Circumstance of the Story, which may serve for the understanding of the nearest
Events, and so reserve to ones self the Liberty of explaining the rest at
leisure.

As for the other general Instructions that Aristotle gives about the Episodes,
they are to be found in his Interpreters; but the Poet must still remember,
that they are to be applied to the Acts and Disposition of Tragedy, as it is
now treated amongst us it being most certain, that Drammatick Poems which
comprehend the Events of two Stories in the unity of one Theatral Action, were
never called by the Ancients. Episodick Fables; because those Drammas which
contain but one Story, are as much Episodick as the others; that is, they have
as many Acts or Recitals between the Choruses, as we have already sufficiently
explained.

Chapter the Third.
Of the Choruses of the Ancients.
WE have said already, That Tragedy in its first Original was nothing but a
Sacred Hymn sung and danced to the Honor of Bacchus; and that by little and
little the Episodes, which we call Acts, were added between each Chorus. And we
know likewise, that now adays Tragedy has quite lost its Choruses, as Comedy
had lost his, even before the Age of Plautus. So that it may seem to some, that
a Discourse of Choruses may be now an unnecessary thing for the Practice of our
Stage. But besides that they may one day be reestablished upon our Theaters,
when we are well informed what they were amongst the Ancients, I think it very
necessary for me to explain here my Thoughts about them, and which will scarce
be found any where else.

To take the Chorus not as it was at first, when alone it made the whole
Tragedy; but as it was in the time of Sophocles and Euripides, that is to say,
in its perfection among the Grecians, I think we may define the Chorus thus.

The Chorus is a Troop of Actors, representing the Assembly or Body of those
Persons who either were present, or probably might be so, upon that Place or
Scene where the Action is supposed to be transacted.

These Words are of importance, and we are not to proceed without well weighing
of them. Thus we see, that in the Hecuba of Euripides, the Chorus is of Trojan
Women who were Slaves in the Camp, it being most probable that they were at the
Tents of Hecuba, who was under the same Captivity with them. And in the Cyclops
the Chorus is of Satyrs, and that very ingeniously contrived; for no other sort
of Men could venture to stay before the Den of cruel Polyphemus. In the
Antigone of Sophocles the Chorus is of the Old Men of Thebes, because being
sent for by Creon to Council, none could more reasonably be thought to be
before his Palace. In the Ajax the Chorus is of Seamen of Salamis, who come
very naturally before the Tent of their Prince, to endeavor to do him some
Service, upon the noise of his being furious and mad. In the Prometheus of
Aeschylus the Nymphs of the Ocean make the Chorus, because in probability
hardly any other Persons could be supposed near that unfortunate Man, who was
fastened to a Rock far from the commerce of the rest of Mankind; and also in the
Seven before Thebes, the Young Women of the Town make the Chorus, because it
was more reasonable to assemble them before the Palace, and make them stay
there full of fears and apprehensions, lamenting the Calamity of the War, than
to have placed Men there, who are supposed necessary to the defense of their
Country. And from this we may judge likewise with what Industry and Ingenuity
Aristophanes, in his Play against Socrates, makes a Chorus of Clouds, because
he supposes Socrates to invoke them to appear at his Sophisms; as in another
place he has made a Chorus of Birds, which two Athenians come and entertain in
a place full of Trees, and out of the way, talking to them about building a
Town in the Air. I make no Citations here out of those Tragedies which go under
the name of Seneca, because they are very ill Models to imitate; and
particularly, the Choruses are very faulty: for sometimes they see all that is
done upon the Scene, hear all that is said, and speak very properly to all; and
at other times one would think they were blind, deaf, and dumb. In many of
those Drammas one can hardly tell who they represent, how they were dressed,
nor what Reason brings them upon the Stage, nor why they are of one Sex, more
than of another. Indeed the Verses are fine, full of Thoughts, and overloaded
with Conceit; but may in most places be very well spared, without spoiling any
thing either in the Sense, or in the Representation of the Poem. Besides, the
Thebaida has none at all, whether it be lost by the fault of the Copyists and
our Printers, which I can hardly believe, because there would at least have
remained some fragments, considering that they were pieces inserted into the
very body of the Poem in many places; so that I am apt to believe that the
Author made none at all for that Play; and this with some other conjectures,
has given me occasion to doubt of the truth of what Scaliger affirms so
positively; to wit, that Tragedy never was without Chorus's; for I incline to
think that in the time of the debauched and loose Emperors, where Mimes,
Embolimes, and Buffoons came in for Interludes in Tragedy, as well as in
Comedy, the Chorus ceased by little and little to be a part of the Drammatick
Poem, and became only a Troup of Musicians and Dancers, to mark the Intervals
of the Acts; but those four Greek Poets, whose works we have, have been much
more exact in their Chorus's than the Author of Seneca's Tragedys, as
understanding a great deal better than he, the Art of composing such Poems; and
out of them likewise it is that we learn that the Chorus might be composed of
all sorts of persons, without distinction either of Age or Sex, nay of living
creatures. or insensible things, as Aristophanes has done, from which we may
likewise observe, that they who thought the Chorus represented the people were
something out; for we see that in his Knights the people of Athens is acting,
speaking and judging the contest between Cleo and Agoracritus, and that the
Chorus is of Athenian Knights, perfectly distinguished from those who represent
the people.

And when Aristotle and Scaliger after him name the Chorus a kind of idle
Client, which gives but small assistance to those he pretends to help. It must
be understood only in comparison of the other Actors, who are generally more
busy; as also because the Chorus never forsakes the place of the Scene;
whereas the other Actors often perform great things off of the Stage; but yet
the Greek Poets have never chosen for their Chorus either idle people (though
they might be easily supposed present) or those who had no concern in the
business in hand, because all that they could have said or done would have been
weak and languishing, of small, or no effect upon the Spectators, who do not
willingly hear unconcerned persons in a Tragedy. Besides, according to the Art
of Poetry, both of Aristotle and Horace, the Chorus, besides its singing, ought
to act a part of some concern, and advance and forward the Affairs of the
Stage, as other Actors do; and therefore it is observable, that when the
Subject did naturally furnish the Poet with a Chorus, he never borrowed it any
where else: as in the Rhaesus of Euripides, where the Scene is before the Tents
of the Generals of the Trojan Army, and all things coming to pass in the night.
The Guard makes the Chorus, because it would have been against probability that
any other persons should have been assembled there at that time. Nay, if the
Principal Actors themselves were enough in number, they made the Chorus of
them, as in the Suppliants of Euripides, where the seven Princes of Argos, that
implore Theseus's help to bury the dead bodies of their Husbands before Thebes,
make the Chorus themselves.

But if they were put to invent a Chorus, they always did it conformably to the
nature of their Subject, and to the Rules of probability. This Aristophanes has
ingeniously enough observed in Comedy, as where he makes a Chorus of Frogs to
sing while Bacchus passing the Stix in Carons Bark; and another of Wasps in the
house of Philocleon, whose Son would hinder him from going abroad; for though
those are very ridiculous Imaginations, yet they are Comical; well enough
invented in mirth, and are not against the Rules of his Art.

From hence we may likewise judge why the Chorus was at last left out in new
Comedy, and of this I think no body hitherto has given a true reason. Horace
thinks that the malignity and satirical humor of the Poets was the cause of
it; for they made the Chorus's abuse people so severely, that the Magistrates
forbid them at last to use any at all; but I think, that if the Rules of
probability had not likewise seconded this prohibition, the Poets would have
preserved their Chorus still, with conformity to their Subject, and that
without too much Satyr; therefore I imagine the thing came to pass thus.

Comedy took its model and constitution from Tragedy; and when the downright
abusing of living persons was prohibited, they generally invented feigned
Subjects, which they governed according to the Rules of Tragedy; but as they
were necessitated to draw Pictures of the life of the Vulgar, and were confined
by consequent to mean Events, they generally chose the place of their Scene in
some Streets before the houses of those whom they supposed concerned in the
Story; and it was not very probable that there should be a Troup of people in
such a place managing an Intrigue of inconsiderable persons from morning to
night. Comedy lost of its self insensibly the Chorus, which it could not
preserve with any probability.

Comedy therefore having lost its Chorus long before Tragedy, that which was
called new Comedy received Dances, Music, and Buffoons, in the room of the
Chorus, as more proper for the genius of Comical Poetry.

Since therefore we are now fully informed what the Chorus was, let us see how
it acted upon the Stage.

At first it was placed a little lower than the Theater, and was seated by it
self, from whence it rose to sing and dance; afterward it was placed upon the
Stage it self, and at last it came upon the very Scene, that is, behind the
Hangings or Decoration, as may be seen in Scaliger, Castelvetro, and other
Authors, with many other things which I forbear to repeat here.

But we may observe besides, that the Chorus did not ordinarily appear upon the
Stage, till after the Prologue, that is, as we have explained it, till after
one or many Scenes, which opened the Play, and were preparatives to the better
understanding of the piece, not being reckoned among the Acts or Episods. This
too is to be understood only in strictness; for sometimes there was no
Prologue, and all that passed before the coming on of the Chorus was the first
Act, and to be reckoned of the body of the Tragedy, as in the Ajax of
Sophocles; at other times the Chorus its self opened the Stage, as in the
Rhaesus of Euripides, because being composed of the Guards, which had watched
all night, 'twas not probable any should be there before them.

We must observe besides, that when the Chorus once came on in regularity, they
were not supposed to go off till the end of the Play; and this appears by all
the Greek Tragedys, where the Chorus often shows the Palace or House to
strangers, complains, or seems astonished at sudden noises made within; by all
which it may be concluded, it stayed all along upon the Stage. It Is true, that
sometimes we may observe it to come in and out, but that is extraordinarily,
and by some remarkable Artifice of the Poet, who has a mind that some Action or
other should be performed upon the Stage without witness: As when Sophocles has
a mind that Ajax should kill himself upon the Stage, he sends out the Chorus
under pretext of assisting Tecmessa, who is endeavoring to find out Ajax, to
prevent the Effects of his fury (he having just left her with a Sword in his
hand*)

Another reason the Poets have of sending out the Chorus is, when it is probable
that they who represent the Chorus have done an action which could not
naturally have been performed upon the Stage: So in the Oratrices, or pleading
Women of Aristophanes, the Women which compose the Chorus, go out at the end of
the first Act in Men's disguise, to go to the Council to have it there decreed,
that the Government of Athens shall be put into their hands; and at the end of
the second Act, they come back upon the Scene to bring their Husbands cloths
which they had stolen in the night: Where by the by we may take notice of the
Ignorance of some of our Pedants in their Latin Tragedys, when at the end of
each Act they bring on a single Actor to represent the Chorus, and declaim some
scurvy Verses of Morality, bringing him on, and driving him off as they please,
thinking thereby to fulfill Aristotle's Rules, and perfectly imitate the
Ancients; whereas their Chorus was composed of many persons, who sung and
danced with great Art, and were always brought upon the Stage for some good
reason; nor are we to imagine, as some have done, that the Chorus sung and
danced always; for that was only when there was need to mark the Intervals of
the Acts. In other places the Chorus was considered as any other Actor, and the
Corypheus, or chief of them used to hold Discourse for all the rest; or else
being divided in two (as sometimes it was half on one side of the Stage, and
half on the other) the Chiefs of each side discoursed together of the Affairs
of the Stage, as is to be seen in the Agamemnon of Aeschylus upon the death of
that King.

We see likewise sometimes that the Chorus after some Discourses falls a
singing, or is commanded to do it, by which it appears, it did not sing before;
The Example is precise in the seven before Thebes, where Prince Eteocles, after
having discoursed with the Chorus a good while, bids him at last leave off
talking, and sing, to know now whether they all danced, and whether the same
persons danced that sung, and if they danced and played on Instruments
together, and of what sort is that great diversity of Song we find among the
Ancients, all this I say cannot contribute any thing to the composition of a
Drammatick Poem; and therefore need not be examined, but in order to instruct
our Music, in case we should have a mind to bring the Chorus's upon our
Theaters.

But we must not forget here, that the chief Actors did frequently mingle with
the Chorus, as Electra in Euripides and Sophocles. Queen Aethra, with King
Adrastus in the Supplicants of Euripides; and in these cases I am of Opinion,
that those Actors were the Coryphaei's.

Sometimes there was diverse Chorus's, when it was not probable that the same
persons could be twice upon the Stage, as in Christophanes, when Bacchus passes
the River Stix, to go to the Palace of Pluto, the Chorus is made by Frogs; but
when he is at the Gate of the Palace, the Chorus is made by the Priests, and
the fraternity of his Mysteries.

Sometimes likewise the Chorus did not come back time enough at the end of an
Act, being engaged somewhere else, and then that Act was marked by some Mime,
Music Dance or buffooning, taken from the Subject, as in the Oratrices of
Aristophanes, the Women being all elsewhere at the end of the fourth Act, the
Poet makes a farce of two old Women, and a young Girl, who sing and dance to
Instruments, in expectation of some Man to come by, and are already disputing
who shall have him to make him obey the Women's Laws.

From all these Observations it is most apparent, that the Chorus is nothing
but what we have described it to be; and that we have much reason to wonder
that the Learned, who have afforded us so many curiosities upon the Drammatick
Poem, have not nevertheless discovered any thing like this to us, though very
important, to understand ancient Tragedy, and justify the probability of all
the Rules of the Theater.

For first, if the Ancient Greek Poets have made but few Monologues upon the
Stage, it is because it was not always easy to find a pretext to send out the
Chorus, and to have it come in again; and on the other side, a man could not in
probability be supposed to speak aloud of secret things, without being heard by
persons who were so near him.

Secondly, The Ancient Poets seldom make any of their Actors die upon the
Stage, because it was not probable, that so many Persons as composed the
Chorus, should see such a thing done, and not endeavor to hinder it. Thus
Aeschylus makes Agamemnon be killed in his Palace, and his Cries and dying
Groans to be heard without by the Chorus, which deliberates whether they shall
call the People, or break in to his Relief; when Clytemnestra her self comes
out, and owns the Murder, and its manner, showing them likewise her Husbands
dead Body; which has made some imagine, that Agamemnon was killed upon the
Stage. On the other side, Sophocles makes the Chorus leave the Stage, and
brings on Ajax in a sedate, calm Resolution of dying; where after having spoke
a most passionate Monologue, he kills himself with his own Sword, from which
none could hinder him, he being alone upon the Stage. And by the by, that may
serve to oppose to those who so peremptorily maintain, that the Ancients never
shed any Blood upon the Stage; for they have both done it, and avoided it, and
still with decency and probability.

Thirdly, The Chorus obliged a Poet to a Continuity of Action; for if the
Action ceased, it was not probable the Chorus should stay there any longer, its
Business being only depending upon the Action. Thus we see, that as soon as
Ajax's Fury seemed to be a little over, the Chorus, which was made up of his
Subjects, who came to enquire of his Condition, has a design to be gone; but is
stopped by a Messenger, who tells them the Arrival of Teucer, Ajax's Brother,
and the danger that Minerva had put Ajax in all that day.

Moreover, we may here conclude, That the Chorus obliged the Poet insensibly to
a necessity of keeping the Unity of the Scene; for since it was regularly to
stay from the beginning of the Dramma to the end, without going out, it is most
undoubted, that the Place could not change: for it would have been most
ridiculous, that Persons who never stirred, should have been transported from
Europe to Asia, or from Athens to Thebes, without ever having disappeared from
the Spectators Eyes; and therefore those Poets, whenever they did make the
Chorus go off from the Stage, were very careful to make them tell where they
went, that it might not be imagined that in carrying off the Chorus, they meant
to transport the Scene too.

And not only the Unity of Place, but likewise the Measure of Time convenient
to the Drammatick Poem, may be learned from the Choruses* for if the Poet had
comprehended in his Play a Year, a Month, or a Week, how could he make the
Spectators believe, that People who had always been in their Eye, should have
passed so long a time without either eating, drinking, or sleeping. I know it
will be answered, That there is an Illusion to be allowed upon the Stage; and I
own it. But the Spectators must still be deceived, so as not to perceive that
they are so; and though they know before hand that they are to be deceived, yet
it must not be done so grossly as to be perceived without reflection, and at
first sight. Therefore that which in our days has helped these irregular Plays
to pass upon us, was the Intervals of the Acts, where none remaining upon the
Stage, and our Music not being looked upon as a Continuation of the Action,
the Spectator's Imagination was at liberty to help the Poet, and to shorten
Years and Months into Moments, the Eyes having nothing before them to
contradict this Imagination.

From hence then it results naturally, That the time of the Dramma ought to be
very short, as we have showed in a Chapter on purpose.

To make an end of this Matter, we must observe, That the Choruses made all the
Grandeur and Magnificence of the ancient Tragedies; not only because the Stage
was always full, but because there was need of making a vast Expense: for there
was a great number of Actors, Musicians, Dancers, Clothes, and often very
costly Machins, as in the Clouds of Aristophanes; and it was among the Grecians
an honorable Profession to instruct and direct the Choruses, as appears by
Plato the Philosopher, who followed that Employment the best part of his Youth;
and Aristophanes, we find, had the direction of his Choruses, particularly of
that of the Clouds. The Richest of the Nobility often bore the Charge; as Dio,
in favor of Plato, who at first was one of the Tragic Poets. The Magistrates
likewise, to make the time of their Administration more Solemn, did the same
thing. Sometimes the State it self, when they would do an extraordinary Honor
to some of their Tragic Poets, ordered, that the Charges of the Chorus should
be allowed by the Public Treasury: And this the Athenians have often done. And
I believe, that when the Great Men forsook the Care of the Stage, it soon fell
into Contempt, the Choruses being retrenched, by the impossibility that the
Players and Poets were in to answer such an Expense; and afterward, the
Ignorance of following Ages thought fit to look upon them as useless, and unfit
to be put in practice. New Comedy it self lost its Choruses, even in the most
flourishing Drammatick Age; but that was rather because it was much harder to
give Choruses their due Probability in Comedy, than in Tragedy, though its
Mimes, Musicians, Embolaires, and such like, were not of a less Magnificence
than the Choruses of Tragedy it self; and those who were the Masters and
Directors in them, had as much Fame when they succeeded, as either Aesopus, or
Roscius, or any of the Chief Actors of the Age. This may be seen by some
ancient Inscriptions of Terence's Comedies, and other very considerable Proofs
in Antiquity.

If then our Age could suffer the re-establishment of the Chorus, as being the
most glorious and magnificent Ornament of Tragedy, our Poets ought in the first
place to study the Art of the Ancients in that point, how ingeniously they
invented them, how necessarily they brought them on, and how agreeably they
made them speak and act; and then the King or our Great Lords, should be at the
Expense: Which I think not the hardest to compass, considering the Profusion we
have seen in Ballets, Balls, and Tragedies in this Kingdom.

And lastly, It would be necessary to have Musicians and Dancers capable of
executing the Inventions of the Poets, after the way of those lively speaking
Dances of the Ancients, which, to say truth, I think impossible for us
Frenchmen to attain to, and I believe it very hard for the Italians. Therefore
I shall not expatiate here upon the Method of adding Choruses to our Tragedies,
nor say what might be left out, and what taken from the Ancients, in conformity
to our Customs; for that would deserve a particular Treatise, I pass now to
things more necessary to the true Understanding of the Drammatick Poem, and the
Practice of the Stage.

Chapter the Fourth.
Of the ancient Actors or first Reciters of Episodes, against the Opinion of
some Modern Writers.
THough in all this Work I have had no other Design than to instruct the Poet
in many Particulars which I thought very important for the making of a Dramma;
yet being carried, by my own Study and Enquiries, into the Discovery of an
Error of some of our Moderns, about the ancient Reciters of Tragedy, I could
do no less than endeavor to rectify that Mistake, though it do not perfectly
regard my first Design, which was only to deliver Precepts about Drammatick
Poetry. But if my Readers are curious enough to be willing to know some
Circumstances about the progress of Tragedy, I suppose this Discourse may not
be disagreeable to them.

We have laid down, as a most constant Truth, That for many Years Tragedy was
nothing but a Pagan Religious Hymn, sung and danced in the Honor of Bacchus;
That Thespis introduced an Actor to recite something Foreign to that Subject,
which was called an Episode; That Aeschylus brought on two Actors, and
Sophocles three, with other Ornaments, which brought Tragedy to its perfection.
And this we have justified by the Testimonies of Aristotle, Diogenes Laertius,
Athenoeus, Plutarch, Donatus, and many other ancient Writers; to whom I may add
all those who since have writ of Drammatick Poesy. But Castelvetro, Ricoboni,
and some others, are of opinion, that the Chorus signifies sometimes the Band
of Comedians or Tragedians, and that it is in that sense that we must understand
that Passage of Diogenes Laertius, in the Life of Plato, which says, That
formerly the Chorus alone acted the whole Tragedy: By which, says Castelvetro,
it appears, that the Histrions acted formerly without Music or Dancing. And as
one Absurdity generally engages us in another, to maintain this Error, he
commits a greater, when he adds, That the Actor introduced by Thespis was a
Buffoon who used to Sing, and Dance, and play upon some Instrument, and that
Aeschilus after him brought on two such, separating Dancing from the Singing,
and playing upon Instruments, and that Sophocles at last brought on three
Actors for these three things. So that he pretends, that before Thespis the
Chorus was a Troop of Players or Actors, and that those brought on by Thespis,
Aeschilus, and Sophocles were not so, but Singers and Dancers which certainly
is both false and ridiculous. First, there is no passage in any of the Ancients
that can be cited to prove, that they who associated themselves to Act Plays
were ever called by the Word Chorus, but by that of Company: We have many
Examples of this in Plautus, who very often makes them appear under this Name
at the end of his Plays to thank the Spectators, and in Terence* Ambivius
Turpio complains, That the Poets carried to other Companies those Plays that
were easy to represent; besides, it is so far from being true, that anciently
the Plays were acted by Histrions without Dancing or Music; that on the
contrary it is most certain, that they were originally danced and sung by a
Chorus of Musicians without Actors or Histrions.

To Illustrate fully the truth, I think that it is a strange mistake to say
that the Chorus of which Diogenes, Athenoeus, and Donatus do speak, when they
say, That Tragedy was at first acted by the Chorus was a Company of Comedians,
or reciting Representatours without either Dance or Music, for one need only
read those Authors to be convinced of the contrary; and when Athenoeus says,
That Tragedy had none of those Histrions which the Greeks call Hypocrites, or,
Representers of other Men; he cannot be understood of Buffooning, Dancing or
Singing Actors, because the Greeks had a great many of them, in Tragedy;
particularly in that which was called Satirical Tragedy. Besides, in the time,
and before the time of Thespis, they used a little sort of Stage called Eileos,
where was placed a Musician to answer the rest of the Chorus, and as Tragedy
was then nothing but a Sacred Hymn in the honor of Bacchus, the Chorus was
composed of those who were Ministers to his Ceremonies, and who were hired for
Money often to Sing and Dance in great Feasts, so that if the Actor brought on
by Thespis, had done nothing but Sing and Dance without reciting, he had done
nothing new, and the Priests of Bacchus would not have had reason to complain
of it, but there is more in it still, for even in the time of Thespis the
Choruses were composed of Dancers and Singers, and Athenaeus says, that he and
Pratinas, and Phrinicus with other Poets of that time, were Nicknam'd Dancers,
because they fitted their Poetry to the Dance of the Choruses whom they used to
teach with care themselves, to represent well in Dancing, that which they had
expressed in Verse.

This Pratinas was a Tragic Poet who lived a little after Thespis, and was
contemporary with Aeschylus, and as Athenoeus tells us, he writ as an
observation of his time, That when the People saw the Players of Instruments
come upon the Stage without Dancing with the rest of the Chorus, and the Chorus
sing and dance without playing upon Instruments, they were angry at it, as a
piece of Novelty against a received custom. By which it appears, that the
Division of Music from Dancing, which was then made by the Poets, was a change
in the Chorus, and not an Introducing of new Interludes; these Choruses were
composed of such great numbers, that Aeschylus was forced to lessen them, as we
have it from Aristotle, and this he did after the representation of his
Eumenides, and that Chorus is well distinguished from the Persons who recited.
If then it were or could be true, that in the time of Thespis the Chorus was
the company of Comedians, or Histrions, we must be told how that Name was
transferred from the Reciters to the Musicians, and who first brought into
Tragedy that great number of Dancers and Singers of which we could not be
ignorant, the Greeks having been pretty well informed of their own History ever
since the settling of the Olympiads, which was near three hundred years before
that time.

To this we may add as very considerable, that which Aristotle, and Diogenes
Laertius say, That by the means of the three Actors introduced by those three
lights of the Stage, Thespis, Aeschylus, and Sophocles, Tragedy received all
its splendor, and its last perfection; for if before them there were companies
of Players that represented reciting, as they have done since, and that these
three Actors added, were only to sing, dance, or play upon the Instruments;
sure these Authors would not have judged that so great a thing as to make the
perfection of Tragedy consist in it; and when in these latter times, Tragedy
having recovered its glory without all this Music, Mimiking, and Dancing; did
ever any one yet object the want of that for a fault, and that its true
splendor consisted in those ridiculous Interludes? Besides Thespis brought so
great a change upon Ancient Tragedy, that he was called the Inventor of it, and
if there had been before his time, whole companies of reciting Comedians, I
doubt whether he would have deserved that name for only adding a Buffooning
Actor to the rest.

There is yet another thing to confirm this, which in my opinion is important
enough, which is, That if before Thespis's time there had been Stage Players,
or Histrions, they must have acted without a Stage, and without Clothes
conformable to their parts, and without any decoration, for all these things
were most certainly brought in by those three Poets, and in different times.

And it is moreover true, that Aeschylus having Introduced the Second Actor,
divided the recitals of his Actours upon the Stage, and Aristotle for this
reason calls the First Actors part, The Principal Discourse, or the Principal
Canto; and Philostrates speaking of this Second Actor of Aeschylus writes, That
by this means he took off from the Stage those long and tedious Monodias of a
single Actor, putting in their room a Dialogue of Discourse of different
Actors. So Scaliger writes, that at the beginning Tragedy was Monoprosope, that
is, of One Actor, and that Aeschilus brought in the Discourse of two, by which
it appears that these Actors were Reciters and not Singers or Dancers, but to
finish the proof of this matter we must know that by the general Interpretation
of all the Greek and Latin Authors that writ since these three Poets; the
Histrion, or Player introduced by Thespis is named Protagonist, that introduced
by Aeschylus Deuteragonist, and the Third added by Sophocles Tritagonist; that
is, First, Second, and Third Actor, and not Dancer or Musician. By the First
they understood that Actor who in Tragedy represented the chief Person of the
Dramma, and had the chiefest part, as appearing most upon the Scene, and by the
two others they understood those who acted the second and third parts of the
Stage. Upon this Cicero writes, That amongst the Greeks he that has the second
or third part, though he happen to have a stronger voice than the first Actor,
yet he moderates it that he may not drown the first. And Porphyrius says, That
the Tritagonists always acted with a low voice; and it is in that sense that
these names have in other cases been applied to those Persons who had the
first, second, and third parts, which made Demosthenes to affront Aeschynes
call him Tritagonist, insinuating thereby, that he had been a Player, and that
only of the third rank, and no body will say, that in all these comparisons
there was any thought of these Actors being Musicians or Dancers.

Indeed something like the imagination of Castelvetro has happened in Comedy:
for where it was first received in Rome, it had no Chorus but Interludes of
Singers, Dancers, and Players upon Instruments, who altogether marked the
intervals of the Acts, and according to my opinion, were translated to the
Stage from the Ludi Scenici, or Scenical Games.

That they sung, danced, and played upon Instruments all at once, appears by
Livius Andronicus, who being grown old took an occasion from the weakness of
his voice to have a youth sing for him, which made his dancing so much the more
agreeable, as being freed from the constraint of managing his motions to his
voice: Some while after he laid aside his Instruments likewise, and then having
his Arms at liberty to give the full grace to his dancing, he brought that Art
to great perfection. This he did in Imitation of the Greeks, for we see in
Lucian, that in Tragedy these three Actions were formerly united and performed
by the same Person of which the surprisal of the people mentioned by Pratinas,
and which we have already alleged, is a sufficient proof.

Not but that there are some passages in Ancient Authors which seem to say,
that formerly Tragedies and Comedies were sung and danced, and that so
Artificially that the Music and the postures gave sensible Images of the
things expressed by the Verses; but this was either because the Musical Games
(even in Plato) comprehended under them all the Exercises of Poetry even to the
Drammatick; or else, because the Hymns of Bacchus which were originally at
first both Tragedy and Comedy, were always accompanied with Music and Dances,
or because in the intervals of the Acts they had people who represented by
their dancing; these things which had been spoken in the Act, as is to be seen
in Plutarch and Lucian, or rather, most probably, because not only they had at
the same time, and in the same places, Actors who recited Tragedy, but likewise
Choruses for Tragedy; and Mimes for Comedy, who sung and danced to the sound of
Instruments with postures which represented the Persons both of Men and Gods.

Let us then conclude, that before the Age of Thespis the Chorus was nothing
but a company of Musicians singing and dancing Tragedy as a Hymn in the honor
of Bacchus, and that Thespis brought on the First Actor, who by reciting,
divided the singing of the Chorus, and gave a beginning to the Episodes, and of
this truth besides Ancient Authors we have for Guarantees many modern ones, as
Robortel, Piccolomini, Bernardo Segni, Scaliger, Benius, Eugubinus, Vossius,
Heinsius, Victorius, and other Interpreters of Aristotle who have all proved
this Assertion, though by reasons differing from those which we have here
declared.

Chapter the Fifth.
Of Tragicomedy.
THis New Word which seems to have been introduced to signify some new sort of
Drammatick Poem, obliges me to explain it more clearly, and at length, then any
of our Modern Authors have done, and to that end I must show all that in our
Plays is different from, or conformable to the Works of the Ancients.

The Stage by little and little being come to its last perfection, became a
sensible and moving Image of all humane life: Now there being three sorts of
conditions or ways of living, that of Great persons in the Courts of Kings,
that of Citizens, and Gentry in Towns, and that of the Country people in the
Country, the Stage has likewise received three kinds of Drammatick Poems, to
wit, Tragedy, Comedy, and Pastoral.

Tragedy represented the Life of Princes and great People full of disquiets,
suspicions, troubles, rebellions, wars, murders, and all sorts of violent
passions, and mighty adventures; whence it was well called by Theophrastus, The
State of an Heroic Fortune.

Now to distinguish Tragedys by their Catastrophe, they were of two sorts; the
one were calamitous and bloody in their Events, ending generally by the death,
or some great misfortune of the Hero; the others were more happy, and concluded
by the felicity of the chief persons upon the Stage, and yet because the Poets
out of complaisance to the Athenians, who loved spectacles of horror, ended
often their Tragedys by unfortunate Catastrophes; many people have thought that
the word Tragical never signified any thing but some sad, bloody Event; and
that a Drammatick Poem could not be called a Tragedy, if the Catastrophe did
not contain the death of the chief persons in the Play; but they are mistaken,
that word, in its true signification, meaning nothing else but a Magnificent,
serious, grave Poem, conformable to the Agitations and sudden turns of the
fortune of great people. And accordingly in the nineteen Tragedys of Euripides,
many of them have a happy conclusion; and which is very remarkable is, that the
Orestes, which begins with fury and rage, and runs upon such strong Passions
and Incidents, that they seem to promise nothing but a fatal, bloody Event; it
nevertheless terminated by the entire content and satisfaction of all the
Actors, Helena being placed among the Gods, and Apollo obliging Orestes and
Pylades to marry Hermione and Electra, which made one of the Ancients say, that
that Play had a Comical Catastrophe; but in that he is much mistaken, as well
as Victorius and Stiblinus, who say the same thing of the Electra and Alceste.

Comedy was the picture of the Actions of the people, in which were generally
represented the Debaucheries of young people, with the tricks and acts of
Slaves and Courtezans, full of Railleries and Jests, and ending in Marriages,
or some other pleasant Adventure of common life; and this Poem was so much
confined to represent a popular life, that the style of it was to be low and
mean, the expressions taken out of the mouths of ordinary people; the passions
were to be short, and without violence. In a word, all the Intrigues were to be
upheld by slight and cunning, and not by the sublime and mavelous part of
humane life; therefore Scaliger is in the right to find fault with Plautus for
making Aleesimark appear with a Dagger, and a design to kill himself, because
that is an undertaking too generous for the Comic Theater. Donatus likewise
blames Terence for making his passions too strong and lasting, with expressions
something too noble for his Art, and Comedy its self does not always in Plautus
end happily as may be seen in diverse of his Plays.

Pastoral or Satyr had a mixture of serious and pleasant; Hero's and Satyrs
were its Actors; and this sort of Poem ought to be considered two ways; at
first it was nothing but a little Poem called Idyllium, or Eclogue, sung or
recited by one man alone, and seldom by two or more; and they were generally
Shepherds, Gardners, Husbandmen, Satyrs, Nymphs, and all sorts of Country
people; there was nothing but complaints of Lovers, cruelties of Shepherdesses,
disputes for Singing* Embuscadoes of Satyrs, and ravishing of Nymphs, with such
like diverting, easy Adventures; but the Poems were all loose pieces, without
any story, or necessity of Action. We have many Examples in Theocritus and
Virgil, and many Modern Poets have imitated them in Latin. In the Reign of
Henry the Second in France, diverse French Poets made Eclogues in their own
Language, of which we have some Examples in Ronsard.

The other sort was a Drammatick Poem, carried on according to the Rules of the
Stage, where Hero's and Satyrs were mingled together, representing both grave
and pleasant, ridiculous things; and for that reason this Poem had the name of
Satirical Tragedy.

This sort of Poem had not any course among the Romans, at least that ever I
could observe either in their Historians or Poets; that which they called
Satyr, being only a Copy of Verses made to slander or reprove, and never used
for the Stage, but with the Mimes, and by way of Interlude.

But among the Graecians, Satirical Tragedy was highly valued; for at the
Feasts of Bacchus, called Chytres, the Poets used to vye with each other, and
dispute for the Prize by this sort of Poem. Athenaeus, Plato, Plutarch, and
Suidas, alledg many Examples of this kind, and we have some fragments, but no
entire Poem of this kind, except the Polyphemus of Euripides: And I incline to
think that his Alceste is one of that kind too, by reason that Hercules is very
pleasant there with a Slave, and does very Comical Actions; but I shall wait
the Opinion of the Learned, before I shall determine any thing in that Point.

These three sorts of Poems are not now upon the Stage, in the same manner as
they were anciently; for to begin with Pastorals, they are now a Drammatick
Poem, according to the Rules of all other Dramma's, composed of five Acts, and
many agreeable Events and Intrigues, but all regarding a Country life; so that
we have borrowed the matter of the Eclogues from the Ancients, and applied it
to the Rules of Satirical Tragedy.

Comedy among us has remained long, not only in meanness and obscurity, but
looked upon as infamous, being changed into that sort of Farce, which we still
retain at the end of some of our Tragedys; though they are certainly things
without Art, or Grace, and only recommendable to the Rascally sort of Mankind,
who delight in obscene, infamous words and actions. I know indeed that
sometimes our Poets have endeavored to restore the Comedy of the Ancients,
either by translating their Works, or by otherwise imitating them, but that has
seldom happened, and then without success too, for many reasons; but
particularly, for not having chosen Subjects that had any conformity with our
manners and customs; or for not having changed in the Works of the Ancients,
that which was not so conformable to our Sentiments: Neither can we say that
the Comedy of the Italians has succeeded to those of Plautus and Terence, for
they have observed neither the matter nor form of them; their Subjects are
always mingled with serious Adventures, and burlesk ones, Hero's and
Harlequins; and generally they consist but of three Acts, without any order of
Scenes, nor any thing of the Conduct of the Ancients. And indeed I cannot but
admire how it comes to pass, that the Descendents of the Romans should be so
unlearned in the Art of their Fathers.

As for Tragedy, it has been preserved a little better among us, because the
manners of our Nobility being serious and heroic, they have with more pleasure
been upon the Stage the Adventures of such persons, and have showed no
disposition at all to that mixture of serious and burlesk which we blame in the
Italians. But besides the Niceties of the Art, which as well as the Italians,
we have long been ignorant of; we have done two things, one of which is very
reasonable, and the other without any good grounds. The first is, that we have
rejected all those Storys full of horror and cruelty, which made the pleasure
of the Roman and Athenian Stages; and for this very reason one of the noblest
Tragedys that we have, Alboin.
and the most worthy of a Grecian Theater, could never succeed well upon ours,
but gave always some disgust both at Court, and to the people. I have already
given a reason for it in another place. But the second thing which we do
without any ground at all is, that we have taken away the name of Tragedy from
all those Plays where the Catastrophe is happy, and without blood, though both
the Subject and Persons are heroic, and have given them the name of
Tragicomedys. I do not well know whether our Poet Garnier was the first that
brought it up, but he gave that name of his Bradamante, which many since that
have imitated.

I shall not absolutely fall out with this name, but I shall show that it is at
least superfluous, since the word Tragedy signifies as well those Plays that
end in joy, as those that end in blood; provided still the Adventures be of
Illustrious persons. And besides, the signification of the word Tragicomedy is
not true in the sense we use it; for in those Plays that we apply it to, there
is nothing at all Comical, all is grave and heroic, nothing popular and
burlesk.

But moreover, this title alone may destroy all the beauty of a Play, which
consisting particularly in the Peripetia, or return of Affairs, it may discover
that too soon; since the most agreeable thing in a Dramma is, that out of many
sad and Tragic appearances, the Event should at last be happy, against the
Expectation of the whole Audience; but when once the word Tragicomedy is
prefixed, the Catastrophe is presently known, and the Audience the less
concerned with all the Incidents that trouble the designs of the chief Actors;
so that all their Pathetick complaints do but weakly move the Spectator, who is
prepossessed with an Opinion that all will end well; whereas if we were
ignorant of the Event, we should tremble for them, and be likewise more
delighted with the return of good Fortune that should deliver them.

One thing which surprises me the most in this occasion is, that there are men
of Learning and Parts, who out of complaisance to popular Errors, do maintain
that this was a word used by the Romans; for, for my part I cannot imagine
where they can find that a Dramma, containing the Adventures of heroic
persons, and ending in a happy Catastrophe, had the name of Tragicomedy. We see
nothing of this in what remains of the Works of the Ancients, nor in those who
have compiled fragments, or written their own sense about the Art and Maxims of
the Stage. It Is true that Plautus in the Prologue to his Amphytrio, uses the
word Tragicomedy; but as he is the only Roman that has used it, so has he done
it in a sense very remote from the use we make of it. That he is the only Poet
of the Ancients that has used this word, is out of dispute; and our Moderns
cannot allege any other Roman Author, while the Roman Tongue was a living
Language; so that Plautus was the Coiner of this word, which also fell with
him, and died in its Cradle long before the Roman Language; but if others after
him had made use of it in the sense he employs it, that could not authorize the
word Tragicomedy, as it is now employed; and quite contrary, it is by Plautus,
that we will show the mistake of its signification, and the ill use that is
made of it.

To understand this well, we must repeat here, that Tragedy and Comedy were two
Poems so distinct, that not only the Adventures, Persons, and Style of the one,
had nothing common with the other; but even the Tragedians never acted Comedys,
nor the Comedians Tragedy: They were as it were two different Trades or
Professions; and accordingly Story gives us the names of diverse Actors, who
excelled in the one or the other, but never, or at least very rarely of any
that excelled in both.

We are to take notice besides, that the Mimes, Pantomimes, Embolarii, the
Buffoons, the Dancers, Musicians, Players of Instruments, nay even the Actors
of the Atellane Fables (which were the modestest of all) were not admitted
among those who acted Tragedys, nor likewise among the Comedians, or those who
acted Comedy; both these being reputed much more honorable than the Actors of
those Farces and Interludes; but the chief distinctive mark of these two Poems
was the matter of their Incidents, and the condition of the persons in each
Poem; for where Gods and Kings acted according to their gravity and dignity,
that was called Tragedy; but when the Intrigues of the Stage were founded upon
the tricks and behavior of young Debauchees, Women and Slaves, that was
Comedy. And if we seek a further reason for this, it will appear that the Hymn
or Song of Bacchus, which was sung and danced before his Altars, having been
transferred from the Country, to Towns and Citys, the Subject of it was always
taken by the Poets out of illustrious and serious Storys and Fables, and
treated in a grave and sublime style; but the very same Hymn remaining in the
Country Villages, took its Subject from the common people, and their actions;
and being treated in a low, familiar style, was called Comedy, though that name
too at first was common to both sorts of Poems, till their Characters being so
very different, made them be distinguished by different names. Now let us see
in what sense it is that Plautus employs the word Tragicomedy in the Prologue
of his Amphytrion, where Mercury speaks; and having desired from the people a
favorable Audience, continues in these words. After this I will explain to you
the Subject of this Tragedy, What, you frown, because I have called this Play a
Tragedy? but I am a God, and therefore can change it presently if you will, and
without altering a Verse of it make it a Comedy. Then having jested a little,
he goes on; I will by a mixture make it a Tragicomedy; for I do not think it
reasonable that a Play should be called all Comedy, where Gods and Kings come
and act; how shall we do then since a Slave too is one of the chief Actors?
why, as I told you, we will make it a Tragicomedy.

After such plain and intelligible words, I cannot imagine how any body can
say, that Plautus had used the word Tragicomedy, as we use it; for he never
dreamt of that signification; all that he says is a jest, wherein he joins the
names of those two Poems, as he had done the persons by which the great
distinction that was between them does more evidently appear; and that
therefore we have very ill applied that name to a Poem, where all the Persons
and Adventures are heroic. It Is for this that Plautus never called his
Amphytrio a Tragicomedy, but because his Gods and Kings do not act according to
their dignity, but rather very far from it, playing the fool almost
continually, insomuch that Jupiter and Amphytrio go to Fisty-cuffs; he
therefore often boldly calls it Comedy, in many places of his Prologue.
Jupiter, says he, will act himself in this Comedy, and by and by, Hearken now
to the Argument of this Comedy; so that his Interpreters and Commentators have
not also called it by any other name, no more than such Ancients as speak of
Plautus and his Works; as Cicero, Quintilian, Varro, Aulus Gellius, Volcatius
in his Treatise of the Comic Poets, Servius, Sextus, Pompeius, Macrobius,
Rufinus, Donatus, Petrus Crinitus, Lilius Geraldus, in his History of Poets,
Scaliger in his Poetica; none of these* I say, have called his Amphytrio, no
more than all his other Plays any thing else but a Comedy. And when Vossius
explains this word of Tragicomedy, he says, Plautus gives it to his Amphytrio,
because he in that Play mingles the dignity of persons with the lowness of
Comical Discourses; and Festus making a division of the Fables among the
Romans, says, that the Tabernariae, were such as admitted of persons of
Quality, mingled with people of mean Extraction, upon which Vossius adds, that
the Amphytrio of Plautus is of that sort, and that such a Play may be called
Tragicomedy, or Hilaro-Comedy, which is a new word invented by that Author. And
Scaliger before him, speaking of the name of Tragicomedy given to this Play,
says, It is done in Raillery, because the Poet had made a mixture of the
meanness of Comedy, with the dignity of great persons; let us not therefore
affirm any longer, that this word Tragicomedy was used by the Ancients in our
sense; for Plautus is the only one that has it, and that in a quite different
sense from ours, who by that word do mean a Drammatick Poem, of which the
Subject is Heroic, and the End or Catastrophe happy; and that indeed is a
noble and agreeable sort of Tragedy much used by the Ancients.

The same fault, in my Opinion, is committed by those who would have the
Hilaro-Tragedia to be a Dramma, or Theatral piece in use among the Greeks, and
of the nature of that which we call Tragicomedy, which seems not to be very
probable. Suidas indeed does say, that Rintho, a Comic Poet, invented a sort
of Poetry called by him Hilaro-Tragedia; but to conclude from thence, that it
was a regular Drammatick Poem, of which the Subject was Heroic, and the End
happy, seems against all appearance, first, because that it was a Comic Poet
that invented it, and they seldom or never undertook to treat any grave
Subjects; or when they did, it was always to turn them into Ridicule, as this
Amphytrio of Plautus, and the Comedys of Aristophanes. Suidas calls this Play
of his a Farce. Hesichius calls the Author Jester and Laugher; and Varro puts
the name of Riortho for a Jester. Besides, this Invention of his had no
progress, and we have not heard ever since, of any regular Dramma that has
carried this title, nor of any Poet that succeeded him in this kind.

What I should think then of this Hilaro-Tragedia is, that it was a little
piece of Poetry, of the number of those called Mimes, wherein were mingled
serious and pleasant things, sung with Voices and Instruments, and danced upon
the Stage with gestures, expressing the sense of each word, according to that
wonderful way of the Ancients, so little known in our days; and this seems to
be so much the more probable, because Vossius says, that the Hilaroedia is the
same with the Hilaro-Tragedia; and it is certain, that that, and the Magedia,
were two Poems of that sort, sung and danced upon the Stage by those who were
thence called Hilaroedians, and Magedians; and they were not Drammatick Poems
represented by Tragedians or Comedians, as some by mistake have imagined, for
the Hilaroedians (who were likewise called Simoedians from one Simon Mages, who
excelled in that Art) did dance and sing a piece of Poetry agreeable, but
serious; and though not so serious as Tragedy, yet much of the same nature and
as for the Magedians, they at first recited only Discourses of Magic or
natural Causes, such as is the Pharmaceutra of Theocritus and Virgil; but in
process of time they came to act all sort of lascivious Farces in the Comic
Character, but much below it. The Magedians represented Men in Women's cloths;
but there were another sort who represented only Women in Men's cloths, and
those were called the Lisoedians Athenaeus remarks many more particulars about
them not proper to our Subject.

But that none may have cause to wonder at what I say about Hilaro-Tragedy, we
must observe that most of the Poems of the Ancients were sung and danced with
ingenious Gestures, either in their Temples, or upon the Theaters, or at their
Feasts In a word, in all public Pomps and Shows, either sacred or profane.
Sometimes they took Odes and Idylliums, and other small pieces of Poetry, as
Mnasion did by the Jambicks of Simonides, and some others by the Verses of
Phocilides, and other Poets. The Lacedaemonians did the same thing by the Songs
of Thaletas and Aleman, and the Paeans of Dionisiodorus, at the celebration of
the Feast for the Tyrean Victory. Sometimes they took a Cento out of some great
work, as out of Hesiod or Homer; and these reciters were called Homeristes,
being first brought upon the Stage by Demetrius Phalereus; and one Hermodorus
was famous among them.

We find also by a certain Jason, cited by Athenaeus, that in the great Theater
of Alexandria, Hegesias the Comedian was a famous Actor of those Poems, written
by Herodotus Logominus, a noted Poet of those times, different from the
Historian of that name.

Nay, there were people who used to sing and dance some parts of Tragedys and
Comedys at Feasts, and great Entertainments; and sometimes the entire Plays
were thus sung and danced, not only in the time when Tragedys and Comedys
consisted of the Hymn of Bacchus, (of which we have spoke in its proper place)
but even since they were reduced into Rules, and made up of many Episodes
inserted between the Chorus's, as we have them now.

From whence we see Aristotle calls Aeschylus's Dancer Divine, for having so
rarely danced a Play of his called the Seven before Thebes; and we see Seneca
makes use of Pylades, a rare Tragedian Dancer: and Batyllus as rare a one for
Comedy, to insinuate, that no one ought to undertake any thing but what they
are excellent in, if they mean to succeed. 'Twas this Pylades who raised a
Dispute before the people of Rome against Hylus his own Scholar, which of them
two represented Agamemnon best, either Hylus, who to make him great, raised
himself upon his Toes, or Pylades, who made him pensive and thoughtful, as
being the best Idaea of a Prince that was to take care of his Subjects good.
Plutarch likewise in his Table Conversations makes two great Discourses about
this ingenious way of representing by motions and postures, persons and
actions, insinuating that Poetry is nothing but a speaking Dance, and Dancing a
dumb kind of Poetry, and condemning at the same time the Dances of Pylades in
public Feasts, as being too serious and passionate.

But, though these Discourses about the Ancients may be agreeable and useful,
they carry me too far from my Subject, upon which I have already been too
taedious to explain only the word Tragicomedy, our Poets may reflect whether
they think fit to use it still in its vulgar acceptance, or whether according
to the tr^e notion of Tragedy, they will use this word indifferently in all
those Dramma's, of which the persons are Heroic, whether the Catastrophes be
happy or fatal, that so they may hinder the Spectator from discovering the
Event of their Plays beforehand.

An Analysis, or Examen of the first Tragedy of Sophocles, entitled Ajax, upon
the Rules delivered for the practice of the Stage.
IF the Curious that have read these Remarks, are willing to receive some
satisfaction for their pains, and to judge equitably of the labor I have
undergone, it will be necessary for them to read in the Original this Dramma,
which I am going to examine, and till then, if they condemn or praise me any
where, I must except against them as unfit either to censure or applaud my
Endeavors. All Criticisms have this property, that they oblige the Readers to
view the piece they criticize; for if they have not present in their minds all
those particulars, upon which the Rules are to be applied, they are subject to
doubt of the beauties and faults that are showed, and of the truth of all the
Critics Observations. I am not ignorant that such a Discourse is none of the
most agreeable of its self, and therefore ought not to impose the reading of
another Book; but there is no way to make this Lecture easy, but by taking in
both. It may be a bolder man than my self would tell you, that these Remarks,
though by the crabbedness of their Criticism they may fail of pleasing one way,
yet they will in some measure atone for that, by showing the hidden graces, and
the great dexterity of those great Masters which have hitherto been little
taken notice of, or at least regarded as casual beauties.

Supposing therefore that my Reader has just read Sophocles's Ajax, I begin to
examine it by the Subject; for it is there that the Poet himself ought always to
begin.

The subject of this Poem is nothing but the just Indignation of Ajax against
his Country men the Graecians, for preferring Ulysses before himself in their
dispute about the armor of Achilles. This affront in the person of a King and
the bravest man of the whole army unjustly and basely used by those whom he had
so valiantly defended, and that by those Generals who could not be ignorant of
his great Actions done in their presence, could not but be most highly resented
and therefore afforded a noble Theme for great passions. The fund, I confess,
seems to be sterile, and to promise little; but there lies the greatest art of
choosing such improvable subjects, to give the Poets Imagination the greater
Play; who it may be upon this Anger alone Invented both his rage and manner of
dying, for I do not find History to have positively determined either of them:
Ovid speaks only of his Anger, and some have said that he was killed by Paris;
others that he was stifled in mud by the Trojans, because he was Invulnerable,
otherwise; for my part, I believe that those who tell his death Sophocles's
way, have had it from him, which is no new thing in Theatral stories, the very
Fables, from thence having by the Poets Inventions passed at last for
Authentic Histories.

These two Incidents then I think to be the Poets Invention, who in that has
with great Art, followed the Rules of probability, for a Soul as fierce and
passionate for Glory as that of Ajax, might well entertain the resolution of
being revenged upon his Judges and his Competitour, and thereupon run mad;
After which coming to himself again, and seeing the extravagant and fruitless
Effects of his transport, he might well kill himself out of shame and some
remainder of rage. That which makes this still seem to be the Poets Invention,
is the prohibition that Menelaus and Agamemnon lay upon Teucer Ajax's Brother,
that he should not bury Ajax's dead body, for it is very probable that those two
Princes were not so inhumane; but Sophocles added that to create the greater
compassion for Ajax's calamity, seeing his brother hardly permitted to pay him
those funeral rites which were due to so great a man and a King; in this indeed
he makes something bold with the generosity of Menelaus and Agamemnon, but Ajax
is his Hero to whom he Sacrifices all things; and this refusal of theirs to let
him be solemnly Interred against the law of all Civilized Nations, contributes
not a little to persuade that they had used him Unjustly in the point of
Achilles's Armor, all which, makes him still be the more pityed; not but that
those princes might have some shadow of reason for their severity, considering
Ajax as one who had meditated the ruin of the chief Captains of the Grecian
Army, and made himself as it were a public Rebel whose punishment among them
was to be prohibited the solemnity of sepulture. I am not Ignorant, That
Cointus Calaber, an Epick Poet, makes them much more generous and with him they
perform honorable obsequies to his body. And in that he aims at preserving the
dignity of his Poem and Hero's, as Sophocles does of his, besides this
Ingenious Fiction in his Subject he brings in Tecmessa Ajax's Wife whence he
draws three or four very passionate Scenes; now let us see what other changes
he makes to adjust the time and place necessary for the composition of his Poem.

As for the time, he shows that indeed there needs no longer a one for the
representation than for the real action. Since in the third Act it is said, That
Minerva 's Anger against Ajax is to last but a day, and that if they could but
watch him for one day, he might avoid destroying himself. Now Ajax after this
is all alone, and kills himself, by which we may naturally conjecture, that the
Play ends the same day that his madness began; for all that is done after his
death, is nothing but a contestation about his being buried, which is soon
over, as happening near the dead body; and to show that he does not employ the
whole day upon his Stage, he opens his Theater in the morning, after Ajax had
already run through the whole Grecian Camp, exercised his fury upon the Flocks
of Sheep, and carried some of those Animals bound into his Tent, which takes up
naturally more time than is spent from the hour that Ulysses comes to spy what
Ajax did, to the time that Teucer carrys away his dead body to have it buried;
so that a small part of the day is taken up by his Actors.

The only Incidents in this piece is the return of Teucer, who was in Mysia
with an Army; and that this coming of his might not appear affected, he makes
Ajax complain of the long stay of his Brother, who should have been back long
before, and who was expected by him with great impatience; so that when Teucer
comes at last, that does not appear so much a contrivance of the Poets to make
him be there to dispute about his Brothers Obsequies, as a natural effect; the
Spectatours being so prepared that they are wishing for his return of
themselves before he comes, that he might save Ajax's life, in which we may
observe another change that Sophocles makes in the Story by this absence of
Teucer, the reason of which change is, that if Teucer had been present in the
Camp during his brothers Madness, the Scene being before Ajax's Tent, it is very
probable that Teucer would have taken care to secure him, whereas all other
Authors who speak of this adventure, as Cointus Calaber particularly, leave
Teucer in the Army, but not able to save his brother, because he was gone out
of his Tent to kill and Massacre the Flocks of Sheep, and no body knew what was
become of him.

Observe moreover with what art he chooses the place of his Theater. In
following the Fable as it is generally received, none of the Actors have any
Stable or particular place. Ajax is abroad in the Fields; Teucer, Ulysses,
Menelaus, and Agamemnon are in the Camp; his Wife Tecmessa laments with her
little Son in his Tents, and his Subjects the Salaminians are either upon their
Ships, or abroad to seek out their Prince. There was nevertheless a necessity
of bringing all these people together, and to make them appear in one and the
same place with probability, and thus he brings it to pass.

He places his Stage before Ajax's Tent as being the most probable place where
all things should come to pass; particularly considering that there was a
necessity of making an afflicted Lady appear before the Audience, it would nor
have been decent to place her any where else, nor to make her run about the
Fields after a Madman; but because likewise he was resolved to bring the body
of Ajax upon the Stage, that he might the better show the Passions of Tecmessa
and Teucer, and the contestation about his burial; he supposes that there was a
Wood Close by the Tent, and to make that supposition the more likely, he places
Ajax's Tent the last of all the Camp, which is very artificially intimated in
the first Verses that Minerva speaks, and to show that the Wood is hard by his
Tent, he makes the Salaminians hear from the Camp, the voice of Tecmessa, when
she falls into loud complaints in the Wood upon finding the Dead Body: Then to
bring Ajax, who was the chief Actor, to his Tent, he supposes against the
received Fable, that he did not immediately kill himself after the slaughter of
the Sheep; but that he brought into his Tent, a great Ram which he took for
Ulysses, and other Creatures which he took for the Chief Captains among the
Graecians with an intent to make them linger under the torment of his Stripes.

But let us see in particular how each Actor is brought upon the Stage, and
goes off according to reason. Ulysses comes to spy what Ajax was doing, and
Minerva to assist him against the fury of Ajax, Ajax appears by the command of
Minerva to give Ulysses the content of seeing his Enemy in the condition that
she had put him; Ajax returns to his Tent to whip the Ram that he took for
Ulysses, then Minerva and Ulysses go off of the Stage where they have nothing
more to do, and that is the First Act. In the Second Act Tecmessa comes out of
her Tent to desire succor from the Salaminians, who are the Chorus in this
Tragedy, and then opens her Tent to go in again, where appears Ajax in the
midst of the slaughtered Beasts, but somewhat come to himself, which gives
subject to very fine Discourses between him, his Wife, and his Friends. In the
Third Act he comes out of his Tent feigning to go wash himself in the Sea to
purify himself; but indeed to hide the Sword that Hector gave him: his Wife
comes out to follow him, but by his command retires into her Tent again, and he
goes on. Then appears a Messenger, who bringing the news of the return of
Teucer, orders from him that Ajax be carefully kept; upon this news Tecmessa
goes out again, and desires the Salaminians to help her to look Ajax, which
they do very willingly, and so ends the third Act. In the Fourth Act Ajax
appears in the Wood near his Tent, making complaints of his misfortunes, and so
falling upon his Sword, the Hilt whereof he had put into the ground, which
circumstance shows that his Death was at the same time an effect of shame for
what he had done, and some remainder of the rage he was possessed with; at the
very moment that he expires the Salaminians come upon the Stage from different
parts weary, and vexed that they had sought him in vain, and Tecmessa who alone
had gone toward the Wood, finds Ajax just expiring, and cries out, which being
heard by the Salaminians they go to her: In the mean time the seeking of him
with so much noise had easily made every body think that he was gone out of the
way on purpose to kill himself, and fame which ordinarily fore-runs great
events, having carried the news of his death to Teucer obliges him to leave the
Greeks with whom he was wrangling about his Brother, and come to his Tent to
hear some news of him; and at the same time almost Menelaus who had likewise
heard the news of his death comes thither to forbid his being buried; then goes
back to tell Agamemnon of Teucers disobedience to his Commands; who at the same
time goes out to find a burying place for his Brother, having first shut up
Tecmessa with her Maids* In the Fifth Act Agamemnon comes himself to put his
Orders in execution; and Teucer who sees him afar off, comes back to be near
his Brothers dead Body, to defend it; Ulysses arrives to appease Agamemnon, who
at last yields and goes out; Teucer desires Ulysses to withdraw, lest his
presence trouble the deceased Ghost or Manes of Ajax who had been his Enemy; he
does so, and Teucer carries off his Brothers Body: Now all these pretexts and
colors for the going off, and coming on of all the Actors, are without doubt
very natural and probable; but the Art with which the Poet brings all to pass,
is so fine, and so ingenious, that one cannot say that he affects so much as a
word in it all, every thing being so well contrived, that all appears
necessary, and therein lies the secret of the Art.

You do not neither see any Actor upon the Stage whose name you do not
presently know, or at least their quality or concern as much as is necessary to
prepare the Attention of the Spectators. At the opening of the Stage Minerva
(easily known to the Ancients by the marks of her Divinity) discovers Vlysses's
name who comes to her, and the design he has to spy what Ajax does; and when
Ajax appears, one sees in what condition he is, for Minerva declares it, and
calls him by his name. The Chorus in its first Verses shows, that it is made up
of Ajax's Friends, the chief of them saying, That he had been always partner of
the good and ill Fortune of that Prince, hardly has Tecmessa spoke three lines,
but the Chorus asking her about Ajax, she tells them that she can best inform
them, being from his Mistress and Slave become his lawful Wife. The Messenger
is presently known by his Dress, and by the first words he speaks. When Teucer
comes in the Fourth Act, the Chorus says they hear his voice, and his name
alone is enough to raise the expectation of some generous Sentiment from him,
and the Chorus bids him consider what to say to Menelaus who draws near, and by
that prepares an incident of some new trouble. When Agamemnon arrives, Teucer
says, That he came back quickly, because he had seen Agamemnon at a distance
with the marks of Anger in his Countenance. Thus by the Poets most agreeable
Artifice, the spectators are not uncertain in the knowledge of the Actors, and
their designs, which always ought to be; except where the ignorance of their
Names and Interests is to produce some rare effect in the incidents of the
Dramma.

Could these Acts have been more judiciously divided? The first contains Ajax's
fury, the second his repentance, the third the preparations for his death, the
fourth his death, and the fifth the Dispute about his burial, not that these
Actions are merely single, for they are accompanied with many circumstances
which much embellish, and altogether compose the Acts; and as for the Scenes
they are extremely well knit together, as because there always remains some
body of the precedent Scene in that which follows except in the Third Act,
where the Messenger who brings the Order to watch Ajax, and not to abandon him,
arrives upon the Stage just as Ajax goes off, which is one way of uniting a
Scene, when he that comes on seeks him that gois off. And in the Fourth Act,
though Ajax talks no longer with the Chorus which comes back just upon the
point he kills himself, yet those two Scenes are united by the time, and the
spectacle of his dead body, which remains as an Actor to whom the others
arrive. As for the Intervals of the Acts, they are so necessary and so well
filled by what is done off of the Stage, that the continuity of the Action is
most manifest; for in the first Interval, Ulysses tells the Greeks what he has
learned concerning Ajax, and Ajax continues his Madness in his Tent: In the
Second Ajax seeks for Hectors Sword; and in the same Interval Teucer comes to
the Camp and sends a Messenger according to Calchas's advice. Between the Third
and Fourth Act there is no Interval, because the Chorus is gone off of the
Stage which remaining empty, makes very well the distinction of those two Acts;
not that Ajax had been doing of nothing all that while, for he says himself
that he had been fitting his Sword to kill himself: The Fourth Interval
contains the return of Menelaus to Agamemnon, with their Discourse about
Teucers's disobedience, and the care that Teucer takes to find a fit place to
bury his Brother in; so that from the first opening of the Stage there is not
one moment that the Actors are not busy each according to their Designs.

Consider besides how well he has chosen the Chorus in this piece, and how
industriously he makes him Act. He makes his Chorus of Salaminians, who more
probably then any others might be supposed to come to Ajax, their Princes Tent
upon the news of his madness, as also to pity his distraction with their own
ill fortune; nevertheless he does not bring them upon the Stage at the
beginning, as he does his Chorus in other Plays, because they were not to hear
the Discourse between Minerva and Ulysses, and besides too they could not
without fear have been in Ajax's presence since Ulysses himself thinks himself
not safe near him, though under the protection of Minerva; but he brings them
on at the end of the First Act, and makes them go off again at the end of the
Third Act under pretext of looking after Ajax; but indeed because that having a
design to make Ajax kill himself upon the Stage, it would not have been
probable that his Subjects should have seen him undertake such a thing and not
hinder him.

To take this Tragedy according to the truth of the Action It seems not that
the Poet has done any thing in favor of the Spectatours, so naturally do all
things fall out, and are depending of each other, and yet his making the Chorus
go out that Ajax may kill himself upon the Stage, is contrived on purpose to
show the Audience a generous Action worthy their compassion, and to move them
yet to more tenderness, the very body of so great a Hero is denied burial.

We cannot but admire besides, the Art of his Narrations, for he makes Minerva
tell the Design which Ajax had secretly resolved upon the Night before against
all the Grecian Princes, and how she had made him run mad to hinder the
execution of it, which are things that Minerva alone could know; and then he
makes Tecmessa tell the remainder of what he had done when he was in his Tent.
This division produces two different effects upon the Stage; the first a
Sentiment of Admiration for the care that Minerva takes of Ulysses, but with
surprise for so great a misfortune in the Person of Ajax. The other is a
Sentiment of Pity, when the Spectatours see a Lady beautiful and well beloved
sitting near a Madman her Husband. We must not neither let slip the Narration
which Tecmessa makes summarily of the ruin of her Family, and the death of her
Parents, her Captivity, and then happy Marriage with Ajax; nor that of Teucer
about the exchange that Ajax made of a Belt with Hector for a Sword which he
received from him; the first having served to fasten the Body of Hector to the
Chariot of Achilles, and the other having been the Instrument of Ajax's Death,
for though both these Narrations are inserted in the most lively passions of
the persons that make them yet are they touched with so much Art, that they do
not at all weaken the Passions, but quite contrary heighten them by giving an
Image of some new misfortunes; besides that all the story of Ajax's Country,
his Family, and his Warlike Exploits are industriously told in different places
without any affectation, and only for a more perfect understanding of the
Subject.

I do not knew whether the Contestation of Ajax's Sepulture would be agreeable
and pathetick in our age, but I make no question but that in Sophocles's time
it must have taken extremely; for then it was a mark of the highest Infamy, and
the extremest misfortune that could befall any body to be forbid burial, and
without doubt the Spectatours were moved with great compassion seeing the body
of so great a Prince ready to receive such unworthy usage by the effect of
Minervas's anger and as the Discourses of the two Princes, Agamemnon and
Menelaus seem well grounded upon reasons of State to deprive him of the honor
of Sepulture; and on the other side, the reasons of Teucer have Piety and
Generosity on their side, I believe that this debate which was conformable to
the manners and customs of the Ancients must needs have been very agreeable to
them, particularly considering that Euripides has founded the Tragedy of the
Suppliants in honor of the Athenians upon that sole consideration; and that it
is not probable that so great a Poet would have taken a weak Subject to
establish the glory of his Country.

As for the show or spectacle he might have made Ajax appear in all his
Madness; but besides that it is a Passion below a Hero, except some great cause
excite it, and that the effects of it are Illustrious; I believe he avoided
doing of it, because it would have been hard to represent him making a great
slaughter among the Sheep and Goats without making him ridiculous and so
deprive the Hero of that compassion due to so great a Calamity; therefore to
show the deplorable condition of so great a Prince, and yet not to rob the
Stage of any thing of ornament, he makes him appear in his frenzy indeed, but
something abated by the presence of Minerva (which is a Figure of the rage of
Great Men, which ought not to be quite abandoned by prudence, as the madness of
the vulgar is) and so shows him sitting in his Tent in the first abatement of
his fury, having those slaughtered Animals all about him with his Wife, his
little Son, and his Friends in a mournful posture near him; all which does in
my opinion afford a well invented spectacle, apt to raise compassion; when Ajax
comes alittle to himself, and that all his looks, words, and actions have the
character of shame, courage, and fury painted in them, the better to manifest
the excess of his misery; add to this the tears and complaints of his Wife, the
presence of a little Infant who cannot speak it self, but whose presence gives
occasion to many tender expressions; and lastly, the heavy consolations of his
Friends, I say, that it is hard, but all this must produce a very pathetick and
moving show. After this the Poet brings him to his Senses entirely, but then
the prophetic words of Calchas which threaten him that day particularly with
death, bring new terror upon the Stage, and that so much the stronger, because
the Spectatours thought him safe by being returned to his Senses. After this he
dies by his own hand and his very Sepulture becomes a Subject of contestation;
all these are new Objects of Compassion which show us the mastery of the Poet
in supplying his Stage with variety by changing continually the Face of things.

A Project for Re-establishing the French Theater.
THe Causes which hinder the French Theater, from continuing the Progress it
had made some years ago in Cardinal Richelieu's time may be reduced to six.

1. The common belief that to frequent Plays is a sin against the Rules of
Christianity.

2. The Infamy with which the Laws have noted those who make an open profession
of being Players.

3. The failings and errors committed in the representation of Plays.

4. The Ill Plays which are indifferently acted with the good.

5. Ill Decorations.

6. Disorders committed by the Spectatours.

To begin by that Generally received Opinion. It Is true that the Ancient
Fathers of the Church always forbid Christians to frequent the Theaters for two
reasons.

The first, (which few have taken notice of) was because that the
representation of Plays was Anciently an Act of Religion, making a part of the
Cult and Worship performed to the Gods of the Heathens; this is out of dispute,
and may be easily proved, if need were, by a thousand Testimonies of the
Ancient Writers of Antiquity; the First Fathers of the Church condemned
therefore the Christians that assisted at those Spectacles as being participant
of Idolatry, which they had renounced by their Baptism, as we may see in the
writings of Minutius Felix, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, St. Austin, Lactantius,
and others.

The second Reason was founded upon the Indecencies and obscenities said and
committed there by the Mimes, Pantomimes, Dancers, and others who acted their
Dyth^rambes, Phales, Itiphales, Priapeas and other impure representations which
were proper to the Cult of Bacchus, to whom the Theater was Consecrated as to
its Author, and to Venus as the companion of Bacchus. As to the first Reason
then of the Pagan Religion, that ceases now, since Plays are no longer a piece
of Worship, but rather an Innocent Recreation without any Impious Ceremonies in
honor of the Idols, but the Public must be well informed of this.

As for the second Reason, though in Cardinal Richelieu's time all Obscenity
was banished from the Stage in his presence, yet the Public Theaters do retain
something of those Indecencies in Farces and other Poems where the Authors
endeavoring to please the rabble represent Impudent Stories, and set them out
with filthy jests; which is a thing that Christian Religion justly condemns,
and which all good Men abhor; and till that be taken away, and the Public
Theater as pure as it was in Cardinal Richelieu's presence, Plays will be
looked upon to be against good Manners and the strictness of the Gospel

As to the Infamy of those who take up the profession of Players, it was justly
inflicted upon them formerly, but now is no longer so.

To understand this point, we must know that there was two sorts of Actors
among the Ancients, the Mimes, and Dancers, and the Comedians or Players, who
are those that now act among us, and as these two sorts of people were very
different in the things that they represented as well as in the manner, places,
and habits of representing, so were they very differently esteemed.

The first in the later end of the Roman Empire were declared Infamous though
at first they were not so, neither among them nor amongst the Graecians.

But the Comedians and Tragedians never were so disgraced, but on the contrary,
always used with civility and kindness by all persons of worth and quality,
which may be made out by many proofs, but particularly by this* that the
Drammatick Poets themselves acted often the chief parts in their own Plays,
though some of them have been Generals of Armies, and had other noble
employments in the State; and if it has happened that the Actors have in some
Reigns at Rome been used somewhat severely, it was by Maxim of State, for
having sided openly with Princes reputed Tyrants, but not at all for being
Enemies to good Morals.

In France our first Acting begun in Churches, representing then only holy
Storys, but it soon degenerated into buffooning and satyr, both of them as
opposite to good Government, as to the purity of the Christian Religion.
Amongst these Actors who were named Basochiens and Bastelours, Comedy remained
with as much shame as ignorance for many Ages; the Libertinism of that sort of
life drawing away many young men of good Families, our Princes very justly
noted them with infamy, to hinder by that means young Debauchees from
continuing in a Society which was made incapable of keeping company with any
other honorable sort of men; and from this likewise followed, that persons of
quality scorned to contribute any thing to so mean a diversion, and were far
from imitating the Ancients in their generous liberality to Comedians.

From these two Considerations arises a third, which still stops the progress
of Drammatick Poesy, which is the fault of Representation.

The Esteem that the Ancients had Plays in, made many of the most excellent
Wits apply themselves that way, and the Glory of the Magistrates, as well as
the Fortune of the Choragues or Undertakers being depending upon the success of
the Play, they did take great care in choosing their Actors, and instructing of
them in the perfect performance of their parts, so that they attained to have
many rare Actors in all kinds; whereas with us very few ingenuously bred, have
mounted the Stage, being hindered from so doing, either by the fear of
committing a sin, or by the apprehension of incurring the Infamy affixed to the
profession by the Laws, from whence it has followed, that those who did
undertake it, being ignorant of their duty, performed it very ill in all its
parts; nay, so little knowing they were in their own Tongue, that they often
expressed very imperfectly, what they were to say; and if there did sometimes
rise up an Actor worthy of the Ancient Theater, he was so ill seconded, that
upon his failing any way, the Stage was ready to sink, and that even in our
days has brought Plays toward their decay.

The fourth Cause is founded upon ill Dramma's or Plays, and this does not so
much regard our Modern Poets, who, to say truth* have gained a very just
applause by many excellent pieces of theirs; but yet something may be said,
which is this;

The Ancients could not leave us any store of ill Dramma's, because all their
Plays were seen and examined by the Magistrates; and besides, their Poets were
not mercenary, but wrought for glory as much as for gain, there being a solemn
Prize appointed for their reward, which was delivered with great Ceremony at
their greatest Festivals, to those who had best satisfied the Judges, and the
Spectators; but we are far enough from that Method.

In the beginning of our Plays, as our Poetry was bad, so was the rest of the
Play, as to the Rules of the Stage; I have seen some of eight and forty Acts or
Scenes, without any other distinction. In the time of Ronsard, Comedy was a
little more regular, being cultivated by Jodelle, Garnier, Belleau, and some
others, who contented themselves with making fine Discourses, but without Art,
nor any contrivance in the Representation. Hardy did quite contrary,
endeavoring to please the people by the variety of things represented, but
without any knowledge of the Rules, which his Poverty did not give him leave to
spend any time to study. At last Cardinal Richelieu encouraging by his noble
generosity the Industry and Labor of our Poets, brought Plays to the State,
where we now see them far enough from their true perfection, nay, and something
decayed since his time.

For, as every day there appears new Poets animated either by the desire of
glory or reward, and that they cannot all be excellent, we see often such Plays
as ought not to be acted, which proceeds from the little experience and
presumption of those new Poets, as also from the ignorance of the Actors, who
being capable of judging only of some things, are nevertheless the only Judges
of all Dramma's, whether they shall be acted or no; add to that the little care
they take to have their Plays reviewed and repeated in the presence of
intelligent persons, before they come to be acted publicly. For there is no
small difficulty to judge of the success of a Play, by the reading of it alone;
for very often those Plays which read worst, are the best, when they come to be
represented; and on the contrary, likewise those which seem admirable to the
Reader, are often very defective upon the Stage, and the reason of this is, the
difference that there is between conceiving an Action as you read, and seeing
the same thing represented to your Eyes. Things fine to say are not always so
to see; and the pleasure of Reading makes some things agreeable, which the
vehemence of Action makes otherwise; as likewise some that appear weak in
reading, are strengthened by Action; all which faults in the representation, as
they lessen the Excellency of the Plays, so they discredit both Poets and
Actors, and keep the people in the Opinion that the Stage is not capable of
much improvement.

The fifth Cause about the Decorations is likewise important among the
Ancients, the Magistrates, and other great Men, who used to give public
Spectacles to the people, either by the obligation of their place, or to gain
public favor, used to be at the charge of the Decorations, the Players
contributing nothing toward it, and by that means those Ornaments were not
only magnificent, but perfectly answered the Poets Intentions. But now, that
our Players, though not very well in their Affairs, nevertheless must undergo
all the charge; they cannot be blamed if they endeavor to do it as cheap as
may be; but then the Decorations must be imperfect, and altogether below the
dignity of the Poets Invention.

As for the Disorders of the Spectators, we may consider, that nothing was more
safe and quiet, than the Ancient Theaters, the Magistrates being always
present, and every thing done by their orders; but amongst us there is no order
at all, but any sorts of people wear Swords in the Pit, and other places, and
therewith attack very often many peaceable Spectators, who have no other
defense than the Authority of the Laws. Among the Greeks and Romans, the Women
were so safe in the public Theaters, that they often brought their Children
with them; but with us a company of young Debauchees come in, and commit a
hundred Insolences, frighting the Women, and often killing those who take
their protection.

We may add to that, that the Seats of the Spectators were so conveniently
placed among the Ancients, that every one was placed conveniently, and there
could be no disorder in changing of place; whereas now the Pit and Boxes are
equally inconvenient; the Pit having no rising, nor no Seat, and the Boxes
being too far off, and ill situated; so that what with the disorders of the
Pit, and inconvenience of the Boxes, the Theaters are much forsaken by the
better sort of people.

To remedy all these Disorders, it will be necessary first, that the King be
pleased to set forth a Declaration, which shall show on one hand how that Plays
being no longer an Act of Religion and Idolatry, as they were formerly, but
only a public diversion; and on the other hand, that the Representations being
now performed with decency, and the Players themselves living sober, and not of
debauched lives, (as they were when the Edicts were made, by which they are
declared infamous) His Majesty does upon these considerations make void all
those former Laws, forbidding them still nevertheless to do or say any thing
upon the Stage against decency or good manners, under such and such penalties,
as of being driven from the Stage, and reputed infamous again. And to preserve
that Modesty which is necessary, it shall be likewise ordered, that no single
Woman shall act, if they have not their Father or Mother in the Company, and
that all Widows shall be obliged to marry within six months after their year
is out for mourning; and in that year shall not act except they are married
again.

And for the Execution of these orders his Majesty may be pleased to settle a
person of probity and capacity to be as it were an Overseer, Intendant or great
Master of the Theaters and other public Entertainments in France who shall
take care that the Stage be free from all Scandal, and shall likewise give an
Account of the life and actions of the Players. By this means the two first
causes which hinder the Reestablishment of the Stage must cease; for all
scandal and obscenities being banished, there will be no scruple of Conscience
in assisting at Plays; and the Players will besides be in so good a reputation,
as not to fear any reproaches from the sober sort of people. It was by such a
declaration as this that the Roman Emperors reestablished the Theater when it
was fallen into Corruption.

The third cause must likewise cease, for the profession of Actor being once
made reputable, all those who have any Inclination that way will the easilyer
take to it; and besides, the Overseer may himself select out of the Schools,
and the Companys of Country Players such as shall be fitting, and oblige them
to study the representation of spectacles as well as the Recitals and
Expressions of the Poet, that so the whole action may be perfect; and to this
end none shall be admitted but by the Kings Letters Patents delivered to the
Actor by the Intendant General of the Theaters, who shall give a certificate of
his capacity and probity, after having tried him in many ways. By this means
there will always be excellent Actors, and the Representations will no longer
be defective.

The 4th cause which regards the Poets themselves does require some distinction
for those of them who have already the approbation of the public by the
Excellency and number of their works, shall be obliged only to show their
Plays to the Overseer General to see that there be no Obscenities nor any thing
against decency in them, all the rest to remain untouched, at the hazard of the
reputation they have already acquired.

But as for the new Poets, their plays shall be thoroughly Examined by the
Overseer and reformed according to his orders, by which means the Stage will
not be loaded with ill Dramma's, nor the Players burdened with rewarding such
as afterward can be of no use to them.

As for the Decorations, they shall be performed by the care of the same
Overseer, who shall employ understanding and able Workmen at the public
charge, and not at the Players costs, who shall have no Expense to bear but
that of their clothes, and the reward they shall give the Authors.

As for the sixth Cause, which concerns the convenience and safety of the
Spectators, the King shall forbid all Pages and Footmen to enter the Playhouse
upon pain of death, and prohibit likewise all other persons, of what quality
soever, to wear their Swords there, nor any offensive Arms* upon the same
penalty, it being reasonable that that safety which cannot be had here, out of
respect to the place, as it is in Churches and Palaces, be obtained by the
equality of the Assistants; and for this reason some of the Kings Guards shall
be placed at the doors of the Playhouse, to take notice of any that shall go
about to contravene this Order.

And for the greater convenience of the Spectators, the Pit shall be raised,
and filled with Seats, that shall overlook the Stage, which will hinder the
quarrelling of the Hectors, there being not room for them to fight.

But to perfect the magnificence of the Stage, the Overseer shall look out a
spot of ground, spacious and convenient to build one according to the Model of
the Ancients, so that it be capable of the noblest Representations, and the
Seats so distinguished, as that the common people need not mingle with those of
the best fashion; and round about which shall be built houses to lodge two
Troops or Companies of Players gratis, which I suppose may be enough for the
City of Paris.

And for the buying of the place, construction of the Theater, lodging the
Players, charge of the Decorations, and the Pensions of the two Houses, as the
King now gives them, with a Sallary For the Overseer, and other such charges,
there will a Fund be provided, without touching any of the Kings standing
Revenue.

Thus there will be Remedys sound for all the defects of the Theater, which
will be magnificent in all its parts, and worthy of the greatness of the Court
of France, and the City of Paris, and the people will likewise have some Idaea
of those mavelous Representations which have been upon the Stage of the
Palais Cardinal* and that of the little Bourbon, and by consequent will be less
envious and discontented at the magnificent pleasures of the Court, and the
great people.

FINIS.

