AN ENQUIRY INTO THE JURISDICTION OF THE CHANCERY IN Causes of Equity.

I. Upon what Ground and Foundation that Jurisdiction is Built.

II. At what time the Chancery began to Exercise that Jurisdiction, and upon
what Occasion.

III. How Modest and Moderate the Exercise of it was at first.

IV. How wonderfully it is Grown, and Enlarged; And

V. What is the best Remedy for Restoring, and Maintaining the Common Law.

Humbly submitted to the Consideration of the House of Lords, to whom it
belongs to keep the Inferior Courts within their Bounds.

By Sir ROBERT ATKYNS, Knight of the Honorable Order of the BATH.

To which is added, The CASE of the said Sir Robert Atkyns upon his Appeal,
against a Decree obtained by Mrs. Elizabeth Took and others, Plaintiffs in
Chancery, about a separate Maintenance of 200 l. per Annum, etc.

London: Printed in the Year 1695.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal IN Parliament
Assembled.
My Lords,
THE following Treatise, together with the state of the Case annexed to it, is
Humbly Presented to your Lordships, to whom it properly belongs; the Subject
matter of both, relating to that Supreme Jurisdiction in Cases of Appeals from
Courts of Equity which is exercised by your Lordships, as being the last
Resort: Your Lordships being also the true and just Moderators in all Disputes
between other Courts in points of Jurisdiction; you having the Coercive and
Directive Power of keeping the rest of the Courts within their due Bounds, set
them by the Law and Constitution of the Nation, that they do not Overflow their
Banks, nor Usurp nor Encroach one upon another.

Your Lordships besides, have a more peculiar Right and Title to the Service of
the Composer of this Treatise, who has had the Honor to serve your Lordships
for some Years, and in several Parliaments, in an Eminent Station, and with a
large Testimony and favorable Acceptance from your Lordships, as appears by
that hearty and kind Address which your Lordships made on his behalf; besides
his ordinary Attendance and Assistance as one of the Judges, which he began
about Four and twenty years since.

If what he has written seem too free and plain, he hopes he is excuseable,
the Necessity and Importance of the Case so requires: And he may be allowed a
more than common Zeal for the Common Law, he having sat so many Years as a
Judge in several of the Courts in Westminster Hall; he himself, and his Three
immediate Ancestors, having been of the Profession for near Two hundred Years,
and in Judicial places; and (through the Blessing of Almighty God) have
Prospered by it. His Great Grandfather living in the time of King Henry VII.
and they all have, in their several turns, undergone the Charge and Labor of
Readers of Lincoln's Inn.

And your Lordships, and your Noble Ancestors have always, and upon many great
Occasions, constantly Testified a true and hearty Zeal for the Common Law of
England; as will largely be manifested by this Treatise, and the Conclusion of
the stated Case annexed to it.

The only Design of this Treatise, being merely to Assist and Serve your
Lordships, in your Discharge of that Mighty Trust reposed in your Lordships; to
whom the Treatise and Case is entirely submitted, by

My Lords, Your Lordship's most Humble, And Faithful Servant, Robert Atkyns.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Jurisdiction of the CHANCERY, IN Causes of Equity, etc.
IT cannot, nor (as to the present Occasion and Enquiry) it need not be denied,
but that the Names of Chancellor and Chancery are very Ancient, not only in
Foreign Countries, The Names of Chancellor, and Chancery.
but even in this Nation, both in the times of the Saxons, and continued from
thence down to our times. But our proper business at present is to Enquire,
what those Great and High Names did at first import and signify; and what
Change has been introduced in their signification by process of time, derived
down to this present Age.

Sir Henry Spelman, (that Learned Antiquary,) in his Glossary printed in the
year 1687. page 109. gives us a Series of the Chancellors in this Nation, and
begins with Turketulus, Chancellor to Edward The first Chancellor in England.
the Elder, (as he is called in our History of the Saxon times) in the year of
our Lord 924. near 800 years since. Rembaldus was Chancellor to Edward the
Confessor, Roll. Abr. Tit. Chancellor. 1 part. 384.

Sir Francis Bacon, (sometime Lord Chancellor of England) in his Resus^itatio,
at the end of that Book, sets down a Catalogue of our Chancellors, beginning
with Mauritius, in the time of our William the First, Anno 1067. And Dugdale in
his Origines Juridiciales gives the same. See Sir Edw. Cook 4 In^tit. 78. in
the Chapter of the Chancery, are the Names of several Chancellors n ancient
times.

This shows the Antiquity of the Names; but our business is to learn the Nature
of them, and what their Business and Employment The Nature of the Chancery, and
Office of Chancellor.
was at first, and when, and how it changed.

Nomen ab Officio. We may learn what the latter (the Officium) is, from the
Name; so that the Nomen may be a true Notamen of the thing, (as it ought to be.)

The Name of an Office, or Employment, generally imports the most eminent and
noted part of the Employment, though it consists of diverse parts. Cowel in his
Interpreter upon the word (Chancellor) deduces it from (Cancellare) id est,
Literas, vel scriptum, line a per medium deducta, damnare. Which, (as the word
now in use with us) is to Cancel, or make void; and it is performed by drawing
cross Lines over the Letters Patents, So Minshew upon the word.
or other Writings, to signify they are made void, and are to be of no farther
use.

And this ('it is likely) was borrowed from the Lettices of Wood or Iron laid
Croswise one over another, to divide or enclose one part of a Room, from the
rest of that Room, so that a Man Cambden's Britannia, p. 143.
might see through them; within which Enclosure the Judge, or Officer sat, so
as to be seen and spoken with, but yet defended from the press of those that
resorted to them. As it is used in Churches, where the Chancel is divided from
the Body of the Church, and the Clergy from the People, in the first design of
that partition. And this rather relates to the place called the Chancery, than
to the Chancellor. But from the resemblance of this partition, the word is also
applied to the Office or Duty of the Chancellor, which was (Cancellare) to draw
cross Lines over a Writing, that is, to Cancel it.

From hence it may be collected, that at first the Chancellors principal
Employment was, to Cancel Writings, for he had his Name from it.

And Cowel cites Lupanus, as testifying the same. That the Name of Cancellarius
was belonging to every Register, who also was styled Grapharius a Scribe, a
writer of Writs, or Actuary, a A Ministerial, not Judicial Office at first.
Register of the Acts and Proceeding of a Court; not a Judge, but an Officer,
attending upon Judges; Qui conscribendis Judicum actis dat operam.

It appears by Sir Francis Bacon's Resuscitatio (before cited) That Turketul
(before mentioned for a Chancellor) was Abbot of Croyland, (as the succeeding
Chancellors till the time of King Henry the 8th. were generally Clergymen,) and
their principal Employment was in serving at the Altar in Spiritual Things.

And in a Subscription by Rembaldus, Chancellor to William the First, as a
witness to Royal Charters, (among others) he did not subscribe in the first
place, but after diverse Bishops, Abbots, and others; which shows something of
his Degree and Character at that time. And Mauritius (Chancellor to William the
Conqueror) subscribed as a witness to that King's Charter after the Bishops,
and before the Abbots. Rolle's Abridgment par. 1. fol. 384. and long before the
Conquest, in the time of Ethelbert, (the first Christian King of the Saxons)
Augemandus the Chan-cellor (as Sir Francis Bacon supposes) subscribes a Charter
by the Title of (Referendarius) a Referee, or Reporter, (as Minshew upon that
word) which seems by that to be the higher Title; and the Office of both, as he
observes, signifies an Officer that received Petitions directed to the King, as
Masters of Requests have done of late; and made out Writs and Mandates, suited
to the different Cases of the Petitioners: Whence it is probable, the place of
the Office afterward acquired the Name of Officina Brevium.

It appears by Sir Henry Spelman's Gloss. page 106. Connectuntur Munus
Cancellarii and Capellani Regis in the time of King Ethelbert, nec deinceps,
nisi raro, disjunguntur: The Chancellor was usually the King's Chaplain.

In the Conqueror's time the Chancellor was styled the Master of the College
of Scribes, or Clerks, which College probably was, what we now call the
Chancery Office; whose Duty was Diplomata Scribere: whence, what was daily
written by them have been called (Writs).

Sir Henry Spelman, ib. page 106. under the Title or Head, De Cancellario
recentiori, and de Cancellaria, says, Olim nec praetoria fungebatur
Jurisdictione, nec Curiae alicujus praerogativa; which The Chancery* an Office.
seems to deny him any Jurisdiction; and makes the Chancery, rather an Office
than a Court, even in the Latin Proceedings of it.

And mentioning Gervasius Tilburiensis, (supposed to be the Author of the Black
Book in the Exchequer) in Henry II. time, and Bracton, who was a Judge in Henry
III. time, treating of the Chancery; Non de Curia (says Sir Henry Spelman)
intelligendi sunt, sed de Officina Brevium and Chartarum Regiarum.

8 H. 4. 13. b. by Gascoign chief Justice, it is said, The Chancery is not a
Judicial Court. See the true Nature and Duty of the Office of the Lord
Chancellor, set out by our ancient Author Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 12. to direct
Suitors to Writs proper for their respective Cases.

Sir Edward Coke, 2 Instit. 552. and 554. says, The Court of Chancery, and the
King's Bench, are but one place; that is, The Chancery was an Office in, or
belonging to the King's Bench. And the Author of Novarum Narrationum, written
in the beginning of Edward III. (4th Instit. 81.) calls it a Court, yet he
corrects and qualifies it again, and says, the use of it was, Pro Brevibus
Originalibus emanandis, sed non pro placitis Communibus tenendis. It had no
Judicature. And Sir Henry Spelman further observes, That Briton, (supposed to
be the then Bishop of Hereford) who wrote in the time of Edward I* giving an
exact account of all the Civil Courts in his time, De hac tamen, (meaning the
Chancery) ne verbum ille, nec, quod sciam, alins quisquam, ante aevum Edvardi
Tertii, vel eum circiter. Then it began (it seems) with a Jurisdiction at
Common Law; whereby we may conjecture, that about the time of King Edward III.
or Richard II. time rather, that Office set up for a Court, as what here
follows seems to concur with; and then began their Latin, and Common Law Pleas,
as distinct and separate from the Court When the Chancery, from an Office, set
up for a Court.
of the King's Bench; And upon the Judgments given in their Common Law and
Latin Proceedings, (which Sir Henry Spelman conceives not to be very ancient
neither) Fitz. Abr. Error. 70. Dier. 315. plac. 100. Error lies in the King's
Bench; which proves the King's Bench to be the Superior Court, whereof
formerly it was but a part and member. Nor can the Chancery, to this day, try
the Issues there joined, in matters of fact, but by the help of the King's
Bench; sure therefore it was very weak and deficient, if it were a Court, not
to have power to try its own Issues. Nor are those 5. E. 3. c. 14.
Issues tried before the Chancellor; he is not so much as present at the Trial
of them, having no Authority in it, but they are tried before the Judges of the
King's Bench; Dyer 288. plac. 51. and Latch. 3. 5. Rep. 92. 9. Rep. 98. and
then returned again to the Office whence they came, Rolls 2d Rep. 291. Stury
and Stury's Case 21. Jac. says, they are but one Court. Rol^s 2d Rep. 349. by
Judge Doderidge toward the end, viz. That as to the Law-Proceedings, the
King's Bench and Chancery are but one Court. Mich. 10. E. 3 fo. 59. (by Shard)
that the King's Bench, and the Chancery, are but one place. And does that look
like a distinct Court, where Issues are joined? but the same Court (if it be a
Court) cannot try those Issues; How defective is that Court then in its Power?
Where shall we find the like in the World? It plainly proves, that this High
Court of Chanc^y, in its Original, was but an Office belonging to the higher
Court of the King's Bench.

In its Equity-Proceedings it is not a Court of Record; this is acknowledged of
all hands; but ab incertis initiis excrevit ad Insignem Magnitudinem says (that
Learned Antiquary) Sir H. Sp. The Chancery, as toits Equity, no Court of Record.
He makes a conjecture of the Original of it is Jurisdiction in Equity; wherein
by the way he ascribes to the King a greater trust and power than our Common
Law does own, as shall be further noted hereafter; for Rex id potest, quod jure
potest, viz. Sir H. Sp. gives the King a power of deciding Causes in his own
person, and of mitigating the rigor of the Law by himself alone; Unless in
this last, he be understood only in his Prerogative of Pardoning, which
belongs to the King. But he moderates what he had said before, of the
Latitude of the Prince's power; in Justitia exhibenda, by subjoyning, that the
Prince still did it by the Administration of his Court of Peers and Barons;
which, The King with the Peers administered Justice, not the K. alone.
according to the Dialect now in use, must refer to the Lords House, or House
of Peers. And by his Margent he understands the Residence of the Court of
Peers, which he speaks of to be (Aula Regis,) sometimes so called in the Saxon
Laws; and here indeed was the true and ancient Right of the Jurisdiction in
Equity; and (Curia sua) consisted of the Peers. Barons olim de causis
cognoscebant ad aulam Regiam delatis. 1b. Sir Hen Spelman's Glos. page 68.
Inter privilegia Baronum, on the word (Baro.) But that I may make have (as this
great Officer the Chancellor himself did, in process of time from his minority,
and the first dawning of his power, to bring him to his Magnitude;) I proceed
to enquire about what time, by what steps and degrees, by what Means, and upon
what Occasion, he arrived to his Altitude and transcendent power, as our
Authors instruct us.

But before I enter upon it, let me premise some few things, which may guide us
in passing a Judgment upon what is so set down, and I set down nothing as my
own private opinion; I only make a Collection of what is delivered upon this
Subject, by the most grave and learned Antiquaries and Authors; and I submit
all to the Judgment of the Lords, for whose Information only this is written.

I^ has been the Wisdom, and I may say the true natural Genius of this Nation,
from its Original and Infancy, especially in Administration of Justice, and of
what is subservient and conducing toward it, to place the Power and confer the
Trust, not in any one single Person, but in many or more than one. And The
Administration of Justice not entrusted in o^ single hand by the Common Law.
it is the Advice of a Lord Chancellor, Sir Francis Bacon, as to the very
Jurisdiction we are Treating of, which he calls Praetorian; let it not (says
he) be assigned over to one Man, but consist of many, because it little differs
from the power of making La(...); and he would have their power limited to
cases heinous and extraordinary, and not invade ordinary Jurisdictions; and
that it reside in the Highest Courts of Judicature, (which with us is the House
of Lords) least it prove a matter of Supplantation of Laws: See his Advancement
of Learning, page 445. and page 446. the 43d Aphorism. Above all, says he, it
most imports the certainty of Laws, that Courts of Equity do not so swell and
overflow their Banks, as, under pretense of mitigating the rigor of the Laws,
to dissect or relax the Strength or Sinews thereof, by drawing all to
Arbitrament. The Lord Coke in his first Instit. 155^ a and Plowd. in his
Commentaries, take notice, that the wisdom of the Law had so ordered it, That
matters of fact shall be decided by Twelve Men in a Jury; and matters in Law,
by Twelve Judges Sworn to the Common Law; in no Case by one single Person.

Sir Henry Spelman affirms, that this was the Genius or Humor of all Europe,
But, to confine our selves to our own Nation, he particularly observes, that
Prisci nostri Reges coram Omni Regno jurabant, etc. Justitiam per Concilium
Procerum regni sui tenturos. The Kings alone never did determine matters either
in Law or Equity. Ingens Exemplorum Multitudo, quibus prisci illi Reges Causas
ad palatium suum allatas, non Unius alicujus judicio, sed Communi Procerum
Concilio definiere. This circumscribes that unlimited Power, which in the
beginning of that Paragraph Sir Henry Spelman seems to ascribe singly and
solely to the Kings; from whence the Advocates of the mighty Power of the
Chancery, (like true Herodians, who cried up Herod) would derive the like to
their Chancellors. Fessi autem (meaning it of our Kings) tautae rei mole,
coguntur exemplo Moysis, Judiciorum lancem Delegatis credere. No doubt but it
was done by the Commune Concilium of the Nation, as Mr. Seldom in his Titles of
Honor concludes of many such like public Transactions; tho the Records and
Rolls of them are not now extant. Tunc erectis seorsim a Palatio Tribunalibus,
(pointing, as he supposes, at the Original of our Courts of Westminster Hall)
Singula multis quamvis ex Canone judicaturis (tho tied to certain Rules) Nullum
unico Substituerunt Judici, Justitiam, (uti veritatem) rati tutius, apud plures
conservari. Neque ideo, vel in Curiis ipsis infimis and Rusticanis (this best
shows the Nations Humor) Monocriten preferebant qualemcunque; it would not be
endured. The Freeholders in the Country Courts, meant by the Curiae rusticanae,
were to determine Fact and Law both: that is, were the sole Judges of the
Folkmotes, or Country Courts: Only there lay an Appeal in exorbitant Cases,
that is, in extraordinary matters, ad Palatium Regni, and they received a
Determination from the King, (not from him alone) but E Concilio Procerum.

This expounds the Law of King Edgar. Lambert de priscis Anglorum Legibus, page
63. Viz. Nemo in lite Regem appellato, nisi quidem domi (viz. the Country
Court) consequi non poterit. Sin Summo jure domi urgeatur, ad Regem, ut Is onus
aliqua ex part allevet, provocato: that is, Moderate the rigor of the
Judgment, not alone, nor by a Chancellor, but by advice of the Peers, as before
is manifestly proved.

Sir Henry Spelwan proceeds further to observe, that several Judges joined with
the Chancellor.
subsequent Statutes which gave power in many particular and limited matters to
the Chancellor, never referred them to him alone, but still in Conjunction with
others. 31. H. 6. C. 4. the Chancellor has power given him, calling to him any
of the Justices to proceed by their Advice, even in the Court of Chancery it
self. 5to E. 4. Inter Cobb and Nore, by Authority of Parliament, Power is given
to the Chancellor and Two Judges, to order a matter of Collusion. In all this
the Humor and true Genius of the Nation was still pursued. He instances too in
the Statutes made in the 20th year of Edward III. about the Forest of Windsor,
and in the Statute about Assizes of Novel Disseisin, whereby in special Cases
pro tempore only, Power was given to the Chancellor, in Conjunction with others.

In the Case of Prohibitions, in Sir Edward Coke's 12 Rep. 63. See Sir Edward
Coke's 2 Instit. i^ the Chas of Arti culi Cle ri. fol. 601, 602.
Banoroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, had informed King James the First, That
the King himself might decide Causes, etc. in his Royal Person; and that the
Judges are but Delegates of the King; and that the King may take what Causes he
please to determine, from the determination of the Judges, and may determine
them himself. And the Archbishop said, that this was clear in Divinity, that
such Authority belongs to the King by the Word of God. But Sir Edward Coke
(then Chief Justice) in the Presence, and with the clear Consent of all the
Judges of England, and Barons of the Exchequer, answered, That the King in his
own Person cannot adjudge any Case, either Criminal, or between Party and
Party; but it ought to be determined in some Court of Justice, according to the
Law and Custom of England. 4 Instit. in the Chap of the King's Bench, fol. 70.
The King (that is, the Law and Constitution of the Government) has committed
all Power of Judicature to several Courts of Justice. This is necessary to be
remembered, because it is confidently affirmed by the Advocates of the
Equity-Jurisdiction of the Chancery; that the Kings of England anciently, and
at the first, did Administer Justice, and more especially did mitigate the
Rigor of the Law, by Equity, in their own Persons alone; and afterward did
delegate the same Power of Equity to a single Person, (the Chancellor) who (as
they phrase it) has the dispensing of the King's Conscience, as well as the
Custody of it: And that, to the King alone, in such Cases, an Appeal does lie;
which, by what has been already said, is manifestly untrue, as shall yet be
further made out.

Sir John Fortescue (who was a Lord Chancellor) in his Book De laudibus Legum
Angliae, page 64. says, to Prince Edward, (Son to King Henry VI) proprio ore
Nullus Regum Angliae Judicium proferre visus est, and tamen sua sunt omnia
Judicia regni, licet per Alios ipsa reddantur. Just as all our Laws are said to
be the King's Laws; not that he has the sole Legislature, (as Sir Robert
Filmer does weakly, or rather wilfully, tho groundlesly infer;) but Denominatio
sumitur a Majore, as is most frequent in common Use; it is but an Embrio till
he quicken it by passing the Bill.

In the next place, Let us enquire at what time, and by what occasion, this
Jurisdiction of the Chancery in Equity began; by which it may appear, whether
it be Entitled to it, either by Prescription, or by Act of Parliament, for Non
datur Tertium. The same Proofs and Authorities will serve to manifest these:
^7. H. 7. Keilway 42. b. by Vavasor. The Sub-Paena began in the time of Edw.
III. and that (says he) was against the Feoffee upon Confidence, that is, to
Uses. Mr. Lambert, who was a Master of the Chancery, (Sir Edward Coke 2 Instit.
552,) in his Archeion. page 72, 74, 75. says, that the Kings used to refer
matters in Equity to the Chancellor, (from whence the Chancellor was anciently
Styled (Referendarius) as was noted before) or to him, and some other of the
Council. And though this does not, (as he observes) plainly erect any Court of
Equity; yet (as he supposes) it is the laying the first Stone of the Chancery
Court: and page 73. That in the time of Edward III. it was a Newly Erected
Court, which may be understood of its Latin Pleas. The Book called, The
Diversity of Courts, written in the Reign of King Edward III. Treats of the
Jurisdiction of the Chancery, according to its ordinary Power, which are the
Latin Proceedings, or by the Rules of the Common Law; but says nothing of that
which the Chancellor holds in Equity. Et quod non invenis usquam, esse putes
nusquam. It was enabled to deal in some special and particular Cases by
Parliament, which were but Temporary neither; which proves, that in such or in
the like Cases, the Chancellor could not meddle without the help of Acts of
Parliament: Nor were those Cases referred to his Equitable or Arbitrary Power
neither, as some misapprehend. For Sir Edw. Coke 4 Instit. fol. 82. says, That
Acts of Parliament giving Power to the Chancellor to hear and determine Causes
in Chancery, are ever intended of the Court of Record, there proceeding in
Latin, Secundum Legem and consuetudinem Angliae, which Power is not contested.
And Mr. Lambert, page 74. ut supra, says, he does not remember, that in our
Reports of the Common No Reports of Causes in Equity in the Chancery, before
the time of K. H IV. The Time.
Law, (in which Reports, under the Titles of Conscience, or Sub-Paena in Fazh.
or Brook's Abridgment, many Cases of Equity in the Chancery may be found) there
is any mention of Causes before the Chancellor for help in Equity; but only
from the time of King Henry IV. in whose days, by reason of those intestine
Troubles between the Two Houses of York and Lancaster; Feoffments to Use did
either first begin, or first grew common; for Remedy in which Cases chiefly,
the Chancery Court The Occasion.
was then fled unto.

No Book-case, (says that great Champion for the Common Law, Sir Edward Coke, 2
Instit. 552.) nor Reports of the Law, make any mention of any Court of Equity
in the Chancery used, before, or in the Reign of King Henry V. but they speak
of the Chancellor's ordinary Jurisdiction, which is at the Common Law, and by
Latin Proceedings; which proves they were very rare at that time.

The few Causes heard by the Chancellor, in the Reigns of Uses of Land.
King Henry VIth and Edward IVth, in Equity, by English Bill, are most of them
concerning Uses of Land. And how great an Invasion that new Invention of Uses
was upon the Laws of England, (both the Common Law and the Statute Law,) and
how pernicious they have been to Men's Estates; and what occasion they have
been of Contention and multiplying Suits, shall appear by what follows; See
Doctor and Student, page 71. to that purpose. Sir Edward Coke's 2 Instit. 553.
No Act of Parliament gives the Chancellor, the power of Equity.
affirms, That no Act of Parliament printed, or unprinted, gave the Chancellor
any power to hold any Court of Equity. The Stat. of 36 Edw. III. Cap. 9.
without question, (says that Grave and Reverend Judge, and true lover of his
Nation) refers to the ordinary power of the Chancellor; but gives him no shadow
of any Absolute Power, (meaning a Power of Equity.) See the 2 Instit. fol. 553.

See that remarkable Case of Sir Richard le Scrope, in Sir Robert Cotton's
Abridgment of the Records of the Tower, page 351. Numb. 10. (exceeding
pertinent and useful in many respects to our present Enquiry, and gives great
light to us in many things). It is mentioned also in Coke, 2 Instit. 553. it
happened Anno 17 of King Richard II. John de Windsor complained by Petition Sir
Richard le Scrope, or John de Wind^ for's Case.
to the King, against Sir Richard le Scrope, and Sir John Lisley, for detaining
diverse Manors in Cambridgshire from him; to which, (as he alleged), he had a
Right and Title. Both Parties submitted the matter to the King's Arbitration;
The King committed it to the Council, (not to the Chancellor alone,) the
Council decreed it for Windsor, (then Plaintiff,) under the Privy Seal; they
sent to the Chancellor to confirm that Decree or Award, under the Great Seal;
which was done, and a Special Injunction to Sir John Lisley; and a Writ to the
Sheriff to Execute it; (A strong Case in all its Circumstances). Sir John
Lisley, one of the Defendants, not satisfied with the Decree or Award,
Petitions the King in Parliament; that is, Appeals from it, and prays the
Matter may be determined at the Common Law, notwithstanding the Decree or Award
so confirmed. The King by Privy Seal, Orders the Chancellor to Supersede the
Injunction, and the Writ and Decree. The Decree was reversed, and both Parties
ordered to stand to the Common Law; and Windsor's Petition was dismissed. Sir
Edward Coke says, that this Decree The first Decree in Chancery was reversed,
and the matter left by the House of Lords, to the Common Law.
so made by the Council, was the first Decree in Chancery, that he could find;
and that upon a deliberate hearing of the whole matter, by the Lords in
Parliament, it was adjudg'd, that Sir John de Windsor should take nothing by
his Suit, but stand to the Common Law; that is, (according to our now usual
Language,) His Petition or Bill in Equity was dismissed, and the Parties sent
to the Common Law. I desire that both these Authorities last cited, may be
compared together, viz. Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. and Sir Edward Coke's 2
Instit. 553. the one gives light to the other; Juncta juvant. This Instructs us
in the method of Proceedings in Equity, used in the time of King R. II. and
most likely in the times preceding: Not to the Chancellor alone, but to the
King himself, to be referred to the Council. And the Case of Sir Richard le
Scrope, was in a matter where there was remedy at Law, (so that they were out
of their way, in Petitioning to the King in it); and therefore the Decree was
reversed by the Lords in Parliament, before whom the Appeal did properly lie;
nor would the Lords themselves determine it upon the Merits of the Cause; viz.
who had the right, but referred the Parties to the Common Law, to the right
course; and yet it was a Decree made by the Submission of all Parties to the
Arbitration. So ready were the Lords at that time to do right to the Common
Law: Sir Edward Coke says, this was the first Decree made by the Chancellor in
the Chancery, who did, (as it seems) in limine titubare, (stumble at the very
Threshold); which (some say) is ominous. The Proceedings in this Case of Sir
Richard le Scrope, was (as I find) when Thomas Arundel, Bishop of Ely, and
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, was Chancellor; who, no doubt, did much
influence the King and Council, in making the Decree.

They have been Churchmen, and diverse of them of the highest rank, (Cardinals,)
who are upon good ground supposed The Churchmen were the first Setters up of a
Jurisdiction in Chancery, in matters of Equity.
to be the first Setters up, and promoters of this absolute Power in Chancery;
the Chancellors generally in those elder times, being of the Order of the
Clergy.

And they began (as is usual in beginnings) with great modesty, and to exercise
their Power in some few Cases, which failed of ordinary help; and when
Parliaments were not so frequent as formerly, to whom recourse should have
been, and who would have censured such assuming of new Jurisdictions, (as they
afterward very frequently did). And the Setters up The Judges were at first
wont to be consulted with by the Chancello.
of this new Jurisdiction, would not at first adventure to do it by One single
Person alone, tho never so high, but with the Concurrence of the Judges; and
they too, not sent for into the Chancery, to attend and assist the Chancellor;
but those new Cases of Equity were sent into S^e Fi(...). Abr. (...) Sub-Paena;
and Brook's Abr. tit. Conscience, and Pasc. 22. E. 4. 6. Pla. 18.
the Exchequer Chamber, where the Chancellor himself resorted to the Judges,
with their Causes in Equity; and these are many of them reported in our
Year-Books of those times. And those Causes were constantly determined by the
opinion of the Judges; and this method took off the Judges, (whose Superior
the Chancellor was, in Dignity and Grandeur) from opposing that new
Jurisdiction, by granting Prohibitions to stop the Proceedings of the Chancery
in such Cases, as it was their Duty to have done.

See Mr. Selden's Notes upon Fleta; How the Clergy, (who anciently had their
Sole dependence upon the Bishop of Rome, and held themselves not Subject to the
Temporal Power,) still promoted and endeavored to introduce the Civil Law into
this Realm, but yet were still withstood by the Lords and Commons, who were
always hearty Friends to the Common Law. Sir Edw. Coke's 2 Instit. fol. 626. at
the end of that folio, it is said, in the Indictment against Cardinal Wolsey,
and charged upon him, that he intended Antiquissimas Angliae Leges penitus
subvertere, and enervare, Universumque hoc Regnum Angliae, and ejusdem regni
populum Legibus Imperialibus, vulgo dictis Legibus Civilibus and earundem Legum
canonibus, imperpetuum Subjugare and subducere, etc. Cardinal Wolsey's being in
the height of Favor and Authority with King Henry VIII. hated both
Parliaments, and the Common Laws; and he was the means that but one Parliament
was holden in Fourteen Years.

The Common Law was the true Natural and Original Law The Common Law, the only
Law in England, anciently.
of England, used ever since the departure of the Romans, and brought in by the
English Saxons again; Qui suis tantummodo quas secum, e Germania (whether they
had transplanted them) attulerant, Moribus usi sunt, only their ancient
Customs, and no other. Caesarei Juris (says learned Seldom) usus plane
reperitur Nullus per Annos amplius Septingentos, (more than 700 years). There
was no Chancery-Law to determine matters of fact, Dr. and Student, page 15. by
Jury, and not otherwise.
much less titles of Freehold, by Depositions of Witnesses only, or by an
Absolute or Arbitrary Power, in all that time of 700 years. No Man was suffered
to have a Civil Law Book in his keeping: King Stephen by his Edict did forbid
it. The Saxons, Danes, and Normans owned no other Law, than that Law which
Anglorum Commune vocitamus, says The Books of the civil Law introduced into
England by the Clergy, are commanded to be (...).
the famous Seldom in his Dissertatio ad Fletam, page 502, 503, 505, 506, 508.
And Johannes Balaeus tells us, that Theobaldus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus
quasdam Leges in Angliam attulerat, sed eas, ut Reipublicae nocivas, Rex
Stephanus perpetuo Parliamenti Decreto damnavit, delevit, incendi fecit. The
Common Law was in King Stephen's time, and before (says Seldom) the Study of
Men that were otherwise Learned too. Sed Moribus Majorum tantum, patrioque
utebantur illi Jure; quod and ante and ad nostra usque tempora Angliae Commune
vocitatur; and their The Nobility were anciently the Students of the Common Law.
Studies were furnished with the Presidents of Judgments, and Copies of Reports
of Law-Proceedings, like those of our Year-Books; and no other were cited in
their Courts. And the Students and Residents at the Inns of Courts, who
afterward were the Countors or Pleaders, were not Clerks or Sollicitors, (as
many now adays are, to the declining of that Noble Profession), But the Sons of
Noble Men, and of the best of the Gentry, as we read in Sir John Fortes^ue, in
his Treatise De Laudibus Legum Angliae. -- Juris Anglicani (says Excellent
Seldom) ut Supra 537. quod Commune vocitamus quae Gentis hujus Genio ab intima
Antiquitate adaptatum fuit, Singularis aestimatio, atque inde, non immerito, in
eodem adhaesio constans, and sane pertinax.

In that great question, (says Seldom in his Dissertation, ib. 539.) concerning
the right of Succession to the Crown of Scotland, referred by all Parties and
Pretenders to the Decision of our King Edward I. Anno Regni 19. and Anno Dom.
1292. about which they met at Norham, in the Bishopric of Durham. It was
Debated as a Praeliminary, whether it should be judged and decided by the Law
of England, or of Scotland, or the Caesarean, or Civil Law, as being the Jus
Gentium; (see Riley's Placita Parliamentaria, 143. in the middle of that Page,)
our King Edward I being the Sovereign or Superior Lord of Scotland: It was
concluded before Roger de Brabazon, (a Judge of the King's Bench; Sir Edw. Coke
says, Chapter Justice, 2 Instit. 554.) the King's Delegate or Substitute, for that
Great and Noble Occasion; That the Caesarean or Civil Law, should by no means
be allowed of: Ne inde Majestatis Anglicanae Juri, fieret detrimentum. And
Seldom, speaking of the Civil Law, page 540. ib. says, about King Henry IIId's
time, Jus Caesareum was newly brought in, Et a nonnullis, maxim ex genere
Hieratico, proculdubio perquam adamatnm, atque prae Anglicano in pretio
habitum. See that admirable and right English Preamble, to the Stat. of 25 H.
VIII. Cap. 21. What Laws only are binding to this Nation, viz. none, but those
Laws which the People of England have taken at their free Liberty, by their own
Consent to be used amongst them, as the customed and ancient Laws of this
Realm, originally established, and none otherwise: Not any new Rules devised,
ex re nata, at the Discretion of any one Man, tho never so Great, or Wise, or
Learned; but never consented to by the Nation, and from the first appearance of
them, declaimed against by several Acts of Parliament, and by a multitude of
Petitions of the whole Commons in Parliament, complaining of their Process as a
Novelty, began at first but about Richard II. or Henry IV. time; a time of
great Troubles. See to this purpose Cott. Abr. 2 H. 4. Nu. 69. 3. H. 5. Nu. 46.
9 H. 5. Nu. 25. Roll. Abr. 26. par. 1. fol. 371. D. nu. 2. Yet let me here
observe one thing more by the way, namely, that from these beginnings here, of
the Chancellor's Power, tho so restrained as we see, by the several particular
Acts of Parliament that gave them: Occasion was taken afterward to Engross the
Power of Equity, and to take it from the highest Court of the Nation: And those
that plead for it, do without all sense or reason, ascribe it to some few Acts
of Parliament, that referred some particular Cases to him, as fairly giving him
the power; whereas those Acts of Parliament manifestly show the contrary.
Utcunque vero, (says Sir Henry Spelman,) se res habuerit, fiquidem vel Exutis
sociis, vel cedentibus (shaken off, sitting silent, or weary of being Mutes)
apud ipsum Unicum, (meaning still the Chancellor) remansit tandem Jurisdictio.
It so came to pass, that he could not well tell how, that the Chancellor
grasped it all, and shook off his Associates, or they proved Deserters. And one
Act of Parliament more Sir Henry Spelman mentions, viz. 36 E. 3. Cap. 9. as
trusting the Chancellor singly; but it has been already shown, that the matter
so entrusted by that Statute, had no reference to Equity, nor indeed to any
Judicial power to be exercised by him, but merely as ministerial rather,
directing Remedies by Writs, in order to a Decision by a Legal Course, and by
the Common Law. He proceeds farther, viz. Ascitisque and protractis in
Cancellariam pluribus quam Justum videbatur; Populus (meaning the Commons in
Parliament) ad candem cohibendam Legem rogat, non autem tulit, sed benign a
Rege responsum est, (as was wont) mandaturum se id parcius fieri quam prius
solitum. This was 4to H. 4. about which time the Chancellor first began to
arrogate The H. of Commons constant opposers of the Equitable Jurisdiction of
the Chancery.
to himself this power, (as shall be more fully shown hereafter.)

See Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. page 410. 2 H. 4. Nu. 69. a Petition of the Commons
against the very Original Process of Sub-Paena, that it might no more be used;
and that the Subjects might be treated according to the rightful Laws of the
Land, And of the Process by Sub-Paena.
anciently used; see Rolles's Abr. part 1. fol. 370. more at large. And that
this Process was illegal, appears by another Petition of the Commons, 4 H. 4.
Nu. 78. Vid. Roll's Abr. ut supra. The Commons in their Petition 4 H. 4, Cott.
Abr. Nu. 78. pray, that the Suggestions made in Chancery, may be tried by a
Jury; and if they be found false, that the Jury may give the Defendant damages:
And that the Plaintiff, before he be allowed to take out a Sub-Paena, may find
sufficient Surety to answer such Damages; which shows the good Opinion the
Nation had of Juries.

The Petition of the Commons, 4 H. 4. Nu. 110. intimates, that all the Estates
of the Realm, were in danger by the Chancery-Proceedings, and they pray remedy
for God's sake. It is very useful and pertinent also, to set down what further
Sir Henry Spelman mentions: Simile quiddam (says he) agitatum ferunt in
Parliamento, Anno primo of King Henry VI. Sc. Neminem ad Cancellariam
provocaturum, cui duo Justiciariorum Regis non ferrent testimonium haud
Subvenire Legem Terrae. Two Judges of the Common Law, (which is called the Law
of the Land, in distinction from the Chancery-Rules,) were to make way for
every Bill in Chancery, by their first certifying, that the Plaintiff had no
Remedy at Law: which was an excellent expedient, and worthy to be made a Law by
a short Act, to be past for that purpose.

The Judges of the Common Law, who are Sworn to maintain the Law, were thought
the most competent, and worthy to be entrusted in it; and not looked upon as
partial and unindifferent, which is a Scandalous Reflection upon the Government
and Constitution. See the 2 Instit. of Sir Edw. Coke, page 544. there is a Writ
directed by King Edw. II. to the Judges of the King's Bench, in these words:
Vos Locum nostrum in placitis teneatis and nostram praesentiam supplere
debeatis; and in the Case of Walter de Langton, ib. fo. 573. Contemptus
ministris domini Regis facto eidem Domino Regi inferuntur, says the Record, in
the 33th year of King Edw. I.

It appears, that the Chancellor could not Act, no, not in many ordinary
Matters, till enabled by the Parliament. See 14 E. 4. fo. 1. Brook Abr. Tit.
Brief. plac. 483. and then his Power was limited, and he alone was not
entrusted, but he had an Association of others. Quantum mutatus ab illo! It
farther shows when he began to enlarge and assume a greater Power, and how
unwarrantable it was in his first Exercise of it, not grounded upon any good
Authority; for we should have been sure to have heard of it in the King's
Answers to the Petitions of the Commons against it, (as was constantly used
upon such Petitions, where there was any Law to warrant what was so complained
of;) had there been any, either Prescription or Act of Parliament, the
Chancellor being constantly the chief Person among the Tryers of Petitions in
Parliament, and framing the Answers of those Petitions in Parliament; together
with the Bishops, Lords and Judges, which of late has been wholly disused.

And lastly, it proves how early this new Jurisdiction of the Chanceries
Proceeding in Equity, was decry'd and exclaimed against, not only for the
Abuses in the Administration of it, but for usurping a Jurisdiction, not
founded upon any good Authority, and carried on by the Potency and Greatness of
the Chancellor. Nor was there any the least pretense of any Prescription or Act
of Parliament, to support it: Nor was it taken to be any part of the Law of the
Land, or of the Common Law, tho taken in the largest sense; but rather
contra-distinct, and indeed opposite to it, and destructive of it.

Sir Henry Spelman at last takes leave of this great Officer, and of his Court,
by showing what a mighty increase came flowing in from that ill Weed, (the
Invention of Uses or Trusts, which are still the same.) But to this point there
are plenty of far greater Authorities and Authors, for whose Testimony herein I
shall reserve it.

Another thing to be premised, is, that as the King had no such Power himself
singly, and in his own Person only, to decide Causes of Equity, and therefore
could not Delegate it to any one Man, (as it is pretended he might;) so, and
upon the There can be no Jurisdiction in Equity, but either by Prescription or
Act of Parliament; not by any Charter, or Commission from the King.
same ground and reason, the King by our Law could not by his Commission, Erect
any Court of Equity. It can be grouned and warranted only upon a Prescription,
or an Act of Parliament; neither of which can be pretended to, in the matter in
hand; it was so adjudged 26 Eliz. in the King's Bench. Sir Edw. Coke 4 Instit.
fol. 87, and 97. That a Court of Equity cannot be Erected, but only by Act of
Parliament, or Prescription. And the like in the Lord Hob. Rep. 63. Resolved
also in Marmaduke Langdale's Ca. 12. Rep. 52. That the King cannot raise a
Court of Equity: the reason is, because a Court of Equity proceeds by the Rules
of the Civil Law, and not by the Common Law. 6 Rep. 11. b. and 2 Instit. 71.
The King may appoint a new Court, and new Judges, but cannot change the Law.
Hill. 8. H. 4. fol. 79. by Gascoign, That the King by his Charter cannot out
the People of their Inheritance, which they have in the Common Law: So note,
the Common Law is the People's Inheritance.

In the next place, Let us proceed to examine about what time, and upon what
occasion, this Court of Equity exerted its Power, which has in part fallen in
among our former Enquiries. For the time and occasion too, Mr. Lambert in his
Archeion, page 75. refers it to the time of King Henry IV. and the occasion was
taken from Feoffments to Uses: For remedy in which Cases the Chancery was fled
unto: With this agrees Sir Henry Spelman, in his Glossary, page 107. at the
lower end Doctor and Student, fol. 98. Sir John Davy's Rep. in his Preface; Mr.
Hunt's Argument for the Bishop's Right, etc. page 144.

And to prevent mistakes herein, it must be observed, That What Equity meant
anciently.
the word Equity, has been very anciently used, (long before this Jurisdiction
began in Chancery,) but not in a Contradiction, or in Opposition to the Common
Law of the Land, (as now it is;) but either in a mild and merciful Expounding
of the Law, by the known and sworn Judges of the Law; or as synonimous, and
signifying the same thing as Law, Justice and Right. For the Laws of England
were not looked upon then, as being like the Laws of Draco, Sanguinary and
Cruel, and Rigorous, but merciful and equitable in themselves, and so expounded
and administered by the Judges of the Common Law. Mulcaster the Translator of
the Chancellor Fortescue, being a Student of the Common Laws of England, in
the Reign of King H. VIII. could readily observe to his Reader, from his Study
of those Laws, and from the Arguments used by his Author (the Excellent Sir
John Fortescue,) Easdem nostras Leges non solum Romanorum Caesarum, sed and
omnium aliarum Nationum Constitutiones multis parasangis prudentia Justitia and
equitate praecellere facile perspicias. See his Preface. Non quod principi
placet, Legis vigorem habet, non quicquid de voluntate Regis, tho his Will be
not Arbitrary neither, but guided by Discretion, and tho he define secundum
aequum and bonum) sed quod Magnatum suorum Concilio (Regia authoritate
praestante) and habita super hoc deliberatione, and tractatu recte fuerit
definitum. So writes Bracton, Lib. 3. Cap. 9. fol. 107. and so Britton, Sir
Gilbert Thorneton, (Chapter Justice, in the time of King E. I.) and Sir John
Fortescue Chief Justice, and afterward Chancellor: These invincibly prove the
Nature of our Laws. The Kings of England, were from the first Foundation of the
Government, Sworn to observe the old known Laws of the Realm, which were called
Usus and Consuetudines Regni, and that they would not suffer any Innovasion,
which was often attempted by the Pope and his Clergy, who endeavored to
introduce into this Realm, the Civil and Canon Laws.

King Henry I. writing to the Pope upon such an occasion, tells the Pope
stoutly, Notum habe at Sanctitas vestra, quod me vivente, Usus Regni Angliae
non imminuentur. Et si ego in tanta medejectione ponerem, Optimates mei and
totus Angliae populus id nullo modo paterentur. And all the Nobles of England,
by Consent of the Commons, wrote to Pope Boniface upon the same occasion, Non
permittemus tam insolita and tam indebita, Dominum nostrum Regem (etiamsi
vellet) facere, seu quo-modo-libet attemptare.

The Lord Chancellor, and Lord Keeper is also Sworn to do Right to all, after
the Laws and Usages of this Realm, (not secundum aequum and bonum, nor other
Rules of Equity.) 2 E. 3. fol. 20. It is said in that Book, by the Chancellor
sitting in the What is meant by Equity, in the true sense of it.
Chancery, and speaking of that Court; This, (says he) is a place of Equity,
where we grant a Writ to every one that Sues for his Inheritance. So that to
issue out Writs, as Officina Brevium, is by the Chancellor's own
acknowledgment, a proper work of Equity. It seems to be the only use of the
word (Equity,) at that time, 2 Instit. 53.

The Civilian Vinius in his Comment upon Justinian's Institutes, page 20. Nomen
Aequitatis (says he) dupliciter accipitur, vel in genere pro aequo, quod cum
omni jure conjunctum est: vel in specie pro eo quod est a Jure Civili diversum.
Omnibus Legibus aequitas inesse creditur. Nomenque juris non meretur, quod ab
omni Aequitate destitutum est. He mentions no Equity contrary to Law, or to
Control the Law; nor any other than what was to be exercised by the very
Judges of the Law themselves, in all Cases that came before them. Plowd.
Comment. 466, and 467. In the Case of Eyston and Studde, it is said, No Makers
of Law can forsee all things that may happen, and therefore it is convenient,
that the fault be reformed by Equity. This the Chancery-men will catch at, as
making much for their practice of relieving in such unforeseen Cases, where the
Law looks severe and rigorous. But the Case cited proceeds further, and makes
not at all for the Chancery, if it be heard out. And, the Sages of our Law,
have deserved great Commendation, (says that Case,) in using Equity in Cases of
Rigor, in the words of a Law; for by that they have mollified severe Texts,
and have made the Law tolerable. Who are meant generally in our Law Books and
Arguments, by the By the Stat. of Articuli super chartas, cap. 5. in anno 28.
E. 1 The Judges are called, the Sages of the Law.
Sages of the Law, but the Judges, to whom by Law belongs the Construction of
the Acts of Parliament and the pronouncing of our Laws? See the 2 Instit. fol.
611. The Judges in their Answ. to the 16th Objection, and 614, and 618. the
Judges only are to expound Acts, tho they concern Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction:
Here is no need of a distinct Court of Equity. Such a Case of Equity was that
of Reniger and Fogassa; the first Case in Plowd. Comment. tho determined by a
Privy Seal, it being in the King's own Case, concerning the Customs. There is
another Equity, says that Case of Eyston and Studde in the Comment. which
differs much from the former, and may be thus defined. Equitas est verborum
legis directio, efficiens cum una res solummodo legis cavetur verbis, ut omnis
alia in aequali genere eisdem caveatur verbis. As for instance, the Stat. of 9
E. 3. Cap. 3. which gives an Action of Debt against Executors, shall be
extended by Equity to Administrators, (tho not within the words.) But this also
is done by the Judges of the Common Law. Here is no mention of a
Chancery-Equity; and it had been (according to the right Rules of Logic,) no
good Division, if it had not taken in all the parts, called the Membra
Dividentia, which ought to be Toti adaequata, Keckerm. Systema Logicae, page
245. regula quarta; Doctor and Student, page 27, 28. Equity is to be exercised
in the mild and merciful Construction of a Law; and in some Cases departing
from the strict and rigorous words of a positive Law, rather than oppress any
Man by it, which is not by appealing from that Law, or from the Court where
that Law is administered; but resorting from the Letter, to the true intent and
meaning of the Law, and the true mind of the Makers of the Law. Ubi aliud
suadet necessitas, cessat humanae constitutionis vigor, cessat and voluntas
Nomothetae. But this is the Duty of the Judges of the Common Law, and to be
done in the same Court, and in the same Suit and Action; and not in another
Court, and by a new Suit, under pretense of Equity; for that were to censure
the Law, and the Judges of the Common Law Courts; and to charge the Lawmakers,
either with Ignorance, or overmuch Severity, which is not to be suffered: And
this (says St. Germin, the Author of that Treatise) is secretly intended and
understood in every general Rule, of every positive Law, according to what is
before remembered in this Discourse, out of the Case of Eyston and Studde, in
Plowd. Comment. and what is said by the Author of Doctor and Student, page 27.
Laws, says he, covet to be ruled by Equity, which is not meant merely to be
done in another Court, Proceeding by Equity, but by an equitable Construction
of the Law, in the Court of the Common Law, as appears page 28. b. the latter
end of that Chap. And those Equitable Constructions are there called Reasonable
Exceptions of the Law, and hold as well in Cases at Common Law, as upon
Statutes, (as appears by the Case there put at Common Law,) page 29. Cap. 17.
and on the b. side of that page, in medio, it is said, the Parties shall be
relieved in the same Court, and by the Common Law, Plowd. 88. b. and 205. b.

Thus in the Exposition of a Statute, Judges depart from the words of the Law,
rather than run into an absurdity or inconvenience, by a too literal
Exposition, (as in the Case upon the Stat. of Marlbr. concerning Distresses.)
The Judges, Hill. 30. E. 3. gave Judgment against the express words of that
Stat. tho the words were in the Negative too, as is observed in the argument of
Reniger and Fogassa's Case. In Plowd. Comment. fol. 9. b. and it is a Rule in
the exposition of Statutes, many times to depart from the words, to meet with
the mind of the Lawmakers, whose intent (as it must be presumed) is to do no
Man wrong. See in the same Case, in Plowd. fo. 10. and in the same Book, fol.
57. b. 199. b. and 203. Laws expounded not only different from the words, but
contrary to them, rather than do any Man wrong. Such sense is to be made of the
words of an Act of Parliament, as may best stand with reason and equity, and
which most avoids rigor and mischief.

Plowd. 364. a. in the Case of Stowell against the Lord Zouch, It is spoken
there by one or more of the Judges: Some Cases by necessity in Construction,
are to be excepted out of a Stat. 2 Instit. 25. Many Cases may be within the
Letter, yet not within the meaning of an Act, 2 Instit. 107. in Principio, 110,
and 111. and general words of a Stat. may be restrained by Construction, 2
Instit. 502. and the Exposition of Statutes belongs to the Judges of the Common
Law, 2 Instit. 618. Hill. 13 Jac. 1. in the King's Bench, Vaudry and Pannell's
Case, Rolles's Rep. first part, 331. It is there said, that if a Court of
Equity made a false Sentence, it may be reversed by the King; that is, by his
Commission; for Mic. 42, 43, Eliz. in a Suit in Chancery, by the Countess of
Southampton, against the Lord of Worcester and others, for the Manor of
Henningham: It was resolved by all the Justices under their hands, (which is
now in the Chancery,) That when a Decree is made in the Chancery, upon a
Petition to the Queen, she may refer it to the Justices, (but not to any
others,) to examine and to reverse The Judges of the Common Law, are to review
and reverse Decrees in Chancery.
it, if there be Cause; and the Lord Chancellor agreed to this Resolve; and
upon such a Petition and Reference, the Decree made in that Case in Chancery,
was reversed by the Justices. This was in time before any Contest between the
Two Jurisdictions, viz. in Queen Elizabeth's time, and before the Judges were
looked upon as not indifferent.

It appears 3 H. 5. Nu. 46. That the Commons in a Petition complain, That many
were grieved by Writs, which were called John de Waltham Bishop of Salish. the
Inventer of the Writ of Sub-Paena, in the wicked time of King Richard II.
(Writs of Sub-Paena,) which they say were not used, till the time of the last
King Richard: That John de Waltham, Bishop of Salisb. of his Subtilty, invented
and began such Novelty against the Common Law; and that they proceeded upon
those Writs, according to the Civil Law, in Subversion of the Common Law: and
they pray, That an Action of Debt of Forty pounds may lie against such. See the
Record at large, Roll. Abr. first part, 371. (too briefly Abridged by Sir
Robert Cotton;) This is of the Nature of a Presentment, by the Commons of
England, (the Grand Jury of the Nation,) and it does invincibly prove and
testify the time when this Jurisdiction was first set up in Chancery; for the
Writ of Sub-Paena is the first Process of that Court, in Cases of Equity, and
it is The Writ of Sub-Paena called a Novelty, by a Petition of the House of
Commons, in the Reign of King Henry V.
called a Novelty, and Names the first Inventer (John de Waltham) who was
Keeper of the Rolls, in the time of King R. II. which is now called Master of
the Rolls; but in the time of King R. II. it was looked upon as an inferior
Office, as may be observed upon the Supplication of Will. de Burstall in the 1
R. II. Ryley's Placita Parl. in the Appendix, page 670. who styles himself A
Petit Clerk, Keeper of the Rolls of the Chancery, and prays his Patent may be
confirmed by Parliament, as a work of Charity. See Sir Edw. Coke's 4 Instit.
fol. 95. and 96. ad finem: And John de Waltham was Burstall's immediate
Successor. This also speaks the mighty growth of that Court; this petit Clerk
now takes place of the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

Let us hear the Judgment of an ingenious Writer, and a worthy Person, Mr. Hunt
before mentioned, in his printed Argument for the Bishop's Right, in Judging
Capital Causes in Parliament, page 144. One may wonder, (says he) That there is
nothing in Antiquity, that gives Authority to so celebrated and busy a Court,
as the Chancery at this day is; none can be able to Cope with it, but the
highest and Supreme Sovereign Power; (he means, I suppose, the last Resort, the
Lords,) and it is the proper work and care of that Court; (and to that Court
only, is this address made). It occasions (says Mr. Hunt) a multitude of Suits,
tedious in delay: The Expenses many times equal (sometimes exceeds) the Value
of the Right in dispute; and (that which is worse,) the Event is very
uncertain. That Court, says he, had its Rise from Feofments made upon Trust, to
avoid Forfeiture to the Crown, in times of Civil War between the Two Houses of
York and Lancaster, 21 E. 4. fo. 23. Bro. Abr. Tit. Conscience, plac. 21. by
Fairfax.

It increased from the Nicety of Pleadings, especially in Actions upon the Case
in the Common Law Courts, and from the Potency of the Chancellor, who commonly
made and unmade, says he, the Twelve Judges.

If we may give due respect and credit to learned Sir Edward Coke, and to the
Resolutions of many Reverend Judges, in several Cases in several Kings and
Queens Reigns, and allow them to interpret Acts of Parliament, (to whom, out of
all doubt, it does peculiarly belong.) We may conclude, That upon such
Proceedings in Equity, for matters tryable by a Jury, and especially where a
Freehold is concerned, and where (if there be a right) there is an ordinary
Remedy for it. I say, upon such Proceedings, That a Prohibition lies to stop a
Suit in chancery. See Mich. 13. E. 3. Fuzh. A bridgment. Tit. Prohibition,
plac. 11.
be they in the King's Courts Ecclesiastical or Temporal, or in a Court of
Equity, not only a Prohibition will lie to the highest of those Courts, to
forbid them, but a Praemunire also will lie, to punish them severely, be they
never so high; because it brings matters tryable at the Common Law, and of
Freehold and Inheritance, ad aliud Examen, and to be discussed, per aliam
Legem, as says Sir Edw. Coke's 3 Instit. fol. 121. in the middle of that fol.
in the Chapt. of Praemunire; and the very Statutes made in those Cases, are
Prohibitions in themselves.

If it were thought convenient, by the Supreme Legislature, to have any such
Power exercised in an ordinary and constant use of it, possibly it might better
be deposited in the hands of the Judges, of the ordinary Courts of the Common
Law; (whatever Sir Francis Bacon says to the contrary, in his Advancement of
Learning,) which has been successfully experimented, as in the late Court of
Wards mixed of Law and Equity; and in the Court of Exchequer, where matter of
Equity, by the Stat. of 33 H. VIII. C. 39. is allowed to be pleaded in the same
Court and Office, among the Latin Proceedings. But neither of these Courts
ventured upon such a Course; no, not to proceed in a Course of Equity by
English Bill, till enabled to do so by Act of Parliament; tho some have been of
Opinion, that the Exchequer had such an Equitable Jurisdiction by Prescription.
And it is a thing to be admired, that after so many Courts suppressed by
several Acts of Parliament, as that of the Star Chamber, the Court of the
Council, in the Marches of Wales, and others; and several Courts that have very
politically surceas'd the Exercise of their Jurisdiction of their own accord,
as not being warranted by Law; as the Court of Requests, etc. That the Friends
to the High Court of Chancery, as to the Exercise of an Equitable Jurisdiction,
have not endeavored to fortify their Court with an Act of Parliament, under
due and reasonable Regulation; especially when it once fell, (tho in times of
Usurpation) under a large Correction; which, tho it wanted a good Authority
too, yet it manifestly shows the sense of the whole Nation, whom the then
Usurping Powers thought it good Policy to gratify and indulge; for in pessimis
temporibus, as well as ex malis Moribus, bonae oriuntur Leges. as to the matter
of them; as in the short Reign of Richard III.

I can appeal to that Highest Judicature, (the whole House of Lords,) who have
had many years Experience of me, begun about Twenty Four years since, (for so
long ago I was their Assistant,) and to Thousands more, with whom I have had a
public Conversation for about Fifty years, and some for a shorter time; that
this is no new, or sullen and revengeful Humor in me, but proceeds from a Love
to my Country, and Gratitude to mine, and my Ancestors Profession; and from a
desire to have my self, and my own Posterity and Neighbors, Free and Happy.

Let me observe from Mr. Hunt before cited, that what he writes, does appear to
be the Vulgar and Common Opinion concerning this Court of Equity, (for which
reason I cite him.) It points out to us, whether we are properly to resort for
a Regulation, (that is to the Lords House,) and (with all Submission and
Reverence to that High Court be it spoken*) it is a Trust reposed in them, to
reform this Lesser, (tho commonly called The High Court of Chancery;) and to
keep the rest of the Courts within their due Bounds. As for the Court of the
King's Bench, (to whom it most properly belongs, to grant Prohibitions upon
such occasions.) 2 Instit. fol. 610. Prohibitions are not of Favor, but of
Justice. It is now grown to that pass, through the length of time and disuse,
that the Court of King's Bench might possibly find it, (Imparem Congressum)
unless encouraged to it, by that Supreme Court of the Lord's House. Observe
too, that this Author Mr. Hunt, does concur herein with many other Testimonies,
when this Court of Equity had its first rise and beginning, and whence it took
the occasion of The Mischiefs from the Invention of Feofments to Uses, and in
Trust.
such a Jurisdiction, viz. from the Feofments upon Trust, whose beginning too
we know, and what the Design and purpose was of such illegal and fraudulent
corrupt Feofments, and Conveyances to Uses upon Trust were, we shall further
examine, and hear the Opinion and Judgment of several Reverend Judges, and
diverse Writers besides, upon that Subject, before the close of this Discourse,
of which much has already been said, as from Sir Edw. Coke, Chapter Jus. (who was
a faithful Friend to our Nation Lamb. Archeion, page 75. Dr. and Student, 98.
Sir Henry Spelman Gloss. 107. Fitzh. Ab. Tit. Sub-Paena, through that whole
title, still about Uses, 2 H. 4. Cot. ^br. Nu. 69.
and Laws;) Mr. Lambert, who was a Master of the Chancery, Mr. Dugdale in his
Origines Juridiciales, from the Chapter Jus. Popham, in Chudleigh's Ca. in the
first Rep. of Sir Edw. Coke, fol. 139. b. and from the rest of the Judges and
Arguers of that Case; whose Judgment as to this point, viz. both of the
Original of this Jurisdiction of the Chancery, and the mischievous effects of
those Conveyances, to Uses and upon Trust and Confidence, (for they are all
one, and so mentioned in the Act of the 27 H. VIII. whose design was to
extirpate both,) will more fully appear. 1 Rep. 121. b. There were (says that
Case) Two Inventers of Uses, Fear and Fraud; Fear in times of Troubles and
Civil Wars, to save Inheritances from being forfeited, (which in Truth and in
plain words, was the same thing with fraud to evade the Law that inflicted
those Forfeitures:) and Fraud, to defeat due Debts and lawful Actions and
Duties. Before the time of Richard II. (says the Chapter I. Popham, in that Case;)
no Act of Parliament, or other Record, nor any Book nor Writing, made any
mention of Uses of Land.

Hear the Opinion of the King, Lords and Commons, (the whole Nation) concerning
Uses; in the Preamble of the Statute of 1 Rich. III. Cap. 1. The makers of that
Statute set forth the mischiefs arising from such Conveyances to Uses and
Trusts, viz. great Unsurety, Trouble, Costs, and grievous Vexations to the
Buyers of Land, or to such as took Leases. In the Preamble of the Stat. of 27
H. VIII. Cap. 10. viz. That by diverse subtle Inventions and Practices by
Fraudulent Feofments, Fines, Recoveries and other Assurances, craftily made to
secret Uses Intents and Purposes, etc. Manifold Mischiefs did ensue. Out of
which Statute, both from the Preamble and Body of it, may be observed, (10.
Uses and Trusts the same things.
That Uses and Trusts are the same things, Styles Rep. fol. 21. and 40.) 20.
That the intent of the Lawmakers, was to extirpate both, as being but the
same: But we know where Trusts are supported, as if they were distinct things
from Uses, and a plentiful Harvest has arisen from them; tho it has been
resolved, that an Use cannot arise out of an Use; but this is evaded by giving
it the Name of a Trust, and making them distinct things. So that we may learn
from what has been said, when, and whence these pernicious things called
(Uses) and (Trusts) had their Original, and who was the first Inventer of the
Writs, called Writs of Sub-Paena; all about the time of Sed Mala perlong as
invaluer^ morat.
that Exorbitant and Tumultuous Reign of King Richard II. and that such
Conveyances ought at first to have been adjudg'd void, being fraudulent, as
other fraudulent Conveyances have been, by the several Statutes of 52 H. 3.
Cap. 6. 50 E. 3. Cap. 6. 2 R. 2. c. 3. 3 H. 7. C. 4. 19 H. 7. Cap. 15. Trin. 7
H. 6. fol. 43. If a Man make a Feofment in fee, Proviso tamen, that the Feoffor
shall always have the Profits of the Land, that Proviso is void and
contrarious, by Hankford a Judge of the Common Pleas, in the time of King
Richard II.

Now, What an absurdity and contradiction is it in Reason, and a mockery and
abuse of the Common Law, That a Man shall use the just and necessary Liberty
the Law allows him to convey away his Land, but it shall be so agreed, that he
to whom it is conveyed, shall not be one jot the better for it, but it shall
still remain his in point of Profit, that conveyed it away? And so it is all
but a Delusion and Deceit, and the honest intention of the Law is baffled by
it; But a world of work is made by this for a new Court. The Judges, who are
the Conservators of the Common Law, and of the rights of the People, early
decryed these Inventions of Uses, and so have several Acts of Parliament: But
the Potency of some great Churchmen and others, did still own and support
them; for they bring great Profit with them to the Jurisdiction.

Under this pretense, and upon these occasions, began the Invention of Uses and
Trusts, which have wonderfully perplexed and turmoil'd almost all the Estates
in England; so that Men's Estates and Titles are not now so much guided and
governed by the old, and most wise and certain Rules of the ancient Common Law,
as by new invented Rules, in a new Court, to the subverting of the Common Law,
and Ruin of many Families.

How much work have they cut out for our Parliaments, by making many Acts of
Parliament to redress the Abuses? but the Mischiefs are insuperable, and the
many good Remedies provided by several Parliaments have been rendered fruitless:
and I cannot for my life tell how it has so come to pass, unless by the
excessive Power and mighty Favor that has been indulged to the Persons in
that High Office; such as Cardinal Wolsey, and others of the Hierarchy, who
were formerly in that great Office, and were wont to have a mighty stroke in
the Government.

By reason of these Conveyances to secret Uses and Trusts the Lord was
Defrauded of his Ward, heriot, and Escheat. To remedy this was the Stat. of 52
H. 3. Cap. 6. called the Stat. of Marlebridge, made, which made such
Conveyances void as against the Lord; and several other Statutes to the same
purpose.

The Creditor who supposed the same Feoffor, (he still being in Possession, and
taking the Profits) to be still the Owner in Law he lost his debt, till the
Stat. of 50. E. 3. c. 6. made the Lands however liable to satisfy the Debts;
and many Statutes more were made in the like Case.

A Man that had cause to Sue for his Land, knew not against whom to take his
Remedy, and to bring his Action: For one Man had the naked Name or Title, like
the titular Bishops of the Church of Rome; and another had the Use and Profit,
till the Stat. of 1 R. 2. c. 9. made an Assize maintainable against the Pernor,
or him that took the Profits.

The Wife was Defrauded of her Thirds.

The Husband of his Tenancy by the Courtesy.

The poor Farmer of his Lease.

The Crown, of the Forfeiture for Treason; whereby Men were more imboldened to
commit Treason.

The Stat. of 1 R. 3. c. 1. Tho it meant well, yet gave too much countenance to
these mischievous Uses, by making good the Estates granted by the cestuyque
Use: Whereas, it should rather have set a brand upon those Conveyances to Uses,
and have declared them all void, as being generally mere Frauds and Cheats; for
so the Judges were in those times wont still to pronounce them. And that Stat.
of 1 R. 3. deals plainly in the matter, by setting forth in the Preamble, the
great Unsurety, Trouble, Costs, and grievous Vexations that daily grew from
them; but at last, that Statute deals too gently by them.

And several other like Statutes were made, but to no very great purpose; for
means were found out to evade them.

At last came forth the Stat. of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. and this undertook, and
plainly so intended, to pluck up this unwholesome Weed by the Roots: Which good
Law, first reciting the excellent quiet and repose that Men's Estates had, by
the wholesome Rules of the Common Law; but cunning Men had sought out new
Inventions by fraudulent Feofments, and Conveyances craftily made to secret
Uses and Trusts, to the utter subversion of the ancient Common Laws of this
Realm, (as the Preamble speaks,) for the utter EXTIRPATING and EXTINGUISHMENT
of all such subtle practiced Feofments, Abuses and Errors; It is Enacted, That
the Possession of the Land shall be in him that has the Use; and that he shall
have the like Estate in the Land as he had in the Use.

How strangely has all this good Intention, Pains and Care been made of little
or no effect, and the mischiefs still continued by a distinction invested
between Trusts and Uses, directly against the often repeated Clauses, and
manifest plain meaning, and express words of this good Act!

For tho the Judges of the Common Law were now by this Act to judge of Uses,
(which before was the work of the Chancery,) they being now converted by this
Act into Estates at Law.

Yet some Men, perfectly to elude this good Act, have confidently maintained,
asserted and allowed a distinction, between an Use and a Trust.

And tho they are content, (because they cannot help it) that the Judges of the
Common Law may determine of Uses; the Courts of Equity shall hold a
Jurisdiction in matters of Trust.

And most of the great Estates in England have, by color of this, fallen under
their determination and controulment, and now have a dependence upon a
Jurisdiction of Equity.

Whereas, Were there the least color left by that Act of 27. H. 8. for any
distinction between an Use and a Trust, (as most certainly and plainly there is
none;) yet as certainly and clearly that Act of Parliament meant to extirpate
those Trusts, as well as Uses, as any ordinary Capacity, well perusing that
Statute to this purpose, may easily perceive. I humbly and heartily beg that
favor of every Lord to read over deliberately this Stat. of 27 H. 8. cap. 10.
for this very purpose; for it will plainly discover this gross abuse.

As to the length of time, wherein such a Power and Jurisdiction of Equity has
been exercised in the Chancery, yet it plainly appears, not to be grounded upon
Prescription, the Original being known, and not so very ancient neither; and
modest too, and moderate at first, (as most such are in the beginning;) and
having from the first starting of it, been hunted and pursued with full Cry,
and upon a fresh Scent, and in view, and having hardly any Color of an Act of
Parliament; That length of time (were it much longer) would be no Plea for it:
See Dr. Barrow in his Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy, page 154. He that has
no right (says he) to the thing that he possesses, cannot plead any length of
time to make his possession lawful.

King Henry VIII. by Acts of Parliament, restored the Regal Ecclesiastical
Sovereignty, after it had been usurped upon by the Popes and their Prelates
near 400 years, that is, from the time of William the Conqueror: For then
began their Encroachment. And the Act of Parliament of 1 E. 6. C. 2. Sect. 3.
calls it a power that had been Usurped by the Bishop of Rome, contrary to the
Form and Order of the Common Law used in this Realm, in high derogation to the
King's Royal Prerogative: from whence we may observe, That Usurping upon the
Common Law, and Usurping upon the King's Prerogative, go together. The Bishops
Courts here in England took their Original from a Charter of William the
Conqueror; so that this Jurisdiction was a great Limb lopped off from the
Primitive Common Law of England: For before that Charter of King William,
Ecclesiastical Causes were determined in the Hundred Court, and not by
Witnesses only, and not by the Canon Law, but by the Law of the Country. But
this Charter was made by advice of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Princes,
and Temporal Lords. See Fox his Acts and Monuments, Vol. (...). Lib. 4. page
2^. says Mr. P^inn in his first Tome of his Vindication of the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of our English Kings. The Charter it self, (says
he) recites, that it was done Communi Concilio, for which he cites, Seldeni ad
Eadmerum Notae, page 167, 168. So that still the old Common Law of England has
been upon the losing hand.

The Civilians hold, that Possessor malae fidei ullo tempore non Regula Juris.
praescribit; yet I heartily concur with that Reverend Chief Justice Sir Edw.
Coke, (a most true and hearty lover of his Country, and an high honor to, and
honourer of the Profession of the Common Law,) in his 4 Instit. 246. at the end
of that folio; in Respect, (says that Good and Great Man) that this Court of
Equity has had some continuance, and many Decrees made by it, it were worthy
of the Wisdom of a Parliament for some Establishment to be had therein, and to
this intent have I chiefly used this freedom; for I never loved Quiet a movere,
but in order to a better Security. And for that end I choose to make this Humble
Address to the House of Lords; It is the House of Lords, who are theSupreme
Court of Justice, that can set the true and legal Bounds and Limits to the
Jurisdiction of Inferior Courts, and can say to the biggest of them, Hitherto
shall thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. And
such their Judicial Declarations are not to be controlled by any, but the
Legislative Power. Almighty God gave a strict charge to his own chosen People
of Israel, to observe those Ordinances and Laws, which he gave them by Moses,
which were very particular, and wherein nothing was left to the Discretion of
the Magistrate; nor had the Magistrate any Latitude, whereby he could depart
from the plain and common sense, and Judge Secundum Aequum and Bonum
Arbitrarily. But they were commanded, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall put nothing to the
word which I command you, (says God by Moses,) neither shall ye take ought
therefrom; and the 12 Deuteronomy. the last verse, in Cases of Difficulty, that might
arise upon the Construction of those Ordinances and Laws, a Provision is made
by Almighty God, that in such Cases resort should be had to the Priest, and to
the Judge who should declare the Sentence of Judgment. This seems to refer to
some special Revelation of the mind of God in such difficult Cases, which God
made known to the Priest that stood before the Lord to minister, 17 Deuteronomy. 8,
and ^2 verses; but here was nothing entrusted with the Priest or Judge, of
relieving against the pretended rigor or extremity of the Law in any Case, and
resorting to another Court, without consulting with Almighty God. And in Cases
of Difficulty of expounding of our Law, or supplying any defect; in the one
Case we must have recourse to the Supreme Court, and in the other to the
Legislative Power. The Judaical Law stoops so low, and is so precise and
singular, as to tell them what might not be taken as a Pledge, what Number of
Stripes might not be exceeded upon punishing an Offender. That Law, (as Moses
says of it) 30 Deuteronomy. v. 11. and 14. was not hid from them, but very evident,
(as the Marginal Note says) so that none could pretend ignorance. It was near
unto them, Lex erat Domina and rectrix populi Israelis, says Melancthon in his
Chronicle. The Lord Chief Justice Hale, in his Preface to the Abridgment of
Rolls, speaking in Commendation of the Common Laws of England, says, These are
not the product of the Wisdom of some one Man, but of the Wisdom, Council,
Experience, and Observation of many Ages, of Wise and Observing Men: They are
the productions of much Wisdom, Time and Experience. Again, says he, The Common
Laws of England are more particular than any other Laws, and this prevents
Arbitrariness in the Judge. General Laws leave a great Latitude to Partiality,
Interest, and variety of Apprehensions to misapply them. And after all this
Wisdom, Certainty, Particularity, and mighty Caution to prevent Arbitrariness,
shall they be all made Subject to the Sudden and Arbitrary Opinion of any one
Man to Control these Laws, under a pretense of Equity, against the Severity
and Rigor, (as they term it) of these Laws? Justitia est aequalitas, non quae
nobis videtur, sed quam Lex ordinat, says Zenophon, speaking of a Decision of a
Controversy made by Cyrus amongst the Youths, when Cyrus himself, being a
Youth, was chosen a Judge amongst them: But Cyrus not observing the Rule of
Law, received Correction for it. Quod docet (says Zenophon) leges ante-ferendas
esse propriis. opinionibus.

That the Common Law, and the Laws of the 9 E. 4. fol. 14. There the Chancellor
affirms, that he has an Pbsolute Aower.
Land are contra-distinct from Equity Proceedings, and that the Proceedings in
Equity are not comprehended under the general words of the Laws of the Land, or
the Common Law, appears by many Authorities, and by the several Petitions of
the Commons against the undue Proceedings of the Chancery: as 2 H. 4. Numb. 69.
There the rightful Laws of the Land anciently used, are distinguished from the
Proceedings by Writs or Letters under the Privy Seal in Chancery: so 4 H. 41
Nu. 78. 3 H. 5. Nu. 46.

It was said with great Meekness, Moderation and Prudence, by that good natured
Gentleman, and very learned Person, when in his height, (which he deserved) the
Lord Keeper Bridgman, in the Case of Fry and Porter in Chancery, being assisted
by the two Chapter Justices, and Chapter Baron, If I were (said he) of another Opinion,
yet I would be bound by the Opinion of my Lords the Judges: and doubtless he
was in the Right, it being in a matter of Law, wherein not himself, but they
were the sworn and proper Judges. See the Modern Reports, Printed in 1682. fol.
313. 22 Car. 2. but a late Lord Chancellor followed not this Example. Now to
satisfy the highest Judicature, (the House of Lords,) that upon several
Grounds, and for several Reasons, a Prohibition by Law might be granted by the
Court of King's Bench; and to induce the Lords so to declare, (to whom that
properly belongs,) which will be of great use for the future, after so long a
disusing of it: I shall, with the favor of the Lords, cite these following
Authorities; and when such Prohibitions are granted, an Appeal, or Error, lies
before the Lords upon it, so that the Lords do not part with any of their
Jurisdiction by it. Fitzh. Natura Brevium, fol. 138. Letters B. and C. Crok.
Jac. 335. Heath versus Ridley, Rolle's 1 Rep. 252. If a Man sue in any Court, a
Plaint of Detinue, for any Charters that touch and concern Freehold, if it be
not in the Court of Common Pleas, by Writ of the King, (where what concerns
Freehold ought to be Sued,) the Party may Sue a Prohibition to forbid it. The
words (any Court) must undoubtedly comprehend the Chancery Court of Equity. But
yet more plainly in that point, see the form of that Prohibition, viz. Cum
placita de detentione Chartarum sive Scriptorum Liberum Tenementum tangentium
in aliquibus Curiis quae Recordum non habent, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Regni nostri sine Brevi nostro Placitari non debent, etc. 4 Instit. of Sir E.
C. fol. 71. It belongs properly to the Court of King's Bench, by granting
Prohibitions to Courts Temporal, to keep them within their proper Jurisdiction.
And in the 2 Instit. fol. 601, and 602, and 615. in answer to the 21th Article,
the Temporal Courts must always have an Eye, that the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction usurp not upon the Temporal; and fol. 618. at the upper part of
that folio, the Judges are bound by their Oaths to grant Prohibitions; and in
the same 2 Instit. fo. 607. at the end of the Answer to the 10th Object. that
Prohibitions are not of Favor but of Justice to be granted; this is affirmed
by all the Judges.

Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity, page 26. stoutly affirms, That for the
manifestation of the right of Governing, the assent of them that are to be
governed seems necessary; and page 27. he further asserts, That all public
Regiment, of what kind soever, seems evidently to have arisen from deliberate
Advice, Consultation and Composition between Men. If so, then it ought not to
be assumed merely by a Man's own Will and Pleasure, or without any lawful
ground, and against the known Rules of Law. Thus much for the Title and Right
of Administering Justice: then as to the manner of the Exercise of it, when it
is so assumed, it is most commonly suited to the Usurped Right and Title: And
therefore Learned Hooker proceeds further to speak also to that point, ibid. To
live, says he, by One Man's Will, is the Cause of All Men's Misery. This, says
he, constrained Men to come to Laws, that all Men might see their Duties
beforehand, and know the penalties of Transgressing.

But if under the specious pretense of the Laws being in some Cases rigorous,
and of relieving against that Rigor by the wide Rule of Secundum aequum and
Bonum, it shall be in the breast of One Man of great Power, and in great
favor, to dispense with those Laws, or to Judge according to his Discretion,
by an Absolute and Arbitrary, and Dictatorian Power: What becomes of my best
See the Preface to Cok. 5th Rep. fol. 4. and Hill. 8 H. 4. fo. 19. by Gascoign.
Birthright, my Freehold and Inheritance, which I have in the known Laws of
England? And what becomes of my property, which that known Law gave me? By
which known Law I squared my Actions and Affairs, and thought my self secure by
it, and my Self, my Family and Posterity well provided for. And after all,
because I could not divine, what might be the Discretion and Judgment of One
great Person, and thereby have fenced against it, I must not only be defeated
of my Right, disappointed of a Provision for my Family, (for which I had long
been laboring;) but beyond all expectation, after a tedious and chargeable
waiting for the Event and Issue of a Chancery-Suit, I shall be doomed to pay
Two or Three hundred pounds by the Name of Costs, because I could not
Prognosticate, what would be the Opinion or Judgment of One single Person upon
my Case, who is not so tied to Rules as the Judges are. This wonderfully
enriches the Men of the Chancery. Leges humanae (says that good Chancellor
Fortescue, in his commendation of the Laws of England, page 11. on the b. side
of the Page,) non aliud sunt quam Regulae quibus perfect justitia Edocetur, as
they are Leges a ligando, so they are Regulae a dirigendo and Regulando. And
id. page 25. b. and 31. b. (says the Chancellor still,) Non potest Rex Angliae
ad Libitum suum Leges mutare regni sui. This Excellent Chancellor Fortescue,
lived in the time of King Hen. VI. and was Chapter Justice of the King's Bench,
Anno 20 H. 6. (as appears by Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales, page 58, and 62.)
yet has not a word to say in Commendation of this Equitable Jurisdiction, tho
it then began to spring up, and he himself were Chancellor, (as he styles
himself,) but rather seems utterly to condemn it, by so highly commending the 2
Just it. fol. 611. See the Opinion of all the 12 Judges, in their Answ. to the
16th Object. How much the Trial of a Fact by 12 Men Sworn, viva voce, as to be
preferred before the Conscience of One particular Man, guided by Paper-Proofs.
Trials of matters of Fact by Twelve Men, and preferring it infinitely before
that of the Civil Law, (which the Chancery follows) by the Testimony of
Witnesses only; and by as much extolling the certainty of our Common Law,
administered by the Judges of it. Could he possibly have forgotten to mention
that Jurisdiction, he himself being Chancellor, had he approved of it? It is
excellent advice in the Preface to Sir Edw. Coke's 7 Rep. fol. 2. b. Quoad
fieri possit, quam plurima Legibus ipsis definiantur; quam paucissima vero
Judicis Arbitrio relinquantur.

Now let us take Notice of the ill Effects that have arisen from the Exercise
of this Equitable Jurisdiction, which in general words were taken notice of by
a Bill, that lately passed One or both Houses of Parliament; take these
Instances.

First, The Common Law of England, which is the Hill. 8. H. 4. fol. 19. by
Gascoin, that the Common Law is the Peoples Inheritance.
birthright of every English Man, and which is so agreeable to the Genius of
this Nation, and a Law of their choosing, is by this new Jurisdiction Subverted;
and the Civil Law, which has been so vigorously opposed by the Lords and
Commons from the beginning, and in all Ages, is introduced; which brings our
Rights and Estates to be determined, ad aliud Examen, to a Decision by
Depositions of Witnesses only, and in such a manner examined, (as is observed
by that incomparable Treatise of the Chancellor Sir John Fortescue, De Laudibus
Legum Angliae) in a private Room, before an Officer called An Examiner, not
before the Judge of the Court, and many times upon leading Interrogatories.
Whereas, the Truth is best discovered, when Witnesses are produced in the face
of the Court, and Examined by the Judge of the Court, in the presence of the
Parties to the Suit, and their Council, and Witnesses brought to confront one
another. There is many times much in the Countenance and Carriage of a Witness,
to help to the manifestation of the Truth or Falsehood of his Evidence, and by
Questions suddenly asked him. Tacitus in his Annals in his Second Book, Chap.
8. tells us, that the ancient custom of Rome was, That even the Vestal Virgins,
that in all other Cases were recluse and veiled, yet upon occasion for their
Testimony, they were examined as Witnesses, in the common place of Pleadings
and Judgment.

Secondly, The Judgment and Determination of Causes in Chancery, depend upon
the sole Opinion and Conscience of one single Person, whose Power therein, (as
some of our Books and Modern Authors presume to affirm) is Absolute and
Arbitrary. Sir John Davys in his Preface to his Reports, fol. 11. b. says, The
Chancellor has Potestatem absolutam in binding and loosing the Proceedings of
the Law, and in deciding of Causes by the Rules of his own Conscience; and that
the King trusts him with his own Conscience, Tr. 9. E. 4. fol. 14. Pasc. 22. E.
4. Fitzh. Sub-Paena, placit. 16. by Hussy, The Chancellor's Judgment is not
guided always by certain and known Rules, so that no foresight can sense and
provide against it. We are not fore-warned, and therefore cannot be fore-arm'd;
and all this by a Jurisdiction, at the first assumed, but not legally granted.
The first Chancellor in this Exercise of this Power, not at all asking that
material Question, Quis me constituit Judicem? as our Blessed Savior himself
did in the like Case. And how expensive and dilatory in Proceedings, we have
been already told by the several Books and Authorities cited, and it shall be
yet further observed.

We may read in the Lord Coke, in his Magna Charta, 29th Chap. in his
Exposition (fol. 51.) of the words (per Legem Terrae,) What mischiefs and
horrible vexations did arise, when this ancient and fundamental Law, this (Lex
Terrae) was laid aside, in diverse Cases by the Act of 11 H. 7. Cap. 3. and a
Liberty given to proceed without any finding and presentment, by the Verdict of
Twelve Men, upon a bare information for the King; although the Justices of
Assize, and Justices of the Peace, were entrusted in it, to proceed according
to their Discretions, upon bare proof by Witnesses, whereby the Judges and
Justices, (who might best be trusted with such a dangerous Power, if it might
be allowed to any) were not only Judges of the Law, as the Judges of the Common
Law Courts at Westminster Hall are, but also in the place of a Jury, to judge
and determine of Fact too, as the Equity side of the Chancery too often does;
and yet this Liberty was given by an Act of Parliament, (which cannot be said
of the Jurisdiction we are treating of,) yet the Nation could not bear it, but
was restless till that intolerable Act of 11 H. 7. Cap. 3. was Repealed by the
Act of 1 H. 8. C. 6. and the Trials by Juries thereby restored again.

The Lord Coke in the same Chap. fol. 54. further declares, That if any Man, by
color of any Authority, where he has not any in that particular Case, Arrest
or Imprison any Man, or cause him to be Arrested or Imprisoned, this is against
this Act of Magna Charta: and it is most hateful, says he, when it is done by
Countenance of Justice; and I take it to be worse if done by a Countenance of
Equity, and by color of a new invented Writ, first devised By John de Waltham.

Mr. Lambard in his forecited Archaion fol. 84. speaks thus, If the Chancery
have no certain Rules and Limits of Equity, if it be not known beforehand, in
what Cases the Chancellor will relieve, and where not; then neither the Subject
can Sir Hen. Sp. Gloss. 108.
be assured, how, or when he may possess his own in peace, nor the Practiser in
Law, be able to inform his Client, what may become of his Suit. Misera est
Servitus, ubi jus est vagum, Cancellarius Angliae, (says Sir Hen. Spel.) non
aliter tenetur Decretis suae Curiae, vel sui ipsius, quin, elucente nova
ratione, Recognoscat, i. e. he reviews, quae voluerit, mutet, and deleat, prout
suae videbitur Prudentiae. A certain late Author in his Preface to his Book
entitled, The happy future State of England, Printed 1688. cites, Leo Afer,
who tells us, That the Inhabitants of the Mountain Magnan on the Frontiers of
Fez, have not any settled Judicature, nor certain Law; but for deciding of
Controversies, (when they happen) they stop some Travelers passing that way,
to give Judgment in them, and they desray the charges of their stay: This is
speedy and cheap, but very uncertain in the Decision; they might as well
determine by casting Lots.

But we in England have contrary Laws, (as some do imagine;) so that we serve
two Masters, that are divided in their Commands, and command contrary things;
and the one undoes what the other does. These are like diverse Weights and
Measures, which are an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20. 10. In one Court they
measure Men's Actions and Rights by one Rule, in another Court the same Actions
again by contrary Rules, as if there were Two contrary first Principles and
Deities in Nature, (as the Marcionites and Manichees held;) the one benign,
kind, and indulgent; the other rigorous and destructive to Mankind.

The People of England have a Right to be Governed, and their Lives and Estates
Subjected to no other Laws, but such as are of their own choosing, to which they
consent, according to that most excellent Preamble to the Stat. of the 25. H.
8. Cap. 21. The Laws of England, (as the Preamble tells us) have been taken by
the People of England at their free Liberty, by their own Consent, to be used
among them, as the Customs and Ancient Laws Originally Established, and not
otherwise. Sir Francis Bacon in his Resuscitatio, page 65. in his Speech upon
taking his place of Chancellor, tells us, that the Roman Praetors, (whose
Office had the greatest Affinity with the Jurisdiction claimed in the
Chancery,) used to set down at their Entrance, how they would use their
Jurisdiction; and he acquaints us with the Excellent charge given him by King
James I. at the delivery of the Seal to him, viz. To contain that Jurisdiction
in its due limits, without swelling, or excess. The excess, or tumor, (says Sir
Fr.) arises is it from that Courts embracing Causes merely determinable and fit
for the Common Law: For the Chancery is ordained (says he) to supply the Law,
not to subvert it; Though by his favor, the supplying of a Law is the proper
work of a Parliament. 2. The Tumor arises (says Sir Fr.) from neglect of the
Assistance of the Judges in Cases of Difficulty, especially if they touch upon
Law. The Power, says he (in his advancement of Learning,) of moderating Laws,
little differs from the power of making them. Page 445. Aphor. 37.


Vinius the Civilian sets forth the true Office of the Roman Praetor, page 16.
Neque praetor aliud quam Magistratus fuit Juridicundo, non Condendo. Custos
Juris, non Arbiter; and again, page 12. Neque ante Lex vi sua constat, Civesque
ad Observationem vel paenam obligat, quam populo innotescere potuerit, quod
sine promulgatione sive publicatione aliqua fieri non potest. To every good Law
of Man it is requisite that it be manifest, (among other Properties,) says Dr.
and Student, 4 Chap. page 7. b. Now, How is that Law manifest, that depends
upon the sudden Opinion and Judgment of One Person, who guides that Opinion and
Judgment, not by any positive, certain, and particular Rule or Law clearly
defined, but according to that large and indefinite Rule (Secundum Aequum and
Bonum) which is directly contrary to the temper and mind of the Common Law of
England, which delights in certainty? Sir Fr. Bacon in his Advancement of
Learning, page 436. The first Dignity of Law (says he) is, That they be
certain; Certainty is so Essential to a Law, as without it a Law cannot be
just: and page 444. That is the best Law, which gives the least Liberty to the
Arbitrage of the Judge; and he is the best Judge that takes the least Liberty:
yet afterward this Grave Chancellor is not steady to himself, but is for
allowing to Praetorian Courts of Equity, Power of supplying the defects of Law,
which (as I said before) does belong to the Parliament only; and herein he
seems (under favor) not to be so consistent with what he himself writes in his
other Treatise.

It is very well observed by Dr. Barrow in his Treatise of the Pope's
Supremacy, page 255. The means and methods by which Power and Jurisdiction from
small and modest Beginnings, arrive at last to a strange Height and
Exorbitancy. The Patriarchate Power (says he) of the Pope can no otherwise be
claimed, but by his Invasion and Assumption, ibid. 256. The Pope's universal
Sovereignty and Jurisdiction has no real Foundation, either in Scripture or
elsewhere; and page 257. he shows by what means so groundless a Claim and
Pretense, gained Belief and Submission to it. Eminency of any kind, in Might,
in Place, etc. does easily pass into advantages of real Power and Command over
those that are inferior, etc. Any small Power is apt to grow (says he) and
spread it self into a Flame, etc. and page 261. All Power is attended by
dependencies of Persons enjoying subordinate Advantages under it, which do grow
proportionably by its increase, enjoying Wealth, See in Tacitus's Annaeis, Lib.
11. cap. 2. What excessive Fees were taken by Advocates for Pleading Causes;
whereas, by the Law Cincia, it was provided of old, that for Pleading of
Causes, no Man should take either Money or Gifts; at length their Fees were
moderated by a Decree of the Prince and Senate.
excessive Fees, Credit, Support, Privileges and Immunities thereby: Let us
look into the beginning of that late Jurisdiction of the President and Council
in the North. In the Annals of Queen Eliz. Printed 1630. Lib. 2. page 68. in
the Reign of King H. 8. (says that nameless Author;) when the Rebellion in the
North, about suppressing the Abbeys, was pacified; whilst the Duke of Norfolk
stayed in those parts, many Complaints were brought unto him of Wrongs done in
the Rebellion: Some of them he compounded himself, and some of them he
committed to Men of Wisdom under his Seal, to be by them Compounded; which when
the King understood, he sent him a peculiar Seal to use in these Causes; and
the same Seal he committed (after the Duke was called back) to Tunstall Bishop
of Duresme, and appointed to him Assistants, with Authority to hear and
determine the complaints of the poor. He was then first of all named President,
and the Authority of his Successors has ever since increased very much. This
Presidentship (says the Annals) which is now full of Honor, has from a poor
beginning grown up in a short time to this Greatness: See Sir E. C. 4 Instit.
245. Chap. 49. upon the same Subject. Rushworth in the Second part of his
Historical Collections, page 1336. mentions how that Mr. Hide (afterward Lord
Chancellor) then a Member of the House of Commons in the Parliament, 1640. by
Command from the House of Commons, presented to the House of Lords a Complaint
against this Court, of the President of the North; and tells the Lords, that
that Court by the Spirit and Ambition of the Ministers trusted there, or by the
natural Inclination of Courts to enlarge their own Power and Jurisdiction, had
so prodigiously broken down the Banks of the first Channel in which it ran, as
it had almost overwhelmed the Country, under the Sea of Arbitrary Power, and
involved the People in a Labyrinth of Distemper, Oppression and Poverty.
Another Member of the House of Commons complaining to the Lords of the
Star Chamber; first he sets forth the Original of it by Act of Parliament, by
the Stat. of H. 7. which he calls the Infancy of that Court: But he says
further, that Court by Cardinal Wolsey, 8 H. 8. was raised to Man's Estate; and
from whence (says he) being now altogether unlimited, it is grown a Monster,
and will hourly produce worse effects, unless it be reduced by that hand which
laid the Foundation, which is by Parliament.

Let Loose but Power, and you shall quickly see,
How wild a thing unbounded Man will be.
Cowley in his Davideis, page 128.
It deserves to be considered how it fares with the Profession of the Common
Law of late years, since the Chancery has been so exalted. Readings at the
Four Inns of Court twice every year, upon some public useful Statutes which
were very ancient, and of great esteem and authority in our Courts of Justice,
are now wholly discontinu'd. There being no consideration had who have been
Readers, in the call to the Degree of a Sergeant at the Law, nor in the choice
of Judges, to the utter overthrow of that Exercise; the Lord Chancellor having
a great stroke in recommending Persons to that Degree and Employment; and this
has happened but of late, since the Court of Equity has swelled to that
Height and Greatness. Nor have the Nobility and Gentry so much applied
themselves to the Study of the Common Law, nor the Students to the performance
of Exercises, whereby they should prepare themselves for the practice of it,
when they observe the Profit and Preferment to run in another Channel, and
forsake the Old. Hence it comes to pass, that an inferior sort of Men
oftentimes procure themselves to be admitted of the Inns of Court, and called
to the Bar, and suddenly leap into mighty Practice and extraordinary Gain in
the Court of Chancery, having taken no great pains in Study, but arrived only
at some experience in the Course of that Court, which is soon attained to.

It may be worth the while to look into some of those Cases wherein these
Courts of Equity do most frequently exercise their Jurisdiction, and then
consider whether there be any great necessity of resorting to those Courts for
Relief in such Cases; or whether they might not be relieved more easily, with
less expense, and more speed, and as clearly by the help of the Courts of the
Common Law, without going a tedious and chargeable Course at Common Law first,
(as it sometimes falls out,) which after all must serve for nothing, but be all
set aside, and a new, but more tedious and more chargeable and uncertain Course
of Equity be undergone at last; which seems to Strangers, (not so much
accustomed to the like) to be very absurd and impolitick, in the Constitution
of our Laws and Courts. It is according to the Latin Adage Penelopes telam
texere and retexere. Put the Case that a Man pays a Debt upon a single
Obligation, without taking an Acquittance, and afterward he is Sued by the
Obligee upon that Obligation, which is clearly against Conscience, he cannot at
Common Law plead payment without producing an Acquittance, which he has not to
produce, and is therefore Remediless at the Common Law; for it is a Maxim, that
every charge must be discharged, by that which is of as high a nature as that
which charges. A Record must be discharged by a Record, and a specialty by a
specialty, and not by a bare Averment of the Party that is charged with it: And
the true reason upon which that Maxim is grounded is given by St. Germin in his
Book Entitled, A Dialogue between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student of the
Common Law, written in the Reign of King Henry VIII. page 22. b. and 23. where
he puts the same Case: That Maxim (says St. Germin) is grounded upon great
reason, and to avoid a great inconvenience, that else might happen to come to
many People; that is to say, That every Man by a bare Averment shall avoid a
Bond, and this is the true reason of the Law; and tho (says St. Germin) it may
follow thereupon, that in some peculiar Case a Man by occasion of that general
Maxim may be compelled to pay the Money again, yet the Law took heed to that
which may often fall out, and do hurt among the People, rather than do hurt to
particular Cases. And the Law sets a general Rule, which is good and
necessary to all, and which every Man may well keep without it be through his own
default. But after all, Though the Obligor in such Case be Remediless at the
Common Law, yet, says the Author (St. Germin,) page 23. he may be helped in
Equity by a Sub-Paena. And so says Sir Geo. Carry in his Reports of Causes in
Chancery, page 2. 1st Case, and there are Precedents of it in Chancery, says
the Archbishop of York, who was Chancellor: And the like is said by Moreton,
Archbishop of Canterbury, then Chancellor, and afterward Cardinal (another
Clergyman) Pasc. 7. H. 7. fo. 12. I suppose these Authors rather speak the
Usage and Practice of the Chancery in such Cases, 22 E. 4. See that year Book,
fol. 6. and that it shall be tried by Witnesses; and the Judges are utterly
against the Sub-Paena, and the then Chancellor agreed to it. See Sir Edward
Coke's 13 Rep. fol. 44. in the upper part, concerning the infinite Exceptions
to Witnesses in the Civil Law Courts.
than what was their own Opinion and Judgment. For if this Relief in Chancery
in such Case may be allowed, what becomes of that great reason upon which that
Maxim was grounded, (as the Author himself observed before?) and how is that
great Inconvenience avoided by this Maxim, which the Author mentioned in the
same breath? If the Chancery may receive the same Averment, and upon proof by
Witnesses, without trying the Fact by a Jury, that Court may relieve the Party.
Does not the Inconvenience return again, and are not the People as much hurt by
it? Or, is it a Mischief and Inconvenience in the Common Law Courts, and none
in a Court of Equity? It were better the Law were changed, and that such
Averment of the payment might be pleaded to the Action at the Common Law; where
if Issue be joined upon it, it must not only be proved by Witnesses, but found
also by Twelve Men to be true, rather than the Chancery shall receive that
Averment and allow it to be proved by Witnesses only, and one single Person to
be Judge of the Fact, upon proof by Witnesses, without referring it to the
Judgment of Twelve Men; upon whose Verdict our Law, and the very Genius of the
Nation from of old, lay so much stress, and are so fond of it. Yet let me
observe further, That by the Chanceries doing this, there is another Great and
Fundamental Maxim invaded; nay, several other Maxims; as that general Rule,
That a Court of Equity cannot Relieve against a Maxim in Law; Rolle's 1 Rep.
219. And again, That a Court of Equity is not to determine of matter of Fact,
if it be denied, but it ought to go to a Jury to Try it. And the Author of
Doctor and Student himself appears to be of the same mind, not to allow of any
Sub-Paena in such Case, page 155. in the middle of that page he holds, That
where the Common Law in Cases concerning Inheritances, puts the Party from
an Averment, for eschewing of an Inconvenience that might follow thereupon,
among the People, if the same Inconvenience should follow in the Chancery, if
the same matter should be pleaded there; he says, no Sub-Paena should lie in
such Cases; for as much and as great Vexations, Delays, Costs and Expenses
might accrue to the Party, if he should be put to answer such Averments in the
Chancery, as if he were put to answer them at the Common Law; and therefore,
says that Author, it is, that no Sub-Paena lies in such Cases, nor in any
other like unto them.

In the Cases of Conveyances made in Trust, which is the great and busy work
of the Courts of Equity, to enforce the performance of those Trusts, enough
has been already observed, how that the Stat. of 27 H. 8. makes Uses and
Trusts to be the same thing: and the drift of that Statute was to Transfer the
Possession to the Use, and thereby what before the making of that Statute was
relieveable only in Equity, is by that Statute now relievable at the Common
Law, and thereby the Common Law in Effect restored, which before was usurped
upon by that mischievous Invention of Uses. But how is the intent of that Law
evaded, by making a groundless distinction between Uses and Trusts, 44 E. 3.
fol. 25. Bro. Tit. Feofments to Uses, plac. 9. and plac. 20. Feeffees to Uses,
are called Feoffees in Trust.
to the mighty enriching of some Men? Mighty profit arises to that Court by
Redemption of Mortgages, wherein Relief being given, long after the time
limited by the Parties, great Inconveniences happen to the Mortgagee, by
expecting the event of a tedious Suit, and what his Estate or Interest will at
last fall out to be, whether real, or only personal, or of what value, and how
to dispose of it in the mean time, as it is probable he would, if he knew it
would be a real Estate, (as the Common Law does Judge it,) or whether only
personal, and then to be left to an Executor, to perform his Will, or make a
Provision for a younger Child, or how to dispose of it in case it prove the one
or the other; he is a long time held in Suspense, till after some years the
Court of Equity come to a Resolution about it. Many good Proposals have been
made by a Bill lately depending in Parliament, and upon other occasions, from
others that have been well wishers to the Nation, that might have cured these
Mischiefs, but mightily opposed; For this is one of their Diana's, by which not
only a Livelihood, but many a large Estate is gotten. The like mischiefs do
arise from long Leases, utterly against the Ancient Common Law of England; but
being generally made in Trust, and many times to attend upon the Inheritance,
draws all the Trade into Courts of Equity; and they must be resolved to have
the same qualities with Estates of Inheritance, as to be limited by way of
Remainder and the like; and thereby a Confusion made of the distinct Species of
Estates, whereby new and difficult Points and Cases every day arise: but by
these means, almost all the Estates in England will in length of time, by
degrees, fall under the Decision of Courts of Equity. So also, by relieving
against the Penalties and Forfeitures of Bonds and Securities for Money, which
might and would easily be provided against, by the Agreement of the Parties in
their first Sealing with one another; but is wholly neglected by reason of this
common Relief given in Courts of Equity, in such Cases; tho to the great
Vexation, and mighty Expense of the Parties at last, who repent of this Course,
when it is too late.

But that which is of greater Importance than all that has been hitherto
observed, and is of a more Transcendent Nature in the Exercise of the
Jurisdiction of Equity in the Chancery, is, that they relieve in Cases after
Judgment obtained at the Common Law, and render the Judgment of no Effect; so
that all the time and charges spent in gaining that Judgment, are lost.

They of the Chancery, supposing that the Statute of 4to Henry IV. Cap. 23.
does not extend to the Court of Chancery, though it Ordain and Establish in
express words, viz.

That after Judgment given in the Courts of the King, the Parties and their
Heirs shall be thereof in Peace, until the Judgment be undone by Attaint or
Error.

Which liberty being taken of a Jurisdiction in Equity, after Judgment at Law,
tends (as the Preamble of that Statute does recite,) to the great impoverishing
of the Parties aforesaid, subversion of the Common Law of the Land.

And the Preamble tells us what the mischief was that occasioned the making of
that Statute, viz. That such Judgments were again Examined, and the Parties
made to come upon grievous Pain, (that is, by Process of Sub-Paena,) to answer
thereof of new, sometimes before the King himself, sometimes before the King's
Council, and sometimes to the Parliament.

It does not indeed by plain and express words mention the Chancery, which yet
(as is held by the Chancery-men) is Coram Rege;

But does the Statute restrain the King himself, and the Council, and the
Supreme Court, the Parliament, from the Liberty of examining into Equity after
Judgment given? and can we Believe it might be indulged to any other Court
whatsoever? whether, to a Court then in being, (if the Chancery were so,) or to
any other Court of Equity, that should in aftertimes be Erected? Would not all
the mischief recited in the Preamble of that Statute, and intended to be
remedied by it, return again upon us? Did the Makers of that Law mean to forbid
it to these High Resorts and Powers, the King, the Privy Council, and the
Parliament, out of favor to the Chancery, or to any Court of Equity, that
after the making of that Statute, should assume to it self a Jurisdiction in
Equity? that the Chancery, or such other Court might Engross to it self this
mighty and exceeding busy Employment, of Relieving in Equity after Judgment,
and so overtop the Courts of the Common Law? Will not the Common Law be still
Subverted thereby, which that Statute meant to redress? And how will the
Parties to such Judgment be in Peace? A Peace with a witness! to be involved
again with a new tedious expensive Chancery-Suit, so uncertain in the Event,
and tied to no certain Rules.

When the Plaintiff at Law flattered himself, and was glad that he had arrived
at his desired Haven, Post varios casus, post tot discrimina. --

He is wonderfully deceived; he must set out to Sea again, to another long
East India Voyage.

But what Authorities, Law Books, or Resolutions of Judges, or Courts of
Justice, have the Chancery had, for the expounding of the Statute of 4to Henry
IV. in this sense? which utterly makes that Statute of no Effect, besides those
of itheir own Chancellors, and besides the Privy Seal of King James I. upon
consulting only with his own Council at Law; A very strange way of Proceedng!

The Great Seal and the Privy Seal are on their side, ('it is true) if these in
such Case must be submitted to, what then becomes of the Stat. of 2 E. 3. cap.
8. whereby it is accorded and established, That it shall not be commanded by
the Great nor the little Seal, to disturb or delay common Right: and tho such
Commandments do come, the Justices shall not therefore cease to do right in any
point; the Stat. of 14 E. 3. c. 14. is fully to the same effect.

The complaint against the late Court of Star Chamber, which yet was
established by Law, was, that by experience it was found to be an intolerable
burden to the Subject, and the means to introduce an Arbitrary Power: and
therefore that Court was taken away by the Act of 16 Car. 1. Cap. 10.

I shall now on the other side endeavor to make it clear to the Honorable the
Lords, that such Proceedings of the Chancery, of Relieving after Judgment at
Law, upon any pretense of Equity whatsoever, is not only against the express
words and meaning of that Act of 4 H. 4 but against the Ancient and Fundamental
Common Law of England; and this I doubt not to make out by all sorts of
Authorities and Resolutions, Ancient and Modern, and in the Reigns of several
Kings and Queens of this Nation, and that not one authentic Legal Authority
can be produced to the contrary.

I shall begin with the most ancient Authority, and that is in 6 E. 1. in the
Case of the Earl of Cornwall, cited in Sir Edw. Coke's 3 Instit. in the Chapter
of Praemunire, fol. 123. Judgment was there given before the Justices of Oier
and Terminer, against the Bishop of Exeter and his Tenants: The Archbishop of
Canterbury Excommunicated all Persons that dealt in those Proceedings against
the Bishop of Exeter and his Tenants, before those Justices.

The Record says, That the Judgments given in the King's Court ought not to be
Impeached in any other Court. This appears by that Record to be the Ancient Law.

The Stat. of 4 H. 4. now treated of, is in effect a Declaration of the Common
Law; for it recites in the Preamble (as was before observed,) that such
Proceeding was in Subversion of the Common Law of the Land, which proves it to
be done against the Common Law.

In the Case of Cobb and Nore, Pasc. 5. E. 4. Coram Rege, cited by Sir Edw.
Coke, in the same third Instit. fol. 123.

A Judgment was obtained by Covin and Practice, against all Equity and
Conscience in the King's Bench: For the Plaintiff in the Judgment retained by
Collusion an Attorney for the Defendant, without the knowledge of the
Defendant, then being beyond Sea; the Defendant's Attorney confesses the
Action, whereupon Judgment was given: The Defendant sought his Remedy by
Parliament, and by Authority of Parliament Power was given to the Lord
Chancellor, by advice of Two of the Judges, to hear, and order the Case
according to Equity.

If the Chancellor had any such Power before, what need was there of resorting
to the Parliament? Non recurritur ad extra-ordinarium, nisi cessat ordinarium:
And why was it not referred to the Chancellor alone without Associates, if it
did of Right belong to him before? Such a Case in these days, would be held in
Chancery, to be a most proper Case for the Relief of that Court.

And Note further, That one Person alone, tho a Lord Chancellor, was not to be
entrusted with a Judicial Power, but others were joined with him.

In the 22 E. 4. fol. 37. It is said by Hussy, Chapter Justice, If after Judgment
the Chancellor grant an Injunction, and commit the Plaintiff at Law to the
Fleet, the King's Bench will by Habeas Corpus discharge him.

In the 21th year of K. H. VIII. Articles were Signed by Sir Tho. Moor (the
Chancellor himself,) and by Fitz-James (Ch Justice,) and Justice Fitzherbert,
against Cardinal Wolsey: One was for Examining matters in Chancery, after
Judgment at the Common Law; in Sir Edw. Cok. 3. Instit. fol. 124. in Subversion
of the Laws; See the 2 Instit. fol. 626. at the end of that folio (before
cited,) more of Cardinal Wolsey, and the Indictment against him.

In Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 67, and 69. and 57. Fol. 41. and
67, and 57 fully.
about the time of 13 Eliz. a Man was Condemned in Debt, in the Common Pleas;
that is, had Judgment entered against him; and he Exhibited a Bill in Whitehall,
and had an Injunction to stay Execution: and the Plaintiff that had the
Judgment at Law, moved in the Common Pleas to have Execution, and it was
granted, notwithstanding the Injunction: afterward the Chancery committed the
Plaintiff at Law to the Fleet, for Suing out Execution; and the Lord Dier,
(Chief Justice,) and the whole Court of Common Pleas, delivered him out of the
Fleet, by Hab. Corpus.

In the Case of Sir Moile Finch and Throgmorton, Mich. 39. and 40. Eliz.
Throgmorton Exhibited a Bill in Chancery against Sir Moile Finch, and showed
clear matter in Equity to be Relieved against a Forfeiture of a Lease, for
years pretended by Sir Moile, for Breach of a Condition, where there was no
default in the Plaintiff Throgmorton.

To which Bill the Defendant in Chancery, (Sir Moile Finch) Pleaded, That he
had obtained Judgment in the Exchequer, in an Ejectment, in the Name of his
Lessee, against Throgmorton, (the Plaintiff in Chancery,) and that Judgment had
been affirmed in Error, and demanded the Judgment of the Chancery; if after
Judgment given at the Common Law, he should be drawn to answer in Equity;
Egerton would not allow the Plea, but overruled it.

(Note, He did not Plead the Statute of 4 H. 4. but grounded his Plea at the
Common Law).

Queen Elizabeth referred the Consideration of this Plea and Demurrer to all
the Judges of England, (not to her own Council Learned in the Law;) for the
Twelve Judges are the proper Judges of this Question, tho it concerned their
own Jurisdiction.

After hearing Council, and the intent of the Lord Chancellor
being said to be, not to Impeach the Judgment, but to Relieve upon collateral
Matter in Equity:

Upon great Deliberation, it was Resolved by all the Judges of England, That
the Plea of the Defendant in Chancery was good.

And that the Lord Chancellor ought not to Examine the matter in Equity, after
the Judgment at the Common Law; For tho he would not Examine the Judgment, yet
he would by Decree, take away the Effect of the Judgment.

And it is there said, That the Precedents produced in the times of H. 8. and
E. 6. were grounded upon the sole Opinion of the Lord Chancellor, and passed
Sub Silentio.

And that no Precedent nor Prescription, could prevail against the Statutes of
the Realm.

Thereupon, this being certified to the Queen, the Plea stood for a good Plea.
Note, The Twelve Judges are the most proper Expounders of Statutes; see the 2
Instit. fol. 611. in the answer to the 16th Objection, made by the Bishops and
Clergy; where all the Judges do affirm, That they never heard it excepted to,
(before the time of King James I.) that any Statute should be expounded by any
other than by the Judges of the Law; and fol. 618. in the answer of the Judges,
to the last Objection of the Bishops, it is truly said by all the Judges of
that time also; That if the Twelve Judges Err in Judgment, it cannot otherwise
be reformed, (not by the Chancellor, nor by the Bishops,) but Judicially by the
Parliament, the Superior Court, not by the Council Table neither.

They further resolved, That the Interpretation of all Statutes that concern
the Clergy, being parcel of the Laws of the Realm, do belong to the Judges of
the Common Law; yet this was a Contest about Jurisdiction.

P. 11. Jac. in the King's Bench, Crok. Jac fol. 343. Courtney versus Glanvil:
The Plaintiff had a Decree against the Defendant Glanvil, after Glanvil had
obtained a Judgment at the Common Law by Confession, and Glanvil was imprisoned
by the Chancery for not obeying the Decree. It is said by Cok. Chapter Just. That
the Decree and Imprisonment was Unlawful, being after Judgment; and that the
King's Bench upon an Habeas Corpus, ought to Relieve Glanvil. The same Case is
reported by Sergeant Rolls in his 1 st Rep. Mich. 12. Jac. fol. 111. and Coke
said, While I have this Coif on my Head, I will not allow it.

Hill. 11. Crok. Jac. fol. 335. in the K. B. Heath and Ridley's Case, It is
said by the Court, That by the Statutes of 27 E. 3. cap. 1. and 4 H 4. cap. 23.
After Judgment given in Curia Domini Regis, be it in Plea Real, (not Fitz. Abr.
tit. Trial. plac. 6. By the word (Royal) is meant (Real) See that Case in the
Year-Book, and Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. 424. Nu. 110.
Royal) or Personal, it ought not to be avoided but by Error or Attaint.

And in the same term, it was delivered for a general Maxim in Law, That if any
Court of Equity does intermeddle with any Matters, properly Triable at the
Common Law, or which concern Freehold, they are to be Prohibited.

Mich. 12. Jac. in the K. B. Roll. 1 Rep. fol. 71. Wright, versus Fowler, It
was ordered by that Court, That Cause should be shown why a Prohibition should
not be granted to the Dutchy-Court, for Proceeding upon a Bill in Equity after
Judgment: thereupon the Plaintiff in Equity relinquished his Bill.

Mich. ^13. Jac. K. B. Rolls 1 Rep. fo. 252. Coats and Suckerman, against Sir
Hen. Warner; George Crook prayed a Prohibition to the Duchy, for Examining a
matter after Judgment in the King's Bench, by Coke, Crook, Doderidge, and
Haughton: It is said, We are resolved that no Court of Equity may meddle after
Judgment, and a Prohibition was granted.

It is further said, That a Prohibition may be granted by the King's Bench to
the Common Pleas, or Exchequer, and so of all the Courts of Westminster Hall;
if they hold Plea against an Act of Parliament, or against the Common Law.

Mich. 16. Car. (...). in the K. B. Crok. Car. 1. fol. 595. Calmadies Case. A
Prohibition was granted against the Court of Requests for proceeding in Equity,
after a Judgment given in the King's Bench.

And the Court Resolved, That so they would always do, whenever any Exhibited
Bills there, after Verdict and Judgment.

And the Case of Austin versus Brereton is there cited, which was 40 Eliz,
Austin obtained Judgment in the King's Bench; the Defendant Brereton Sued in
the Court of Requests to be Relieved, and the Plaintiff at Law was Committed by
the Court of Requests, and was Bailed by the King's Bench; and Sir Tho. Gaudy
(one of the Judges) was convened before the Queen for it, yet it was held good;
and Brereton was enforced to satisfy the Judgment.

Mich. 7. Car. 2. 1655. in the Exchequer, Sir Tho. Hardres Rep. fol. 23. Morel
versus Douglas, The Bill in Equity was to be Relieved against a Judgment, by
Nihil dicit, upon a Bond for the Money was paid. There was a Demurrer to the
Bill, upon the Stat. of 4 H. 4. and the Court allowed the Demurrer.

There the Case of Langham and Limbrey is cited, where the
same point was Ruled by the House of Lords, by advice of all the Judges; the
Judgment was for no less than 18000 l. in an Action of Covenant.

Trin. 1658. In the Exchequer, Sir Tho. Hardres's Rep. fol. 121. Harris versus
Colliton; The Defendant had Judgment at Law See also the Book entitled, The
Modern Reports, fol. 61. in the case of King against Standish.
against the Plaintiff in Equity, for Rent of an House. The Plaintiff in Equity
(Harris) Exhibited a Bill in Equity, to be Relieved against that Judgment;
Suggesting, that the House was Demolished in the War, so that he could make no
Profit. The Defendant in Equity (Colliton) sets forth the Stat. of 4 H. 4. and
Demur'd to the Bill.

Finch, (afterward Lord Chancellor) argued for the Defendant Colliton, to
maintain the Demurrer.

As to the Precedents he answers, That a 1000 of them will not change the Law,
and many of them passed Sub silentio, or upon the sole Opinion of the
Chancellor, who is willing to enlarge his own Jurisdiction, (this was plainly
and stoutly said.)

He further held, That there were no regular Proceedings in Equity till of late
times; for Parliaments ought to have been once or twice a year, to redress such
Grievances.

Stephens (who argued for the Plaintiff in Equity) held, That
the Statute of 4 H. 4. did not extend to the Chancery, because the
Jurisdiction in Equity of the Chancery was Cok. 12 Rep. fol. 38. at the lower
end, Statutes that Prohibit Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts extend to
Courts afterward Erected.
not in being, at the making of that Statute, and therefore it could not be
restrained by it.

Bigland for the Defendant; That the Statute of 27 E. 3. cap. 1. of Praemunire,
did not extend to a Suit in Chancery, because the Chancery was not a Court of
Equity, at the making of that Stat. and Lambert (who was a Master of the
Chancery in his time) is cited to prove it.

And it is there said, That the Chancellor TOOK NtOT UPON HIM ex Officio, to
determine matters in Equi^y till Edw. IVth's time.

Saunders (afterward Chief Justice of the King's Bench) of Council for the
Plaintiff at Law, grants it to be true, that at the making of the Statute of 27
E. 3. there were no Proceedings in Equity in Chancery; but that the words (or
in any other Court) will extend to any Courts that then were, or at any time
should be, where there might be the same mischiefs, viz. by Impeaching
Judgments given in the King's Courts, which are so often declared to be in
Subversion of the Law.

He affirms, That the Proceedings by English Bill in Chancery, are not Coram
Domino Rege in Cancellaria, (as the Latin Proceedings are,) but by a Bill or
Petition directed to the Lord Chancellor, and not to the King. This Case was
adjourned, and we heard of no further Proceeding. I was then of Council for the
Plaintiff at Law to maintain the Stat. of 4 H. 4. and the Demurrer.

Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts, in the chapter of the Chancery, fol. 67. he
allows of the Statute of 4 H. 4. and agrees it extends to the Chancery, and
mentions what is written by Doctor and Student upon that point.

So that here are all sorts of Resolutions in this very point, and from all
sorts of Authorities in Law, and in several Reigns Ancient and Modern, by the
whole Parliament, declared by several Statutes; by the House of Lords, by all
the Twelve Judges, at several times; by all the Courts of Law in
Westminster Hall, and in particular by the Court of Exchequer; most of whose
business is to Relieve in Equity, grounded upon a Power and Jurisdiction,
vested in them by Act of Parliament, if not by Prescription; (the two only
ways whereby a Jurisdiction in Equity can be given, as has been often resolved,
and was before observed). And all these are Unanimous, not one Judge dissenting
or doubting; not any one Resolution, Book, or Authority in the Law to the
contrary: And yet, as I am informed, the Court of Chancery constantly, and
without any hesitancy or scruple made of it, proceeds to Relieve in Equity
after Judgment at Law.

The Plea and Argument for it on the Chancery side (which we may find in a late
Author, the Title of whose Book is, Reports of Cases in the Court of Chancery,
Printed 1693. to which is added Arguments to prove the Antiquity, Dignity,
Power, and Jurisdiction of that Court: And much to that purpose is recited in
Sir Edw. Coke 3 Instit. fol. 125. in the beginning of that folio.

It is a Privy Seal, 14 Jac. Anno 1616. whereby that King (assuming to himself
a Power to Arbitrate between the Courts of the Common Law and the Chancery, in
questions concerning their Jurisdiction, and more especially in the great
Dispute between the Judges and the Chancellor: Whether the Chancery could
Relieve in Equity after a Judgment obtained at Common Law; which Dispute did
arise upon the construction of the Stat of 4 H. 4. cap. 23. (whichdid by Law
belong to the Judges to determine and resolve, as has been proved: and they
had determined it.)

King James taking it to belong to his Kingly Office, to Arbitrate in such
Cases, Decides (as they would believe) the Controversy, by adjudging it with
the Chancery, which he signifies under his Privy Seal; and thereby does Will
and Command, the Chancellor shall from thence-forward proceed to give such
Relief in Equity: And this was done against the Unanimous Resolution of all the
Judges of England, and without calling the Judges to Debate it, and without any
Hearing of them; looking upon them as Parties concerned and practical, (which
is a Scurvey Reflection, and Scandal upon the Justice of the Nation; See the 2d
Instit. of Sir Edw. Cok. fol. 617. The Answer of the Twelve Judges to the
Twenty fourth Objection, to this purpose;) so that the King upon hearing his
own Council, Learned in the Law, only took upon him to Overruled all the Twelve
Judges in a point of Law, and to Interpret and Expound an Act of Parliament,
which properly belongs to the Judges, next under the Supreme Court.

And no wonder is it, if King James I. took this Arbitrage upon him, as
belonging to his Kingly Office, and resolved it under his Privy Seal; when his
constant Opinion was, that he was above the Law; and that it was Treason to
affirm the contrary; which yet all the Twelve Judges stoutly did; See Sir E. C.
12 Rep. before cited, fo. 65. at the upper end the Opinion of K. James I.
and cited Bracton for it; Rex sub Deo and Lege. See a Collection of King
James's Works, in a large Folio, Printed 1616. page 203. where he affirms, that
the King is above the Law, and that he may Interpret it: And page 534. That it
is his Office to make every Court to contain it self within his own Limits; See
the Act for regulating of the Privy Council, etc. 16 Car. 1. cap. 10.
beforementioned in the 5th Paragraph, it is Declared and Enacted, That neither
his Majesty, nor his Council, have, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Authority, by Petition, Articles, or any other way, to draw into question,
determine, or dispose of the Lands or Goods of any of the Subjects of this
Kingdom; but the same ought to be Tried and Determined in the ordinary Courts
of Justice, and by the ordinary Course of Law. See the several ancient Statutes
that require and command the Judges to proceed to administer Justice, without
Regard had to the Great, or Privy Seal, that command the contrary, Magna Charta
cap. 29. 2 E. 3. c. 8. 14 E. 3. c. 14. See 2 Inst. fo. 601. the 1st Objection.
20 E. 3. c. 11.

Some will argue for the Jurisdiction of the Chancery in Equity, from the
Statute of Westminster the 2d, 13 E. 1. cap. 24. which directs, That Nemo
recedat a Curia Regis sine Remedio; from hence they Collect, that where there
is matter of Equity, wherein the Common Law cannot Relieve, there the Chancery
by this Statute is enabled to provide Remedy.

Whereas the Design and Scope of that Statute extends no further than to the
framing of Writs, in order to Relief by Actions at the Common Law, where the
Register of Writs (that ancient Book of Law) had for some new and special Cases
provided no Writ; which is the first step in every Action, and is proper work
for the Chancery, which is therefore styled, Officina Brevium.

It is very far from giving that Court any Jurisdiction in Equity; but it shows
what Remedy is to be given toward a Proceeding at the Common Law, and not to
Relieve against it.

But it may be noted from this ancient Statute, that neither the Chancellor nor
the Chancery could alter an Original, or so much as frame a new Writ, were
there never so great Necessity for it, till enabled by this Statute. It could
be done only by the Parliament; and in such Cases the Parties were forced to
wait till the meeting of a Parliament, tho they had manifest Right, and clear
Equity on their side, but no Remedy at Law. If it were then a Court of Equity,
why did not the Chancery Relieve in Equity, because the Party was without
Remedy at Law?

Note in the next place, That the Parliament by that Statute does not entrust
the Chancellor alone, nor any one Person, with the framing of new Writs, fitted
to such new Cases; tho they were Cases that had a manifest Right, but not a
Legal Remedy; and yet. Writs serve but as a mean to bring the Case to a
Judgment; but it refers the matter also to the Clerks (now called the Masters
of the Chancery) to frame Writs for such new Cases. And those Clerks (now
Masters) were, as Fleta describes them, Men of profound Science, (What! in the
Civil Law? no, but) in the Laws and Customs of England; Qui in Legibus and
Consuetudinibus Anglicanis notitiam habeant pleniorem.

And these Masters have Caution given them by that Statute, that if any 2
Instit. fol. 408.
Doubt or Difficulty did arise about framing those Writs, Atterminent querentes
ad proximum Parliamentum, and Scribantur Casus in quibus concordare non
possunt. Et de consensu Juris peritorum fiat breve.

Why was it not referred in such Case to the Lord Chancellor, at least where
the Masters could not settle and agree the Form, it being a Form? No, not to
any one Man, and it was a Work proper for a Parliament; and in those days,
Parliaments met often for these very purposes; and it was settled by an Act of
Parliament in King Alfred's time, (and it is a Law still in force,) That for
ever, twice a year, or oftener, if need were, in time of Peace, a Parliament
should be holden at London; and as Bracton (a Judge) tells us, this was so
ordained to determine of Cases that were new, and had no Remedy at Law, or a
doubtful Remedy, but good Equity; (where was the Chancery-Equity then?) Si
aliqua Nova and inconsueta Emerserent, quoe nunquam prius evenerunt: Ponantur
in respectu usque ad Magnam Curiam, ut ibi per Concilium Curioe terminentur.

And there are infinite Precedents, (says the Learned Coke) in the Rolls of
Parliament, of such references to the Parliament; and to that end were
Parliaments Ryley, ibidem, fol. 411, 386, 374, 373, 371, 361, 362.
so often to be held; and it took up most of their time. See Ryley's Placita
Parliamentaria, in the Appendix, fol. 525.

And the infrequency of Parliaments has given occasion to other Courts to
Transact in those matters, that are indeed proper for the Parliament. The
Exorbitances of great and high Officers have been many times a means to hinder
and prevent the frequent Meetings of Parliament, as in the Case before
mentioned of Cardinal Wolsey; least their Exorbitancies should be questioned.

All these Mischiefs might be Remedied, either by some good Act of Parliament
to be Passed, as has been often endeavored; or by Referring the Determination
and Judging of Bills of Review of their Decrees into good and indifferent
hands; or by the Supreme Court's declaring, that the Courts of the Common Law
in Westminster Hall, ought, ex Debito Justitiae to grant Prohibitions to any
Court whatsoever, that either Usurp a Jurisdiction where they have none of
Right, or exceed their Jurisdiction where they have one. This Legal Remedy
having been long disused and laid asleep wants a Revival. In order to obtain
these peaceable and most necessary Helps, this small Treatise is Humbly
recommended to the grave Consideration of the HOUSE OF PEERS.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page ^1. line 31. politically r. politiquely. P. 32. l. 6. r. his Exercise. P.
40. l. 43. it heir r. their.


