A TREATISE OF Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in all Cases and Conditions.

Wherein is manifested, 1. What the Lord Jesus Christ is to, and does for
Believing Souls; which may be a constant ground of their Joy and Rejoicing. 2.
What are the grounds of that Darkness which is upon Believers about their
Interest in Christ, hindering this Rejoicing. 3. What Believers should do in
the interim, until they can have the evidence of their Interest clear. 4. How
Souls may know their Interest in Jesus Christ.


Together with A Christians Hope in Heaven, in one Sermon, and Freedom from
Condemnation in Christ, in two Sermons, being the last Preached.

By Robert Asty, late Minister of Jesus Christ in Norwich.

Phil. 4.4 Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice. LONDON,
Printed by Tho. Snowden, for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich, near the
Marketplace. 1683.

TO THE Congregational Church of Christ In the City of Norwich.
Dearly Beloved,
IT is much to be lamented in any day, if many of the righteous are taken away
by death ( Isa. 57.1.) as being signal of evil to come; and more, when many
Eminent Ministers of the Gospel are so removed, whereby Vision fails; and
most of all, when the Sin of a People, and impending Judgment threaten their
being benighted, and no prospect is given of others to fill up the places of
those who are transplanted to Eternity.

I know you cannot but have many searchings of heart, for your deep share in
this matter of Lamentation; the Lord having (in so short a measure of time)
called home to himself from among you, so many faithful Teachers; as that
Spiritual man Mr. Armitage, Judicious Mr. Allen, and now this Laborious Mr.
Asty, who served you in the Gospel: But it is some matter of refreshment, that
they being dead, yet (by their Printed Labors) they still speak to you.

It was the earnest desire of some amongst you, that the ensuing Sermons of Mr.
Robert Asty might be Published; they were taken from his mouth by the Pen of a
Ready Writer, and not polished by his own hand, yet may be exceedingly useful
to all, for the promoting of Faith, Obedience and Comfort.

Indeed, the chief purport of this Treatise is, to raise the Joy of those who
are interested in Christ, and that in every state and condition: It directs
unto the right Object of Joy, the Lord, and so to an everlasting ground of
Rejoicing.

I shall add a few words of Counsel to you, for whom I have a great respect.

1. Improve the remembrance of those Gospel Truths which you heard from the
mouths of your Ministers now at rest: Their Labors were not intended by the
Lord only for a present relief to your Souls during their speaking, but for
afterward, Rev. 3.3.

Remember how thou have Received and Heard, and hold fast. Beware of losing or
growing indifferent as to the practical owning those Gospel Principles which
you have been grounded in; be tenacious there; hold them fast; for Christ
adds, If thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall
not know what hour I will come upon thee.

2. Keep up lively Affections toward God, when your Gospel Ministers are
withdrawn from you. When David was exiled from the Ordinances of God, yet then
had he the most earnest pantings of Soul after Enjoyments of God, Psalm. 42.1,
2. and 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee -- Beware of
coolings in Affection to the Institutions of Jesus Christ when you want them,
and let nothing short of God satisfy when you enjoy them. Beware of leaving
your first love, Rev. 2.4, 5.

3. Maintain frequent Spiritual Communion each with other when some Gospel
Administrations are wanted. This is prescribed as a means for the prevention of
Declinings or Departures from God, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily while it
is called to day. Daily Converses each with other duly managed, may not only
preserve from Spiritual Decaies, but quicken Affections, and blow up the spark
of your graces into a mighty flame.

4. Wait uncessantly in Prayer for the Return of God's Ark to you. The less you
have of Preaching, the more should you be in Praying, and others for you, that
Gospel Light may shine among you as in former days; and the Answer will
rejoice many, and should grieve none; for, what hurt can it be to any real
Christian, that Christ is Preached to others?

I shall only add 2 Cor. 13.11. Finally Brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of
good comfort, be of one mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace
shall be with you. So prays he who is

Yours in the Lord Jesus, Sam. Petto.
October. 23. 1681.
SERMON I.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.


OF the Stock and Parentage of this Prophet, we have no clear account in
Scripture. It may be, implicitly to hint unto us, that we should always look
more to the Message than to the Messenger, and that nobleness of birth and
greatness among men do not greaten the Word of God. Indeed Epiphanius tells us
with some confidence, that this Prophet was of the Tribe of Simeon, and that he
lived in the time of the Babylonish Captivity; but there is but little grounds
for this conjecture. The time also of this Prophet's Prophesying, is very
uncertain. Some Hebrew Writers do expressly tell us, that he lived in the time
of the Reign of King Manasseh; and there is some probability for this
assertion; but however this is clear, that he comes from the Lord of Hosts; he
was his Prophet, and he speaks in his name, in much power and plainness to this
people, not fearing the face of man, and spares not to deal closely with that
incorrigible Spirit that was among them; who had slighted the Lord's Message
that was delivered by his Predecessors before him, and was now near unto
destruction: Whether it was in the time of the Reign of Manasseh, or any other
King, modern Expositors are very modest in their conjectures and apprehensions,
not seeing the thing clearly and absolutely determined in Scripture; but this
is certain, it was at that time when God was about to raise up that bitter,
sharp, cruel, fiery, fierce enemy the Chaldeans, to come out against this
people; as you may see, chap. 1. v. 6. It was at that time, when God had born
so long with their provocations, that the time of his patience was even almost
expired. It was at that time when their sins were so multiplied and increased,
as that they were near unto ruin; destruction and desolation was at the door.
Now this Prophet understanding the mind of God, and seeing upon good grounds
that the Decree was past against this people, as one who was faithful unto
their interest, among whom, and unto whom he was the Lords Prophet, and as one
that would approve himself faithful unto the Lord; he takes upon him the
boldness to expostulate the case with God, why he should suffer such a wicked
and vile Nation as the Chaldeans were, to prevail and prosper against his own
inheritance, though they were sinful and unworthy; and he cannot rest, neither
can he give God any rest, until he hear something further of his mind. The Lord
is pleased to condescend to him in the beginning of the second chapter, and to
make answer to the anxiousness and earnestness of his Spirit in this great
affair at the second verse: And the Lord answered me and said, Write the
Vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he that runs may read it. Verse 3.
For the Vision is for an appointed time, at the end it shall speak, and shall
not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, and not
tarry. In short, the Lord makes this Answer to him, that though he did make use
of the Caldeans as a Rod in his hand to scourge his own People with, yet when
he had done his work upon his Israel, he would take his Rod, and throw it into
the fire, that he would deal with all the Enemies of his People according to
their desert. Desolation might come for a while upon the Lord's People, but
they should be raised out of their ruins; but utter desolation and destruction
should come upon the Enemies of his People; they should at length be brought
down, and suffered to rise no more. In this third Chapter (according to his
name, which signifies (Wrestler) he wrestles with God, and is another Jacob
that will not let the Lord alone until he bless him.

Habakkuk encompasseth God, and in his prayer wrestling with him, closed in
upon him. And he gathers up in this third Chapter the great Experiences that
Israel had of God, when he walked with them, and led them by a strong hand n
the wilderness; and he urged those old Experiences that this People had of God
upon God, at this time; how he had dried up the mighty waters, and rode in
Chariots of Salvation through the Sea for them; and how he caused the Sun and
the Moon to stand still, until the Enemies of the Lord were cut off and
consumed. And he gathers in upon God upon those Experiences, waiting for the
same power, and the same wonderful appearances and actings for their
deliverances out of the present and succeeding troubles that were, or should
come upon them; as God had appeared for them, and delivered them out of all
their troubles of old. And though he tells us, that at the first sounding of
the words of God's displeasure, he was filled with shakings, and with
trembling, and with quivering; yet within a little time he recovered his
Spirit, and in the exercise of Faith upon God, he glories, rejoices and
triumphs in God alone in the midst of most sinking, most discouraging
Providence: When indeed I heard, says he, verse 16. my belly trembled, my
lips quivered at the voice; rottenness entered into my bones. But see what he
says in the 17th and 18th verses; Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom,
etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. He
saw shakings coming upon the whole Earth, that did even put the Foundations as
it were out of course; he saw God's Besom in his hand ready to sweep away all
their comforts; an East Wind was rising, that would blow upon their Spring, and
make all their Spring-buds to blow off. Well, says he, let it be so, or as ill
as can be supposed to be, or as ill as the creature can be as to its state in
this world, yet I have God on my side, and all is well: I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. This verse is a most noble strain
of a heavenly Spirit in the high and constraining exercise of Faith upon God in
a most dismal day of darkness. The Prophet gets upon the Ruins of the Creature,
and rejoices in his whole Christ: He gets upon the Ashes of his house that was
burnt here, and sings of his Building that cannot be burnt in Heaven: He gets
into his withered Vineyard, and into his barren Fields, and there sings, The
Lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place, I have a goodly Heritage. It
seems a very strange speech, that he should in the former part of his Prophecy
be speaking of the sad dispensations of the Lord toward them; and cap. 3.17.
speak of great failures that were like to come upon them in reference to all
their terrene comforts and enjoyments, and yet speak of rejoicing and joying in
the Lord! It is a strange speech to talk of joy and rejoicing here, where he
had almost nothing in this world left him, or supposed to be left him, yet I
will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. We say of some
men, It is strange how they live, their Trades fail, and their Estates are
gone, and yet they bear up: Why, it is a mystery how they live, how they have
wherewithal to defray their charges; surely they have some secret friends that
feed them, and maintain them, that their neighbors know not of. Why, after the
same manner we may speak concerning the Lord's People; They have enemies on
every side, and they are broken again and again, and yet behold they live, and
their Joy none can take from them; although they are numbered to sorrows and
distresses every day: Why, my Text tells you the mystery of their living, and
of their living in joy, and peace, and comfort in the midst of all their
losses, and troubles, and discomfortures. I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my Salvation. Says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing, etc. This verse does open something of the mystery of
the verse that we have chosen to be our present Text; As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; and while they seem to be poor, they make many rich; they seem to
have nothing, but yet indeed they possess all things; yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy inthe God of my Salvation. [I will rejoice in the Lord.] The
word in the Hebrew is a very full word. I will rejoice exceedingly in the Lord:
Or, My heart rises like the Sea with surges when it is enforced with the wind:
Or, My heart is like a boiling Pot when it seetheth: Or, (how shall I express
it!) I will rejoice in the Lord; I will magnify my self in God, or make my
boast of God in all disasters, and under all discouragements. I will joy in the
God of my Salvation. [I will joy] That word also is very full, and it signifies
in its grammatical sense, my heart shall leap or skip for joy: My heart shall
sally forth in my God, and take heart in the Lord who never fails: I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. One of the Ancients
speaking upon this Text, says, Although, says he, all the Elements should
threaten us, and conspire and swear as it were a Confederacy against us, to
turn us out of all, yet, Ego exultabo in Deo; I will rejoice in my God, even in
the God of my Salvation. And Calvin says, My joy is not founded upon the
Creature, nor upon external enjoyments, therefore let all things be brought
into confusion here below; nay, let God himself seem to stand frowning over us,
yet says he, will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation.

Joy is the sweet motion of the Soul in a full contentment of heart, and
complacency of Spirit upon some good set before it. Now here the Prophet sees
all discouraging below, he turns his Eyes up to Heaven, and he sees a certainty
there, he sees stability there, and therefore he rejoices in the Lord, and Joys
in the God of his Salvation, I will rejoice in the Lord. Who is meant by Lord
here? I will rejoice in Jehovah the God of my Salvation.

Jehovah is a Title given unto God the Father, setting forth his self-being,
and self-sufficiency, and giving existence unto all Creatures, but the Title
Jehovah is attributed also unto the Son, and so I understand it here in this
Text, I will rejoice in Jehovah, that is in Christ Jesus, who may be called
Jehovah; not only as he has a sufficiency in himself, but as he gives
existence, and being unto all the promises of the Covenant of Grace, in whom
they are yea, and Amen: and on this account I take it that the Title Jehovah is
often given unto Jesus Christ the second Person. I will rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God of my Salvation, that is, in my Lord my Savior, my dear
Jesus, and my Redeemer, and so from the words you may observe this proposition:

Doct. That there is enough in Christ Jesus alone for the Souls full rejoicing
and triumph in all cases and conditions. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my Salvation. Let things go how they will in the world as to
my outward Concerns, yet the ground of my joy, that is never taken from me.
Although the Fig Tree do not blossom, although there shall be no fruit in the
Vine, although the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield
no meat, the Flocks shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd
in the Stall; yet my Joy that abides, the ground of my Joy that cannot be taken
from me, it is not in the Creature, it is not upon Earth, but it is in Heaven,
it is not in Man, it is in the Lord, it is not in the confluence of these things
that are coming and going, and in an uncertain enjoyment, but it is in the Lord
who never fails, says David in the 2 Samuel 23.5. Though my House be not so with
God; my Family is not as I would have it to be; I cannot rectify all the
disorders of my House, and settle things as I would, my house is not with God
as I would have it according to my hearts desire; yet God has made with me an
everlasting Covenant of Grace, and this is all my Salvation and all my desire.
The word that is translated desire here in the Hebrew signifies also delight,
this is all my Salvation, and all my delight as we may read it; here is the Joy
of my heart, my delight is here, Gods Covenant of Grace stands sure with me,
and therein will I rejoice; as if David had said, things go ill with me here
below; the Sword is threatened never to depart from my House while I live, that
I must be a man of trouble and of war to the end of my days; what breaches may
be made upon my Kingdom; and what breeches may be made in my Family, the Lord
only knows, yet the Covenant that stands sure, and that is all my delight, my
heart centers here, and I will comfort my self in the Lord my God. And if we
search into the Psalms, there we shall find that David does frequently under
great disasters make his boast of God. Providence were frowning, and he seemed
to be driven out of all, yet says he, The Lord God is my refuge, he is the
Horn of my Salvation, my Sanctuary, and high Tower, and I will rejoice, and let
all the righteous rejoice and be glad in him.

In the handling of this proposition there are these things that we shall
propose to consider and unfold to you.

First, What Jesus Christ is. Secondly, What he has, and Thirdly, What he will
do for the believing Soul, that the believer may take comfort, and rejoice in
him at all times, whatsoever his condition is.

First, What Jesus Christ is, that the Prophet does here so comfort himself in,
and rejoice and make his boast of.

First, He is glorious in his Person, a very glorious person he is, not one
like him in Heaven nor in Earth; what is said concerning Saul in the 1 Samuel
9.2. we may in allusion apply unto Christ, that he was a choice young man and a
goodly, there was not among the Children of Israel a goodlier Person then he,
from the shoulders upward he was higher than any of the People. I only allude
to it.

Jesus Christ is a most choice excellent one, a very goodly, and a very lovely
Person, he is higher both by head and shoulders than any of his Brethren; a
Person all glorious, a Person all over lovely and beautiful, in Can. 5.16. His
mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely, this is my beloved, etc.

But I shall descend into particulars, and show you wherein Jesus Christ is
such a sufficient ground of rejoicing, and of comfort to the believing Soul
that has an interest in him in all conditions, and I shall here show you
wherein it appears, that the glory of Christ's Person is such a ground of
rejoicing to us at all times? And that will appear in his Mediatory
Constitution, as God-man in one Person; Jesus is a Mediator, a days Man, an
umpire between God and Man, one that has come between God and Man to make
peace for us, and the glory of his Person lies in his mediatory constitution,
as he is God-man, so he is a most glorious Person. Now this Title of Mediator
is often given him in Scripture, in Heb. 8.6. he is called the Mediator of a
better Covenant, and Heb. 9.15. the Mediator of the New Testament, and Heb.
12.24. To Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling. So 1 Timothy 2.5. This was such a one as Job wished for, in Job 9.33.
Neither is there any days-man between us that might lay his hand upon us both.
Now there are two things that are requisite for the completing and
accomplishing of a Mediator.

First, He must be equally related to the Persons between whom he comes.

Secondly, He must be impartial and faithfully indifferent; now both these are
found in Jesus Christ.

First, A Mediator, I say must be equally stated between, and related to the
Persons, that he comes to reconcile. A Mediator must be a middle Person that
must not be related more to one Person than to another, that he comes between,
but there must be an equal proximity or nearness in him unto the parties, that
he comes to mediate for, or to make peace between. Now Jesus Christ was such a
Person in whom there was an equal proximity or nearness to both parties that he
had to do with, for he was both God and Man; as he was true Man, he stood in a
nearness unto man, and as he was true God, so he stood in a nearness unto the
Father that he had to do for; he was by the Divine Nature as near unto the
Father, as by the Humane Nature he was near unto man; and he was as near unto
man by his Humane Nature, as he was unto the Father by his Divine Nature, so as
he is equally stated between, and related unto the persons that he came to
reconcile.

Secondly, A Mediator must be impartial and faithful, indifferent in and about
the interest of the parties that he has to do for. Jesus Christ being made
God-man, was not only in a nearness to man, and to the Father, but he was
thereby unbiassed, and carried out upon equal terms impartially, to manage the
Concerns of the Interest of both Parties; he was both God and man, and was not
only as so, in a nearness to both Parties, but he was equally concerned
honorably to manage the Interest of both Parties that he came between and had
to do for, and was engaged in this nearness that he stood in unto both; he was
engaged thereby equally to manage the Concerns of both Parties; being God, he
was engaged in point of honor to give satisfaction to his Father; and being
Man, he was engaged in point of faithfulness to work out the whole business and
concern of our Salvation, and to make peace for Sinners; he was faithfully
indifferent, and equally concerned in the Interest of both Parties, having the
Divine Nature and the Humane united together in one Person; both Natures do
constrain him to have an equal and right aspect into both Interests; if he
should look more unto God's side, than unto man's side, the Humane Nature would
speak; and if he should look more unto man than unto God, the Divine Nature
would speak; he had both Natures, and therein was unbiassed, and carried out
with an impartial spirit to manage the Concerns of both Interests, and to bring
them into one; and it was requisite that Jesus that was to be a Mediator,
should be thus constituted; for indeed, had he undertook the work, and had not
been thus constituted, it would not probably have been so impartially managed,
neither could Jesus Christ have been complete for the work of his Mediation,
but under this constitution; for if he had been God only, then he had been too
high for the work; for he must make satisfaction; he must suffer and die for
Sinners; he must be made sin for Sinners, and be substituted in the room of
sinners. Now God absolutely considered, cannot be thus: And if he had been man
only, he had been too low for the work; for there could not have been that
dignity in his sufferings, as to give a value and worth to all his layings out,
and layings down for us: He must therefore be God-man, and as so, he was
neither too high, nor too low, but equally stated between both, and so
completed for the work; and thus was Jesus Christ constituted; and thus do the
Scriptures set him forth to us as Mediator, Joh. 1.14. The Word, that is, the
Second Person was made flesh; there is Jesus becoming Immanuel, God with us;
and 1 Timothy 3.16. God was manifest in the flesh, etc. and Luke 1.31, 32. And
behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call
his name Jesus. And Romans 1.3, 4. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
which was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and declared to be
the Son of God with power, etc. So as you see he was constituted Godman; The
Word was made flesh. Now being thus constituted God-man, he had his nearness to
God the Father, and his nearness to the Sons of men, for whom he came and
appeared in the flesh. You may see his nearness unto the Father, Zech. 13.7.
Awake O Sword against my Shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, says
the Lord of Hosts. So as Jesus Christ he is, and he was the fellow and the
companion of the Lord of Hosts. So Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, etc. Here you see he has his
nearness to the Father, and also his nearness to the Sons of men, for whom he
appeared in the Flesh, Heb. 2.14. For as much then as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
etc. and in Isaiah 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given,
etc. and Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy thing that shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God; he thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; there was his nearness to the Father, and he was born of the
Virgin, and so clothed with our flesh, and therein he was near a kin unto man,
and hence is he called Immanuel, that is, God with us; now as thus constituted,
did he undertake the work of his mediation, for thus he suffered, and thus he
satisfied, his sufferings hereby came to be satisfactory as he was God, he died
as man, and he overcame death, and arose again from the Grave, by the power of
his Godhead.

Quest. But you will say this indeed is a great mystery, worthy of all
admiration, that the Eternal Son of God should become man, that he should be
God and Man, that there should be a union of the two natures in one Person, but
what is this to us, as a standing constant ground of rejoicing to us in all
saddening, sinking providence whatsoever?

Ans. I answer much every way, and this would be clear to you, should I enter
upon, and open to you the glory of his Person as thus constituted. The glorious
excellencies of Heaven that are shining in both natures, or upon his Person
under its constitution in the union of both natures, and there may be a greater
matter of rejoicing to our Souls in the exercise of faith in our contemplating
upon his personal glories. It may be a matter of greater rejoicing to our
Souls, than ever there was satisfaction to the heart and mind upon any object
whatsoever it did behold with a bodily eye; but I shall not go that way, nor
enter upon such a prolix discourse, but shall only give you some particulars
wherein there is a standing ground of rejoicing for us in Christ Jesus upon
this his personal constitution, as God-man to be a Mediator for us; and here,
First, We have dignity. Secondly, Tranquillity. Thirdly, Sanctity. Fourthly,
Stability. And Fifthly, Familiarity given to us, or brought in upon us.


1. Hereby is the nature of man raised unto unspeakable honor and glory, in
that Jesus Christ the Second Person has assumed our nature, and taken it into
union with his own divine nature in his Person, and therein does he now reign
upon the Throne in Heaven, at the right hand of God, herein is the nature of
man most unspeakably advanced and dignifyed. The nature of man was very low
before; Man was made of the earth, of a little red earth, man was before but a
contemptible Creature, but now what honor is put upon it, that Jesus Christ
has taken our nature, and united it unto the Divine nature, that nature that
was despised before, is now honored, honorable and worthy. It has glory and
dignity from the Lord Jesus put upon it, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44.
The body of man, or the nature of man it is both born, and it dies in
dishonor, ay, but it is raised in glory. The body of Man is a corruptible
body, it is a dying body. It has a sentence of death that hangs over it as soon
as ever it has a being; but now though it be sown in dishonor, yet it shall
be raised in glory; there is glory that waits upon the body of man, or upon
man's whole nature, Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like to his own glorious body, etc. So as there is unspeakable honor
that is given unto our nature, in that Christ Jesus has taken it so near unto
himself, and advanced it upon the Fathers Throne in Heaven; we are here under
the contempt and disgrace of men, but it matters not (Christians) they cannot
take away your glory. The glory of your nature is not laid in the breath of
men, but it is founded here in Christ Jesus's assumption of our nature, and
uniting it to the divine nature; and if indeed the enemies of the Lords people
could take our nature from Christ Jesus, then they might take away our glory,
and our honor; but he has inseparably and everlastingly united our nature
unto his divine nature, therefore our honor is such, as can never be taken
away; it is counted a great honor for an Ambassador to be sent forth in the
name of some great Prince to personate him in another Country, but my friends
what is it for Jesus Christ to assume our nature, and to personate man before
his Father in Heaven; this is a greater honor that is put upon us, than if God
had made man the Lord of all the Angels in Heaven, therefore let this satisfy
you under all the reproaches and contempts that you meet withal here in the
world by one and another, though despised, and though contemned here and there
by a few, yet your honor in the Lord, that abides.

2. In and upon the appearance of Jesus Christ as Mediator for us, there is a
full, firm and lasting peace made between God and us. Jesus Christ he came as a
Mediator between two to reconcile both, and make them one, and this he has
done by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. and 21. Jesus has reconciled God
and Man together, he has taken away the wrath that the law of God had to
denounce against man, he has slain the enmity of our natures, he has brought
these two enemies together, and made them one in his own mediatory hand, so as
now you may look unto God, and be at peace with him, you may see Heaven, and
all the powers of Heaven reconciled to you, Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified
by says we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and not only so,
v. 11. But we also Joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom we have
received the atonement: here is the blessing mentioned in the Text, I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my Salvation, but how must I
consider him? why, consider this Lord as Mediator, making peace through the
blood of his Cross, and then Christians you may Joy in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, because it is by him that you have received the atonement, Jesus
Christ has satisfied and reconciled God to you, he has appeased God, he has
brought over the heart of God to the sinner, that now he may take comfort and
encouragement in him, and go to him as to a Father in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.13,
14. But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were afar off are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, for he is our peace who has made both one, etc. Is not this a
matter of rejoicing for you, that now you may go unto God as your God, you may
look up to God, and see him reconciled to you, and see all the properties of
his nature looking toward you in a friendly way, that you may see God
overruling all providence and dispensations for your interest and advantage,
you may go and comfort your selves in your God, you may encourage your selves
in him, you may go and rejoice in the Lord as your God through the blood of the
Cross of Jesus your Mediator.

3. Hereby are our corrupt natures sanctified, and made holy unto God; Jesus
Christ becoming man, he has consecrated unto the Lord that part of humane
nature, that he came of, and did belong to, he has taken off our nature, and
he has offered it up unto the Lord, and so consecrated the whole lump that it
was taken out of; this was typed out of old by the first fruits that did
consecrate the rest, Levit. 2.1. Or of the Meat Offering; here you see was a
part taken and offered up unto the Lord, and the whole was hereby consecrated.
Now Jesus Christ he comes of that part of the world that was the Elect, and the
chosen of God, he did not come in General of all mankind, though in a general
way God has said, that all Nations are of one blood, yet Jesus Christ did not
come so promiscuously, and in the general, but he came of that particular part
of man that the Lord had chosen, and set apart for himself, and that is the
Elect of the world, and as for Reprobates, he came not of them, he was not of
that rank and number, as you may see, John 17.16. They are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world, and v. 19. For their sakes sanctify I my self,
that they also might be sanctified through the truth. For their sakes, that is,
for those that were the Chosen of God, and given to Jesus Christ by the Father,
as v. 6. I have manifested thy name unto the men, that thou gave me out of
the world; for their sakes I sanctify my self; he takes our nature and offers
it to God, and consecrates it as a part, or the first fruits of the whole,
whereby the whole nature of the Elect of God are dedicated to the Lord, and
sanctified and made holy, or way is made for the sanctifying of it; I may
allude unto that Scripture, in Romans 11.16. For if the first fruit be holy, the
lump is also holy, and if the root be holy, so are the branches; I know this is
not the meaning of this Text, I only allude to it; as the Apostle says in that
case, so I say in this case, if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also
holy, and if Jesus the root be holy, then all the branches are holy, to be
under a peculiar and special consecration to the Lord; now here Christian, is a
ground of rejoicing for thee, thou art born a child of wrath, and thy nature is
a sinful nature, and there is by nature nothing but sin dwelling in thee; ay,
but Jesus Christ he has taken thy nature, he has worn it, and he has
consecrated thy nature to God, and made way for the sanctifying of it. So as
now way is made through Jesus Christ's appearing in our flesh for the
consecrating of thee unto God, and making of thee holy, so as thou may
rejoice, notwithstanding the remains of sin that are in thee, notwithstanding
all the impurity and defilements that are to be found in thy heart; thou have a
stained, polluted Soul, thou look into thy self, and thou see thy self so
spotted and defiled, that thou art ashamed of thy self; well, but look upon
Jesus Christ, and consider how thy nature is sanctified in him, he sits upon
the Throne all holy, and thy nature that he did assume is holy; why Christian,
there is holiness in the root for thee, there is holiness in Christ thy head
for thee, and because he is holy, thou also shall be holy; because he has
sanctified thy nature, therefore thy nature shall be sanctified, for your
sakes, says he, I sanctify my self, that you also may be holy; I am holy, and
you also shall be holy, Analogically, that is, in some proportion, in your
degree and measure you shall be in a suitableness to my holiness, that you may
be made meet for me. Says the Apostle in 1 These. 5.23. The very God of peace
sanctify you wholly; ay, it shall be so, because Jesus Christ has sanctified
himself, and your nature is sanctified in him, and therefore you shall in due
time be made holy, and therefore rejoice; though defiled and sinful for a
season, yet you shall be made holy, and without spot, and blameless. Christ
has made way for this.

Fourthly, Hereby way is made for our stability, for an eternity and perpetuity
for us in grace and in glory. Jesus Christ he is a Mediator for ever; he has
taken our Nature to wear it for ever; he will never lay aside our Nature again,
no not to eternity; well therefore, we who are consecrated by him, and
reconciled to God by the blood of his Cross, have a perpetual standing in his
Grace, and shall have an everlasting abiding in that state of Glory unto which
we shall be advanced by him, and through him; all Enemies cannot unthrone
Christ; Ages cannot remove Christ off from his Throne in Heaven, but there he
is, and there he shall ever Rule and Sit. Now because he Sits there, thence is
your state in Grace sure: Why if he keep our Nature in conjunction with his own
Divine Nature, then he abides always full and powerful in reference unto the
Concerns that he is to manage, and the work that he is to do for you, full of
strength, and powerful therein, able to make all effectual; he Sits there in
Heaven to that end. This makes him so much concerned about the bringing in, and
gathering home of those that he did appear for in our flesh, Joh. 10.16. See
how Christ does concern himself for all those for whom he was a Mediator. There
are others, says he, that are not of this fold. I have some among the Jews and
among the Gentiles; I have some of all Nations, these I must gather home:
Christ will not lose any: And those that are brought home, he will maintain in
his Grace, because he is an ever-living, and an everlasting Mediator, and a
powerful Mediator: Why, under all your temptations (Christians) in your way,
that you meet withal to cast away your confidence, and to renounce your hope
in the Grace of God: Do you glory and triumph in Christ Jesus that is our
standing Mediator in Heaven; comfort your selves in him; for as long as he
abides in our Nature, he will concern himself for us; and as he has his Eye
always upon the Glory of God, so upon the good of sinners; and being a
Mediator, he is carried on with unbiassed ends, and aims to act impartially and
indifferently between both Parties; therefore whilst Jesus Christ is Mediator,
your state in Grace is certain: whilst Jesus Christ has God's Glory to care
for, your Salvation is sure; for while he concerns himself for the Glory of God
he must concern himself for the Salvation of his People. These two Interests
are made one by Jesus Christ the Mediator. And then,

Fifthly, In the 5th and last place; Hereby we have familiarity and communion
with God. Jesus Christ having as Mediator made peace for us; now behold he lets
Believers into a comfortable enjoyment of God. Now we may look toward Heaven,
and see God the Father, in the face of Jesus Christ. He therefore that has
seen the Son (says Christ) has seen the Father also, Joh. 14.9. What, Do you
say, Show us the Father? What, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have
thou not known me? Do you not know that I have reconciled both together, and
made way for communion, that you now, in and through me, may converse with the
Father as your God and Father. Jesus as our Mediator has given us boldness
with God, and let us into the enjoyment of communion with God, and has given
us blessed familiarity with God that now we shall enjoy him in a Gospel way
here, and and have certain hopes of enjoying of him in a glorious way in
Heaven, ever to be in his presence, and to behold his glory; all this comes in
by Jesus Christ the Mediator; and by the way, there is no state and condition
into which a Soul may be brought while he is under Grace on this side Heaven,
but in that state and condition he may hold fellowship and communion with God.
The three Children did so in the fiery Furnace. Daniel did so in the Lion's
Den. Jonah did so in the Whale's belly, when he went down into the great deep,
yet there he enjoyed communion with God. So as whatsoever your discouragements
be here in the flesh, yet glory in this, that having peace with God through the
blood of Jesus, you may go to him and say, Father: You may say, My Lord, and my
God. You may converse with him in the way of the Gospel that is consecrated for
us to hold and enjoy fellowship with him in; and now Christians, what a ground
of rejoicing is here! Friends they die. A bosom, acquaintance in the flesh is
taken from thee; they die from thee, and their places know them no more; but
here is Jesus, he ever abides upon the Throne, clearing the way of communion
between God and thee: So that God is always thy friend, always in
reconciliation to thee; always ready to make known himself, and to impart of
his Love and Grace to thee. Here is an abiding ground of joy for us in Christ
Jesus, if we consider him as he is a glorious Person in his Mediatory
Constitution.

SERMON II.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.


THE words have been opened unto you, and we have given you this Proposition
from them; Doct. That there is enough in Christ alone for the Soul that is
interested in him, to rejoice in, whatsoever his case and condition is.

You need no more than Jesus to make you blessed upon Earth; and there is
enough in Jesus to make you blessed for ever in Heaven; there is enough in
Jesus to make you happy in time, and enough in Jesus to make you happy to
eternity.

Now here for the Direction of your Faith in looking up to, and in dealing with
Christ in a dark or low condition, we proposed to consider,

First, What Jesus Christ is: And here we told you, that

1. In the first place, He is glorious in his Person. I now proceed.

2. As he is glorious in his Person, so he is gracious in his Nature, full of
grace, full of kindness, full of compassion both unto Saints and unto Sinners:
He might have ap^eared glorious in his Person, and not gracious in his Nature.
He might have appeared altogether terrible; a glorious Person, and yet
surrounded with terrible Majesty; but Jesus Christ is as gracious in his
Nature, as he is glorious in his Person; he is full of compassion unto the Sons
of men; there is no harshness, there is no bitterness in Christ Jesus; there is
nothing in him (my friends) that will discourage you; if you search him never
so narrowly, and if you look him through, there is nothing in him to discourage
you, but he is full of love, and full of all encouragement: I do not mean that
he is full of love only as he is God absolutely considered. The Apostle says,
That God is Love; he speaks it of God the Father; and so as Christ Jesus is God
equal with the Father in the Divine Nature, it is applicable to the Second
Person; but that is not all, but he is full of grace in his Nature, as he is
clothed with our flesh, and his Love it is always an encouraging Love; it is
always a heart-casing Love; it is always a Soul-satisfying Love. You cannot
find such an Object upon Earth, nor such an Object in Heaven, as Jesus Christ
is; that is, so full of compassion, and so full of grace as he is; and the
greatness of his Love as a ground of Joy unto the believing Soul in all
conditions, is such as First, Does break through, and conquer all opposings.
Secondly, It heightens under all our sorrows: And Thirdly, It abides unmixed in
all seasons.


First, His Love is such, and so great, that it breaks through all opposings
and forbiddings. Though there is nothing in Christ to discourage our Love to
him, yet I must tell you, that there is enough in us to discourage Christ's
Love to us; and indeed there is nothing else in us, but that which may forbid
the Love of Jesus Christ dealing with us: Now, whatsoever are the matters of
discouragement in us, the Love of Jesus breaks through them all; it sticks at
nothing: Let the heart be never so vile, let the sinner in himself be never so
loathsome; let his ways be never so contrary; let the principles upon which he
acts be never so averse, the Love of Jesus Christ breaks through all. What is
the state of a sinner when Christ Jesus comes to visit him? a vile, loathsome,
filthy abominable state: You have it set out in the 16th of Ezekiel, by all
manner of strange expressions, that shows the sinner is in a very loathsome
state; in the 5th and 6th verses; Thou layest in thy blood, says he, and none
Eye pitied thee. One casts his Eye upon thee, and says, There is a loathsome
Object, I will have nothing to do with him; another comes by, and casts his
Eye, There is a loathsome Creature, Who would come near such a one? Thou were
cast out, says he, to the loathing of thy person, but says Jesus, I passed by
thee, and it was a time of love. And in the 10th of Luke you may see it set out
in a Parable of the Samaritan; one passed by a poor Creature that lay in his
blood, and would have nothing to do with him; and another passes by, and would
have nothing to do with him; but Jesus the good Samaritan he passes by, and he
pities him, and binds up his wounds, and heals him. You may see what
forbiddings this Love of Christ marches through, Titus 3 3. For we our selves
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceivers, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in malice, hateful, and hating one another. Good Lord! one
would think, is it possible that such a Soul as this should be brought home,
and loved by Jesus Christ, that is in such a state, and have such a heart, and
walks in such ways? But, says the Apostle, v. 4. After that the kindness and
love of God our Savior appeared, not by works of righteousness, which we have
done, but accoridng to his mercy he saved us, etc. And 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were
some of you, but ye are washed, etc. Jesus, he loves you notwithstanding this,
and continues to love you. Nay (my Friends) this is not all, but his love is
such as does not only march through great opposings and forbiddings before
grace, but high discouragements after grace; Why, what is the walk of the Soul
after grace? Is it not very crooked, and very perverse? Does not he fall short
of the Rule? Does not he offend God in every thing he does? Is there not a
great deal of unbelief? Is there not a great deal of pride, a great deal of
carnality, and impatience, and passion, in your hearts after grace? Do not you
stumble and fall in the Christian walk every day? violate the Covenant of your
gracestate? break the Commandments of God? and yet notwithstanding all, be
continues to love you; in the 80th Psalm. v. 30.31. Supposing, says God there,
that my Children, my Redeemed Ones, that I have set my love upon, and visited
with my grace, that they will forsake my Law, and walk out of the way of my
Commandments, that I have called them to walk in and charged them to abide in:
Now the Love of Jesus Christ keeps up through all; therefore says the Apostle,
Neither life, nor death, etc. shall separate us from the love of Christ, Romans
8.38. The life of a Believer after grace is full of provocation; and it may be,
he continues to provoke God as long as he lives: There are provocations and
unkindnesses in his way to the Lord all his life long, till he come to the end
of his days; and yet says the Apostle, Life shall not separate. Now this is a
great ground of rejoicing, that thou may look unto thy Jesus, and see him
always loving of thee: Thy ways are very uneven and unconstant; and thou
can not keep in so good a frame as thou would do, yet still Jesus loves
thee: thou art full of wanderings, still Jesus loves thee; why, here is a love
that marches through all opposings.

Secondly, It is a Love that heightens under all our sorrows; I mean as to the
communications and dispenses of it, or the actual and saving discoveries of it
unto the Believer; it heightens under all our sorrows, that the greater our
troubles are, the more he loves; and the more pitiful our state is, the more
compassionate he is; he sees a Believer it may be, lying under great distresses
of body, or in great Agonies of spirit; why, this draws out his love, he loves
thee more, he is the more pitiful, and the more compassionate to thee, as he
sees that thy state is a sorrowful state, and thy condition a troubled
condition; and indeed the Believer never has such discoveries and evidences of
the love and kindness of God to him, as when he is in a low condition. Jesus
Christ, he did come, you know, into a wilderness, to walk with Israel; And let
their troubles be never so many, Jesus Christ would not leave them; but the
greater their troubles were, the more was his love discovered, and the more did
his faithfulness to them appear; and they never had such an eminent and signal
appearances of God with them, as when they were in their Wilderness Travels.
Jacob a holy man, never had so much of God, nor never had such a sight of God,
as when he was in a low condition, Genesis 28.15. Behold I am with thee, and I
will keep thee in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again to
this Land, and will not leave thee till I have done what I have spoken to thee
of. And Genesis 31.42. Here the good man was in a great strait; he was afraid that
he should be cut off; Ay but says he, The Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, he it was that rebuked thee yesternight. He did charge thee that thou
should speak no hurt, no evil unto me. And when Israel, Exodus 3. came into a
groaning captivity and bondage; when their bondage grew very great and
unsufferable, then did the Lord wonderfully discover himself, v. 7. And the
Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt,
and have heard their cry, by reason of their Taskmasters, and am come down to
deliver them, etc. And Psa. 34.16. The Eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and his Ears are open to their cry. Here is a supposition of a condition that
the Soul is in, or may be brought into, that makes it groan and cry; Well, for
your comfort know, that then in a special manner is the Eye of the Lord upon
you, and his Ear open to you. And Psalm. 56.18. Thou tellest my wanderings, etc.
Thou tellest my flights; so some read it. I have never an enemy to pursue me
but the Lord takes notice of it, and sees whither the enemy hunts me and
drives me; he takes notice of the fury of the oppressor that comes out against
me: Thou tellest my wanderings, and put my tears in thy bottle. Every tear
in a sorrowful condition Jesus Christ bottles up; he keeps it in remembrance;
God's Peoples highest visits of favor and grace; their choicest experiences,
and the most comfortable manifestations that they have of God, have been when
they have been in a low condition. In prosperity, there God many times lets the
Soul walk more at liberty; ay, and he has less of God in prosperity then in
adversity; there he is left to walk by his own light (as I may so say) and he
bears up himself more upon his own comforts, he stands then (as it were) more
upon his own legs, but in a weak condition, and in an afflicted state, in a
time of trouble, then is the Lord present, discovering himself more fully to
him; and hence it is that the Saints have had their highest Joys in the prison,
and have been made to sing in the flames. They have commended the sharpest
distress that ever they were brought into in this world to be such as could
never separate Christ and their Souls: the love of your Jesus is so great, that
it will leap into a furnace to keep you company. It is such as it will come
into any strait and hazard to support and bear up your spirits; Lo, this is
your friend and your comforter, that you have, O believer, to rejoice in: Jesus
his heart is always toward you, and the love of his heart it heightens under
all your sorrows; let darkness grow upon your state, the light of his love will
shine through it, and give you a light that you shall see your way: let your
disconsolations be never so many in the creature, the love of Jesus Christ will
countervail all, for if the creature be taken away, Jesus Christ will be the
more, and in the want of all things he will discover himself so, as shall
answer all to your Souls.

3. As his love is such as heightens under all our sorrows, so it abides
unmixed in all seasons; as it is a love that cannot be diverted, so it is a
love that cannot be adulterated, but it is always a sweet, always a pure
love; a heart easing, a soul pacifying, a soul rejoicing love, none can throw
any bitterness into the love of Jesus, but it is always a pure, clear,
Crystal love, that has no mixture in it; it is not thus with the love of
friends; the sweetest, the best, the firmest friends that ever man had upon
earth, there is some mixture in their love: They will sometimes rejoice your
hearts, and sometimes they will make your hearts sad: loving friends may
sometimes frown, and be churlish and unkind, and you may go to them with your
hopes and expectations, and be disappointed; you may soon weary out their love,
and they may discover such a mixture, that their hearts seem sometimes to be
alienated. But it is not thus with the Lord Jesus, but his love is always a
pure, clear, soul satisfying love, there is light in him, and no darkness at
all, there is sweetness in him, and there is no bitterness at all. There are
(as I said before) things that may encourage you, but there is nothing that
will discourage you in Jesus, no not unto eternity: now believer this is thy
friend, is not this a brother born for adversity, look amongst all thy friends
upon earth, have thou such a one? look into Heaven, are any of the Angels able
to do for thee as Jesus can? Who is there in Heaven or Earth that thy Soul can
desire in comparison with Jesus? he is glorious in his person, and he is
gracious in his nature.

3. Jesus is the exhibiter, revealer, and unfolder of all the fullness of the
blessed and glorious Attributes of God in a salvation way; God is thy God in
and through Jesus Christ, and not otherwise, God absolutely in himself dwells
in light unaccessable, and is a consuming fire, we cannot make an approach to
God as he is absolutely considered, and live; but now in and through Jesus
Christ, God he is a God that may be spoken withal, and all his attributes, and
the properties of his nature are savingly enjoyable. There is a great deal of
the glory of God that was discovered in the works of Creation, there was the
glory of his wisdom, and the glory of his power, of his goodness, and of his
sovereignty, these were discovered in the works of Creation, but as so
exhibited they afre not saving, neither do they afford soul-saving relief to
us, absolutely considered in that primary exhibition that was made of them in
the works of Creation; but now, in and through Jesus Christ, there all the
attributes of God they are saving, all the attributes of God they are
comfortable and refreshing. Adam when he was out of Christ, could not think of
God, but it was a terror to him: therefore as soon as ever he had sinned, fear
entered into his Spirit, and he hid himself; why? says the Lord to Adam, what
is the matter? O! says he, I was afraid, and I hid my self? Why so? O to
consider the greatness of God, and the wisdom of God that was discovered in the
Creation, and the power of God that was discovered in the Creation, and the
sovereignty and dominion of God that was discovered in the Creation: and to
think that he had no interest in this God, that he had provoked and grieved
him, this was a terror to him, and says Adam, Lord I was afraid, and I hid my
self, ay, and all the attributes of God are enough to strike terror into the
Soul that has no interest in Jesus, considered out of Jesus, and they are not
relieving. But now in and through Jesus, all Gods attributes they are
reconciled to, and engaged for the believer, and he may see that which may
comfort him, and that which may satisfy him, 1 Cor. 1.24. But unto them which
are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of
God, as if he had said, all the power of God that is saving, it is in and
through Christ Jesus, and all the wisdom of God that is saving, is in and
through Christ Jesus, therefore in him it is said are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Now do but consider the attributes of God
apart, and you will find, that they are no way relieving out of Christ, but in
Christ they are full of Grace, and they are all exhibited and revealed through
him as saving.

1. As to the Justice of God. Why, the justice of God out of Christ, it is
terrible, to consider that God is a most exact, severe righteous God, that will
give every one their due, and will mete out a portion to every one according to
his desert. This is most terrible, to consider God out of Christ, and what may
we expect, but as Ps. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup:
This will be the portion of all those that God has to do withal out of Christ.
But now in Christ Jesus this attribute is attoned, and all that wrath, and that
justice, and that vengeance had to execute, is poured out upon Christ Jesus;
justice dealt with the Lord Jesus in its utmost severity, and received
satisfaction in him and from him; so as now says the Apostle in 1 John 1.9. If
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, etc. and
so Romans 3.26. To declare I say at this time his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus: Why, justice has
nothing to say against thee, but it speaks all for thee, because God is a
righteous God, therefore he will love thee: and therefore he will bless thee
with all blessings, because he has received full satisfaction from Jesus
Christ thy surety.

2. Consider secondly, the power of God out of Christ, and it is enough to fill
thy heart with terror, Ezekiel. 26.14. Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be
strong in the day that I shall deal with thee says the Lord, etc. Have thou a
strength to grapple with me, or can thou set thy foot against me? no verily,
what are all the nations of the earth? they are less then a crawling worm
before the foot of the great God, thou can not stand before it. But now in
Christ Jesus this Attribute is attoned too, and the mighty power of God is
engaged to carry on, and to manage a salvation design in thee. Therefore says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.19. That ye may know what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward who believe according to the working of his mighty power: So
as let the power of God be never so great, it is a power engaged for thee to
manage and carry on salvation work in thee: whatever be the opposings that it
meet with, either from thy own heart or from others.

Thirdly, If you consider the Attribute of God's Wisdom; It is not relieving
out of Christ. That God is so infinitely wise, and so deep, the Soul may think
all this is against me, and what is he now doing, but contriving new torments,
and new Hells, that are more fierce and exquisite for me? and surely there will
be no end of these torments. But now in Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God is
employed in such a design of Salvation, that the Angels are said to pry into
it; they are astonished at the design that is brought to light by the Wisdom of
God.

Fourthly, If you consider the Patience of God out of Christ; it is no way
relieving. For, what will it advantage a Soul that God does bear with it a
while, when under all, there is wrath treasuring up for him against the day of
wrath. Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction; So as the Patience of God is exercised in bearing with a sinner a
little while till he greaten his sins: But God will come in upon him
notwithstanding all, though he bear a little while. But now in Christ Jesus the
Patience of God is reconciled, 2 Pet. 3.9. For the Lord is not slack concerning
his Promises, as some men count slackness, but is long-suffering to usward,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.
Why, in Christ Jesus God he is patient, and God he glorifies his Patience, that
he might be known to be gracious.

Fifthly, The Love and Goodness of God out of Christ is not relieving; for it is
at an end. The Soul may think, well, his love is at an end, he has no more
love for me; I am his enemy. Man, when he had sinned, must turn out of
Paradise; he must pack away and be gone. See my face no more, says God. But now
in Christ Jesus is the Love of God revealed, and the Goodness and Mercy of God
revealed.

Sixthly, The Immensity and Benignity of God, out of Christ, is not relieving.
What though God may give thee a considerable portion in the world, he may fill
thine hands with wealth, and thy house with treasure, and fill thy chest with
store. But all this is given in anger and displeasure; there is nothing of love
in it; and thy fullness is but fitting thee for the slaughter. There is the
Curse of God upon all thy store and plenty; this will not at all avail thee.
But now in Christ Jesus the Immensity and Benignity of God is reconciled, and
how does it speak out love and grace! God is an Immense God, and he gives out
according to his own Immensity. And what then are the gifts of his Love and
Grace! they are such as cannot be weighed; they are such as cannot be measured;
there is a height, and depth, and length, and breadth, in all his goodness that
cannot be fathomed. And all this he is to the Soul through Christ. And

Seventhly, If you consider his Eternity out of Christ; it is no way relieving.
That God is my enemy, says the Soul, and is an everlasting God; he will be my
enemy for ever; and all that is in God will be engaged against me for ever; his
Justice, his Wisdom, and his Power, and all his Attributes will be engaged
against me for ever: But now in Christ Jesus, the Eternity of God is matter of
great comfort to thee, because he is an Eternal God, being thy God, he will be
thy God for ever, thy dwelling place for ever, and thy portion for ever: he
will never depart from thee: he will never leave thee: he will never cease to
be what he has promised to be, because he is an everlasting God; and thus you
may run over all the Attributes of God, the glory and the fullness of them is
exhibited and unfolded, published and revealed by Christ Jesus unto us; and
hence it is that in Scripture ordinarily there is no great mention made of the
mercy and kindness of God to sinners, but through and with respect to Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 1.3. Who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. And hence is it said, that we with open face behold the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 3.8. and 2 Cor. 4.6. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness has shined in our hearts to give
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; and
hence is it that Jesus Christ is said to be the brightness of the Fathers
glory, and the express image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. So as here is another
thing that is an abiding ground of joy and rejoicing for us in Christ Jesus, he
is the exhibiter, revealer, and unfolder of the fullness of all the blessed and
glorious properties of Gods nature in a salvation way: hence when God comes to
enter into Covenant with a believer, he does not enter into Covenant with him
absolutely, but in and through Christ Jesus; and hence is it that all the
promises of the Covenant that are Gods gifts of grace to us, they are yea, and
Amen, in Christ Jesus; now do but consider this, and you may see that Christ is
one your Souls may take comfort in; consider the glory of his Person as he is
Mediator, and consider the graciousness of his nature as he is full of love,
and consider how he is the exhibiter and unfolder of the fullness of all the
blessed and glorious Attributes of God in a saving way: And whatsoever
discouragement Christian thou have here below, look up to Jesus, and thou
may see encouragement; have you men that are engaged against you? look up to
Jesus, and you may see God in him engaged to be your God, Gods power engaged
for you, Gods mercy, Gods name, and Gods glory, all engaged for you. Thus as to
the first particular, what Jesus Christ is.

2. We shall now proceed to speak something to the second, and that is what
this Jesus has; you have seen what he is, we will now consider what he has;
and there are but two things that I shall glance upon under this head, that may
be relieving to us in our looking up to Jesus.

1. He has an irresistible power.

2. He has an unexhaustible treasure.

1. Jesus in whom we should rejoice at all times, has an irresistible power. A
power over all flesh, over all Creatures, over good Angels, and over bad
Angels; a power over men, a power over every creature in the whole Creation of
God, Col. 2.1. Ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principalities
and powers, and Mat. 28.18. All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth;
Jesus Christ has an absolute dominion over all Creatures as he is God, and
this is a dominion that he received, not by gift from the Father, but he has
it from the right of Creation, as he is with the Father God over all blessed
for evermore. But there is a delegated power as I may so say, a power that is
committed to Christ Jesus by special grant from the Father as he is Mediator
over the whole Creation of God, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Far above all principalities and
powers, and might, and dominions and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but in that which is to come, and has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be the head over all things to the Church. Now Phil. 2.9, 10,
11. there you may see that he received this power from God, Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, etc.
and 1 Cor. 15.27. For he has put all things under his feet, and Psalm. 8.6.
Thou have made him to have dominion over the works of thine bands. Christ has
an universal power as Mediator over the whole Creation of God: Now that which
is for thy comfort in it, is, in that this power is employed and improved;

1. For the overcoming of all thine enemies. And

2. For the overruling and filling up of all thy wants.

1. This great and universal power that Christ has received over all creatures
is improved and employed in the overcoming and binding of all enemies that are
against thee; Let thine enemies be never so strong, let the powers of men
engage against a poor Soul; Jesus Christ has a power greater then them all,
and will bind them at his pleasure, and will take the prey out of the hands of
the terrible; let Satan the Prince of darkness put in against a poor creature,
he shall never be able to take him, and carry him Captive; for Jesus Christ
will secure him, because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the
world, 1 John 4.4. He is greater than the Prince, the God of the world; now the
great power that Jesus Christ has, is a power for you; Jesus Christ he is
invested with this power as he is Mediator. that he might over rule all the
enemies of your state, and vanquish them at his pleasure, so as let them for a
while tyrannize and vaunt it; yet they shall never be able to carry one poor
believer to Hell, nor out of the dominion and power of Gods Grace; for all this
power that Jesus has, he is entrusted withal for your security, And

2. For the overruling of all your wants in your state. Jesus Christ has a
power, and all power, that he might supply you in all your occasions and
necessities; it may be the poor believer is discouraged, he sees but a little
meal in the barrel, but a little Oil in the cruise, he sees his stock begins to
wast, he thinks he spends upon the principal, and it will soon be all done, and
how shall he live then; the water in the pitcher is almost out, and the cake
that is baked is almost eaten, and the Soul begins to think now it must die;
ay, but Christian, this Jesus has an all-power to answer all thy wants; let
thy necessities be never so many, do but consider who it is that thou have to
deal with, it is he that has the fullness of the earth in his own possession,
Psalm. 50.12. If I were hungry, I would not tell it thee for the world is mine,
and the fullness thereof, and Psalm. 89.11. The Heavens are thine, the Earth also
is thine, and as for the world and the fullness thereof thou have founded it?
whose is the world I pray? In whose hand is it? is it not in the hand of your
Jesus? Has not a dominion over all creatures for you? his mediatory power is
for you, to be improved for you, and to be employed for you, so as let your
necessities be what they will, they cannot be greater then your Jesus has a
supply by him for, and is able to answer. You know the thousands of Israel,
were called to live 40 years in a howling wilderness, where there was no
plowing nor sowing, and yet behold they were always supplied. They did but cry
unto the Lord, when they seemed to be in want, and the Lord gave them bread
from Heaven, and flesh from Heaven, and he gave them water out of the Rocks,
and the fullness of the earth is still in his hand, Elijah was in a low
condition, and did not know what to do, and God commands a Raven to feed him,
and God commanded an Angel to be his Servant. All the Creatures they are in
covenant for your good; I have made says the Lord a Covenant for you with the
Beasts of the field, and with the Fowls of heaven, and with all Creatures. And
if God does but command the quails to come, and feed the people of Israel, they
shall do it; And if God do but command the Ravens to seed the Prophet, he shall
not want; says Christ, Mat. 16.9. do ye not yet understand, neither remember
the 5 loaves of the 5 thousand, and how many Baskets ye took up? They were in a
little strait, and reasoned among themselves: Why, says Christ, have you
forgotten how I fed so many thousand with 5 loaves, and 2 fishes? and my arm is
not shortened, my power is not lessened. It is an absolute power, an
uncontrollable dominion that I have; therefore fear not Soul, do not weep over
your empty bottle, do not weep over your lost estate, do not weep over your
past comforts, but look up to the, fullness of Jesus; he has enough for your
relief, he can command of the fullness of the earth into your condition, and
give it you by what hand he pleases. And as he has an uncontrollable power
that can rebuke all your enemies, and make a supply to you in all your wants;
So,

2. He has an unexhaustible treasure; It has pleased the Father to put his
all-fulness of Grace into him, and make him Lord of all that Grace that is to
be dispensed to believers in that known place, Col. 1.19. It has pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell. All Grace it comes from Christ, it
is placed in him as the Fountain, and he has the fullness of all Grace for your
relief;

1. Unto vital influences: And,

2. Unto actual assistance.

1. He has a fullness of all Grace unto vital influences; Therefore the second
Adam was made a quickening Spirit, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15.45. he
has received life that he might give it unto others; the Son of God is said to
raise those that were dead, he is a living spring of Grace that sends vital
Grace into our hearts. It is he that does implant vital principles of Faith, of
love, of patience, and of new obedience, and makes us new creatures to God, and
causes us to live before him; and this may be matter of encouragement to those
that are yet dead in trespasses and sins, those that are yet void of Grace, and
destitute of spiritual life; why Sirs, Jesus Christ is a living Spring; Jesus
Christ is a quickening Spirit, and he gives life to those that are dead, he is
furnished with life by the Father to give life to dead Souls; let the dead
sinner then hope in Jesus, and let him wait upon Jesus, he that has commanded
those that have been dead to live, can also command thy dead Soul to live, he
has still life-power in him, and life-grace in him. And,

2. He has all grace for actual assistance; he is the true Olive, that empties
of his golden Oil into the hearts of believers; hence Christ says, John 15.5.
Without me you can do nothing. I am the Vine, and ye are the branches, or I am
the Root, and ye are the Branches. Why, Jesus Christ he is an influential root;
he is a root full of sap: and full of nourishment, and full of moisture, that
he does convey to believers for their spiritual growth and improvement; by his
strength it is that we are able to stand in a day of temptation, by his
strength it is that we are able to manage spiritual duties. O alas, a little
duty would be too great for us, were it not for the strength of Christ Jesus,
and a little of the grace of Christ Jesus, will make a Soul wonderfully strong,
that he shall be able to do even to amazement, to bear and to suffer to
astonishment. A little of the Grace of Christ, O now patient will it make the
Soul under great afflictions, and how will it strengthen a poor weak believer
to hold on in the face of all difficulties! he shall be able to hold pace not
only with the Footmen, but with the Horsemen, by the grace of Christ are we
sweetly, swiftly, and joyfully carried on in the ways of new obedience, hence
is it that we are oft-times commended unto the grace of the Lord Jesus in
diverse Epistles; I commend you says the Apostle to the grace of the Lord
Jesus, and the grace of the Lord Jesus be with you; and indeed there needs no
more, because there is enough for our supply at all times, and therefore when
we are poor and weak, and empty, and low in our selves, we should look up to
Jesus, Jesus is always full, we know not how to go through such a duty, nor
how to manage such a condition, we have not grace for it, and we think we shall
sink and fail under discouragements; why Christian, if indeed thou had no
more then what thou have in thy self, thou might fear this, but keep thine
Eye upon Jesus, he is full, and filled for the supply of thee, and he will
communicate according to thy necessities, we may therefore at all times, and
upon all occasions wait upon him.

SERMON III.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my
Salvation.


WE are showing you from this Scripture what a constant ground of joy and
rejoicing there is in Jesus Christ for the believing Soul, at all times, and in
all conditions; as to what Christ is, and as to what Christ has, we spoke the
last day, and shall now proceed unto the third particular proposed to be
considered.

3. And that is, what Jesus Christ will do, and is a doing for the believing
Soul that may be a ground of comfort and joy to him in all his heart saddening
conditions and tribulations in this world.

And first, Jesus Christ appears as an Advocate in Heaven at the right hand of
God for all believers, answering and silencing all accusations and charges
brought in against them, whereby they are continued in that justified peace
state, that in their first coming over to God they were stated in. There are
many failings and provocations in a Christians way and walking with God. The
remains of sin that yet abide in them, they will be rising up and putting forth
into the life and life-acts of a Christian. But Jesus Christ as his Advocate in
Heaven ever stands up before God to see the peace of a Christians state kept:
Satan that old accuser of the Brethren, he is daily observing a Christians
walking and viewing a Christians steps, to see if he can gather up any thing in
his life to improve it, and carry it unto God against him, and believe it
friends, he will not better your case as he represents it unto God, he will not
lessen your fault, but he will greaten it, and make it worse than it is; he is
called 1 Pet. 5.8. The adversary of believers. The word that we translate
adversary, some read it a Court adversary, one that puts in something against
you in the Court of Heaven, but I would rather read the word thus, one that
will charge beyond truth, one that will go beyond the bounds of truth in the
charges and accusations that he brings in, for the word in the Original does
import so much one that acts against all rules of justice in the plea's that he
shall put in, or the charges that he shall deliver against a Christians state
in the Court of Heaven, Rev. 12.10. he is there called the Accuser of the
Brethren, which accused them before God day and night, he is the old Accuser
and Traducer of the Saints at the Bar of Gods justice. Now Jesus Christ he
always stands up at the right hand of God, there to appear as an Advocate on
the believers account, suing out on the account of his blood, new pardons for
their renewed transgressions, or the continuance of justification and of
pardons upon their state, so as nothing may be heard in the Court of Heaven
against them; Jesus Christ stands up to see that a Christians peace with God be
not violated, and therefore he removes sin as fast as it appears, and he
answers the accusation as soon as it is made, and he silenceth the adversary as
soon as he comes, Romans 8.34. Who (says the Apostle) shall condemn? It is
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us: If sin appears, he will
remove it, and if Satan step in, he will silence him, he is there upon this
account, as an Advocate, or as an Attorney to answer for you, whenever your
name is called in Question; and therefore says the Apostle, 1 John 2.1. My
little Children, these things write I unto you, that you sin not, and if any
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; as
soon as ever an offense is committed, Christ steps up, and he pleads your case,
and he urges the value of his blood that was shed for the remission of sins,
that your peace with God, into which you were brought in your first coming over
to him, may be maintained; Now Christians do but consider this, and you will
find that it is a ground of joy and comfort in your present state. It may be
your outward peace is broken in upon; you have enemies that have disturbed you
as to your outward comforts, and as to your outward joy and settlement, you
have those that have incensed it, may be your intimate friends against you,
that now they stand aloof from you, well though it be so, yet your peace with
God, that abides, and Jesus Christ as your Advocate continues you in your
justified state before God, let the Devil do his utmost, he shall never incense
God against a believer, because Jesus Christ is an Advocate always at his
right hand, speaking for him, let him tell never such stories of a Christians
carriage and conversation unto the Lord, yet he shall never incense God against
him. You know that he did his utmost to incense God against Job, he told the
Lord fair stories of him, that there was no truth, no sincerity in him, and
that he served him but for the comforts of his state, and for the outward
advantages that he did enjoy, but Jesus Christ he saw the peace of Job kept, he
was his Advocate then so early, and he maintained Job in the love and favor of
God, and thus will he do for all believers, he will silence all accusations,
and remove all objections, and he will continue you in your peace state with
God; the virtue of Christ's death is a continued virtue, it is always
influential upon the heart of God for a Christian, the blood of Jesus is said
to be a pleading blood, Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then the
blood of Abel; It is a pleading blood, and it says, Father, Remember the
merits of the Sacrifice of my death, remember the satisfaction that thou have
received, and do thou continue to love, and continue to bless, and continue to
delight in, and to acknowledge these poor ones, though they fail, and though
they provoke thee. The believer it may be is so ashamed of himself upon an
overcome, that he has not one word to say for himself, he can give no reason
why a decree of justice should not come out against him, but the blood of
Jesus, that is always speaking, and always interceeding, whereby we are kept
in that justified peace-state with God, that in our first coming over to God we
are stated in; and this may satisfy the Christian under all the disquiets,
troubles, turmoils and unsettlements that he meets withal in this world.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is a powerful Intercessor in Heaven, daily urging the
merits of his Death, and improving the Interest that he has with God for the
completing of the work begun in the hearts of Believers, whereby they are
growing up to perfection. Jesus Christ is not only an Advocate with the Father,
silencing and answering all accusations and charges, and so maintaining of the
Believer in his justified Peace-state with God, but as a lively and living
Intercessor, he is always urging the merits of his Death, and improving the
Interest that he has with God, for the completing of the good work of his
Grace that is begun. Jesus Christ has not only a Fountain of all Grace for
your constant supply, but he acts the part of an Intercessor, and improves the
merits of his Death for the managing of the work of Grace that is begun in your
Souls. This you have, Heb. 9.24. Jesus Christ is gone into Heaven to appear in
the presence of God for us: And he is not there to appear only as an Advocate
or an Attorney, but he is there as a mighty Intercessor pleading with God in
the strength of the merits of his own Death, improving all his Interest with
the Father for you, Rev. 5.6. In the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb as it had
been slain, having seven Horns, etc. This Lamb is Christ. Now Christ Jesus he
is in Heaven, advanced upon a Throne for you: He is in the midst of the Throne
near unto his Father; and how does he sit? or how does he appear? Why, says he,
he appears as a Lamb as it had been slain; that is, Christ he bears the marks
of his Death before his Father upon the Throne; he is there to make a fresh
commemoration of his sufferings, presenting his bloody death, and his bloody
Sacrifice before his Father. As Jesus Christ after he was risen, said unto
Thomas, Come, says he, behold my wounds, and see the print of the Nails in my
hands, and in my feet. So Jesus Christ says as it were to his Father; Father,
behold these wounds! behold how I was pierced! behold how I was wounded for
these people! and, as one says, so many wounds, so many cries. Every wound has
a crying mouth that is daily pleading with God for the Believer. Jesus always
stands as a Lamb as it were slain, urging his death, urging his agony, urging
the greatness of his sufferings, when justice had him under the lash, when he
trod the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone, and he is urging the value of
his death for the succeeding of the work of grace begun, for the increasing of
strength, for the carrying on of your Souls unto perfection, Jesus Christ lives
upon the Throne, carrying on this work, and for this great end, he considers
the Christians state in all his dangers, and in all his weakness, and under all
his wants, and he is improving his death for more grace, and for an increase of
spiritual blessings, he knows your dangers by reason of your temptations in the
world, and he is praying for you there, and improving his interest with his
Father on that account, John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them
out of the world, but that thou should keep them from the evil; O Father
says he, they cannot stand against the temptations of the world, in their
trades and concerns in the world, not alone, let thy grace be sufficient, and
let thy strength be sufficient to secure them in their dangers, he sees that
your grace is yet but small, and will hardly stand against a small encounter,
and therefore he prays that it may be increased, as Luke 22.31, 32. I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: as if he had said I know that thy
grace will be sorely tried, and will meet with great opposition, but I have
prayed that it may not fail, he pleads with the Father for a more plentiful
effusion of the Spirit upon the hearts of his people, John 14.16, 17. And I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, etc. And when Jesus Christ
does pray for the Spirit, he prays that he may come in the royalties of his
office into your hearts, bringing in the fruits of grace, of peace, and of joy,
and of spiritual comfort. And thus he in Heaven looks after the work that is
begun, and upon that account he is called not only the Author but the Finisher
of our Faith, Heb. 12.2. The intercessory work of Christ is not only at your
first coming over to God, to give you favor with God, and peace with God but
it is a continued act over your whole state, till you come in glory, Heb. 7.25.
He is able to save to the uttermost, or to carry on salvation work, till he
has completed it; Why? because he ever lives to make intercession for us;
Jesus Christ by his intercession does deliver out of one straight to day, and
he will continue in the same work, and if a new straight does appear to morrow,
he will aid through that also, and he will go on so, until he has settled thy
Soul in a complete salvation state. Jesus Christ does daily exhibit, and urge,
and present the merits of his death, for the carrying on, and managing of the
work that he h^th begun. And here take notice by the way, that when we say
Jesus Christ continues to interceed; you must know, that he does not interceed
in a way of free Grace, as we do at the throne of Grace, he does not interceed
in a precarious way, as believers do, but he interceeds in the merit of his own
sufferings, his interceeding is an authoritative act, he does not only pray the
Father for Grace, and for acceptance for us, but he urges the Father upon the
account of the infinite price of his own sufferings that he gave him in, and so
does in an authoritative way challenge and demand the blessings of his
purchase, or of his death for the believer, he demands of his Father the Grace
that he pleads for, and he in his interceeding act, does will it into the Souls
of his People, I will Father, says he, that those that thou have given me, be
with me, where I am; and God the Father does always hear his Son, he never
denies his Son any Petition that he offers to him, John 11.42. And I knew,
says he, that thou hear me always, and Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I will
give thee the heathen for thine inheritance; says the Father, ask and you
shall have; so as Christ's intercession is a prevailing intercession, it is a
powerful intercession, it is always a speeding intercession; now Christians,
do but consider what a ground of joy and comfort this is for you in your
present low condition. It may be thou have met with many losses in thy outward
estate, it may be thou have met with many breakings there, and emptyings there,
that thy outward comforts they are many of them gone, and thou see others
very uncertain; ay, but here is Jesus Christ, he is interceeding with the
Father for more Grace, for more spiritual blessings, so as though thou art poor
in temporals, thou art growing rich in spirituals; though thou have but a
little of the Creature, yet thou have Grace that is thriving in thy heart, that
Christ will see shall be always increasing and growing; be not discouraged
therefore though thou have but a little Grace, and but a little strength; who
knows how much Grace the prayer of Christ may bring into thy heart, Christian;
who knows how much strength the prayer of Christ may bring in upon thy weak
condition to cloth thee with, be not therefore discouraged, though thou see
thy Bottle empty, and thy outward store growing low, seeing Jesus Christ is
carrying on the work of Grace in thy Soul, and enriching of thee with the high
and sacred blessings of Heaven; verily Sirs, if any of you had a Friend at
Court, that did always sit at the right hand of the King, and that had his
ear, and a grant of all his Petitions that he made to him, and if you knew that
he would be always moving the King on your behalf, and pleading with him for
some new favors, and new advantages, and places of ^rust and dignity, and the
like, how would your hearts rise in the remembrance thereof, and you would
promise your selves great things in a little while. Why, Jesus Christ he is
your friend in the Court of Heaven, that has always the Ear of God; and
verily it is not a vain notion; he is always interceeding with the Father on
your behalf, pleading for some new blessings, for some further discoveries of
his love, and manifestations of his favor for thy further proficiency in
grace, that thou may be carried on unto perfection. Jesus Christ is always
pleading this with his Father; so as though you be very low as to your outward
condition, yet you may rejoice that your spiritual comforts they are always
thriving; they are growing comforts; and your strength in grace is always an
increasing strength; Christ prays for it, and makes it so by his daily
Intercession.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ perfumes all your Spiritual Offerings; and presents them
unto God as grateful and acceptable, through whom they always remain as a
sweet memorial in his presence, notwithstanding the weakness and imperfection
of them as they come from us.

My Brethren, the liquor of our spiritual services has a tang of the Vessel
through which they pass; there is an ill favor in all our duties as they come
from us; there is a great deal of sin, a great deal of self, a great deal of
corruption that does mingle with them, and does defile them, and give them an
ill savor. But now Jesus Christ he always stands between God and us, and
receives our Offerings, and refines them, and purifies them, and cleanses
them, and perfumeth them, and so makes them a sweet odor, and then offers them
up unto God; and hence comes our Prayers to be prevalent; hence come they to be
heard, and to have returns of Grace made unto them. It was Jesus Christ that
made Noah's Sacrifice so sweet and odoriferous, Genesis 8.20, 21. And Noah builded
an Altar unto the Lord, and he took of every clean Beast, and of every clean
Fowl, and offered burnt Offerings on the Altar; and the Lord smelled a sweet
savor, etc. Christ Jesus was in his Sacrifice, and that made it pleasant, and
sweet, and fragrant before the Lord. This was typed out of Old by the High
Priests bearing the iniquities of the holy things of God's People away, Exodus
28.36, 37, 38. He shall bear their iniquities, that is, he shall bear them
away; he shall receive the iniquities of their holy things, and shall bear them
away, whereby all shall be hallowed; and this shall be, says he, upon his
forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord; or that they may be for an
acceptableness before the Lord: Why, Jesus Christ is the Gospel of this type;
he told his Church of old, that there must be a Priest and an Intercessor for
the sins of their holy things; now Jesus Christ is this Priest that takes the
iniquity of our holy things away; and so he presents our spiritual offerings
unto God refined and purified, that no dross, that no matter of sin may be
found in them when they are presented before God, Cant. 3.6. Here the Church of
God is spoken of, as coming out of a dry barren wilderness condition; now she
comes like pillars of smoke, she comes praying, she comes pleading with God;
now her prayers are like pillars of smoke, that is, say some, to set forth the
darkness, to set forth the corruption or weakness of them: Our prayers, as they
come from us, are more smoke than fire; they are more sin than grace; there is
a great deal of corruption upon them that does defile them, and that does
besmear them, they go up like pillars of smoke, but they are perfumed with
Myrrh and Frankincense, and with all Powders of the Merchant; that is, Jesus
Christ he sweetens them, he scents them, and makes them offerings of a sweet
smelling savor, as any thing is perfumed by sweet Spices, or odoriferous
Powders that are mixed with them: Or, Who is this that comes out of the
wilderness like pillars of smoke; that is, say some others, like the smoke of
Incense; the Prayers of God's People they do ascend like the smoke of Incense;
Jesus Christ he perfumes them with his Incense, and so they go up through Jesus
Christ as the smoke of Incense of old went up to Heaven; and this perfumes
them, as that which is perfumed by Frankincense and by Myrrh, and by sweet
Powders, and the like: It comes all to one reckoning in which sense soever we
take it. I^ sets forth thus much to us, that howsoever spotted, and howsoever
defiled, and howsoever tainted our duties are as they come from us. Jesus
Christ makes them sweet and savoury, and pleasant unto his Father, and presents
them as a sweet memorial unto him, Isa. 56.7. Even them will I bring to my holy
Mountain, and I will make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt
Offerings and Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar, etc. Why, the
Believer comes and brings his poor Petitions, but they are not fit for the
great God to read over, to consider, nor to look upon; but Jesus Christ he
examines them, and he mends the Petitions, and draws them up fit to be
presented to his Father, and delivers them with his own hand, and then they
come to be accepted. You are, says God unto his Church of old, a Kingdom of
Priests unto me, and an holy Nation, Exodus 19.6. Now this is applied unto the
Church in New Testament days, 1 Pet. 2.5. And in v. 9. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People: Ye are made
a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices. Ay, but will they be
accepted? yes, through Jesus Christ, acceptable to God by Christ Jesus. And
Rev. 1.6. He has made us Kings and Priests unto God the Father; that is, to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices; but this will not do alone; Jesus Christ he
stands to receive every Offering, and it passes through his refining and
cleansing hand, and his perfuming Incense, and so it comes unto God, and then
it is a valuable Sacrifice; then it is a pleasant and delightful Sacrifice; he
puts it into his golden Censure, and offers it up to his Father, as Rev. 8.3.
Here is the great Mystery of the Intercession of Jesus Christ held forth to
you, in reference to your spiritual Oblations; he had a golden Censer, and
there was given him much Incense; he has enough for all your prayers; there
was given him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
Saints; so we read it; but it might also be read, That he should add it unto
the prayers of all Saints; so as our prayers are not weighty as they come from
us, nor acceptable, but they have the Incense of Christ Jesus added to them,
and then they are weighty, and then they are acceptable, and from hence God the
Father comes to be delighted in the supplications of his servants. Now by the
way Christians, I beseech you, take in this notion into your faith; it is
generally received and believed, that we must rest upon the satisfaction of
Christ Jesus for the acceptance of our persons; let me tell you, that you must
also act Faith upon Jesus Christ as an Intercessor, and rest upon the Merit of
his Incense, and of his Mediation for all your speedings in your approaches
unto God. As you must act Faith upon the Merits of Christ Jesus for the
acceptance of your persons; so you must act Faith upon the Merits of Christ's
Death, and of Christ's Life now in Heaven for the acceptance of all your
spiritual performances with God. And here, my Brethren, you have another ground
of Joy and Comfort in your low estate here: Suppose that you be tossed to and
fro by many tempests; suppose that you were sorely broken in upon by breaches
of providence; suppose that you have lost many dear friends that you did use to
consult withal, and to go to for assistance, why, yet you have Jesus Christ
keeping your way clear unto the Father, and he it is that gives you a constant
boldness with him; Bring all your Petitions; ask what you will in the Name of
Christ Jesus, and it shall be granted to you: Christ stands ready to receive
your Petitions, and to mend whatsoever is amiss in them, and to present them in
his own dress unto his Father, that they may be accepted; and in and through
Christ you have a liberty and boldness with God; Let us come boldly, says the
Apostle, unto the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. ult. And in Heb. 10.19. Having
therefore Brethren boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus.
Jesus Christ will not throw out a Petition because it was no better worded:
Jesus Christ will not throw back a Prayer, because the Spirit was no more
composed and ordered in it: Jesus Christ will not throw back a duty, because he
sees a little unbelief in it, or something of self in it, or something that is
displeasing to his Father in it, but he takes out whatsoever is displeasing,
and he adds his own incense to it, and carries it unto his Father, and delivers
it an acceptable offering unto him. And on this ground you may joy and rejoice
in the Lord Jesus, whatsoever your condition in this world is.

4. Jesus Christ does in wisdom direct, and with love and grace influence all
the losses, crosses, and afflictions of your Christian state, whereby they are
all made to further your spiritual interest, and be subservient unto your great
soul advantage.

It is the lot and portion of Gods People to be often afflicted, to be sore
broken, as in the place of Dragons, and they are many times emptied from Vessel
to Vessel, but there is infinite wisdom, (Christian) infinite reconciled
wisdom, that does order all the motions of providence in all the changes of thy
condition; Jesus Christ he has hold of every providence, and he directs it in
wisdom, and influences it with love and grace, that so it must do thee good, it
cannot be unto thy harm or prejudice, in Ephesians. 1.22. And has put all things
under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things unto the Church.
Christ's providential Kingdom is subordinate unto his spiritual Kingdom, unto
which thou do belong, and by his grace and wisdom he directs all, and in
mercy does manage all for thy advantage, Psalm. 34.15. The Eyes of the Lord are
upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry: The Lord Jesus is
ever viewing of a Christians state, in his goings out, and in his comings in,
in his lyings down, and in his risings up: he is ever viewing a Christians
condition, and wisdom does direct all for the best, it is said therefore,
Ezekiel 1.18. and it is an observable Scripture, as for their rings they were
so high, that they were dreadful, and their rings were full of Eyes, round
about them four. The Prophet is here speaking of the great mystery of
providence, sometimes says he, Gods providence are very deep; they are very
tremendous and dreadful; but be it so: the rings of the wheels of providence
they are always full of Eyes, says he, round about them four, they are full
of Eyes, [Eyes] note, wisdom, directing, guiding, influencing, and managing.
Now says he, the rings of the wheels that move in every state and condition
are always full of Eyes, there is not only an Eye one way, but there is an Eye
that looks every way. The wheels of providence they are full of Eyes; there are
many Eyes, Jesus Christ does observe, and he looks narrowly, and in his
infinite wisdom he does direct for the best; there are Eyes in the wheels.
Things do not casually come upon you, things do not come upon you by chance,
but there is the wheel, that is full of Eyes, that does move (Christian) in all
your troubles, and in all your losses, and in all your crosses, and by the Eve
of God that is upon your condition, that set the wheel a going, does he observe
and take notice what is best for you, when it is seasonable to make a breach,
and then a breach shall be made, when it is seasonable to take away a comfort,
then a comfort shall be taken away, when it is seasonable to let a temptation
loose, then a temptation shall come, when it is seasonable to put you upon a
trial, then the trial shall appear: The rings are full of Eyes. There is wisdom
that does direct the providence of a Christians state, therefore you have it,
1 Pet. 1.6. I pray mark this Scripture: if need be ye are in heaviness through
manifold temptations; the Eyes of the wheels observe when it is needful to come
in with a change of providence, when it is needful to let loose Satan upon you,
when it is needful to bring a cross into your condition, when it is needful to
bring an affliction upon you, to lay a wound upon your bodies, or a weight upon
your Spirits, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, so
as the temptation don't come till you have need of it: God sees when it is time
to bind, and when it is time to loosen, when it is time to enlarge, and when it is
time to straiten, when it is time to give, and when it is time to take, and if
need be it is thus and thus with you; and as the Lord sees for the overruling
in matters of affliction, so also for the comings in of comfort, therefore
says the Apostle, Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in the time of need;
when God sees that you need more strength, and more grace, you shall have it,
when God sees that you need more comfort, and more peace, you shall have it, so
as wisdom does direct all, and love and grace does influence all the crosses,
and all the losses of a Christians state, so as they shall work for his good
and advantage; so Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and
scourges every Son whom he receives: Now see the design of God in all
afflictions, the design that love and grace is managing and carrying on,
through the influence that it has upon afflictive dispensations, v. 10.11. For
they verily, for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for
our profit that we might be partakers of his holiness, etc. He fans you that he
might fan away your chaff, he puts you into the furnace to refine you from your
dross, and make you more pure Gold, he is carrying on a design of grace and
holiness by all the emptying providence that he brings upon your state, and by
all the changes that he makes in your condition, Isaiah 27.8.9. In measure when
it shoots forth, thou will debate with it: By this shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away sin. And Ezekiel 20.37.
And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bonds
of the Covenant, they were Gods Covenant People already, therefore he means, I
will bring you more into the Covenant, I will bring you to walk closer up to
the Covenant of my Grace; the Apostle under this consideration tells us, 1 Pet.
1.7. That the trial of your faith being much more precious then that of Gold
that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. This is from the blessed
design that Christ Jesus is managing by all your afflictions, in wisdom
directing of them, and in love and grace influencing of them; hence the Apostle
James says, James 1.2. My Brethren, says he, count it all joy when you fall
into diverse temptations, why, how is it possible for a Christ so to do? Let him
but consider that infinite wisdom reconciled, does direct the temptation, and
love and grace do influence the temptation, then behold he may count it all joy
when he falls into diverse temptations, and 2 Cor. 4.17. For our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
an eternal weight of glory: See how all the losses, crosses, troubles and
temptations of a Christians state, are made subservient unto his main and
spiritual interest, they help to perfect holiness that is begun, to bring your
hearts closer to God, to cause you to walk more watchfully, to live more
believingly, and more dependingly, to carry it more humbly before the Lord: Now
Christians here is a further ground of rejoicing for you, whatever are the
emptyings of thy state, whatever are the losses and the crosses of thy present
condition; why say, that wisdom directs, and love, and grace influenceth all
for the best. If I be broken, it is for the best that I should be broken, if I
be thus and thus afflicted; why, it is best for me to be thus afflicted. I am
thus and thus reproached, I will be contented, and I will be satisfied in the
will of God, it is best for me to be thus reproached. I am thus and thus
tempted, I am thus and thus unsettled, thus and thus burried; well, God sees it
best for me to be thus, this is the best condition, and this is the best
providence, this is the best dispensation for me; God sees that it is so, for
wisdom that does direct, and love and grace that does always influence.

5. Whatever are the failures of your outward condition, Jesus Christ does
always keep the wells of Salvation open for you, which are always full,
whither you may come and have your fill.

Creature Springs they often times run low, but promise streams they are
always high, Creature Cisterns, they are often empty and dry, but the promises
that are the wells of salvation, they are always full. The leaves and the
blossoms of your outward condition, they are often blasted by the wind, and
withered by the frost, and they drop off, but the promises they always keep
their greenness, they always keep their beauty, they always retain their
fullness: Christians there is a fullness in the promises, that you can never draw
out, if you should spend all your days upon a promise, you can never empty it;
the Saints that have gone before, have been spending one age after another upon
the promises, and still they are full; and they are full with a running over
measure, now whatsoever is thy condition in this world, if thou be a
believer, there is some promise of Grace that does suit thy condition,
whatsoever is thy temptation, or thy trial there is some promise that does
offer relief; whatever is thy necessity, there is some promise that stands
ready with mercy and grace. Now Jesus Christ he stands at the head of every
promise, and keeps the way clear, and the passage free for every believer, and
therefore Christ is called the yea, and the Amen of every promise, that is,
they have their certainty, and their stability in him, and from him, confirmed
by him, and are communicated from him, Jesus Christ is the Lord of every
promise, and he will see (Christian) that thou shall not be wronged of thy
right, he will not suffer any to come and take away thy blessedness that lies
there, now whatsoever thou want in thy outward condition, the promises are
always full, whither thou may go for relief; we read that the Philistines
did fill up the wells that Abraham's Servants had dug, Genesis 26.18. these
wells of water, they were stopped, enemies could fill them up; but my friends,
all the Devils in Hell cannot fill up one well of Salvation, they cannot rob a
Christian of one Gospel promise, neither can they obstruct his way to the
promise, but Jesus that sits above, and is at the head of the promise, he
always keeps the way clear and open; now my friends here is another ground of
rejoicing for you in Christ Jesus, you look into your estates, and you see that
you are on the losing hand daily, you look upon your outward condition, and you
see that you are going down the wind there, you look upon your outward
comforts, and you see them fading, and dying, and uncertain, and perishing
before your Eyes; ay, but your choycest blessings that lie in the promises,
these are in no uncertainty, and though you have not a friend upon earth to go
unto, and though you have not a fullness upon earth to go to, yet you have a
fullness in the promise (Christian) that you may go to; there is a fullness of
mercy, and a fullness of grace in the promise, whither you may go. Those that
have taken away your outward comforts, they cannot take away your comfort in
the promise, neither can they stop up your Wells of Salvation; says David,
Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has quickened
me. The word of Promise that came to my Soul with life, and that was as life
from the dead unto me, when I was in a low, and in an afflicted state; when I
was sorely tried, and broken in upon; why, consider Christians then, that you
have a ground of rejoicing in Christ Jesus, that he is the Yea and the Amen of
every Promise, that can never fail; and he secures the Grace of every Promise
for you, and the Comfort, and the Light, and the Strength of every Promise for
you. You may therefore, though you are brought low in your outward condition,
look up unto Christ Jesus and rejoice.

Sixthly, Jesus Christ he is always a Light unto the Believer in all his
darkness, and a Guide unto him in the intricacies of his way unto his Fathers
house. We know not which way to go, nor how to direct our own steps; Jesus
Christ he is promised as a Light, as a Light unto the world, and that is not
all, but he is a Light unto his own People in a special manner, and a Guide
unto them in all their ways, Luke 1.79. To give light to them that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet in the way of peace:
Why, the Believer he wants counsel, and he wants direction, and he wants advice
from the Lord, how to steer his course; Jesus Christ he stands by him, and he
administers it; he opens the way; he reveals the Mysteries of the Kingdom; he
instructs the ignorant, and teaches those that are fools the great and deep
things of God, and therefore the promise is, that the wayfaring man, though a
fool, shall not err in the way of peace, Isa. 35.8. He will guide them, and
direct them, and instruct them by his counsel at all times. And because
Believers go in a wildered way, that is very hard to find, and dangerous, and
hazardous, Jesus Christ therefore is such a Guide, that takes the charge of
them, as a Commander and Leader: So the Promise runs, Isa. 55.4. Behold I have
given him for a Witness to the People, a Leader and Commander to the people; so
as he takes the charge of the Believer in his wildered way; he guides him, and
he directs him in his course, and he will see that he shall be safe aided to
his Fathers house. Now Christian, here is a further ground of rejoicing for
thee: You meet with many troubles, and discomfortures, and discouragements, and
disappointments in your outward condition; but Jesus Christ he will see that
you shall not be disappointed of Heaven, but he is an abiding Light to you, and
a constant Guide to you; and he will so lead you, that you shall not stumble
nor fall, nor perish in your way unto the Kingdom.

Seventhly, Jesus Christ maintains the Union of the Believer with himself, from
whence arise unchangeable relations of Grace, both with the Believer and him,
and with the Believer and the Father, which are always pleadable and
improveable. My Brethren, Jesus Christ takes Believers into a near and intimate
union with himself, and makes them branches of him who is as the stock; he
makes them as bone of his bone, and as flesh of his flesh: He takes them into
an union that he will never suffer to be broken. It is an indissolvible union;
it is an insuperable; it is an inseparable union; therefore says Christ Jesus,
Joh. 17. Those that thou have given me have I kept, and not one of them have I
lost. Jesus Christ never lost a member; Jesus Christ never lost a limb; Jesus
Christ never lost a true subject; Jesus Christ never lost a sheep out of his
fold; so as this near intimate union it is an indissolvible union; now from
this union do arise everlasting, unchangeable relations of Grace, that are
always pleadable and improveable, from this near and intimate union with the
Lord Jesus, does Christ ever abide your head, filled with strength to animate
you, and to influence you; filled with wisdom and knowledge to instruct you,
and inform you; filled with understanding to guide you in your way. In this
intimate union you are members of his body; he will never suffer you to be cast
off; so as you may always (Believer) stand in him, and plead the advantages of
a standing in him, and of an implantation and ingraftment into him. Jesus
Christ in this union is always your Husband, and you are always his Spouse;
and the advantages of this relation are always enjoyable, and they are always
pleadable; I have betrothed thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment for
ever, says the Lord; so as I will never cast thee off; I will never give thee
a Bill of Divorce; I will be thy Husband for ever, and thou shall be my Spouse
for ever: The relation is always pleadable. And in your near and intimate
union with himself as you, stand in relations of grace to him, so you stand in
relations of grace to the Father: You are the Adopted Children of God; God the
Father of Christ is your Father, and he is always your Father, and you are
always his Children; nothing can come between; nothing can cause him to cast
you out, and disinherit you: having received you into this firm, into this
intimate union, you are Heirs; being made one with Christ, you are Joynt-Heirs
with Jesus Christ, Heirs of God; once an Heir, and for ever an Heir; so as all
the blessed things of the purchase of Christ Jesus, and the whole Inheritance
of Christ Jesus is before you; it is yours, and for you. And now Christian, what
a ground of rejoicing is here for you? What though your outward comforts are
coming and going? they are fading and vanishing: It may be you have your hands
full of them to day, and to morrow they will be gone, and you shall see them no
more for ever; yet know, that you have an abiding ground of Joy in Christ
Jesus; for he it is that maintains your union with himself; he has not only
united you, but he keeps you in union, and he maintains all the gracious
relations of the union, both with him, and also with his Father; so as though
you have not a Friend upon Earth, you may go and say, well, I have a Friend in
Heaven; I have not a Father upon Earth, ay, but I have a Father in Heaven; I
have not a Husband upon Earth, ay, but I have a Husband in Heaven; I have not a
faithful Brother upon Earth, ay, but I have a sincere hearted Brother in
Heaven; the relations of Grace they hold, and they are always pleadable and
improveable. And then

Eighthly, In the eighth and last place, Jesus Christ is making glorious
provisions in Heaven, and will in due time glorify all his people with himself
for ever, says Christ Jesus, It is expedient for you that I go away, it is for
your good, it was for your good that I came, and it is for your good that I
staid so long, and it is for your good that now I go away: For I go to prepare
a place for you: In my Fathers House are many mansions, and I go to make these
mansions ready for you, I go to Heaven as your forerunner. Consider Jesus as
your forerunner, that is entered in for you beforehand, making Heaven ready,
preparing the Crown and the Kingdom for you; now though you be robbed of your
earthly comforts, you cannot be robbed of your Heavenly glory; you may be
spoiled of your Treasures here upon Earth, but you cannot be cheated of your
Treasures in Heaven? Why, Jesus Christ is there to secure it, and he has it in
possession, he is there as your forerunner, he is there to make all ready, I
will Father, says he, that those that thou have given me, be with me where I
am, and the glory that thou have given to me, be bestowed upon them, that they
may be one, as thou Father and I are one. Now under all your vicissitudes, and
changes, and emptyings, and spoylings in this world, look up to Christ Jesus,
and see Heaven sure in him, and see glory sure in him, and see a Crown, and a
Kingdom sure in his hand, take comfort then Christians in all your necessities
here below in the Lord Jesus Christ, and with the Prophet do you always glory,
and rejoice in him.

Use. All that I shall super-add, shall be only in a sentence or two unto
Sinners (for as to Saints how they should come to improve Christ Jesus, and to
live by faith upon him in all conditions, I shall show you afterward, if God
gives the opportunity;) but here in a word let Sinners consider how miserable
their state and condition is? Why Sirs; you have heard that there is an abiding
ground of joy in Christ Jesus for the believer, whatsoever his state is; But do
you consider that none of this belongs to you, all this comfort belongs to
Saints, not to you; you have no part in it, there is an abiding ground of
terror, of sorrow, and of bitterness that belongs to you, because you are
apart from Christ that has such a fullness of all joy in him for believers.
Take heed therefore how you content your selves in a Christless state, and how
you bless your selves whilst you are remote from Jesus Christ, and without a
part and interest in him; thou art not under the blessing, but under the curse;
there is the flaming Sword that hangs over thy head, and there is the hand
writing that is over thee upon the wall. Let then the Sinner tremble on the
consideration of his perishing condition in which he is, out of Christ, And let
it be an inviting word to all of you who have not yet made your close with
Jesus, that you enquire after him, that you earnestly pursue after him; for
your rest and your peace, your comfort, and your blessedness, it is all in him,
and can only be obtained by a closure with him.

SERMON IV.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my
Salvation.


THe Proposition that we are upon from the words is this.

Doct. That there is enough in Christ Jesus alone for the Souls full rejoicing
and triumph, whatsoever his condition be in this world. Before I come to that
which I further proposed to consider and speak to, viz. how the believer should
be helped to live a life of faith upon Christ Jesus unto his spiritual joy and
comfort in all conditions; I shall alittle insist upon, and labor to clear to
you the Souls interest in this Jesus that has such abiding grounds of joy at
all times in him; says the Prophet here in the text, Yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. I shall insist upon the Pronoun
[my] and labor to clear the believers standing, that he may know his interest,
and that he is indeed united unto Christ Jesus; it is not in Christ at large
that a Person can glory in, but it is in Christ under, or in a peculiar Gospel
relation unto his Soul; it is not in Christ in general, but in Christ, that his
Soul is interested in, that he can rejoice in in all conditions; and this I
suppose is an inquiry that all of you will be desirous should be spoken to, viz.

Qu. How the believer may know that he has an interest in Christ Jesus? That
this glorious and blessed Jesus, this full Jesus is his Jesus, his Savior?
That he may be able to say with the Prophet here; Yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation?

Ans. In speaking unto this inquiry, we shall observe this method.

1. To premise several particulars to you by way of introduction, unto the
resolving of the inquiry.

2. We shall show you the grounds, and the occasion of the darkness that is
upon the Spirits of believers, generally in and about their interest in Christ.

3. We shall show you what the believer should do in the interim, until he can
have the evidence of his interest clear. And then,

4. Give you some discoveries how you may come to know whether you be indeed,
and in truth interested, and stated in Christ Jesus.

1. As to the premises.

1. In the first place you may consider, that Christ is enjoyable, and only
enjoyable. upon an interest in, and Gospel relation unto him.

There are many that comfort themselves in a general notion of Christ, that he
is a Savior, and please themselves well with the thoughts of it, but they will
not find this relieving another day. It is only upon interest and relation,
that Christ is savingly enjoyed. It is propriety and interest that gives the
Soul real ground of glory and rejoicing in Christ in the worst of conditions.
And all the saving benefits of Christ they are dispensable, and only
dispensable upon a Gospel interest. A Soul can lay no claim to any thing that
Christ has; I say he can lay no saving claim unto any of the sacred blessings
that Christ has to dispense out, but upon a Gospel interest in him, neither
can the thoughts of Christ be really comforting unto the Soul without respect
unto this relation that we are speaking of, Jer. 31.33. But this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and will be their God, and they shall be my people, and so Zach, 13.9. I will
say it is my People, and they shall say the Lord is my God, here you see is a
mutual interest and relation, the Lord does make over himself unto his people.
And the Lords people they are owned in a near and intimate relation with and
unto the Lord; now this becomes the ground of the dispensing of all the saving
benefits of Christ, and this becomes the solid, and the foundational ground of
all the believers hopes and expectations from Christ. I say this interest and
relation, it is the ground and visible foundation upon which the Grace of
Christ is dispensed, and the saving blessings of Christ are communicated. Do
but see what interest and relation carries with it, Ezekiel. 16.8. And I entered
into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou becamest mine, and then,
says he, washed I thee with water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood! from
thee, and anointed thee with Oil, etc. And in Ezekiel. 34.11, 12.13, 14, 15. For
thus says the Lord God, behold I, even I, will both search my Sheep, and seek
them out, as a Shepherd seeks out his flock in the day, that he is amongst
the Sheep that are scattered, so will I seek out my Sheep, etc. You see here
the Lord does manifest a signal care, and it is grounded upon interest, upon
relation. They are my Sheep says the Lord, and therefore I will seek them up,
and therefore will I gather them. They are my Sheep, and therefore will I
preserve them from Wolves. They are my Sheep, and therefore I will feed them,
and lead them into green pastures, and by the still waters, and John 17.9, 10.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given
me, for they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, etc. I pray
for them says Christ, and I will see after them, whilst they are in the
world, that they shall not be devoured and destroyed there, and what is the
ground of the prayer of Christ, and of the care of Christ? Why; they are mine
says he: they were thine, Father, says he, and thou have given them me, and
now they are mine, and they are thine still, says he, and therefore Father,
look after them also; and then interest and relation, it is the solid ground of
our great expectations from the Lord in all our goings to him, and dealings
with him; I am thine, says the Psalmist, O save me, and Isa. 63.8, 9. For he
said, surely they are my people, Children that will not lie, so he became their
Savior; in all their afflictions, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them, in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, etc. And v.
18. We are thine; thou never bear rule over them, they were not called by
thy name. And Joel 2.17, 18. Let the Priests say, spare thy people O Lord, and
give not thy heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them;
wherefore should they say to the People, where is their God? It is interest you
see that they ground their expectations from God upon; it is upon a Gospel
interest and relation, that the Grace of Christ's fullness, and the sacred
blessings and privileges of all his offices, are given out and dispensed unto
Souls; and without this interest and relation, the thoughts of Christ would not
at all be comforting nor relieving, but the Soul might think on Christ Jesus,
and be troubled, as you have it, Psalm. 77.3. I remembered God, and was troubled,
I complained, and my Spirit was overwhelmed. And so a person remembering Christ
Jesus, and knowing no interest in him, must needs be troubled to think that
there is such a Savior, and he has no interest in him; to think that there is
such a glorious fullness in him, and he has no right to approach to that
fullness, and to expect from the all sufficiency of Christ Jesus, the thoughts
of this must needs trouble a poor Creature. Thus all the blessings of Christ
Jesus, and all communicable grace is dispensed upon an interest and relation,
so as it is of great weight and importance for every one of you to consider,
whether you have an interest in Christ or no, for if you have no interest in
him, you can have no solid ground of expectation from him.

2. A believer that has an interest in Christ, may yet be without the sense of
that Interest.

Interest, and evidence of Interest do not always go together; but a Soul that
is in Christ may be full of fears and doubts, and questionings of spirit in and
about its Interest. Interest is absolutely necessary to Salvation, but the
sense of Interest is not so. Sense of Interest is indeed necessary to our
consolation in Christ Jesus, but sense of Interest is not absolutely necessary
to our safe state in Christ Jesus; but a Soul that stands sure in Christ, may
be in the dark in and about his standing. A Soul that is under the everlasting
and unchangeable Love of Christ, may yet be in the dark in and about that Love
that is glorified, and shall further be glorified upon him, and in him. I have
thought sometimes, that many a poor Believer is just as Hagar was when her
Bottle was empty, and she sat down weeping, that now she must die. Why, she
need not fear famishing, when there was a well of water near her, that she and
the Lad might drink their fill: Ay, but she did not know this well of water to
be so near her. So the Believer's state is safe and good; ay, but he does not
know it. Jesus Christ deals with his People as Joseph did by his Brethren; he
fed them, and nourished them, and comforted them a great while, but would not
discover himself to them, that he was Joseph their Brother. A Believer that
has an Interest, may yet want the evidence of that Interest.

Thirdly, Evidence of Interest is attainable, and it is the will of God that
Believers should give all diligence to make it clear. It is possible that a
Soul may come to see his own standing in Christ Jesus, and know unto his full
satisfaction and rejoicing in all conditions, that he is interested in him.
Many Scripture-Saints have delivered it to us upon record, that they did attain
to an evidence of their Interest. The Spouse in the Cant. did attain an
evidence of her Interest, Cant. 2.16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Job had
a clear sight of his Interest, Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, etc.
David had his Interest cleared up to him; The Lord is my Light and my
Salvation, whom shall I fear? Psalm. 27.1. Paul was assured of his Interest in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens: For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon with our house which is from Heaven. And it is the mind and will of God
that Believers should give all diligence to clear their Interest, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves, know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates.
And 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather Brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and your election sure. There is the command, which implies a
possibility of attaining it. The possibility of it does further appear, in that
the Father and the Son have both sent forth the Spirit to be a Comforter, to be
a Witnesser to those that are in Christ; and his Office it is an Ensuring
Office. The Spirit he comes, being sent forth by the Father and the Son, into a
poor heart that is full of fears, doubts, questionings and misgivings, and does
settle this Soul in the steadfast belief of his abiding Interest in Christ
Jesus, and Christ's everlasting relation unto it. This you may see, Romans 8.16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the Children
of God. And Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also after that ye believed ye were sealed
with that holy Spirit of promise. And a considerable part of the Scripture is
given forth to this end, to clear up a Believers Interest in, and Relation unto
Christ, that he may know his standing in him, 1 John 5.12, 13. There is Life in
the Son, says he; and I write unto you, that ye may know that ye have an
Interest in the Son, and so have life from him; and this is that which the
Lord's People have gloried in, Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledgeth' us not, etc. And
this is one end of that grand Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, to seal and
ensure Believers. It is not only an Ordinance of Communion, but it is a sealing
Ordinance, wherein the Lord Jesus does come and set upon the heart, clearing up
the Soul's Interest in himself, and telling of him what he has done for him,
and sealing all that has past upon his Soul. It is sometimes hereupon made a
feast of fat things. It is an Ordinance of Joy. It is not a converting
Ordinance, but it is an Ordinance of comfort unto those that are converted,
being often owned by the Lord, as a sealing Ordinance, to confirm all that has
formerly past between God and the Soul: So as an evidence of Interest is
attainable, and it is the will of God that Believers give all diligence to make
it clear.

Fourthly, The Interest and Relation that one Believer is owned in, with
Christ, is not different in its nature and properties from what every Believer
is owned in; but all that are interested in Christ, are equally interested in
him.

If you speak of the Interest and Relation absolutely it is the same. Jesus
Christ is not more one believers than he is another, Jesus Christ has not
given one believer a greater propriety in himself then he has given another
believer: but all are equally interested in, and related unto Christ, all have
an equal share in Christ. All have an equal standing in Christ in point of
interest and relation. Indeed if you speak of interest and relation, quo ad
effectum, as we say, if you speak of it in reference to improvement and
effects, there indeed there is a difference between believer and believer. One
believer may improve Christ more than another, and one believer may grow up in
Christ more then another: and one believer may in point of application and
enjoyment possess more of Christ, more of the Grace of Christ, then another
believer does, but they are all equally interested in, and related unto Christ
Jesus: and the interest that one believer has, is as pleadable, and as
improvable as the interest that another believer has, Jesus Christ is equally
a Head and a Husband, and a Brother unto all his People, and they are equally
Members of the same body in point of interest, though not in point of growth;
says the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 6.17. But he that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit. It is spoken in general, let him be an Apostle, let him be an eminent
Saint, or let him be a meaner, or more obscure Saint, let him be a strong
believer, or let him be a weak believer, if he be joined to the Lord he is one
Spirit, alike joined, alike related, and alike interested.

Fifthly, The believers interest in Christ is abiding, and can never be
crush't, it can never be broken, it can never be violated, but the evidence of
interest, though once obtained, and seem clear, may be obscured and darkened: A
Christians joy, that is passing away, it is transient, but as to his interest,
that is inviolable, and inseparable; none can disunite Christ, and the believer
being once Gospelly joined. So you have it spoken out by the Apostle, Romans
8.35. and so on, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? No says he, they shall not, they cannot do it, and Hosea. 2.19. I will
betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercy, etc. I
know full well what I do, says the Lord, I will betroth thee in judgment, I
know what the Soul is that I take, I take him, so as to keep him, and to
maintain him, I will hold him, and never lose him; I will do it in judgment,
and it shall be a relation for ever; I will betroth thee unto me for ever. But
now the evidence of the relation that is passable, that may be clouded, after
you have had some clear discoveries of it. A Soul that is brought into the
light, may be turned into the dark again; thus it was with Job: Job he had a
very clear and full sight of his interest at one time, that he glories in
Christ Jesus; I know that my Redeemer lives; and yet the same Job at another
time, Job 6.4. Tells us that the Arrows of the Almighty did set themselves in
array against him, the poison whereof, says he, drinks up my Spirit. It was
not the terrors of men, it was not the terrors of his condition, of his
poverty, or of his sores, or of his great disgrace, but says he, the terrors
of God they are entered into my Soul, and so David, at one time he rejoices in
Christ Jesus; says then, though I pass through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, Psalm. 23.4. and another time he cries out, Why art
thou cast down O my Soul, why art thou disquiered within me? And in another
place, has the Lord forgotten to be gracious? are his mercies clean gone? he
mourns after the Lord, and complains as one that was banished from his face;
though your interest cannot be shaken Christians, yet the evidence of your
interest may be darkened, the love of Christ Jesus to your souls may be so
obscured, as you may be left without the feelings of it. And the Soul that is
sometimes under comfortable manifestations, and filled with joy, with peace,
and with comfort, may at another time be darkened with clouds, with vails, and
with curtains, and know not where he is; the seal of the Spirit of the Lord may
be so defaced, as that you cannot tell what to make of it; the believer that is
built upon the rock, can never be washed off the rock, yet the ways may dash
against him upon the rock, he may be sorely dashed upon the rock, though he
cannot be washed off; though your interest stands sure, yet the evidence of your
interest is not sure, it is a passable evidence.

6. Sense of interest is in a sovereign hand, and is given out to whom the Lord
pleases, and when the Lord pleases: The Lord is pleased Soveraignly to act in
the sealing, and ensuring, and comforting of his People; sometimes he will come
in upon a believer at his first conversion, and will fill him with joy and
gladness that shall abide upon his Soul many years; and sometimes the believer
shall wait upon God from ordinance to ordinance, and follow him many years in
the dark, and not have a discovery of his love; sometimes the Lord will give a
Soul no sight of his interest, nor evidence of his relation, until he come to
die; and some believers have walked with the evidence of Gods love in their
hearts, almost all their days, and when they have come to die, they have died
in the dark. Sense of interest is under a sovereign dispense, both as to the
persons to whom it is given out, and as to the time when, and as to the way and
manner how.

7. Though the interest that believers have, and are owned in with the Lord, is
the same, and is not different as to its nature, and properties, yet the
evidence of the interest will admit of degrees in different persons, and also
in the same Persons at diverse times; those that are taken into relation with
Christ Jesus, they are all owned in a near, blessed, intimate relation, as I
told you before, so that there is no difference in the relation, neither is the
relation an increasing relation, indeed the benefits of the relation, they are
increasing; but the relation it is self is not increasing. A believer is not
more a Child of God afterward, then he was at first, when the Spirit of
adoption came upon him, but the evidence of the interest that admits of
degrees; the relation its self is capable of an improvement as to the
advantages of it, but that is not all, but the evidence of the relation is
sometimes clearer, fuller, and more satisfying then at some other times. It is
said, Prove. 4.18. That the path of the just is as the shining light that
shines more and more unto the perfect day: A believer has a little sight of
Christ; a glimmering of Christ through the cravis; this may be improved, and it
is possible that the Soul may come into a full assurance of its interest in
Christ Jesus; ay, and it is possible you may be assured more at one time then
at another. Therefore Christian, the little joy that thou have, may grow to a
great deal, and the small apprehensions that thou have of Christ, may greatly
increase in thy Soul; and in this respect the day of small things is not to be
despised.

8. It is possible that believers may disingenuously act upon low principles in
their carnest pursuits after sealings and ensurings: I pray mark it, assurance,
it is the Flower of Faith, it is the growth, the improvement, the flourishing
of Faith, it is the fragrancy, the odor, and the sweetness, nay, the very
brightness of faith, the sealings of the Spirit, they are the high strains (as
I may call them) of the Spirit in and upon the hearts of believers. And yet it
is possible that the believer may act upon low principles in his eager pursuits
of the sealings of the Spirit, that is such an high act: Then does the believer
act disingenuously in a pursuit after an evidence of his interest, when he
presses after the sense of his interest, more for peace and comfort, then to
improve his interest unto more grace and holiness. Your interest in Christ has
two streams, the one runs with grace, and the other runs with peace and
comfort: now then does the Soul disingenuously act, when he presses more after
the stream of peace and comfort, then he does after the stream of grace and
holiness; then is the believer acted upon low, principles, when he advances
the sense of interest, above the interest, or if you will, thus, when the
desires of the sense of interest do overbalance the desires of more grace and
holiness upon the interest. Therefore in all your eager pursuits after the
sealings of the Spirit, consider the principle (Christians) upon which you act,
search whether there be no disingenuous actings n your spirits, in your eager
desires after assurance.

9. Satan will indefatigably endeavor to darken your evidence, and to obscure
the sense of interest. Satan's design is to keep Souls as long as he can from a
closure with Christ, he will meet the Soul in all ways, if possible, to turn
him out of his way; and if he cannot do that, his next design is to obscure
your evidence, and to darken your sense of interest, that so he may make you to
walk heavily, and in the dark, he will follow you with false reports, and false
suggestions, he will hint to you this falsity and the other, if possible, to
make you to believe a lie, and to deny what Jesus Christ has done, and to deny
your interest, and standing in him, that it may be is clear upon undeniable
grounds and demonstrations; the Devil you know came to Christ with this very
temptation to make him to question the truth of his relation to God, though the
Devil knew it well enough that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, and the true Son
of God; yet he comes and sets upon him with this temptation, if possible, to
make him question; If thou be the Son of God, then do so and so. And he
levels at the Believer in the same manner, and his design is to keep you in the
dark, to rob you of all the peace, and comfort, and joy, that you might have
upon the sense and evidence of your Interest.

Tenthly, There are many that presume upon a groundless confidence, that they
have an interest in Christ, and yet are wholly ignorant of the nature of a
Gospel-Interest. There are many that do promise themselves great things in and
from Christ Jesus, and yet they are wholly ignorant of him; they have hopes of
large blessings that shall come in by Christ, and yet are ignorant of Christ,
and the nature of a close with Christ that gives right to him. Doubtless the
foolish Virgins had hopes, that as to the bulk of them, were as large and as
promising as the hopes of the wise Virgins were; they never at all questioned
their admittance when the Bridegroom should come. In Deuteronomy. 29.19. And it shall
come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in
his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my
heart, etc. So when we are discoursing of the terrors of the Law, that do
belong to persons uninterested in Christ; there are many that bless themselves
in their hearts, and say, These things do not belong to us: And when we are
opening the comforts that Believers have in Christ, those that are strangers to
Christ will presume and say, All these are mine, Micah 3.11. The Heads thereof
judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the
Lord among us? no evil can come upon us. In the midst of all their wickedness,
they would still presume upon an Interest in the Lord and think all should go
well with them. My friends, what think you of the Church of Laodicca? they were
a people of a very great and high profession; they stood in a Gospel body, and
lived under the enjoyment of the great Privileges of a Gospel-state, and they
promised themselves that all was well with them; and yet see what the Lord says
Rev. 3.17. Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not that thou art poor, and miserable, and
wretched, and blind, and naked. They had a profession upon them, and they
thought there was a great deal in that: They were in a Church State, and they
thought that would serve their turn: They did enjoy Church Priviledges, and
they thought upon it that their condition was good, and that they might well
say, Now we are rich, we are Professors in a Church State, we are under the
common and sacred blessings of the Gospel; and who better than we? We are rich,
but says the Lord, you say so, but I say otherwise; you say you are rich, but I
say you are poor; you say you are full, but I say you are empty; you say you
are increased with goods, and have need of nothing, but I say you have nothing
and have need of all things. Verily my friends, this is a deceivable Age, an
Age wherein many do not only deceive others, but their own Souls, and therefore
it concerns you to enquire whether the Lord be your God, or no? and not to
satisfy your selves with general notions of the Lord's being your God.

In the Eleventh and last place; An evidence of Interest obtained, maintained,
and Gospelly managed, will be of singular advantage to a Christian in his whole
Christian course. You do not know (Believers) you that are careless in and
about the clearing of your state, you do not know what a change a Gospel sight
of your Interest in Christ will make in your hearts; an evidence of your
Interest will expel all your fears, and will resolve all your doubts, and will
cause a calm in your hearts, whatsoever the present storm is. Why, if that we
could look into the hearts of many, or most of us, I believe they would be
found very tempestuous; storms they threaten, sore fears are ready to
overwhelm, and doubts are even ready to swallow up a Christian; why, an
evidence of your Interest will remove all these, (Christian) an evidence of
your Interest will make all in Christ Jesus precious to you, and will strangely
raise and inhaunse the price of Christ, and the blessings of Christ in your
esteem. The evidence of Interest, O how precious will it make the Blood of
Jesus to you! O how precious will it make the Death of Jesus to you! O how
precious will it make the Life of Jesus to you! O how precious will it make the
Offices of Jesus to you! when you can see that you are concerned in his Blood;
that Jesus he is your Surety, your Mediator; that he has suffered for you, and
satisfied for you; that he is your forerunner in Heaven; this will make all of
Christ exceeding precious. An evidence of Interest is that that will carry your
Souls cheerfully through all sufferings that do or may befall you in the way of
Christ. There are reproaches that Believers meet withal in the way of Christ,
and the sense of Interest will help you to bear them all. There are great
losses that we are exposed to in bearing our Testimony to the Truths of Jesus;
sense of Interest will bear you up under all: Why, we have a building of God
that is above. It is said of those in the Hebrews, that they did not regard
their outward comforts, knowing that they had in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance. Sense of Interest will bear you up under all changes of
providence, when the Lord is taking, as well as when he is giving: Why, will
the Soul say, there is still enough in Christ; Christ is still full; my Jesus
is full; though I am robbed, he is not robbed; though I have little or nothing,
Jesus Christ he has all, and Christ is all, and all his fullness is mine. Sense
of Interest will raise your hopes and expectations upon Christ Jesus. My
friends, now we look upon Christ, and have low thoughts of him; we look upon
Christ, and our expectations are not raised upon Christ: We come to an
Ordinance where Christ is discovered and displayed in the riches of his Death,
and in the glories of his Life, and our hearts are not raised upon this; why,
but because we have not the sense of our Interest: The sense of Interest will
raise your expectations, and will comfort you against the thoughts of death.
Now Lord, says good old Simeon, let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.29.30. And says the Apostle, I desire
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. The sense of
Interest will lay you in against all fears of the approaching Judgment; instead
of being afraid of it, it will make you long for it, when the Soul comes to
see, and know, and be ascertained that the judge of the Court is his friend,
and is in relation to him, and has loved him so as to lay down his life for
him, and has ever been designing upon him in a way of love and grace; this
Soul will not be afraid to appear before him, but will long for the day when he
shall come to see his Jesus clothed with glory. So as a clear evidence of
interest in Christ obtained, maintained, and gospelly managed, will be of
singular advantage unto a Christian in his whole Christian course.

SERMON V.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.


THe Proposition was this,

Doct. That there is enough in Jesus Christ alone for the Souls full rejoicing
and triumph, whatsoever his state and condition is in this world.

Now we proposed;

First, To give you several introductory particulars by way of premise.

These we have dispatched. And shall now proceed to consider what are the
grounds of a believers darkness about his interest.

2. It may be said in the second place, if there be such solid and substantial
grounds of joy in Christ Jesus for the believing Soul, at all times, and in all
conditions; what is the reason then that believers are so often in a dark,
dubious, uncomfortable, shattered state, that they are seldom able in any
stedfastness of spirit to look up unto Christ Jesus, and glory in him?

Ans. 1. I answer; The darkness of the believers interest does oft-times arise
from a looking more unto such things in the examination of himself, as argue
the height of an interest, then to such things as do discover the truth of an
interest. They do fix upon such things as are discoveries of a grown state in
Christ, when as they should fix upon such things as do discover an in-being in
Christ; they propose to themselves that corruption must be so and so brought
under, and mortifying work must be carried on to such a height, or else they
can have no grounds of their interest in Christ; they propose to themselves
such a measure of love, as must be flaming to Christ at all times, or else they
think they have no love at all, they think they must have such a measure of
faith, as to believe without staggering, or else they have no part in Christ.
Now hereby they ^o ensnare their own Spirits, and increase their darkness. But
you should look more at such things, as argue the truth of an interest, then at
those things that do argue the growth and improvement of that interest.

Secondly, Darkness of evidence does oft-times arise from the believers viewing
his wants, and overlooking his present receipts. Jesus Christ has done a great
deal for him, and has given out a great deal to him, and has made a wonderful
change in him, he cannot deny it if he be put to it; but he overlooks all this,
and considers his present wants, his weaknesses, his short comings, his
failings, his smallness of strength, his staggering before a temptation, the
uncertainty of his Spirit in his walking with God, and he bears the stress of
his condition upon his present wants, not considering what Jesus Christ has
already done, nor considering that the work is gradually carried on. Now
Christians if you would lay your selves fair for the Spirits Gospel evidence in
your souls, then you must take in the encouragements of your condition, as well
as your discouragements, you must not only insist upon your discouragements,
but consider also what Jesus Christ has done, and what a change he has begun
to work, and what have been the movings of your souls toward him, from divine
influences upon your Spirits.

Thirdly, The darkness of evidence, or obscurity of interest do oft-times arise
from the prevailings of sin in the heart, upon which Christ suspends. Sin that
rallies, that gathers head in the Soul, that presses forward, and the Soul
gives way to the temptation, and is overcome, and upon it darkness does arise;
this was David's case, David was assured; ay, but sin prevailing in his heart,
drove him into the dark, that all the joys of the holy Spirit were for a time
taken from him, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. And Nathan said unto David, thou art the
man, thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, and I
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, etc. Wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord to do evil in his sight? I have done all this for thee
says the Lord, and thou have despised my commandment, and done evil in my
sight. So the Lord Jesus speaks unto the Soul: I have thus and thus manifested
my self to thee. I thought it not too much to take thee into communion with my
self; I thought it not too much to dandle thee upon my knee, and to give thee
the assurance of all that I have done for thee: But thou have wickedly departed
from me, and broken my Commandments, and it is just with the Lord now to
suspend; prevailings of sin will cause a suspense. You know that Absalom upon
his rebellion, was excluded for a while from his Fathers House, he must not see
his Fathers face: just thus it is with a Soul, when it has turned aside into
some way of folly, after it has provoked the Lord, the Lord he hides himself
from him, he will not let him see his face, he must not come into his presence to
see him, and to rejoice in the light of his countenance as formerly he had
done. The prevailings of sin after Grace do many times cause a suspense.

Fourthly, Darkness of evidence is occasioned from the Souls crediting the
reports of Satan, that lead him to deny what Jesus Christ has done for him and
in him, upon undeniable demonstrations of the power of his Grace in his heart:
Satan he will be always putting the Soul forward to entertain hard thoughts of
God, and will be making false reports in his heart, contrary unto the
experiences that his Soul has had; Now when the Soul will take up a report of
Satan, against a clear and visible demonstration of grace upon the heart, and
will join with Satan, and say, ay, this is true, there has nothing past upon
my Soul; Christ has not loved me, Christ has not taken me nigh unto himself,
neither has he in truth and reality done any thing yet for me, upon the Souls
thus falling in with, and arguing upon the reports of Satan, does he help to
darken his own state, and to cloud his interest; Satan is indefatigably
industrious to obscure our interest, and to keep us in the dark. Now he will
always stand by you, and be always speaking to you, if he see that his
testimony is once received and credited. Therefore beware how you hearken unto
him, who is ever an enemy unto your interest, and unto your sense of interest.

Fifthly, Darkness of evidence does arise from our frequent neglects of the
Spirit both in a way of duty, and also in a way of comfort; The Spirit of the
Lord does attend us, and he is calling of us up to obedience, and spurring of
us forward to closer walking with God in obedience to his commands. Now when
the Soul does refuse to comply with the Spirit, and does not observe his voice,
nor obey his commands, but is silent unto his earnest motions in it, upon this
is the Soul more and more darkened, for the Spirit does hereupon withdraw, when
we refuse his aids and assistances in the duties unto which we are called; he
offers us his help to stand by us, and to lead us, and to strengthen us, and we
set by his help, and we will venture upon duties in our own strength, not
resting upon him for strength and power, and the Spirit is hereby provoked: Or,
when we neglect him in a way of comfort; he would clear our condition to us,
but we w^ll not believe what reports he makes in our hearts; he would settle
us, and we will not be settled; he offers us consolation, and we refuse his
consolation, and yet complain of our darkness, Job 15.11. Are the consolations
of the Lord small with thee? Why, the consolations of the Lord are small with
many Souls; for they refuse them, and they think they do well to refuse the
comforts that are offered them, and yet they mourn over their want of comfort;
hereby they grieve the Spirit, and they wound the Spirit, and they quench the
Spirit, and it is not like then that the Soul should be assured. You have these
expressions in Scripture, Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. And 1 These. 5.19. Quench not
the Spirit. And Isa. 63.10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit,
wherefore he was turned to be their enemy, etc. Why, my friends, this is often
our case, we rebel against, and vex the holy Spirit of God, and he becomes our
enemy, that is, he cease to comfort us, and he cease to settle us, and he
cease to establish us; he cease to fill us with joy and with comfort in and
about our Interest.

Sixthly, Darkness of evidence does oftentimes arise from, and is occasioned by
remisness in holy duties, wherein God uses to manifest himself unto us: When
we neglect our spiritual watch, and lie under, or act under the weight of
spiritual sloth, deadness of heart, carelessness and slightiness of spirit in
our waitings upon God. This was the Spouses case, Cant. 5.3, 4. I have put off
my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
My Beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved
for him, Verse 5. I arose to open to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, Verse 6. Acts of communion were not ceased: The Spouse did not decline
Duties and Ordinances, but grew remiss and sluggish, and slighty, and careless
in the duties of communion: She had put off her Coat, and she could not put it
on. Her Beloved knocked, but she could not open to him presently; she must make
him wait a while, Here were some workings of heart, and some genuine affections
in the Spouse toward Christ, for she said, My Beloved put in his hand by the
hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him: There were some movings of
heart toward Christ; ay but she moved slowly, and was careless in her
spiritual frame, and behold she looks, and her Beloved was gone: Here was a
suspense, and darkness grew upon her condition. My friends, this is often our
case; we let the fire of the Altar of our hearts go out, and our affections
they grow dead, and we lose our spiritual fervency; we lose the spiritual
savor of communion with God in Ordinances of Communion, and Christ Jesus
withdraws. There is a suspense of manifestations of favor and darkness
increases.

Seventhly, Again, Darkness of evidence does sometimes arise from unkind and
unworthy Jealousies of the love of Christ's heart to us, notwithstanding long
strivings with us. The Soul knows not how to believe that Jesus Christ is in
earnest with him, when it comes unto his own particular case: then he
entertains hard thoughts of Christ: O surely Christ does not mean me, surely
Christ is not in the way of Grace with me, although he cannot deny, being put
to it upon a serious examination, but that there is a strange alteration in his
Soul; ay, but he is always questioning of the truth of Christ in his way to
him, not but that he believes that Christ is in good earnest in the design, ay,
but he does not know how to believe that Christ Jesus is really engaged in a
design of love upon his heart; no, this he questions, he thinks that the
proposals that he makes, are not in good earnest, that Jesus Christ does not
mean him: That Jesus Christ does overlook and pass by his Soul, and it is
others that he is seeking after, and others that he is designing upon, and by
these unworthy jealousies he does provoke Jesus Christ, and it is just with
Christ to leave the Soul a while to its self, that will not be persuaded to
have good thoughts of him.

8. Again, Darkness of evidence does sometimes arise from, and is occasioned by
our inconsiderateness of the present state of our own hearts, and inadvertency
to what has past upon us: There is a work wrought in him; ay, but he has not
been so wise as to observe the motions of Christ Jesus in his comings in, and
in his dealings with him, he has not kept an account of the goings of God with
him, but has been very remiss in the observe of the state of his heart, as he
has passed on in the way, following of Christ, and waiting upon him in
ordinances, and hence he can make nothing of his condition, he cannot say that
the work of Grace is so and so wrought in him, because he has not been
observant to gather up what has past upon his Spirit.

9. Again, Darkness of evidence does sometimes arise from an ungospel modesty
that dares not believe such good things of its self. There is a kind of
ungospel modesty that some Christians do express, wherein they would discover a
great deal of unworthiness in themselves, and a great deal of lowliness of
Spirit, but in it they do but deny what Jesus Christ has done, and wrong their
own case; O to think that Jesus Christ has been dealing with them, and has
made powerful applications of his blood unto them; and has united and
reconciled them unto himself; O they cannot tell how to believe this of
themselves; an interest in Christ is a great thing, and a heart change is a
mighty change: I dare not think, says the Soul, that the Lord has done this
for me, who am so vile, and so unworthy, and thus the Soul stands and reasons
against all the experiences that he has had of God, and denies the comforts of
it.

10. Again, In the last place, Darkness of evidence does sometimes arise from
peremptory conclusions of the issues of our state upon the reports that sense
makes upon all inquiries. The reason of our darkness is because we lay the
stress of our condition upon sense, and upon what we can seel in our selves,
and not upon a naked venture upon Christ Jesus; not upon a Gospel throw upon
Christ Jesus; whatever be the issue, but the Soul goes to its feelings, and
makes a judgment of its state upon and from them; when he can find his heart
warmed for Christ, when he can find his Spirit under any Gospel enlargement for
Christ, when he can find his Graces begin to grow and thrive, and when he can
find speedy returns made unto all his seekings after the Lord, then he
concludes, now all is well; here is an interest, and behold the fruits of it:
But now when the Souls Graces are alittle clouded, when he misses of that
enlargement that sometimes he has experienced: And when he comes under some
straitness, and when Jesus Christ is a while silent unto his prayers; why, then
he concludes against himself; O here is no interest, why, if I were in Christ
Jesus, it would be otherwise with me, Christ would answer me, and Christ would
enlarge me, and Christ would heighten and brighten my Graces, Christ would not
leave me in such an uncomfortable condition, he would fill me, and lift me up,
and set me on high; O surely there is nothing of truth and reality that has
passed upon my Soul: Now Christians, while you draw up peremptory conclusions
of the issue of your state, upon the reports of sense in your hearts, you will
never come to be settled, and established, while you are in this world:
conclusions drawn from changeable, mutable principles will never be relieving
nor comforting to you. Well, these things briefly may suffice for the second
proposal, what might be the grounds of a believers darkness in and about their
interest and evidence.

Thirdly, We shall proceed unto the third particular, and that is this:

Qu. If it be thus, that Believers are often times in the dark in and about
their Interest, and have not the evidence of their relation in Christ clear,
what should the Believer do in the interim until the Lord shall be pleased to
discover and unfold himself to him, and seal and confirm all that he has done
for him, and bestowed upon him?

Ans. There are nine or ten particulars that I shall lay down here in way of
Direction.

First, In case of darkness of evidence, muck the root of faith: Or, if you
will take it thus, strengthen and double the direct act of faith, when you are
not able to put forth a reflex act of Faith. There is a direct, and there is a
reflex act of Faith; the direct act of Faith is an act of recumbence; it is an
act of relyance upon Jesus Christ; the reflex act of Faith is the Soul's
glorying and triumphing in Christ Jesus, that he has made a close with. Now
Christian, if thou have not the assuring act of Faith, then be sure that you
strengthen Faith in its closing act, and in its believing act, wherein it rests
on Christ Jesus alone; go oftener unto Christ, and there determine thy Soul,
and resolve ever to wait upon him, and to abide at his footstool; the believing
act of Faith, or the direct act of Faith, that I may call the first act, and
the reflex act of Faith, I may call the second act of Faith. Now Christian, if
you be not able to come up to the second act of Faith, then be often repeating
the first act of Faith; be often rolling your Souls upon Christ Jesus, and by
this means you may come to be assured; for the direct act of Faith has a
tendency in it to carry thee up unto a full assurance in Christ Jesus, and
therefore be often redoubling that act, thou do not know how soon the joy of
thy assurance may come in.

Secondly, Upon the darkness of evidence, take notice of, and rejoice in the
strengthenings and upholdings of the Spirit, though for the present you are
without the sealings and ensurings of the Spirit. Why, let it not be a small
thing unto thee, that though thou art not comforted, and though thy Interest is
not cleared, yet thou art kept waiting upon God. Who is it that upholds thee
against all thy discouragements? Could thou hold out of thy self? Could
thou bear up when there seems to be no returns made? nothing but
discouragements in thy way? Thou cryest again and again, and have no return,
but a seeming repulse; who is it (think you) that upholds you? doubtless it is
the Spirit of the Lord: Who was it that upheld the Woman of Canaan, when Christ
Jesus did chide her, and seemed to give her a repulse? doubtless whilst he
seemed outwardly to discountenance her, he was secretly upholding and drawing
her heart nearer to himself, or else she had fainted. Now, if thou have had a
heart to continue waiting upon God, and thy desires and resolutions are still
to follow the Lord, take notice of these upholds of the Spirit, and bless God
for these, and it may be the Spirit in a little while may go on to assure thee.

Thirdly, Again, Upon the darkness of evidence, and want of assurance, labor
to heighten true grace and holiness: Strive to increase and to grow in grace,
for that will be more to thy advantage than to bend thy desires wholly for
comfort and for assurance. It is a greater mercy for God to give thee a new
measure of grace, than to give thee a new degree of comfort. It is a higher
privilege. There is more in grace, than there is in comfort; for grace has a
more immediate tendency to God's glory, the other tends more immediately to thy
satisfaction and joy. There is more in a little grace, than in a great deal of
consolation. Now it may be the Lord sees that thou art not fit for comfort,
nor yet fit for settlement, and for peace, and therefore he holds thee in the
dark. Now the heightening of grace will fit thee for the enjoyment of an
Evidence. The higher grace is in the heart, the more fair the Soul lies for an
evidence; the more grace thou have, the more fit thou art for the joys and
consolations of the Holy Ghost: Therefore strive to heighten grace and holiness
upon the want of an evidence.

Fourthly, Keep in thy way waiting upon the Lord, though the Answer is delayed.
Thou art seeking to be assured, and thou art waiting for an evidence of thy
Interest, and yet it does not come. Well, hold on Christian, and do not give
over until the Answer is given in; He that believes makes not haste: Wait
quietly and patiently upon the Lord, pressing after him, that he would remember
his Word from Ordinance to Ordinance; but do not give over; know, that whilst
the Lord does suspend the evidence of your Interest, he calls you to abide in a
waiting posture, and therefore continue to watch and pray.

Fifthly, Diligently attend all discovering Ordinances, but bound your desires
after a sense of Interest in waiting upon the Lord in the ways that he bath
consecrated for the dispense. God has been pleased to appoint many ordinances
for us to wait upon him in, wherein he is pleased to make known himself.
Sometimes he does it in one ordinance, and sometimes in another; sometimes he
will come in in prayer, and sometimes in meditation, and sometimes he will come
in in preaching, and sometimes in that great sealing ordinance of the Gospel,
the Lords Supper. Now attend upon the Lord in all sealing ordinances, but bound
your desires, (I pray mark) I say bound your desires in the ways that the Lord
has consecrated for the dispense, do not expect that God should work a miracle
to confirm you, don't think that there must be a voice from Heaven to settle
you, and satisfy you, don't look for some miraculous expressions or impressions
upon you, but bound your desires after the sense of your interest in his own
way; and that which makes me mention it, is this: That Satan does rush many
Souls upon this, they cannot believe an ordinary evidence, and a small sign
will not serve them, but they must have some immediate appearance from Heaven; an
immediate testimony from Heaven, in some miraculous way upon their Spirits, or
else they cannot think that their state is good; and the design of Satan here
is to drive you into such a way wherein you shall certainly meet with a
disappointment, and being under a disappointment, then you may more easily, and
more strongly question your state. But we are not to expect revelations, nor
miraculous operations, but to wait upon the Lord in his own consecrated ways
that he has appointed for the dispense of pardon, of peace and comfort, and an
evidence of our interest.

Sixthly. Again, Look upon and rejoice in the dawnings of the day, when thou
can not see the Sun in its noon day brightness; my meaning is, bless God for
a little, let it be never so small that he has given to thee, and wear it with
much thankfulness, though thou have not a full assurance of thy interest, yet
bless God that thou have a liberty to follow Christ; thou have not a full sight
of thy standing in Christ; ay, but bless God that thou have a liberty to cry
after Christ, thou may cry after Christ, though for the present thou can
not rejoice in Christ; well, if the Lord has given thee a heart for this, thou
should magnify his name; let the work be never so small that is in thy Soul,
yet if thou be in the way to Heaven, bless God for this. It is matter of
comfort to thee in thy present state (Christian) that though thou have not yet
assurance, yet thou art in the way to be assured, though thou have not yet a
full evidence of thy interest, thou art in the way of following of Christ, and
thou do not know how soon thou may have the evidence of thy interest. It is
a comfort to a Child to consider, that though he is in some remoteness from his
Fathers House, yet he is in his way upon his journey to it: So Christian,
though thou have not all, yet thou art in the way to more, thou art in the way
to be assured, and in the way to the full possession of Christ; take notice of
this, and bless God for it.

Seventhly, Prefer service for Christ, before assurance in Christ, and esteem
duty for and toward Christ, before consolation in Christ. It argues a very low
and mercenary spirit to act only for, or toward the Lord upon the feelings of
our interest in him, or only for the comforts that do attend a sensible
interest in him; no, we must follow Christ wherever he goes, and prefer
service for Christ before comfort in Christ, and resolve to follow Christ, and
to serve him, whether he do settle us, and comfort us or no: It is a very
filial, genuine Spirit in a Child to say; well, let my Father give me a
portion, or deny me a portion, yet I will serve him, though my Father
disinherit me, yet I will serve him; so the believer should say, he should
prefer a command before a promise, and assistance for duty before incomes in
duty. Now it may be Christian, thou have failed here, therefore advance thy
esteem of the command, and advance the honor of duty and service for Christ,
and let these things be uppermost in thy heart, and in time the Lord may more
fully appear to thee to settle thee, and to comfort thee whilst thou art
serving of him.

8. Again upon the rising of new darkness, have recourse unto the former
experiences that thou have had of peace, joy, and comfort in believing: God it
may be does withold a new word, because he would have thee go to the old
word, that he has spoken before, and God may withhold a new sign, because he
would have thee go to the old sign that he gave thee for a discovery before;
now in present days of darkness often reflect upon what formerly thou have
enjoyed in order to thy hope and confidence, and make use of that. And then,

Ninthly, In the ninth place, Be you kind unto all the Lords mourners that are
companions with you in darkness. I mean, learn to sympathise with those that
want the light of Gods countenance. The Lord (it may be) in withholding a
sense of interest, does design to make thee more sensible of another condition
in the dark, that thou may know how to sympathise with him in his sorrows
and tribulations; ay, and to comfort others with the consolation wherewith the
Lord has comforted thee. Therefore be you kind and affectionate unto those
that are companions with you in darkness, and pray with them, and pray over
them, and express the affections of your Souls to them in all your remembrance
of them; and in a little while the Lord may come in for to lead you forth into
the company of those whose hearts are made to rejoice and be glad in the light
of his countenance, and in the evidence of their own interest in Christ.

SERMON VI.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my
Salvation.


FRom hence we have observed,

Doct. That there is enough in Christ Jesus alone, for the Soul's full
rejoicing and triumph, whatsoever his state and condition is in this world. We
told you in nine particulars what the doubtful Soul should do in the interim,
until he can clear up his own interest, and standing in Christ Jesus. We shall
only superadd one particular more.

Tenthly, If thou be (Soul) still in the dark in and about thy Interest after
narrow and deep searches and enquiries, resign up thy self unto the Lord Jesus,
and stand to his allowance, and be willing to work in the dark, whilst the Lord
shall keep you in the dark. Be not your own chusers and carvers in this thing,
but leave the Lord to choose for you. Indeed, we are not to rest satisfied in
our spirits without an evidence of our Interest, because it is attainable, but
as to the comfort of our Interest, and the Joy and Peace of our Souls upon the
Interest, we should resign up our selves unto the Lord Jesus, and leave him to
make the dispose of our state; and this is the way to come unto a speedy
settlement and assurance: But I shall not enlarge here, but proceed unto the
fourth thing proposed.

Fourthly, And that is, to give you some Signs and Evidences of your Interest
and standing in blessed Jesus. And as we say generally, Causes are best known
by their Effects; Trees are best known by their fruit; Life is best known by
motion; so interest in Christ is best known by the effects of Interest. And
that you might know what Jesus Christ has done in you, and is doing for you,
do but consider

First, In the first place, That there is upon the Soul's Interest in Christ, a
Divine Principle of Life infused into the heart by the Lord Jesus, unto whom he
is united, which becomes the spring of his spiritual motions toward Christ,
and of his profession of Christ. Interest in Christ is a Life-Interest, and
there is a Divine Principle of Life that upon it is infused into the Soul, that
becomes the spring of his spiritual motions. This Principle of life is
variously set out in Scripture; sometimes it is called the New Creature; If any
man be in Christ he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. A New Creature denotes
life; sometimes it is set out by the word life; He that has the Son has life,
1 John 5.12. Sometimes it is called the Divine Nature: Whereby are given unto
us exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these ye might be partakers
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Now there is life in the Divine Nature, and
the Divine Nature infused, becomes a Life-Principle in the heart where it is
infused, and is the spring of its spiritual motions. This is set out sometimes
by ingraftment, as the Syence is ingrafted into the Stock; there is a
conveyance of life upon the ingraftment, and upon the union: Thus the Graft or
the Syence does receive sap and nourishment from the Root, whereby it comes to
live. Now, says Jesus Christ in your spiritual union with him, I am the Vine,
says he, ye are the branches, John 15.5. He that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit. And Romans 11.17. And if some of the branches
be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive Tree, be grafted in amongst them,
and with them partakest of the Root and fatness of the Olive Tree. Abraham is
only instrumentally here spoken of, as God was pleased to own him, and honor
him to be the Father of all Believers; but Christ Jesus is principally and
effectually the Root, the Stock that Believers are ingrafted into; he is the
Root that both Abraham and all Believers stand in, and grow upon, and they
partake of the sweetness and fatness of that good Olive Tree: Sometimes it is
expressed by an incorporation, as the Head and the Members do make up but one
Body, and every Member united unto the Body, it does receive, life spirit,
sense, motion and strength from the Head. Now, says the Lord Jesus, Ye are all
Members of my Body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. We are all Members of the same Body, and
so have the same Head, from thence is life, spirit and grace, and nourishment
conveyed into every part. Now from hence it is that Jesus Christ is called the
Life of Believers, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And
Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, etc. So as Christ he does
convey and infuse a Principle of Life into the Soul, that is interested in
himself, and upon that account he is called a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45.
(The second Adam was made a quickening spirit,) that he might give Life to all
those that are united to him, and interested in him. And this spiritual Life
that we receive from Jesus Christ, is the Life of our Life, and the very Soul
of our Soul in all our motions Godward, and it becomes the spring of our
spiritual profession, and of all our movings toward God. The Soul that is
interested in Christ, is not moved by an artificial spring, but he does act and
move from a life, spring, from a living spring, which is the Principle of
Divine Life, that in his Interest in Christ he receives; and this it is that
puts him on; this it is that constrains him; this it is that moves and acts
him, in all his bendings and inclinings Godward. They that are interested in
Christ, they do desire Christ, and move toward Christ upon a Principle of
Life, so as they cannot be satisfied without Christ, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born
Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. The Babe
or Infant does cry after the Breast upon a natural Principle of Life; natural
Life is the Principle of its crying. So does the Believer move toward, and
make after Christ, from a spiritual Principle of Life; and that Principle of
Life that he has received from Christ, is the Divine Spring of all his Divine
Actions, or of his Religious Actings. The Soul is not moved only upon a
Principle to satisfy and silence his Conscience, nor yet to get himself a name
to live, to make himself honorable among the people that make a profession of
Christ; nor yet upon the account of any secular advantage; but there is a
Divine Spring in his Soul of spiritual Life, that he has received from the
Lord Jesus Christ, and this works up his heart to the frame he is in, and
causes him to move toward the Lord, and makes him unsatisfied without Jesus
Christ. Now my Friends, bring your Soul-state into an examination by this, What
change is there wrought in your hearts? Do not eye your profession so much as
your hearts. Consider what work has past upon your Souls: Are you spiritually
renewed? Have you received Life from Christ? Is there such a real spiritual
Change wrought in your Souls as does amount to a New Creature? And have you
received of the Divine Nature from Christ? And is there a living Spring that
moves your Souls in all your motions toward Christ? If so, it argues an
Interest; but if the Spring of your motion be from without, it is a sign that
it is artificial, and not living; and so it argues no Interest in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, Interest in Christ mixeth concerns, and may be discovered by
reciprocal acts in a mutual Interest. The Interest that the Soul has in
Christ, is never alone; but the Soul that is interested in Christ Jesus, has
Christ Jesus interested in him; so as the Interest is mutual, and upon a mutual
Interest concerns are mixed; so as Christ and the Believer have one concern
between them: Christ is interested in the Believer's concerns, and the Believer
is interested in Christ's concerns: The Believer concerns himself for Christ,
and Christ concerns himself for the Believer. The Believer is interested in all
that Christ is, and in all that Christ has; and Christ is interested in all
that the Believer is, and in all that the Believer has: The Believer has a
room in Christ's heart, and Christ has a room in the Believer's heart. The
believer has a propriety in Christ, and Christ has a propriety in the
believer; says the Spouse, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, the
interest is mutual. Jesus is my Jesus, says the believing Soul: Christ is my
Christ, he is my Savior, and I have an interest in his love and grace, and I
have an interest in his life, in his power, in his strength and fullness; and
Christ, he has an interest in me also, he has an interest in my love, he has
an interest in my heart, and in my strength, and in all that have and am: and
the interest being mutual, mixing concerns, it may be discovered by reciprocal
acts, that is, as Christ makes over himself to the Soul, so the Soul makes over
himself unto Christ, 1 John 4.19. We love him because he first loved us: he
has set his love upon us; and there will be a reciprocal acting in the Soul
toward him, he will also set his love upon Christ; Christ indeed is the first
mover, and so the glory must be given unto him, but the interest it is mutual,
and the acting is reciprocal. The Lord Jesus Christ he makes over himself to
the Soul to be his: The Soul he accepts of Christ when tendered, and that is
not all, but he makes a return unto Christ, devoting himself unto him, yielding
and resigning himself unto Christ to be his, to walk in his ways, Ezekiel. 16.18.
there you may see the actings of Christ toward the Soul, says he, I spread my
skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness, yea, I swear unto thee, and entered
into a covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou becamest mine, I swear unto
thee; there the Lord did pass over himself to the believer. Now there are
reciprocal actings in the Soul toward him, Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the
Lord this day to be thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes,
etc. and the Lord v. 18. has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people
as he has promised; here are reciprocal acts, now Christian, if thou would
make a discovery of thy state, to know whether thou art interested in Christ;
Consider what interest Christ has in thee, what interest he has in thy heart;
what a share he has in thy affections, and what a place he has in thy life,
is there a kind of sacredness in thy heart for the Lord Jesus Christ in a holy
resignation to him. So there is in the Soul that is interested in Christ, Cant.
4.12. A Garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, a Spring shut up, a Fountain
sealed: She is under a peculiar dedication to, and reserve for her Lord, whom
she has devoted her self unto, and is as a Garden enclosed, Now Christian, if
thy heart lies in common, and there be no sacredness upon it, and no secret
reserve of it, it speaks but sadly for thee; but where there is a dedication
unto Christ, and if you can find Christ interested in you, it is an evidence
that your are interested in Christ, for we can never move toward Christ, till
he first moves toward us: We can never choose Christ, until Christ has first
chosen us. If that thou can find thy heart open for Christ, and toward
Christ, it is a clear evidence that Christ's heart has been first opened to
thee; all our love to Christ is but the reflection of Christ's love to us: Mary
did not call Raboni, till Christ first called Mary. So as if thou find thy
heart under a dedication to Christ, that Christ is thy joy and delight, and
has full rule and liberty in thy heart, that thy heart is opened, or at least
opening, and there are outgoings of Soul in thee toward the Lord Jesus Christ;
It does argue that thou have an interest in him, and that he has begun to draw
thee, that he has cast the skirt of his Grace over thee, and made thee his.

Thirdly, The Soul that has an interest in Christ is brought under the ruling
power of Christ, so as he chooses him to be his only Lord. That Soul has as
yet no interest in Christ, that despises the government of Christ, that
resuseth obedience unto the Scepter and dominion of Jesus Christ; these you
know are reckoned among Christ's enemies, that say concerning him, this man
shall not reign over us; you have a clear Scripture for this, Isaiah 63.19. We
are thine. How did it appear that they were the Lords? Because it was
implicitly and tacitly asserted that the Lord did bear rule over them. And how
did it appear that they were none of Christ's, and Christ none of theirs?
Because he did never bear rule over them, neither were they called by his name:
So then, those that slight and despise the Scepter of Christ Jesus, and refuse
allegiance to this glorious King of Heaven, are none of his Subjects, and so
have no part nor interest in him: but now that Soul that has an interest in
Christ, is brought under the rule of Christ, and Christ does exercise and
display an overruling power in his heart, that brings him unto his foot, and
he is enabled to live in a professed subjection to the Scepter, and Kingly
power of Christ Jesus; upon this interest the Soul has in Christ, his Spirit
is satisfied in the government of Christ, he is reconciled unto all the
commands of Christ, and he delights in the dominion of Christ, and he freely
and cheerfully resigns up himself unto the Scepter of Jesus Christ. Lord (says
the Soul) here I am, rule over me. Christ never interests a Soul in himself,
that he does not bear the sway in its heart, and command the powers of its
Soul, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy
power: When Jesus Christ makes a willing people, that is, displays the power of
his Grace, and brings home a Soul, and gives it an interest in himself, he
subjects the heart unto his Government, he makes the Soul freely willing to be
ruled by the laws, and by the Authority of Christ Jesus; no laws seem so
desirable unto him as the laws of Jesus; no rule, no Scepter so pleasant as the
Scepter of Christ, and all the commands of Christ are chosen by him, as being
equal, righteous, holy, pleasant, and good: the Spirit is reconciled to Christ
Jesus in the whole of his Gospel Government over the heart of the Christian. My
Lord and my God, says Thomas; these always go together; My God, and also my
Lord. And this particular I ground upon, and gather out of my Text, he is
become the God of my Salvation; how shall I know that? He is my Lord, says the
Prophet, I will rejoice in the Lord; the title Lord notes Dominion and
Sovereignty. Now the Soul that is interested in Christ, rejoices in the
Dominion and Sovereignty of Christ Jesus; I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my Salvation. The inference that is drawn from this
Scripture, for our present purpose is this, that the Soul that is interested in
Christ, will rejoice in the dominion of Christ, or does receive Christ Jesus as
a Lord, and as a Lord does rejoice in, and under him. Indeed there may be much
weakness in his obedience; I don't say that he does exactly, and to a tittle
walk up to the rule to fulfill every command of God; No, I know there is a
great deal of weakness in the strongest believer upon earth, and through the
strength of corruption, and the violence of temptation, he may sometimes be
fovled and born down, ay, but when he is so, still his heart is right, and he
loves the commands of Christ, that he cannot come up to, and he honors the
rule of Christ, and to his utmost makes way for the sway of the Scepter of
Christ in his Soul, though he may be born down by temptation; yet his love
remains still unto every command of Jesus, Romans 7.25. I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord; so then with my mind I my self serve the law of God, but with
the flesh the law of sin. Says Paul, I am born down, I am overcome, but I
don't justify my self herein, but I bless God, says he, that my heart is
secured, my love does not abate, I have not waved a command through my
dissatisfaction in it, I have not been disobedient to a command, because I
judged it unreasonable, or were dissatisfied in it; No, but my heart, that
stands right for those commands that I cannot reach in my life; with my mind I
my self serve the law of God. So Romans 1.9. says the Apostle, For God is my
witness whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son: so as you see the
Spirit that stands clear, and is under a constant and full engagement, though
it may be the life does not discover that evenness that it should; with my
Spirit, says he, I serve the Lord. It may be said in the case of the
temptation of a believer, as was said concerning the Spouse, I sleep, but my
heart aw^k^th; thus it is with many a poor Soul, he may be brought into a
sleepy condition, and he staggers and stumbles in his way, he finds it so
difficult, but says he, while I sleep my heart awaketh, his declensions do not
arise from dissatisfaction, but his love is reconciled to the command still,
and he honors those precepts that he is not able to come up to. Now Christian,
bring your condition to this touchstone, if thou have a heart that does slight
the government of Christ; and if thou can not bear the strict rule and
dominion of Christ Jesus over thy Soul, if that thou have thy exceptions,
against the Scepter of Christ Jesus being lifted up in thy heart; it is a sign
that thou art not yet interested in Christ, thou never did bear rule over
them, they were not called by thy name; I pray remember that that rule that
thou despisest, is the only saving rule, and that power that thou refusest to
stoop to, is the only saving power, the only blessed and blessing power. But on
the other side, if thou can find that thy heart is open unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, as he is the Lord, as he is invested with all power, as the Father has
given all Authority unto him, if thy heart be open to him, and thou do love
his Laws in their holiness and strictness, and his Government and Rule for its
closeness; and if way be made in thy Soul for the Throne of Christ to be set
up, it argues thou art interested in Christ; for those that are Christ's does
the Lord bear Rule over.

Fourthly, The Soul's Interest in Christ may be known by the distance that the
heart stands in from the power and interest of his former state that Christ
Jesus has overturned. The Soul before his coming over to Christ was under the
Rule of another Lord, and was in subjection to another Interest, to the power
and interest of sin, and that bore sway in his heart, and commanded his life;
he yielded up himself a servant to sin, and devoted himself unto the service of
sin. This the Apostle speaks out, Romans 6.16, 17. Know ye not that to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness; but God be
thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the
form of Doctrine which was delivered to you. And in 19, and 20 verses you have
it again. And says he, When you were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness. He does plainly show, that they were formerly servants to
another Interest; they were engaged in the service of sin; they acted sin as in
a service; as a servant observes, and respects, and obeys his Master, so does
the natural heart observe, respect and obey sin; and it is his Lord; it has
the commanding power of his Soul; and it is a most pleasant service to the
sinner, though he will find it a sad service in the latter end; yet it is a
most pleasant and a most delightful service; therefore a sinner's walking in
sin, and gratifying the lusts of the flesh, is called his pleasure, the
pleasures of sin; he takes pleasure therein: O! it is his meat and drink to
satisfy the lusts of his heart, in gratifying this Lord that is over his Soul.
Now my Friends, your Interest in Christ may be discovered, by the distance that
your hearts stand in from the power and interest of this Lord, that Jesus
Christ has overthrown, that is a constant enemy to your in-being and standing
in Christ. And that I may help you to make a right judgment of your state in
reference to this particular, I shall open to you in several particulars, what
this distance is that the Soul stands in unto the interest of sin, that Jesus
Christ has overthrown in the heart upon his making over himself to the Soul.

First, There is upon the Soul's Interest in Christ this distance unto sin, his
former Lord, that he proclaims war against it, and becomes its professed enemy.
It may be the life of a Christian is not at present a Conquering life; ay, but
it is a Conflicting life, Romans 7.23. But I see another Law in my members
warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law
of sin which is in my members. Well, there is opposition for opposition, as sin
rises up against him, so he rises up against sin: And as sin upon his
Interest in Christ declares against him, so he declares against sin, and he
watches it as one enemy watches the motions of another; and he takes all
ways, and uses all endeavors to foil and bring under this enemy.

Secondly, The opposition that is carried on and managed in the heart against
sin, it is general. It is not an opposition in one part only, but it is an
opposition that the whole Soul does engage in, and all the powers of the Soul
are concerned in it. It is not only an opposition in the Conscience, but there
is an opposition in the Affections as well as in the Conscience; and there is
an opposition in the Will, as well as in the Conscience and Affections, and
also an opposition in the Judgment; both the Conscience and the Affections, the
Will, and the Understanding and Judgment, do all discharge against sin; and all
the renewed powers of the Soul enter into a strict combination against the
interest of sin. The Conscience that lays loads upon it whenever it appears,
and the Affections they declare against it, and the Will that resolves against
it, and the Understanding and Judgment do discover it, and witness against it.
The opposition that is made it is general.

Thirdly, In this distance that the heart stands in unto sin upon its Interest
in Christ, the heart in its most deliberate actings stands in an
irreconcileableness unto it. The opposition that is made is not upon a sudden
motion; it is not upon a passion of the Soul that in cool thoughts will be
called in again; but the Soul in its most deliberate actings stands in an
irreconcileableness unto it. That the Affections will never be enticed over to
sin again, the Love will never be invited over to sin again; indeed he may be
overpowered to sin, but he will never be reconciled to sin more; his Love and
Affections can never be gained to sin again, but the Affections are so broken,
that the distance will ever remain, and the Soul will always stand in, and act
upon an irreconcileableness to it.

Fourthly, The distance of the heart unto the interest of sin upon the Soul's
Interest in Christ, is universal unto all sin. It is not only alienated and
drawn from notorious and gross sins, that make a great noise in the world, or
against some particular sins, that his walking in will turn to his
disadvantage; but it stands at a distance from all sin, from heart-sins, as
well as from life sins, from small sins as well as from great sins; and from
such sins as are connatural to us from inclination, complexion, and condition,
and employment, and the like, the heart stands at an universal distance from
all sin.

Fifthly, The distance of the heart from sin upon its Interest in Christ, is
unto sin as it has a contrary nature in it to the Interest of Christ in him.
He does oppose sin, not upon a particular, but upon a general account; he
opposes sin as sin, as it has a contrariety in its nature unto the Lord, and
the Interest and Dominion of the Lord in his Soul; and so he will oppose sin
while sin is sin, and whilst there is any sin remaining in him. The distance
that his heart stands in unto sin, is unto it as it has a contrary nature in
it unto Christ's Interest in him, and his Interest in Christ.

Sixthly, The distance of the heart unto the Interest of sin that Christ has
overturned, upon his having an interest in himself, it is such as hates sin in
the temptation. It does not only hate sin when it is committed, and when
Conscience lays hold upon him for the commitment of it; but it sets the Soul at
a distance from sin in the temptation, whilst it is a great way off; and hence
we are commanded to abstain from the appearance of evil; and the Saints they
hate the appearance of evil; that which looks like a disputable evil, the
gracious heart stands at a distance from it, or that which has a probability
in it of being an occasion of sin to him, that will the gracious heart stand
off from; he will oppose sin at a distance, and he hates and watches against
sin in the temptation, the heart stands at such a distance from it.

Seventhly, The distance of the heart from sin is such, that it chooses rather
to suffer than to sin. Nay, it will choose a great suffering before a little
sin. It will say, Lord, any thing rather than sin, and no burden will be like
the burden of sin to him; no weight like the weight of sin upon his
Conscience; and therefore he says, Lord, any condition rather than to be driven
upon a temptation whereby I shall sin; any thing Lord but sin.

Eighthly, The distance that the heart stands in unto sin upon its Interest in
Christ is such, as does discover a great reluctance of spirit, and deep
searchings of heart upon the invasions of sin, and the Soul's passive
captivities by it. Probably he may be foiled and overcome by sin, and many
times against his will he is overcome; ay, but when he is so, he mourns, and he
weeps, and that bitterly; he does not justify the fault; he does not extenuate
the offense; he does not hide his transgression but his Soul breaks out into
mourning by reason of it, and that upon the passive captivities of the Soul by
it, when the Soul against his will is overcome; he watches and he strives to
keep it under, and yet sin is too hard for him, and whether he will or no
sometimes leads him captive, and carries him out of the way; he goes mourning
into these captivities, and he groans when he falls into the hands of sin, and
when he is at any time taken a prisoner. Thus it was with Paul; Paul had an
honest heart, he did labor against sin what he could, and yet says he, I find
that when I would do good evil is present with me; and there is a cursed Law in
my members, that leads me captive to the Law of sin, whether I will or no; he
strove, and conflicted, and watched, and did his utmost, yet says he, I find a
Law, that when I would do good, evil is present, and I am taken captive, but he
groans under it; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? Romans 7.24. It was one of the deepest and most sorrowful
complaints that ever the Apostle Paul made; and thus we find Scripture Saints
upon Record, when at any time they have been overcome and led captive, it has
been a time of great sorrow, darkness, mourning and bitter complaint to them.
Now this is another part of the distance that the Soul stands in from sin.

Ninthly, The heart stands (upon his Interest in Christ) at such a distance
from sin, that nothing will satisfy the Soul but the returns of death upon it.
Sin, that seeks the ruin of grace, and the destruction of the Soul; and the
Soul that is interested in Christ stands at such a distance from sin, that he
seeks, and designs, and labors to the utmost to hate sin, and to pursue it
unto death. It is not the pardon of sin that will satisfy a true Believer. Let
me say thus much, that if you be at no greater distance from sin than this;
that if the Lord will pardon you, all is well, and you will lay down the
Cudgels, it is a sign your heart is not right with Christ. If you have an
Interest in Christ, you will be at a greater distance from sin than so, the
pardon of sin will not satisfy you; if sin should be driven into the secret
retirement of your Soul, and should there remain among the stuff, yet this will
not satisfy you. The Soul that is interested in Christ, is set upon the death
of sin as its enemy; and that is the meaning of those Scriptures wherein we are
called upon to mortify sin, and to crucify sin, that is, to destroy sin, to
be the death of it, Ephesians. 5.14. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts: They are doing of it; sin is dying, and
mortifying, and crucifying, and it shall be crucified, and mortified, and
slain, and appear to be wholly dead ere long: This is that that the Soul is set
upon, the death of this body of death, the utter ruin and destruction of it;
it will not be satisfied that sin is a mortifying and dying in it, but the
distance of the heart from it is such, that it will not bear the being of it:
Though it cannot drive out all these cursed Canaanites, to have the Land at
rest, and peace when it will; yet it will maintain the war, and abide the
field, and never give over till sin be wholly dead. Now I beseech you
Christians, you who are desirous to clear your own state, bring your condition
to a trial upon this head, and examine what that distance is, that your heart
stands in unto the Interest and Power of your former state which Jesus Christ
has overthrown; examine the distance that your hearts stand in unto sin, in
these nine particulars: Is the distance such as that you have proclaimed and
engaged in an holy war against it; Or do you only speak slightly of sin before
men, and hide it in your hearts? Again consider, Is the Conflict that you
professed to be engaged in against sin, general? Or is your opposition against
sin only in your Conscience? Verily a natural man will oppose sin thus. A
Hypocrite's Conscience may check him for sin; a carnal man's Conscience may
sometimes wound him for sin, and speak high against it, but is the opposition
from the Affections, from the Will, and from the Judgment, as well as the
Conscience? Do all the powers of the Soul engage against it? And do they all
combine against sin to bring it under? If so Christians, though sin yet live in
you, and sometimes prevail over you to your grief and disadvantage, yet you are
of the better side, and have a promising evidence of your Interest in Christ.
And again, does your heart in its most deliberate actings stand in an
irreconcileableness unto sin? It may be the opposition thou make against sin,
is only in a passion, or only some sudden motion upon a disadvantage that thou
meetest with in thy sinful ways; but consider whether your Souls do
deliberately stand in an irreconcileableness unto sin; and whether your
Affections be so engaged, that they refuse to receive this object, because your
Souls loath it. Again, Is this distance universal to all fin? It may be Soul,
there are some sins that thou would pick at, and be willing to part with
them; but there are some others that you are ready to say of them, O! they are
but little ones; Good Lord spare them. Is the distance thy heart stands in to
sin, to all sin, to heart-sins as well as to life-sins, to little sins as well
as to great sins, to those sins that are most connatural, and that thy heart
and thy disposition does most close with? And then again, Is thy distance to
sin as sin, as it has a contrary nature in it to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to
his blessed Interest in thy heart? then the Conflict will be abiding as long as
there is sin remaining in thy Soul. Again, How stands thy heart unto sin in the
temptation? This verily is a discriminating Character of a Saint. Those whose
hearts are not rightly engaged, they may oppose sin, and speak highly against
it, when it is committed, and when they have seen the ill consequents and
effects of it; but do you oppose sin in the temptation, when it is a great way
off? And do you shun and avoid, and flee from the occasions of sin? that which
may probably be an introducement unto sin? do you avoid that, and arm your
selves against that? This will be an evidence to you that you are interested in
Christ. And again, Do you choose rather to suffer than to sin? Verily this is
also a discriminating Character of the reality of your Interest in Christ.
Another man may choose to avoid sin, when he receives a prejudice by it, or when
he cannot apprehend an advantage to the lusts and desires of his own heart; Ay,
but the gracious Soul that is interested in Christ, it stands afar off from
sin, so as it says, Lord, any condition rather than sin; any burden rather
than the burden of sin; any affliction, any grief, rather than sin. And then,
Do you consider what reluctancies are in your spirits against the irruptions of
sin, and the passive captivities of the Soul by it? Where the heart is not
right, it will have no great reflection upon a passive captivity; upon an
active surrender he may, when he has sold himself to work wickedness, he may
be made ashamed of his folly; Ay, but a Hypocrite, a false heart, will never
deeply mourn for a passive captivity, but there he will say, Well, I could not
help it, it was not my fault, and so will be excusing of it; as the Woman did;
The Serpent beguiled me, I intended no such thing, I was seduced and overcome;
a passive Captivity bears no great sway in a false heart, but an upright Soul,
he mourns over sin, how passive soever he is in the prevailings of it, when he
cannot prevent sin, he will mourn over the prevailings of it. It will be his
constant grief that he was led Captive, and that when he would do good, evil
was present with him, and that he is overcome when he strives to overcome. And
again, consider Soul whether there be any thing less then the returns of death
will satisfy thee in thy pursuits of sin? for the gracious Soul that is
interested in Christ will pursue sin unto death, restraining grace will not
serve him, pardoning grace will not do, but he will be for the crucifying of the
lusts of the flesh, for the mortifying of sin in his Soul, for the utter ruin
and extirpation of it. Now Sirs, if you can find those things in you, it does
speak for you, and will help to clear your interest in Christ Jesus.

Fifthly, The Soul that is interested in Christ will prize the least of Christ
above the greatest enjoyments out of Christ. A little of Christ will be more to
him then a great deal of the Creature; nay a little of Christ will be more to
him then all the Creature; a little of Christ's grace, a little of Christ's love,
a little of Christ's Spirit, a small income from Christ, the least love token
from Christ, the least saving Gospel manifestation and discovery of Christ; O
it is the sweetest discovery, and the most blessed enjoyment that ever his Soul
had: Thus it was with David (if he be the Author of Psalm. 73. and Asaph only
the Penman;) David at once overlookt his Crown, and his Kingdom, and all his
Treasures that he had in the world, and the whole world that was before him,
and says he, Lord, whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. And so the Apostle Paul, says
he, I count all things but dross and dung in comparison of Christ Jesus my
Lord, Phil. 3.8 Christ was more to him than all other things; and verily
Christians, so will it be with you, if your hearts be right; a little of Christ
will be more to you then all the treasures, pleasures, and the glories and
enjoyments of this whole world, and you will esteem your selves more honorable
with a little grace in your hearts, then with your Houses full of wealth.

Now to close, do but bring thy heart to this touchstone, and do but consider
what it is that thy heart is most set upon, and what it is that will satisfy
thee; if this world, and the comforts of it can satisfy thee without Christ,
thou have no part in Christ; nay if thou preferrest other enjoyments before a
participation in Christ, thou have none of Christ; if thou have a saving
interest in Christ, the manifestations of Christ to thy Soul, will be the most
blessed manifestations, O the least incomes of Christ will be as life from the
dead. The least love token, the least intimation of his love, the least saving
effect and operation of his grace upon thy heart, and the increase of communion
with him: These things will be the life, and the joy of thy Spirit. If thou
can find it thus with thee, really and in truth, that a little of Christ is
prized in thy heart above the greatest enjoyments out of Christ; it is a sign
and evidence that thou art interested in Christ. It may be Soul thou have but a
little of Christ in thy heart, very little of Christ but a little of the grace
of Christ, and but a little of the Spirit of Christ, and can do but little
for Christ; ay, but the least incomes of Christ, they are the sweetest incomes
to thee, and thy enjoyments of Christ are the most satisfying enjoyments, and
thy Soul will prefer an opportunity of communion with the Lord Jesus before
great advantages otherwise: If it be thus with thee, it is an evident sign that
thou art interested in Christ, and thou may take comfort in thy present
standing in him.

SERMON VII.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.


THe Proposition is this,

Doct. That there is enough in Christ Jesus alone, for the Souls full rejoicing
and triumph, whatsoever his condition and exigency is in this world. This we
have cleared to you, and are now upon clearing up of the Souls state, that he
may know whether he has interest in this full Jesus: We have already given you
five particulars that may be as so many evidences of a Christians interest in
Christ, and shall now proceed.

Sixthly, In the sixth place, The Soul that is interested in Christ, is under
an overruling influence from Christ that secures the habitual inclinations of
his Soul for Christ against all contrary invitations and drawings. Particular
acts are not a sufficient conclusive ground of our state one way or another: A
Soul that has no interest in Christ, may seem choice and singular in some
actions and there may be a seeming lovely desirable sanctity upon him, and a
Soul that is really interested in Christ, may by the power of a temptation be
drawn into some unbecoming acts; so as particular acts are no sufficient ground
of an interest: and if you judge by them, you may easily be deceived, but he
that is really united to Christ, is under a divine influence from Christ, that
secures the habitual inclinations of his heart for him, that so the blass of
his heart is toward Christ, and the full purpose of the Soul in its secret
breathings and inclinings are after the Lord Jesus alone. It may be when the
temptation comes, he may be almost staggered, but yet his heart stands right
for Christ in the main, in whom he is interested, and though temptations may
have a great power upon him, yet the biass of his heart will wind through all
temptations unto Christ alone; thus it was with Paul; there were contrary
drawings in the heart of Paul, and the temptations that he met withal from the
remains of indwelling sin were very great, yet his heart under all stood right,
and the habitual inclinations of his heart were for, and toward Christ Jesus,
and this was the Characteristical note of his in-being in Christ, Romans 7.15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. You may see it at large, For that which I do, says
he, I allow not, for what I would do I do not, but what I hate, that do I: if
then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good, etc.
The old man it was rising and rebelling in him, and did improve all its
strength, and its whole interest in his heart to draw him aside; now, says he,
at this time when I was under those shakings, then my heart was in the way of
Christ, and I consented unto the law that it was good, that which I did not,
was that which I would do. And though I found a law in my Members that was
warring against the law of my mind, yet says he, I delight in the law of God
after the inward man, there is my delight, the inclinations, the habitual
inclinations of my Soul were not changed nor turned, but the secret workings
and breathings of my Soul are toward the Lord Jesus Christ. And thus it was
with David: David had many temptations, and rubs in his way, that had like to
have turned him out of the way, but yet says he, Psalm. 119.20. My Soul
breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times, and
Psalm, 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul
after thee O God. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I
come and appear before him? And says the Prophet, Isaiah 26.9. With my Soul
have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek
thee early; the night season was a dark time, and it is probable his Spirit was
very much endangered at that time by temptation, dark times are times of
temptation, and his Soul at that time was almost overwhelmed in the conflicts
of his Spirit, with the divisions of his heart in the night season. Now says
he, when it was thus darkness about me, temptation arose upon me, with my Soul,
says he, have I desired thee. Then did my heart stand clear for Christ, though
I could not discover my self as I would: Now Christians, if you would make a
judgment of your own state; do you fix your eye upon your hearts, and consider
how they stand, and secretly observe the habitual inclinations of your hearts,
do you, as the expression is, Acts 11.23. Cleave unto the Lord with full
purpose of heart? Those that are interested in Christ, do with purpose of heart
cleave unto the Lord. There is not only some good thoughts rise in their hearts
now and then, they have not only some scant desires after Christ, or some
sudden motions upon their Spirits toward him, but the bent of their heart is
toward Christ at all times, the breathings and longings of the heart is after
Christ. Now those that are under such an influence from above, as to secure the
habitual inclinations of their Souls for Christ against all contrary
invitations and drawings; these are such as have indeed an interest in Christ,
and this is the influence of the interest on Christ's part upon your Souls?

Seventhly, A Soul that is interested in Christ is so concerned in the concerns
of Christ, as dishonours unto, and dishonorable reflections upon the Lord
Jesus Christ, bear hard upon his Spirit: My Brethren, the Souls interest in
Christ is a oneing interest, an interest that makes you one with Christ, and
the Soul will be a sharer and partner with Christ in all his dishonours, in all
his griefs, and in all his afflictions, Jesus Christ speaks sometimes of being
wounded, and of being grieved, and of being offended. Now the Soul that is
really interested in Christ, is offended where Christ is offended. The Soul
that is really interested in Christ, will grieve over, and for whatsoever does
grieve Christ, either in himself or others, he will be wounded with that which
does wound Christ, and will mourn over that which is an occasion or matter of
mourning unto Christ, and does bear heavily upon his Spirit, that which does
reflect dishonor upon the name and glory of the Lord Jesus. I remember what
was spoken of our Lord Jesus in reference unto his Father, and the concerns
that he was oned in, Psalm. 69.9. For the zeal of thine House has eaten me up,
and the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me, both these
passages are applied unto Christ Jesus in the New Testament, John 2.16, 17.
there you may see the first passage applied unto him, And his disciples
remembered that it was written, the zeal of thine House has eaten me up: Jesus
Christ you know came into the Temple that was his Fathers House of Worship, and
there he saw his Father dishonored, there he saw his Fathers Worship corrupted
and adulterated, and defiled, and he saw there great reflections upon his
Fathers glory, and he was even eaten up with it: his holy zeal and passion for
his Fathers glory that he was concerned in, did carry him out even beyond
himself to make him disregard and neglect himself; The zeal of thine House has
eaten me up. And says he, the reproaches of them that reproached thee are
fallen upon me. This you have applied to Christ, Romans 15.3. For even Christ
pleased not himself, but as it is written, the reproaches of them that
reproached thee are fallen on me. Jesus Christ he took up sin, and he bore that
sin upon himself, that was a dishonor unto his Father, and that was a wound
unto his Father, and that his Father said he was laden and pressed with, as a
Cart is pressed with Sheaves; he took up this dishonor and reproach, and bore
it upon himself, he was wounded for our transgressions, he was afflicted and
chastened for our sins, the reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me;
Christ he came, and he mourned over sin, and he expressed the sorrow of his
heart, for that whereby his Father was dishonored; now the Soul that is really
interested in Christ is so oned with Christ, as he has fellowship with him in
his dishonor; and in his reproaches, and in all his sufferings, he is a
partner with Christ in his griefs, he is a griever with Christ, and a mourner
with Christ, and a complainer with Christ; if there be any thing in his heart,
or ways, that do offend Christ, he is offended and disturbed with this as soon
as he espies it, and he cannot bear it, because it offends the Lord Jesus, that
he is oned with: and this is that that makes true Christians walk up and down
with such sad hearts; what is the matter? Why, there is something that they
have espied in their hearts, that is offensive to Christ, and they cannot bear
it, and know not how to get rid of it, and there is something in their walk and
conversation that does reflect upon the honor of the Lord Jesus, and their
Souls are wounded with it. And as to the sins of others, that which is a
reflection upon the name, upon the honor and glory of Christ lies hard upon
their Spirits; says David, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of water run down mine Eyes,
because they keep not thy law; and Jeremiah 9.1.2, 3. See how the Prophet
complains of that which the Lord does make a complaint of: They proceed from
evil to evil, says the Lord; and O says he, that my Head were Waters, and
mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep for this. Hence the Saints are
called Mourners in Zion, and we read of those that mourned in the midst of the
Lords People, they mourned sometimes for their own sins, as dishonouring Christ
Jesus. Thus did Peter when he had displeased the Lord, and was sensible of it,
he goes out and weeps bitterly. And sometimes they weep for the sins of others,
that they see the Lord is so much dishonored, and offended by the lives and
conversations of Saints. Now by this make a judgment of your selves
(Christians) and bring your hearts to this touchstone; if that you stand at a
distance from the concerns of the honor of Christ Jesus in the world; and you
look upon the eoncerns of his glory as Alien, that you are not concerned in;
and the dishonours of Christ you are not touched with them, they make no
impression upon your Spirits, truly this speaks very sadly: But now on the
other hand, if that you find your Spirits in fellowship with Christ, in all his
dishonours, if you find that whatsoever does disturb, displease, and grieve the
Lord, is a weight upon your Spirits, and that because it is a weight upon the
heart of Christ Jesus, this is some evidence that you are interested in, and
united unto the Lord Jesus.

Eighthly, Again, The Soul that is interested in Christ is restless in all
pursuits after Christ, until it can compass something of him: Christ is the
center of the heart, and he cannot rest out of Christ, neither can he be long
satisfied without him, but is continually pressing after a sight of, and
fellowship and communion with the Lord Jesus, his heart being as it were
swallowed up with him; lead him unto other things, and they will not satisfy him
out of Christ; lead him unto ordinances, this will not do, if Christ be not there;
advance him unto all Gospel privileges that give him a name and renown amongst
Saints, this will not satisfy him if he has not Christ Jesus there. Thus it was
with the Spouse, she had lost her sight of Christ, and now she had her
ordinances still, and her privileges still, yet this would not satisfy her,
but she goes from ordinance to ordinance, and from privilege to privilege, to
seek after Christ, O saw ye him whom my Soul loves? And truly I may say of
such a heart as is interested in Christ, as Absalom spoke in another case, when
he was well provided for, and had royal Princely accommodations; O! says he,
what is all this to me if I may not see the King's face? 2 Samuel 14.32. So,
whatsoever, be the outward accommodations that a Soul has that is interested
in Christ, still he will be saying, O! what is all this if I have not Christ?
he will be restless in his pursuit after Christ, until he can compass something
of him. Now Christians, examine your hearts by this; if that you can sit down
with something short of Christ; if that you can come to an Ordinance, and have
no communion with Christ in the Ordinance, and yet are well satisfied; if that
you can take up your rest in the privileges of the Gospel, without the Lord
Christ himself, it is a very shroud sign that you are not yet interested in
him; but if no Ordinance will please you, where Christ is not, no enjoyment
will satisfy you if Christ be away; that your eye is upon Christ in and
through all enjoyments, as the only rest and center of your Souls, this is a
good sign of Interest.

Ninthly, In the ninth place, The Soul that is interested in Christ, makes his
preparations, and his reformations in his heart, which Christ principally
respects. He that is united unto Christ, looks chiefly a the heart, which
Christ looks chiefly upon, and his great care is to have his heart swept,
cleansed, purified, sanctified, fitted and furnished for the Majesty of Christ
Jesus: And heart-disturbances, and heart-disorders, are matters of great grief
unto him, because he knows that thereby Christ is displeased. Jesus Christ
takes up his abode with the Soul that is united to him. Now Christ's residence
is in the heart, and the Soul that is united to Christ, will principally look
to prepare that Room where Christ's residence is to be; he will be in the use
of all means to bring his heart into some Gospel decency for the entertainment
of the Lord Jesus; and all that comes from him, it comes from the heart. The
profession that he makes of Christ, it is a heart-rooted profession, and the
change of his life it springs from the change of his heart, and the holiness
and sanctity that he discovers and manifests, is holiness from the heart. Now
Christians, examine your own hearts by this particular also; some preparations
you make, some reformations you are able to show, but are your preparations
only life and conversation preparations? are they not heart preparations too?
Or is your reformation only a life reformation, and not a heart reformation?
They they that are not interested in Christ, they may prepare and reform; but
they will look only to the washing of the outside of the Cup, and the adorning
of the outward man, not the inward man; but now if your greatest care be upon
your hearts, and your utmost diligence is to have them thoroughly reformed, and
to have them under a heavenly dispose for Christ, to make provision there, and
to be fitted in the inward man for communion with the Lord Jesus; and in all
your reformings you first begin there, and carry on outwardly as you are able
to succeed inwardly; This is an evidence of an Interest in the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Tenthly, Again; The Soul that is interested in Christ, lives not upon himself,
nor upon his own actings, but upon Christ unto whom he is joined. The Soul that
is brought into union with the Lord Jesus, he makes the Lord Jesus his all, and
he leans upon him, and stays upon him, and not upon any thing short of him:
Jesus is full, and he lives upon the fullness of Jesus; he comes hungry, and
empty, and naked, unto Jesus, to be satisfied, and to be clothed; he stays
himself upon the merits of Christ, and he confides in the faithfulness of
Christ; and he leans upon the power of Christ, and he acts by the strength of
Christ; he lives in all his whole Christian course upon Christ. Says the
Spouse, Cant. 2.3. As the Apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my
Beloved among the Sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet to my taste. Here Christ was the Spouse's all; she got under
his shade, and there she rested; and she fed upon Christ, and lived upon
Christ; His fruit was sweet unto my taste. The true Believer cannot stay upon
any righteousness but upon Christ's righteousness, in whom he is interested; as
you may see, Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea doubtless I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is through the Faith of Christ, etc. Now Christians, examine your own
hearts by this also; What is it that you live upon? Is it upon Christ? or, Is
it upon your selves? If you can satisfy your selves with a righteousness short
of Christ's, that is, a righteousness of your own, it is a sign you are not yet
interested in him; if you do not go wholly out of your selves, to make loss of
all for Christ, it is a fign you are not yet interested in him; if you act by
your own strength, and do not look up to Christ for strength, it is a sign you
are your own men, that you are not yet in Christ; and if your greatest care be
not to please Christ, it is a sign you are not yet in Christ; but those that
are in Christ, they live upon Christ, they do not live upon duties, they do not
feed upon bare Ordinances, but they feed upon Christ Jesus, and they trust only
to his righteousness, and they eye his merits, and consider his faithfulness,
and act Faith upon his Offices; they trust in him, and they have reference to
Christ at all times.

Eleventhly, Again; The Souls that are interested in Christ, will with
boundless desires be always pressing after Christ, and never think they have
enough of him: Not only will they be restless in their pursuits after Christ,
till they can compass something of him; but there are boundless desires in them
after Christ, and after more of Christ; a little of Christ will not satisfy a
soul that is interested in him; but though he have a little of Christ, he will
still bepressing after more, and think all that he has received is but little;
he must have more of him, more communion with him; and he must be brought into
a higher conformity to him; he cannot rest with a little of Christ, his desires
will be boundless, that he will always in his participation of Christ be still
looking forward, pressing after perfection, and reaching and designing to
apprehend as he is apprehended. A Soul that is interested in Christ, has
always a rising, reaching desire in him after Christ. This you may see, Phil.
3.12, 13, 14. Not as though (says he) I had already attained, either were
already perfect, but I follow after, etc. I press toward the mark for the
prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. What an enlarged heart had
this man Paul? he was come to a very high pitch in Christ Jesus, to make loss
of all for him, and to glory in him, and in his righteousness; and yet
Brethren, says he, I I count not my self to have apprehended. O! says he, What
have I yet of Christ? What have I received yet of the Spirit of Christ? O how
unlike am I yet unto Christ! how unsuitable is my heart yet unto Christ! how
little of Christ is yet in my heart! Brethren, I count not my self to have
apprehended, but this one thing I do, I am reaching forward, says he. The Soul
that is interested in Christ will have noble, genuine workings of heart
suitable to his inbeing in Christ; he will always be desirous of him, and
pressing after more of him, never satisfied with any thing that he has; though
he will bless God for the least he has, yet he will not be satisfied with any
thing that he has, but will be pressing after more, and his language is
always, Give, Give. Now Christians, do you examine your own hearts by this? if
you have really an interest in Christ, it will have such an influence upon your
Souls, as always to prompt you on to a pressing after more of Christ, to get
further into him, and to know more of him, and to be filled with the Spirit of
Christ. A little grace, grace enough to carry you to Heaven, will not satisfy
you, but your desire will be to be made to abound in all grace; your desire
will be to be holy as he is holy, and to be pure as he is pure, in all manner
of conversation; and you will never leave craving and desiring whilst there is
a corner in your hearts to fill, and whilst there is room for a hungring and
thirsting desire to rise in your hearts after the Lord Jesus. Now, if that you
can satisfy your selves with any thing of Christ, and sit down with a bare
profession of Christ, without any thing of Christ in your hearts; if you have
not these holy hungrings and thirstings in your Souls after high measures, and
full enjoyments and manifestations of Christ, it does speak very sadly; but if
there be such boundless desires, as we have told you, after Christ, it is some
sign of Interest.

Twelfthly; Again; The Soul that is interested in Christ, values himself,
persons and things as they are in, or have of Christ in them: He measures all
persons and things by their reference to Christ; and he judges that it is
Christ Jesus only that makes them to differ; and whatsoever is excellent in any
person, or in any thing, it is from Christ Jesus, and it has no more
excellency in it than what it has in and from the Lord Jesus; he does not
value himself by his outward enjoyments; he does not value himself by his
gifts, and by his natural accomplishments, though they be very great and large;
he does not value himself by his privileges in his Gospel-state, but he counts
that he is what he is in Christ Jesus: I am (says he) what I am, by the grace
of God; and if he cannot espy the grace of Christ in him, he yet counts that he
has nothing; and if he cannot find some hopes of an Interest in Christ, he
counts that he is nothing; he owns and makes reckoning of himself as he stands
in, and has reference to Christ. If Paul would have made a judgment of himself
by his gifts, who had greater? If Paul would have judged himself by his
privileges, who had higher? but he judges these nothing; By the grace of God,
says he, I am what I am. And so he reckons of all others; he esteems of persons
as they are in Christ; and those that have most of Christ in them, are most
excellent; he loves a poor mean Soul in Christ, more than the greatest and
richest man in the world out of Christ; if any persons have more of his love,
more of his heart than others, it is those that have most of Christ in them.
The most sincere Christians, and the most growing Christians, and the most
upright Christians, these are the persons that he most loves and values, and
delights in; and as to all Ordinances, he values them not but as he meets with
Jesus Christ in them; if he finds not Christ in an Ordinance, he counts the
Ordinance as no Ordinance: And if a Lord's Day does pass without some communion
with Christ, he counts it is no day to his Soul. And the Gospel of Christ Jesus
that he prizes so much, it is because it is Christ's Gospel, and the Truths of
the Gospel, that are so dear to to him, that he can venture all for, it is
because they are Christ's Truths. Now Christians, examine your state and
condition by this also; what is it that you value your selves by? Do you value
your selves by your bare professions? Do you value your selves by your
enlargement? Do you value your selves by your gifts? Do you value your selves
by the name that you have amongst men? Those that are in Christ do not value
themselves thus, but by what they apprehend themselves to be in, and to have
received from Christ Jesus.

Thirteenthly, Again; The Soul that is interested in Christ, rises and falls in
its spirit, according unto the sensible manifestations or withdrawings of
Christ in his heart; he rejoices as Christ does appear, and he is saddened as
Christ does withdraw, and his joy is coming and going as Christ is coming and
going in his heart; an appearance of Christ makes day in his heart, and the
withdrawings of Christ makes night in his Soul: When there is a Curtain drawn
between Christ and him, then he is in the dark, and then his Soul sits in
sorrow; then he is covered over with mourning; but upon the return of Christ
his Soul leaps within him, and he is filled and satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, Isa. 61.10. I will rejoice in the Lord; my Soul shall be joyful in my
God. Why so? because Christ does appear, and puts on something of his own
clothing, and gives out something of himself to me; he comes as a Bridegroom
decketh himself with Ornaments, and makes me as his Bride, and decks me with
his Jewels. Now this does cause me to rejoice in the Lord, and makes me joyful
in my God. Days of communion, and seasons of manifestation, they are the
festival days that his Soul enjoys, and nothing causes so great a damp upon his
heart, as when Christ draws off. This was seen in David, he rises and falls in
his spirit, as were the manifestations or the withdrawings of Christ there.
Lord, says he, thy loving kindness is better than life; Ay, there was his joy
and gladness. And Lord, says he at another time, thou did but hide thy face,
and I was troubled; there was his sorrow for Christ's absence. And, says the
Spouse, Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. By [kiss]
here, is meant some visible manifestation of Christ unto his Soul, some
discernable token of his love; Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth [
for thy love (says he) is better than Wine.] [Wine] you know was to be given
to those that were of a heavy heart by Solomon's direction, Proverbs 31.6. and
Psalm. 104.15. Wine that makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make his face
to shine. So as Wine, it is to be given to those that are of a heavy heart, it
is that which is to make joyful, and to exhilarate the Spirits. Now says
David, Lord thy love is better then Wine, there is more in a little
communication of Christ Jesus, then in the greatest refreshment, and heart
chearing in the world, for this love that is better then Wine, is not love
simply considered, but the effects of love in gracicious manifestations, as
John 14.21, 22. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest my self unto him; and says Judas, not Iscariot, Lord
how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world?
This love was a love of manifestation; now says he, Let him kiss me mith the
kisses of his mouth. Let love be manifested, and this manifesting love is
better than Wine: O it will make all other things dainties to him, and sweets
to be bitter in his Spirit; this is sweet indeed, and an abiding ground of joy
and comfort to his Soul upon the evidence of his love, and upon the sight of
his face, and communion with him. Now Christians, examine your hearts by this,
if that your joy be determined upon something else then upon Christ, and if
that the withdrawments of Christ don't cause the greatest sadness unto your
Spirits, it is a shround sign that you have no interest in Christ: But now
where Christ Jesus is looked upon as the very joy of your Souls, and you most of
all joy in his presence, and you are most of all troubled at his departure, and
at the hidings of his face; it is a sign of interest. O it is a sign that that
Woman does entirely love her Husband, that cannot bear that he should be long
absent from her, and is most of all pleased in his company; so it is a sign
that that Soul is married unto Christ Jesus, that cannot bear the withdrawments
of Christ, and that is never so much troubled and tossed, and discomforted and
afflicted in his Spirit, as when Jesus Christ stands behind the Curtain, and
refuses to make answer to his Soul; when he is crying after him.

SERMON VIII.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my
Salvation.


WE proposed to give you some notes of evidence, whereby you may come to know
that this Jesus is your Jesus, and that you are interesced in him. We have
already gone through 13 particulars, and shall now proceed.

Fourteenthly, The Soul that is interested in Christ has constraining, abiding
endearments in his heart unto Jesus Christ, so as no discouragement shall turn
him off from Christ, but he will cut the way through all opposition to come to
the enjoyment of him.

My Friends if you are really interested in Christ, and have (upon an interest)
tasted how gracious the Lord is, difficulties in your way to Christ will be no
difficulties so you may enjoy him; the Soul in Christ will be contented to be
reproached for Christ, so he may enjoy him, and the reproaches that he meets
withal in the way of Christ, will be no great matter to him, so Christ and he
may keep together. You may see what was the Spirit of an old Testament Saint,
in Heb. 11.24, 25. By Faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the People of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. v. 26.
Esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt.
Persecutions will not part Christ, and the real sincere Christian, but though he
shall be persecuted for Christ, yet if Christ and he can but keep close
together, he will think all is well, Romans 8.35. and so on, Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or
Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword, etc. Why, says he, we can bear all
this for Christ; we can bear tribulation, we can bear distress, we can bear
persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword; Lord, any thing rather than to
lose Christ, says the sincere interested Christian, he Will suffer losses for
Christ, rather than to lose Christ. Lord (say the Disciples) We have left all
for thy sake; and it is said of the primitive Christians, that they took
joyfully the spoiling of their goods; let men frown, and let Devils frown
still, the heart of the sincere interested Christian will be working
Christ-ward, and he will have constraining, abiding endearments in his heart,
that will cut through the difficulties of his way, he will be willing to lose
any thing rather than to lose Christ; this is the frame of a Soul interested in
Christ, when he is under deliberate actings for Christ. I am sensible that an
honest heart by the strength of a temptation may be suddenly surprised as Peter
was; ay, but it will be but for a moment, and he will rise again, he will not quit
his interest in Christ, he will not sell his part in Christ, when he comes to
reflect and consider, Christ and he cannot live asunder: and his interest in
Christ will have such an influence upon his Soul, as will cause him to abide in
Christ, that whatsoever he meets withal, yet he desires above all to enjoy
Christ; and will go through fire, and through water, if that be the way, and
the only way that in the circumstances of providence in divine overrules,
Christ is to be enjoyed, Phil. 1.29. I pray mark the connection there, It is
given to you to believe, and also to suffer; upon the Souls believing is his
interest struck up with Christ, and he is oned with Christ. Now says he, those
that believe, that is, those that are interested in Christ, they will also
suffer for the sake of Christ, and the same power that helps them to believe,
does also bear them up against the frowns, and against the discouragements that
they meet withal in the way of Christ. Well Christians, examine your own state
by this particular; how stand your hearts affected and endeared to Christ in a
day of suffering, when difficulties look you in the face, reproaches they are
like to befall you, losses and breakings in your outward condition are like to
come upon you? Can your hearts say whatsoever comes, O let us have Christ,
Christ is more than all; and what we shall enjoy in Christ is more then we can
lose for him; there is a constraining, abiding endearment in the heart that is
really united to Christ that will cut the way through all opposition. It is not
thus with one that is not interested in Christ. The young man in the Gospel
made a very fair profession of Christ, and comes and pretends to be his most
forward Disciple, but says Christ to him, can you live upon me alone? and can
you suffer any thing for the enjoyment of me? And will you value and prefer a
naked interest in me before all your possessions? No, Lord, says he, I have
great possessions; What, must I forgo all these in hand to live upon I know not
what? and I know not who? and so he takes his leave of Christ. And says the
Apostle, Demas has forsaken me, having embraced this present world: Their
comforts, and their enjoyments, and their outward possessions, and their
outward peace will be more to them then all that they ever thought of Christ,
that are not really interested in him; but now that Soul that has made its
close with Christ, his heart is so engaged, and he has tasted so much
sweetness in Christ Jesus; as whatever it cost him, Christ and he shall never
part; though he be stripped naked for Christ, yet he will have Christ, and though
he die for Christ, yet he will not give up his interest in him. Now examine your
Souls by the strong endearments of your hearts unto Christ, when there is an
oppressing interest that seems to come between you and Christ, do your
affections then divide; and do you then deliver up Christ, and quit your part
in Christ? By a close examination of your hearts, under this head you may come
to some knowledge of your present state as to your interest.

Fifteenthly, Again in the last place, The Soul that is interested in Christ,
prefers the glory of Christ's interest before his own private advantage; if you
be indeed joined unto the Lord, then the interest of Christ's glory is a swaying
interest in your hearts, it is a ruling, captivating interest, that does bind
and engage you to the glory of it, that the Soul will prefer Christ's glory
before any thing of his own, his life will be under a peculiar dedication to
advance and promote the glory of Christ Jesus; and he will be always upon an
advancing design, to exalt Christ in his heart, and to exalt Christ in his
house, and to exalt Christ where he has to do, and with whom he has to do: he
will exalt Christ, though it be upon his own name, and upon his own interest,
he will deny his own name for Christ, and will believe for the advancing of the
glory of the interest of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 1.20, 21. To me to live is
Christ, and to die is gain. The Apostle he sums up all in this, Christ is my
all; if I live, I desire not to live to my self, but to Christ, and if I die, I
desire to die to Christ, that Christ's interest, and the glory of his interest
may be exalted by me, both while I live, and when I die. Now Christians examine
your selves by this, what sway does the glory of Christ bear in your hearts? If
that you cannot deny your selves for Christ, if that your own names be more to
you then Christ's name, and if that your own honor be more to you then Christ's
honor, and your own interest be more to you then Christ's interest, it is a
very ill sign that things are not right in your hearts: but if the interest of
Christ be the ruling, swaying interest, that you are all upon the advance of
the glory of Christ, whatever become of your selves, and whatever become of
your interest, and whatever you suffer in the way; yet O that Christ might be
magnified, and O that Christ might be glorified; Christ's glory is uppermost in
your hearts, and is the only interest that you would prefer; it is a sign that
you are indeed interested in Christ, otherwise your hearts would never be so
much concerned about Christ's interest, and about the glory of his interest.

And a little further to help and direct you; do but consider these few things.

First, In searching your own hearts for an evidence of interest; If you can
find these things that we have laid down, in truth, though not in high degrees
and measures, you may be comforted. Many Persons they wrong their case, and so
darken themselves thereupon, by looking more unto the height of those things.
that are notes of evidence, then the truth of them. Now examine your selves I
say by the truth of these things; though you cannot yet find that you have
overcome temptation, that you have got into an holy triumph over temptation,
yet if that you can find that under all contrary inclinations and drawings, the
habitual frame and inclination of your heart is secured for Christ, you may be
comforted; though you cannot find that you are able to do much toward the
repairing of the glory of Christ in your place, yet if you have a heart that is
deeply affected with the dishonor that is done to Christ, because Christ is
dishonored thereby, you may be comfotted. Though Christians you can find in
your searches but very little of Christ in your hearts, yet if your Souls are
restlesly carried out after Christ, in all your seekings of him, that you must
compass something of Christ, or you cannot be satisfied; this seeking heart and
restless Spirit after Christ is a note of evidence to you; and though you
cannot live up to Christ as you would, yet if your preparations and
reformations be heart-preparations, and heart-reformations, that the work is
begun, and going on in you, this may be matter of comfort to you; and so you
may go on to all the other particulars that I have given you; look more to the
truth of them then to the height and degree of them, if you would upon them
come to a right understanding of your present state.

Secondly, If upon a search you can find but some of those things that have
been given you as evidential of an interest, you may be comforted, though for
the present you cannot speak of them all upon a particular experimental sense:
The Lord he speaks unto one Soul by one word, and he speaks unto another Soul
by another word, and we don't know what particular word the Lord will make use
of, nor what particular of all these the Lord has singled out, and made of
use, advantage, and comfort unto any of you, but if the Spirit of the Lord has
singled out any one of them, and given you a hint of interest thereupon, you
have cause to rejoice in the Lord; and if the Lord has given you but the least
hint of his love, and the least intimation by any word of Grace, of your
interest, let not this be looked upon as a small thing. Take heed of refusing
the consolations of the Lord when they are offered to you, remember him of whom
it is said, Psalm. 77.2. My Soul refused to be comforted.

Thirdly, Know this, that full assurance, and clear evidence of interest is
gradually brought into the heart; as the light of Grace comes in gradually, so
also does the light of comfort, which is a light unto your Souls to discern
Christ, and to take comfort in him, now the Lord it may be at first let in a
little light, as it were through the cravis; don't set light by this; thus does
the Lord work, he gives in a little light at one time, that does as it were put
the Soul between hope and fear, and by and by he comes in with a little more
light, and then with a little more light, and so gradually he carries on the
Soul until he has led him unto a clear evidence, and given him a full
assurance of interest; so as, if you have but yet the day star in your hearts,
don't despise it, if you have yet but the beginnings of the light of
consolation, don't judge this small: though comparatively to what some do
enjoy, it is but small, yet let it not be small in your apprehensions; but know
that the light of interest gradually comes in and increases I may liken the
light of interest unto the Prophets Cloud, that was at first but like a man's
hand, and it was a great way off, there was some hope of rain upon it, but they
did not know what would come of it, but this was the beginning of such a Cloud
that brought abundance of rain. So thou have (Christian) a little light that is
glimmering in thy heart, that sets thee it may be between hope and fear; well,
let not this be small to thee, for though for the present thou can not come
to a full assurance, yet thou do not know what this will come to; thou do
not know what a growing light this is, and how much it may increase in thy
heart.

Now unto those that have as yet but a little light in their Souls, some small
hopes through grace, of an interest, but they dare not positively conclude, nor
they dare not absolutely deny; they have not that full assurance that some
have, neither are they left wholly in the dark; unto these Souls I would speak
something by way of encouragement, and something by way of direction.

First, By way of encouragement to those that have a little hope through grace,
and have some small glimmerings of their interest, and some buddings of their
evidence, though it is not yet fully blown; let such hearts consider,

First, That if thou have any thing that is a note of evidence, or gives thee
hope through grace, any thing I mean that is in truth, know, that though it be
never so small, yet thy interest in Christ is as great as his is, that dwells
in the height of assurance: my friends, your interest in Christ is not the
less, because your evidence of interest is very small, but your little evidence
that is in truth, or this little word of grace that the Spirit has spoken,
that gives you some hopes about your condition, does give you as full an
interest in Christ, as he has, that has the highest measures of assurance in
this world. The young Child that can but run to his Father, and cry Father,
Father, he has as full an interest in, and relation to his Father, as the
grown Child that in understanding and judgment is able to reflect upon, and
improve the relation; and so it is with thy Soul in thy union with Christ,
though thou can but look up unto the Lord, and cry unto him that he would
help thee; though thou can but just cry Father, though thou art not able to
improve thy interest as some others can, yet if upon the least hint of grace
from the Spirit thou art able to cry Father, thy interest is as good, and as
great as that Souls that is able to rejoice in Christ in full evidence; Christ
is yours, and you are Sons, you are heirs as well as others, and you have the
same Spirit, and the same Fountain of Grace to go to, under the smallness of
the evidence of your interest.

Secondly, You are under the same preservable, maintainable care that those
are, that dwell upon the top of assurance: Jesus Christ does not take the less
care of you, because your interest is very dark and cloudy for the present, but
his care over you is the same; he is always opening his watchful eye upon you;
and he is always doing for you, always defending of you; see what he says,
Isaiah 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are
with young. O alas, they are scarceble to believe that they are Lambs in the
flock of Christ, they would hope so, and they dare not wholly deny it, but that
Christ has a part in them, and hold of them, but it is all they can do to say
so; but be it so, they are under as much care as any; He will carry them in his
arms, he will gently lead those that are with young: Christ Jesus in one single
act does equally respect all those that are interested in him; be their
evidence of interest more or less, clearer, or more clouded.

Thirdly, Again; The comprehensions of Christ upon the union are not
proportioned unto, but do far exceed our apprehensions of him in the union:
Christ does not say, I will be unto you as you are unto me, and as you do, so
will I do, and as you be, so will I be, and according to your apprehensions, so
will I be unto you; but he does exceeding abundantly for us above our faith,
and above our hope; it may be we can but say unto him, Lord help; and though we
are so weak, he will not do the less; but he will prosecute and manage the
interest on his part upon your Souls, though your apprehensions may be very
small of him; you have a very full satisfying Scripture for this, Ephesians. 3.20.
Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we are able to
ask or think, according to the power that works in him: So that Jesus Christ's
actings toward us, and dealings with us, and comprehendings of us are not
proportioned to our apprehensions of him, not according to our faith and hope,
and not according to our prayer, but says he, he is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we are able to ask or think, and that according to
the power that works in him: So that though you cannot at all times make
faith of that power, yet that power is working, and though your apprehensions
be very small, yet the comprehensions of Christ are very great; it is in Heaven
that we shall know as we are known; we are fully known here, but our selves
know but in part.

Fourthly. The weaknesses discovered upon your interest, and the provocations
given, will be covered and forgiven by the Lord Jesus in the strength of the
love of his relation to you, or interest in you. The Soul that is in relation,
is not able in a clear Gospel way to live up unto his standing in Christ Jesus,
but he oft-times walks very dishonourably unto his interest, and very
unbecomingly to his hopes of evidence; well Soul, though it be thus, the Lord
Jesus Christ will display such love on his part, as shall cover and forgive
all; the Father will not disinherit his Child, because he does provoke him, and
because he does grieve him by many foolish and unchildlike acts, but the love
of the relation, on the Fathers part will forgive the Child. The Husband will not
give a bill of divorce to his Wife, because he finds failings in her ways, but
the love of the relation does bind him, and influence him to cover all her
weaknesses, and continue his kindness to her; if we have a member that is full
of pain, and puts us to a great deal of smart and puts us much out of order, we
do not presently call for the cutting off of this member, but we bear with the
pain and smart, remembering that it is a member: now thus it is my friends,
between the Lord Jesus Christ and you, though there are weaknesses discovered
in your ways, yet he will remember that you are interested in him, and though
he meet with provocations from you, yet he will remember that you are his
Children, and that you are in relation, and that will engage him to cover and
forgive all; though I speak not this to give any a liberty to indulge
themselves, and I hope none of you will abuse discoveries of grace so, I am
sure an honest heart will not, but for your terror, if your temptation be
thereunto, know, that though Jesus Christ will not proceed in the utmost of his
displeasure against you to give you a bill of divorce, yet there are rebukes,
and there are frowns that are as bitter as death, that the Soul may meet withal
from Christ upon his high provocations; though we don't presently cut off a
member that is full of pain, yet we may see cause to send for the Surgeon, to
make an incision, and so verily will Jesus Christ be forced to do in your
hearts, that give your selves such an allowance, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. If his
Children forsake my laws, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, etc.

Fifthly, Know that your interest in Christ is not dissolvible as the evidence
of your interest is loosable. Christian, it may be the Lord has singled out
some word that he has made use of by his Spirit to give you some hopes in, and
about your interest in, and relation unto Christ; I would hope that all has
not been spoken to you in vain, but if the Lord has given you some hint by his
word of your interest, possibly within a little while all this will be lost
again, and thou may be as much in the dark, as ever thou were since thou
came into Christ; well, Christ will not disown thee, and Christ will hold
thee up, that thou shall never be left to disown him; still thy interest is
sure in Christ Jesus; though light is coming and going in thy Soul, and thy
evidence is sometimes coming, and sometimes going, yet know that thy interest
is firm and inviolable.

Sixthly, Thy present interest in, and relation unto Christ in a state of
Grace, is a certain and infallible pledge of thy future possession of Christ in
glory: Christian, thou have now a little hope through grace; O make much of it,
thou do not know what is in it: There is not only matter of consolation in
it, but it contains a pledge of Heaven, and of thy full possession of the Lord
Jesus Christ in glory for ever, therefore says Christ; He that believes on me
has everlasting life, believing that gives the interest, thereby the Soul is
united to Christ; now upon the union he has everlasting life, he has the
pledge of it, his union is the pledge of it; and he is reserved for eternal
life, and he is going on to perfection, to enjoy eternal life. The Lord is in
grace and by grace fitting of him for a glorious enjoyment of himself for ever;
now these things are for thy comfort in thy present condition, whilst the
light of evidence is but glimmering in thy heart.

Secondly, Some few things briefly I shall give you by way of direction.

First, Have you the least intimation of the Lords love to you, and of your
standing in his love, be thankful for these small appearances of light in your
Souls. I say be thankful Christians; there is a great deal in a little and
small word of evidence, or in a small word of hope. Therefore take every hint
that the Lord gives, and wear it with thankfulness, bless his name for it, that
is the way to have it increased.

Secondly, Joy and triumph in the Lord, upon the present evidence that you
have, living up to it. I say live up to the light that you have, in a holy joy
and rejoicing in Christ Jesus, get into the Prophets Spirit, and into his frame
here in the text; To joy in the Lord, and to rejojce in the God of your
Salvation, and learn Christian to live up unto a small measure of assurance,
and that is the way to have a greater.

Thirdly, Acknowledge all sense of interest to be given forth in a way of
grace; I say acknowledge, that not only the grace of your union, but also the
light and comfort of your union is dispensed in a way of free grace; The Lord
is pleased to give out all manifestations of interest in Christ in a way of
grace, John 14.22. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that
thou manifestest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? He must speak this
upon a reflect act, or else he could not speak with that confidence; Lord, that
thou have manifested thy self to us, and not to others, this is to be
acknowledged unto free grace.

Fourthly, Have you a little light of your Interest? do you gather in upon
Christ from that little that you have for more? Christians, though you have but
a little light for the present, and are weak in assurance for the present, yet
there is a full measure of assurance to be given out: There is not only the
Soul's comfort from a reflect act, by the light of the Lord upon his own grace
that is wrought, but there is the immediate Testimony of the Spirit that is
ready to be given out, which is a Witness not argumentative, or in a way of
argumentation, but it is a Witness and Evidence that is given in by, and in the
immediateness of his own presence in the heart of the Believer, Romans 8.16. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of
God: He bears witness in some immediate act in the Soul. It is a clear
undeniable, soul-satisfying, Divine Testimony, that the Spirit gives in the
Soul, that resolves all its doubts, and clears his whole Interest, and settles
him in the full enjoyment of the Lord Jesus, and enables him to act upon it.
And then

Fifthly and lastly, Have you a little evidence of your Interest for the
present? Christian, do you improve this little unto the comforting of your
Souls in Christ in all straits, and unto a living upon him in all the
necessities of your present condition? Jesus is yours, and you are interested
in him; the Lord has given you some little hope of this; this hope through
grace Christians, should be improved by you; upon all occasions you should run
out unto the Lord Jesus, and have recourse to him, and venture upon him; you
should glory in him, and live upon his fullness, and rely upon his power and
faithfulness: Jesus that is so full is your Jesus; and Jesus that is so free is
your Jesus; and Jesus that is so faithful is your Jesus; you have some sight of
this, and some hope of this through grace; the Lord now expects that you should
come and live upon him in all conditions, and comfort your Souls in him in all
disconsolations, when you are weak, and when you are tempted, and when you are
tried, and when you meet with discouragements from without, then to retire to
the Lord Jesus, and act Faith upon him.

SERMON IX.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.


I Shall now proceed to help and direct those Souls that are able to reflect
upon their own Interest and standing in Christ, that they may live upon Christ,
and glory in him in all conditions, and under all changes of Providence, that
though they have none else, though they have nothing else in this world but the
Lord Jesus Christ to live upon, their hearts may be full of joy and comfort.
And before I come particularly to speak unto this, I shall premise and propose
several considerations that may help to clear the way to what we design to
speak to, and to encourage your hearts unto a living upon, and glorying in
Christ, when you have nothing else to rejoice in.

First, Consider that all the comforts of an outward condition are held at
great uncertainties, and continued at the sovereign pleasure of the great
disposer of Heaven. The Lord has not fixed us unchangeably in the enjoyments
and comforts of an outward state, but he reserves a sovereign power in his own
hand to remand from us what at a time he was pleased to command down upon us.
And all the comforts of an outward condition they are mutable, and we are
exposed unto a variety of changes of condition in this world. All our outward
comforts they are exposable unto the spoil; and the very foundation of our Joy
in this world is avertable: He that has to his own apprehension a mountain
that stands strong, that he thinks can never be moved, is exposed to the
sovereign alterations of the great Ruler of Heaven, that he may have his
mountain overturned in a moment; and he that is lifted up on high, and seems to
himself to be so upon the advance, that he shall never fall: The Lord can
suddenly like unto Job, lay him in the dust. We are full one day, and the Lord
may empty us before the next; we are rich to day, and we may be poor before to
morrow; we are comforted to day on every side, and we may be left naked,
destitute and broken before to morrow: As to our Stocks, they are losable and
spendable; and as to all Lands and Inheritances, they are saleable and
morgageable; uncertain riches, they make to themselves wings and flee away;
they have the wings of fire, or the wings of Thieves, or the wings of this
providence, and the other to flee away with. The Lord he suffers one man to run
away with so much of such a man's estate, and suffers another to run away with
another part of his estate, that those that were rich are soon made poor; and
as to your relations that you at present take comfort in; now they are, and
anon they are not, Parents, Children, Friends, Comforters, Counselors, they
die away from us, and we see them, and we know them no more for ever; and which
of you that are here in the Lord's presence, that may not sit down and weep
over your broken pitchers, and say, This once I had, and that once I had, but
now I have it not; once I was full, but now I am empty; once I was lifted up on
high, but now I am brought down very low; once I was a lender, but now I am a
borrower; once I had most comfortable relations, none happier than I, in a
tender Father, in a loving Yoke Fellow, in a desirable Child, in a faithful
Friend; but now it is quite otherwise, they are all like Jonah's Gourd that
grew up and withered on a sudden. This you may see in the verse before the
Text; the Figg tree that blossoms not, the fruit of the Vine, and the labor of
the Olive they fail, and the Fields yield no meat, the Flocks are cut off from
the fold, and there is no herd in the stall. The Lord you see has given us but
a weak tenure to all these outward enjoyments, and he maintains a Sovereignty
over every comfort that he is pleased to bestow upon us, that so we shall hold
all that we have in this world at great uncertainties, and must day by day
stand to the allowance of the great disposer of Heaven, who will sometimes
give, and will sometimes take what he has given.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ is, and has whatsoever the Scripture has
said, and much more than we are able to conceive of him, in our largest and
utmost apprehensions: He is, and he has, according unto all Old Testament
Prophecies and Predictions in the utmost Exposition that can be made of them,
in the largest extent, and he is, and he has according to the utmost word of
the revelation that is made of him in the New Testament; and you are not able
to conceive and apprehend what he is, and what he has in the considering of
the Scripture expressions that are made use of to set him forth unto you. You
cannot measure Christ by your thoughts and imaginations; but when you have
conceived all that you can, Christ is more, and Christ has more than you are
able to apprehend of him. The Scripture tells us, that the Lord Jesus Christ
has a fullness of grace in him; now you are not able to apprehend what this
fullness of grace is; it is an infinite fullness, and you are not able to
comprehend it in your finite thoughts, how comprehensive soever they are. The
Gospel tells you of the outgoings of Christ's heart unto sinners, but you are
not able to apprehend, nor to measure what is the love of the heart of Christ
to poor sinners; but when you have conceived never so much of his love, there
is more still than you are able to grapple. The Scripture tells you of a great
power that is in Christ; conceive never so much of his power, what it is that
he is able to do for you, in a strait, and how wonderfully he is able to work,
there is yet a greater extent in the power of Christ than your apprehensions
can reach. The Gospel tells you of an All-fulness, or an Allness that is in the
Lord Jesus Christ: Sum up all that you can think of, and all, that the
Scripture can help you to conceive of, to add unto this Allness of Christ, and
yet behold you are not able to tell what his All is; you may soon tell what
your All is, or you may tell what another All is, what a great man's All is,
or what a Prince's All is, or what a Kingdom's All is, but you cannot tell what
Christ's All is; but when you have thought and conceived, when you have dived
and reached until you are weary, still the grace, the power, the love, the
fullness of the Lord Jesus is above your reach, and there is more than ever
entered into your hearts to conceive of him. This you have, Isa. 55.8.9. For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the
Lord; for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. See how the Lord tells us that
he is advanced above all our imaginations of him. Now the thoughts of Christ's
heart are always toward us, and always proportioned unto the fullness that he
has received: Now, says he, My thoughts are not like to your thoughts; you
thought that I could relieve only in such a case, or I could help only in such
a strait; you thought I could do thus, and that I could do thus, and do no
more; but alas, says Christ, you are mistaken; there is as great a distance
between my thoughts and your thoughts, as there is between Heaven and Earth; so
as the fullness of Christ Jesus is a most glorious and blessed fullness, enough
for all your Soul's relief, and to spare.

Thirdly, Christ's fullness of grace is always subjectively and objectively the
same.

First, It is always subjectively the same. Christ's Spring is not a rising
and a falling Spring, but the waters of it are always of the same depth; the
waters of this Fountain do not admit of an ebb and of a flow, but they are
always at one and the same height. Christ has not a more and a less; his
fullness will not admit of an augmentation and a diminution; but notwithstanding
all the overflowings of the fountain, still it is a fountain-fulness;
notwithstanding all the streams that have run from it, still it is as full as
ever; notwithstanding all the thousands of Souls that Jesus has relieved, and
empty hearts that Jesus has filled, still he is as full of grace as ever, as
full of mercy as ever: There is no less in this fountain as it is subjectively
considered, upon all that he has given and dispensed; but he is as rich in
grace, and there is as great a plenty in him, as there was when he first opened
his fountain unto sinners, Col. 1.19. For it has pleased the Father that in
him should all fullness dwell: There it does always abide, and the same fullness
without change, the same fullness without diminution. That fullness that God
placed in his Son, there it does abide in the glory of its utmost height, Heb.
13.8. Jesus is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. This is that that is
said of your Jesus, his fullness was a great fullness at first; why, he is the
same to day; spend Christians what you will, and draw out of the fountain what
you can, it will be as full to morrow as it is to day; Yesterday, to day, and
the same for ever.

Secondly, Christ's fullness is always objectively the same unto all those that
do possess it; the Soul that has an interest in Jesus once, has an interest
in him for ever: and the Soul that is once admitted unto the fountain of Christ
Jesus, shall never be debarred more; you have not a coming and a going
interest, an interest that is to day, and may be taken away to morrow; indeed
your outward comforts they are losable comforts, and your outward blessings are
spendable, God may give you much to day, and you may have nothing of all that
much to morrow; but it is not so here, you are not interested in Christ to day,
and dis-interested in him to morrow; but once interested, and for ever
interested; not gracious now, and graceless by and by, but your interest in the
grace of Christ is an everlasting interest; and you have the immutable fullness
of the Lord Jesus ever to go unto, whatever your strait is, having once an
interest given you in him; the Lord does not give you a part in himself, and
then take away that part, but Christ once yours, is for ever yours, and your
fountain fullness none shall ever be able to take from you, nor to deprive you
of, so as if thou have once Christ to go unto, thou have always Christ to go
unto; and if thou do once discern thy interest in Christ upon good and
Gospel substantial grounds, thou may always glory in the Lord, that thou
art once interested in.

Fourthly, All Saints have the same Jesus to live upon, and the same fullness of
Jesus in all its dimensions to go unto: The Lord has not given one believer a
greater propriety in himself then he has given another; neither has one a
fuller way prepared for him of going unto Christ than another has; the same
Jesus that Abraham had to do with, and did live upon, is in common for every
Son and Daughter of Abraham; and the same fullness of Jesus that Abraham had,
you have in all its dimensions; the Lord did not open a Fountain unto Abraham,
and open only a stream unto you, but if you be a Son or Daughter of Abraham,
you have the same great Ocean to go unto in all its fullness that Abraham had,
you have the same merits to implead that Abraham had; you have the same blood
to be washed in, and to wash in, that any other believer has; and you have the
same great and precious promises to apply that another believer has; one
believer cannot lay a challenge upon this promise, and say it is mine, and not
yours; but it is yours as well as his, the same Fountain in all its dimensions
you have to go unto in all your streights, that another believer has; and
therefore if you have not that strength, if you have nor that grace, if you
have not that riches, if you have not that fullness that another believer has,
you must blame your felves and not Christ, for he offers himself alike unto
all, and discovers and holds forth his Fountain alike unto all.

Fifthly, There is a vast disproportion between your creature losses, and your
gains and enjoyments in Christ; your losses in the creature they are but
shadows, and not substance; there is an emptiness in the fullest outward
condition, take it as an outward condition, and there is a bitterness in the
sweetest outward enjoyment, and the losses that you can meet withal in this
world, they are only such as reach and concern an animal life; but now there is
more in a little of Christ Jesus, then there is in a great deal of the
Creature, nay in all creature enjoyments, so as whatsoever the loss is that you
meet withal in the creature, a little of Christ Jesus will make it up; the
least gift of Christ's right hand does far exceed all the gifts of his left
hand, and one draught of the water of the upper springs is more then all the
waters in the nether springs, so as though thou meetest with sore losses, and
great blows and breakings in the outward man, yet know that a little of Christ
will fill up thy Soul, that there will be no want, whatsoever thou have lost:
it may be Christian, that the Creature that thou have lost, would have been
enjoyed to thy disadvantage, if it had still been kept in thy hand; it may be
it had been to the loss, to the hurt of the possessour: but now Jesus Christ is
always enjoyed to the advantage, and Christ Jesus is such an advantage as will
answer all losing disadvantages, so as Christian, be not overmuch dejected at
the passing away of the Creature, when there is still enough in Christ to make
up the loss that thou have sustained.

Sixthly, The joy that is drawn from Christ depend, not upon sensible things,
but lives in the Soul when all outward comforts are gone: you may as to the
world be an undone man, broken in your outward estate, and yet your joy none
can take from you, but now whatsoever you have in the Creature, if you have not
Christ with the creature, you have no ground of joy, so as Christ he is always
a ground of joy whether the Creature be absent or present, but the Creature is
never so without Christ; do but consider the Apostle Paul, he had an interest
in Christ, and he glories in his interest when he had nothing else, Romans 5.3.
We have peace with God, says he, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and we rejoice
in hope of the glory of God; and now says he, we glory in tribulation; we are
spoiled in our goods, and we are sore broken, and left sorrowful, and desolate,
and forsaken as to outward supports, and supporters, and yet says he in the
midst of all we glory in tribulation; or if you will according unto another
Scripture; we are says he, but as sorrowful, and but as poor, 2 Cor. 6.10. For
indeed we make many rich, we have grace, and abundance of grace in Christ
Jesus, and we are in no want: Paul and Silas, Acts 16.26. they were in Prison,
and in the Stocks, and yet behold, at midnight they break out in singing
praises unto God; their hearts were full of joy when they had nothing of the
Creature in their hands; and thus did the Prophet in the text; there comes a
famine upon all his outward comforts, that behold he had nothing to live upon,
and yet will I rejoice in the Lord; we have all in him, (says he) when we have
nothing out of him: Joy that is drawn from Christ shall abide in the Soul, when
all visible creature supports shall fail; though his entertainment in the world
be very mean, and his outward burdens be very great, and his poverty very
pressing upon his outward man, yet the Soul that has an interest in Christ,
will joy, notwithstanding all this.

Seventhly, Again; The Lord Jesus Christ in his Gospel-fulness of grace is
under an indispensible obligation to dispense that grace, that as the great
officer of Heaven he has received the charge of: The fullness of Christ Jesus,
it is a common fullness, it is a fullness for all believers, and Jesus Christ
does not live and spend upon the fullness of grace that he has received; but he
discovers it to the Saints that they may have it to live upon; and he lies
under indispensible obligations to dispense it to those that come unto him, and
Jesus Christ will not debar any Soul that comes unto him for spiritual relief;
he is engaged in faithfulness unto his Father to relieve those that come, and
he must deny his office, (which he can never do) should he not do it, for the
Father has entrusted him with grace, that he might dispense it, and he has
given him his fullness that he might communicate of his fullness to those that
are in want, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity
Captive, thou have received gifts for men; Jesus Christ he has received great
gifts from his Father; he has received grace gifts and office gifts, and he
has received personal gifts, and all these gifts that he has received, they
are for men, and 1 Cor. 3.21. All is yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or the world, or things present, or things to come, all is yours; all
that Christ has received from his Father, or is ordained to dispense, he must
dispense, and he will dispense, Isaiah 61, 1. The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek,
he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound, etc.
says Christ, there is a poor Soul that I must deliver, and there is a wounded
heart that I must heal, and there is a bruised reed that I must bind up, and
there is one weak in grace that I must strengthen, and why must I do it? Why
says he, I am anointed to do this; the Father has commissionated him to do
this, he has ordained him hereunto, and he must deny his ordination, and
refuse the office that he is to act in, should he refuse a poor Soul, and not
give liberally to those that come to him, John 6.27. Labor not for the meat
that perishes, but for that meat that endures to everlasting life, which the
Son of man shall give unto you, for him has God the Father Sealed; in these
expressions are discovered the great blessings of the Gospel that are
dispensible by the hands of Christ; now go unto Christ Jesus, if you be hungry;
if you be thirsty go unto Christ Jesus; if you be naked go unto Christ Jesus,
if you be empty; why? will he bless such an one as I am? will he look upon such
an one as I am? yes, says the Father, go, and you shall speed, my Son shall
give these things to you, for I have sealed him; or you may consider these
words as spoken by Christ, and as the indispensible obligation that lies upon
the Son, from the charge that he has received, an Office-charge of all that
grace that the Father has designed should be dispensed; do not question
therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, but let your applications be frequent to him,
he will be faithful unto his Office.

Eighthly, There is an exceeding tenderness in the heart of Christ unto
distressed Sinners, according to all the concernments of his Office: There is a
very great willingness, and forwardness in the Lord Jesus Christ to be dealing
out his grace unto those for whom grace was designed, or to whom grace is to be
dispensed; there is an unexpressible desire in the Soul of Christ Jesus to be
dealing out the grace that he has received the charge of; all Office-work is
most desirable work to Christ, though never so hard, therefore when he speaks
concerning his death, says he, I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how
am I straightened till it be accomplished. But now we may conceive that there is
much more a desire in the heart of Christ to dispense the grace of his death,
Psalm. 16.3. Thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not unto thee, but to the
Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight;
My delight says Christ, it is with the Saints, to be relieving the Saints, and
to be comforting of the Saints, and to be blessing and strengthening of the
Saints. The heart of Christ takes great delight in this, my delight is with
them says he, as to all my goodness, as to all my kindness, as to all the
gifts of grace that I have received, and as to all my fountain fullness, it does
not extend to the Lord, but it is to the Saints, and my delight is with the
Saints, on the consideration of the grace that I have to dispense to them, and
Heb. 4.25. Jesus Christ he is touched with us, he has a feeling of our
infirmities, not a feeling in a way of passion and suffering, but a feeling in
a way of compassion and tenderness, that is his feeling, as the Mother has a
feeling of the pain and sickness, and weakness of the Child, through the
sympathy of her spirit, and the yernings of her bowels over it; so the Lord
Jesus Christ stands with yerning bowels over his Children, and he is touched
with our infirmities: You have not a weight upon your spirit, but in compassion
and tenderness Jesus Christ feels it; and you have not a burden on this
respect, or the other, but Jesus Christ feels it; such are the compassions of
his spirit toward you in all the concernments of his Office. It may be you are
ready to say in a great strait, or under a sore Trial; O that such a friend
knew how it is with me! O that my Father were here! or such a Relation were
here! that they did but know how it is with me! Why Soul, Jesus Christ he
knows, and he feels the weight of thy troubles; and sympathiseth with thee
under all thy sorrows. We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with a
feeling of our infirmities. Now this tenderness of spirit, this sympathy of
Christ, does influence his hand unto a liberal and free discharge of his
Office. So that whatever are your losses in the creature, and however your
outward condition is broken, you may go to the Lord Jesus, you see he is such a
one as you may take comfort in.

Ninthly, Faith is the great instrumental means that receives from Christ, and
that establishes the Soul in Christ. All our blessings they are lodged in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and there they meet as in a fountain. Now faith that is the
drawing grace, that draws out of this fountain for the Soul's supply. The
Father has placed all in Christ, and faith is the receiving grace, that takes
all out of the hand of Jesus Christ that he offers to the Soul; by faith we are
united to Christ, and by faith we receive from Christ upon the union: As the
Pipe that is laid unto the mouth of the fountain does receive and convey water
into your houses, so does faith receive from the Lord Jesus Christ, and convey
into your Souls. Faith is the great Conduit that Jesus Christ does send down
his grace in into our hearts. Faith, that deals with Christ in all his
royalties of grace, and takes life from him, and takes comfort from him, and
peace from him, and joy from him, and whatsoever the Soul stands in need of.
Faith is the life-grace, that feeds your Souls, and that keeps you living and
thriving, and that makes you strong in the Lord; we are said therefore to stand
by faith, Romans 11.20. Well, because of unbelief they were broken off; and thou
stand by faith. Faith is a confirming grace, it does build the Soul upon, it
does root the Soul in the Lord Jesus Christ, and does receive strengthening,
confirming, assisting grace from Christ, according to to the Soul's necessity:
So as Christians, if you would be strong in the Lord, you must get your faith
strengthened more and more.

Tenthly, The Lord Christ, in the dispense of mercy has great respect unto the
glory of his office-fulness, and office-faithfulness. The Lord Christ in the
communications of grace, has not only a respect unto your necessity, but also
to his own glory; and he will dispense in such a way, and at such a season, and
under such circumstances as shall make most for the glory of his
office-fulness, and office-faithfulness. The Lord Jesus Christ therefore he
comes in such a way, and at such a time, as shall most of all publish his glory
unto those to whom he comes, and before whom he comes. When the creature is run
into emptiness, and has spent all, then does Jesus Christ open his
fountain-fulness. In the weakness of the creature does Jesus Christ discover
his all-power; and in the uncertainty of the creature, does Jesus Christ
glorify his constancy; in the darkness of an outward condition, does the Lord
Jesus Christ cause his morning Star to arise, and shine from on high, that
gives light to our feet, when we know not how to direct our own paths; when we
have lost all here below, and all our comforts have failed us, and forsaken us,
then does Jesus Christ appear as a friend that stands up in a time of
adversity; that neither troubles, nor crosses, nor trials, nor temptations,
shall separate. And he chooses this most dismal state to come in, that he might
glorify his office-fulness, and his office-faithfulness; that he might
glorify his office-fulness, to let us know it is a never failing fullness, it
is a fullness that is always running over; that is not dry when streams are
dry, but can fill streams at any time, when they are never so dry and empty,
and then he comes that he may glorify his office-faithfulness, to appear as
one that never does forget his people, that can bear all the concerns of his
people upon his heart, 2 Cor. 1.9. But we had the sentence of death in our
selves. So the Lord Jesus Christ he comes and discovers himself when the
sentence of death is upon our outward mercies, and upon all our outward
supporters, that they are fading, dying, and falling down under us, then does
the Lord Jesus Christ appear as our God; Ye had the sentence of death in your
selves, that ye might trust in the living God. The Lord will so appear, as his
appearance shall be unto the glory of his own Name in the Office that he is
placed in by the Father: And therefore do but consider what titles Jesus Christ
has put upon himself, that are denominative thereof, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord also
will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble. A poor
distressed Soul that has no whither to go, that is driven off from all his
former holds, and that has all his other Wells of consolation dried up, Jesus
will be a refuge to such an one, and that at such a time. And Psalm. 10.14. The
poor commits himself to thee, and thou art the helper of the fatherless. And
Psalm. 68.5. A Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widow is God in his
holy habitation. Why, says the Soul; Now all is gone, my Father is gone, and my
Husband is gone, and my Friends that use to comfort me have left me, and I am
now a miserable creature! No, says Christ, this is my time to appear to show my
self to be a Father to the Fatherless, and a Judge of the widow. And Isa.
25.4. Thou have been a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the
blast of the terrible one is like a storm against the wall. Why Christian, do
not fear an outward distress then; do not fear a low condition; do not fear a
breaking providence; why, because Jesus Christ does then take his time to
discover his All to you; he will then take his time to discover a Fountain to
you that can never be exhausted; he is a refuge to the poor and needy. And
these considerations might be prevailing upon your spirits, to gather off your
eyes from beholding other objects, and place them upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
where there is a sufficient ground of Joy to us, whatever our condition is.

SERMON X.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my
Salvation.


I Proposed several weighty Considerations, to encourage your spirits to be
getting up into this Life of Faith; I have already gone through Ten, and shall
now proceed.

11. Consider; That to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ without the least
encouragement of sense, is the most noble exercise of Faith, and that which
does most please the Lord. To believe in the Lord Jesus Christ when he is
breaking of you, and when he is frowning upon you, and when you have nothing
else to live upon, this is the most noble exercise of Faith in this life. To
believe on the Lord Jesus when your heads are lifted up in the world, and when
your Table is spread, and when your Borders are enlarged, is no great
difficulty; but now to live by Faith upon Christ when there is no encouragement
in the creature, this is the most noble exercise of Faith: What! says Sense,
live by Faith upon Christ when he has impoverisht me, and emptied me of all
creature-enjoyments? Ay, now is the time to exercise Faith, and this is the
most noble exercise of Faith, and that which does most of all please the Lord
Such an exercise of Faith as this, was found in Job: When the Lord had taken
away his estate, and taken away his Children, says Job, Job 1.21. Blessed be
the Name of the Lord. There was a great exercise of Faith in that word; and
such an exercise of Faith was found in David, in the case of Ziklag; he had a
little place given him in the enemies Country, where he might live alone, but
he had it not long before enemies came and smote the place of his habitation,
and take away his relation and his goods, and leave him nothing but ruins,
that when he returned, he found nothing but emptiness, a heap of Ashes: What
does David do then? he exercises Faith upon Jesus Christ, and encouraged
himself in the Lord his God. And this is the exercise of Faith that the Prophet
speaks of in our Text, and that which he is driving Believers up to: When the
Figgtree shall not blossom, etc. What is here left? here is nothing for sense
to live upon; yet, says he, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my Salvation. Such a noble exercise of Faith was found in the Woman of
Canaan, in the midst of all discouragements; she had discouragements from the
Disciples of Christ, they were not so kind to her as they might have been; but
that was not all, but she met with discouragements from the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, unto whom she made her applications; he seems to give her a repulse,
and checks her forwardness, and yet she goes over to the Lord Jesus, and in a
bold act, ventures upon him alone: Why Christians, whatever are your
discouragements from Sense, yet in the face of all rebukes to cast your self
upon the Lord Jesus, and comfort your Souls in his All fullness, is the most
noble act of Faith that you can put forth.

12. The great improbabilities of relief and succor after grace, whatever your
case is, are not answerable to the improbabilities that your Souls were in
before grace, and Christ Jesus helped you then. Christ came through them all,
and with ease removed them to do your Souls good. Do but consider, you that sit
down with your hearts full of discouragement, upon the loss of a creature, or
upon the emptyings of providence; do but consider how unlikely and improbable
your condition was of help and succor before you did believe on Christ; you
were then covered over with the shadow of death; you were then in a hopeless
condition; Who had then any hope of you? When you were seen marching in the
fury of your spirits against the Lord? Who would have thought that there were
hope in the Lord for you? You were at the very brink of Death, and at the very
brink of Hell; there was (as it were) but a hairs breadth between you and Hell,
and who would have thought that you should have been recovered? And then the
Lord Jesus he broke thorough all the improbabilities of your state to save you,
and do you think that he cannot break thorough all the improbabilities of your
present state to comfort you? He came leaping over greater mountains of
opposition and discouragement and impossibility (I mean as to other help;) I
say, he came leaping over greater mountains of impossibility in his first
dealings with you, than there are for him to come thorough in his afterdealings
with you, Cant. 2.8. The voice of my Beloved, behold he comes leaping upon the
mountains, and skipping upon the hills. These mountains, and these hills did
lie between Christ and you, that were the improbabilities, (or I may call them
the impossibilities of your state as to help and relief in a rational
consideration and apprehension. Now Jesus Christ he skipt over this mountain,
and the other mountain, that lay in his way, and he came unto your Souls to do
you good; and if Jesus Christ has done this, do you think that he will not do
the lesser? When you were without grace, did he bring grace into your Souls?
and do you think that he cannot comfort you now when you want comfort? Do you
think that he cannot bless you with the annexed blessings of your state, when
he has brought in the great fundamental blessings of your state? Christians,
you should reason thus, I was once ready to die, and the Lord Jesus came and
saved me; I was in a Soul-undone state, and Jesus Christ has set me up; and
what, has he set up my Soul, and cannot he set up my Body? Has he made up the
great breach that was upon my spiritual condition? and cannot he make up the
breaches that are in my outward condition? Jesus Christ came and plucked me out
of the fire when I was burning, and the fire was so hot, that none could take
me out but Jesus Christ; he came and snatched me out of the paw of the Lion and
the Bear, and none could rescue me but he; and he that came over all these
impossibilities to save you, do you think that he cannot make up a breach in
the loss of a relation? or make up a distress in your outward condition? the
Lord that has done the greater, can easily do the lesser.

13. Again; To rejoice only in visibles and sensibles, is to go no further than
those may go that have no interest in Christ. I pray consider it; To have your
spirits born up only by sensible supports, is not to exceed those that are
strangers to Jesus Christ, that have not an interest in Jesus Christ as you
have: For your spirits to rise and fall only as the creature ebbs and flows,
this is to do no more than a carnal man does; Is this living upon Christ? Is
this to make Christ your Joy? and Christ the Peace and the Comfort of your
Life? Says Christ in another case, To love those that love you, and to do good
to those that do good to you; if you do no more, Publicans and Sinners do this.
The Christian is under peculiar and distinguishing blessings, and it is
expected that he should peculiarly and distinguishingly live under the
distinguishing blessings of his state, Matthew. 6.31, 32. Wherefore take no
thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall
we be clothed? for after all these things do the Gentiles seek. Why, says
Christ, to be so thoughtful about our outward condition as others are, is to
place our selves in common with them: Says he, After these things do the
Gentiles seek. It is the case of a Gentile to say, when his outward comforts
are gone, O now must I die! now there is no further help for me, I must now
perish; this is the language of a Gentile, that has no interest in Jesus
Christ. O you that have interest in Jesus Christ! what! will you take up the
language of a Gentile? O no! having a God to go to, you must live upon that God
that you have given up your selves to. God does expect a distinguishing acting
under the distinguishing blessings that he has brought into your condition;
therefore know, that to rejoice only in visibles, is to set your selves in
common with those that have no interest in Christ; and is not this to dishonor
your interest, and to reflect upon the Lord of your interest, to live in joy
when the Creatures are about you, and to sit down discouraged, when Creatures
are taken from you?

14. Faith exercised upon the Lord Jesus will have an universal influence upon
all other graces in your hearts: Christians do but once exercise faith upon the
Lord Jesus Christ under a sinking, discouraging providence, and you will
immediately see and find a strange alteration in your hearts, you will find
those graces that are weak begin to gather strength, and you will find those
graces to arise, and appear, and shine forth, that you could scarce discern;
faith exercised upon the Lord Jesus Christ will have a mighty influence upon
your love, to raise that when the Soul is got into Christ, and can improve his
interest in Christ; O how will his Soul be enlarged, and his heart burn in love
to him who is the Lord of his interest, and of his comforts; faith exercised
upon the Lord Jesus, will have a mighty influence upon your hopes, that were
even just giving up the Ghost to your apprehensions; faith exercised upon the
Lord Jesus will have a mighty influence upon your patience, to strengthen and
quicken that, when a frowning providence comes that would royl your Spirits,
and put you besides your selves, and drive you out of a Christian frame; faith
will raise up your patience, and learn you to be quiet under the hand of the
Lord; faith exercised upon Christ will have an influence upon your joy, it will
cause a mighty and wonderful rejoicing in your Souls, that you have such a full
Jesus, to live upon; faith exercised upon the Lord Jesus will have an influence
upon your zeal, and will wonderfully excite you, and stir you up unto all
duties of serving and following the Lord; so as Christians, do but lay these
considerations together, and you will see what great encouragement you have to
glory in the Lord Jesus Christ, whatsoever your outward condition is, and you
will see the way of living by faith upon Christ to be clear, and to be the only
way that the Christian should walk in.

Well, having premised these things, we shall now come to give you some
particular directions, how you may get up your faith, and your Spirits in the
exercise of faith unto a glorying and rejoicing in the Lord Jesus Christ,
whatsoever your saddening outward providence are. And here,

1. If you would come to live upon Christ Jesus alone in the saddest
providence of your state, then entertain and keep up low thoughts of the great
things of this world: Truly Christians you may think of it what you will, but
while you have hearts that are magnifying and adoring of the things of the
world, and the enjoyments of the world, and counting these great things, you
will never come gospelly to live upon the Lord Jesus, your thoughts must be
altered in and about the comforts of this life, and you must possess your
hearts with this, that they are the smallest comforts of your state, and the
blessings of this life they are the least blessings that the Lord has given
you; you must have very low thoughts of the world, and of the comforts of it;
if you would come to live by faith upon Christ Jesus alone, whilst you have
vast thoughts o^ your creature enjoyments, and creature comforts, and creature
conditions, and suppose your comforts to lie here, and your comforts to lie
there short of Christ; alas, you will be driven out of all the exercise of
faith in an emptying providence. I will give you two instances for this in the
eleventh Chapter of the Hebrews; the first is that of Father Abraham, in the 8
and 9 verses. By Faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which
he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and went out, not knowing
whither he went; by faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange
Country dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac, etc. Here Abraham was called to
leave the possessions of his natural place, the possession that he was born to,
and to follow Christ whither he would lead him, and to accept of that condition
that Christ would place him in, and to stand to the allowance of God let it be
more or less; this Abraham was called to. Now it is said Abraham by Faith did
obey this command, and call of God, and went out; why, how did faith help him
here? doubtless by showing of him Christ Jesus, for faith in every exercise
has to do with Christ, and therefore his faith carried him up to Christ, and
when he was once got up to Christ, then behold how low were these things to
him; my Country Lord; says he? what is my Country to thee? I will leave my
Country to follow thee; and my Friends are nothing to me, and my possessions
are nothing to me, I will leave all to follow thee; what a low esteem had he of
these things? And the other instance is that of Moses in verse. 24, 25, 26, 27.
By faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproaches of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to the
recompense of reward. Here are great things that Moses left for the sake of
Christ, he left the Court, yea, he probably left the Crown of Egypt, and all
the glories thereof; now he did this by faith, the Creature was of a low esteem
with him. O alas what is it to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and
what is it to be an heir of an earthly Crown, and to be King of Egypt? I had
rather be afflicted, and spoiled, and destitute in my outward condition with
Christ, then to enjoy all these things without him; Christians you must get
mortified affections to all enjoyments on this side Christ, if you would come
to live upon, and glory in Christ alone.

2. Acquaint your selves more with the royalties of Christ, and the greatness
of his Gospelglory, as he is proposed the object of your says, if you would
come to glory in him alone, and live upon him in an empty condition: One great
reason why we can take no more comfort in Christ in an empty condition is,
because we are such strangers to the fullness of Christ Jesus; we don't know
what is in Christ, we know not what Christ can do, what is in his heart and
hand to give forth to you; Christians if you would live more by faith upon
Christ, then view Christ in his royalties of Grace. Look into the length of
Christ, and into the breadth of Christ, and see what he is the owner and
possessour of, what the Father has betrusted him with; view the extent of his
Offices, and consider the largeness of his power, and what he is able to do for
you; study and acquaint your selves with the royalties of Christ, as he is
proposed an object for your faith to fix upon; there is no condition but he can
comfort you in it, let the condition be never so comfortless in its self, study
the fullness of the Lord Jesus.

3. Get by faith upon the all sufficiency of Christ, and there take a prospect
of your losses, and of your troubles, and then you will see them to be but
small. You go (Christians) and stand below Christ, and there you look upon your
troubles and afflictions, and then indeed they seem very great; ay, but get
upon the all sufficiency of Christ, and then view them, get but upon the mount,
and look down upon all your losses and crosses, and they will seem little
things then. What is this loss that I have sustained, to what I have in the
Lord Jesus Christ? what is my poor empty vessel to the great fullness that is in
the Ocean of the Lord Jesus? If you did stand upon the all sufficiency of
Christ, and look upon the disasters of your outward condition, they would seem
to be but like a little Vessel brought to the great Sea, that is presently
filled, and yet there is no lessening of the water in the Ocean, but the Sea is
as full as ever.

4. Always keep the invisibles of Christ's Grace, and of Christ's glory in your
Eye: It is something a strange thing, but it is the mystery of faith; I say keep
invisibles in your eye, faith knows the meaning of it, faith will espy an
invisible thing, that which sense can discern nothing of, faith will espy and
keep sight of; now this was one way that Moses had to get up into a living upon
the Lord Jesus by faith, he kept invisibles in his Eye, he saw him that was
invisible, Heb. 11.27. he endured, as seeing him that was invisible; and what
is the description that the Apostle gives of faith in a Gospel exercise that we
are speaking of, but that which I have told you, the discerning of invisibles?
Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen: Faith in its exercise will ransack among the promises, the
promises both of grace and glory, and there will espy a great treasure, and
show the Soul this, as that which is his, and belongs to him; now Christian
view the promises of grace, and the promises of glory that are in the hands of
Jesus Christ, and see the invisible graces, and the invisible comforts, and the
invisible blessings that are contained in them, and never lose the sight of
these invisibles, but keep them always in your eye, and then you will see a
glorious Jesus, that your Souls will love to dwell upon, and you will not dwell
from him.

5. Never ground your faith and your hope upon your experiences, but upon the
promises, which is always attended with a wonderful working power; If that you
ground your faith and your hope upon your experiences, if your second trial be
greater then your first, your faith will be posed, and you will sit down under
discouragement; indeed there is a holy and Christian use that is to be made of
your experiences, but you must never ground your faith and hope upon them; for
God is always an out-doing God, he will outdo his own act, he will go further
in one act then he will do in another; if you ground your faith upon your
experiences, when you come into a new straight that you never came into before,
your faith will fail; do but consider this in the Israelites, if they had gone
no further then their experiences, what a loss had they been in? nay upon this
account they were at a great loss, they only considered what God had done for
them, and did not consider what he could do, and what a boundless power was
working through the promise for them, and therefore though they were delivered
through the Red Sea; yet say they, can God spread a Table in the Wilderness?
Moses, what, have thou brought us into the Wilderness to destroy us? there is
no Bread here, there is no Water here, how can we subsist? They never had
experience of the wonders of Gods power in those particular cases, and
therefore their experiences could not carry them through, but they were to
exercise faith upon the promise, that had a boundless power working with it,
and that would have told them, that God can spread a Table in the Wilderness,
and can command a rock to give out water for the Israelites necessity; and that
can tell you that there is no straight too great for Jesus to deliver you out
of. Faith in the promise will tell you that you never experienced, you never
saw to the utmost end of Christ's power yet; you never saw into the midst of his
treasures of grace; you have seen but a little way; Faith in the Promise will
tell you this; therefore never ground your Faith and Hope upon your
Experiences, though they have been large, but upon the Promises, that have
always a boundless power working with them.

Sixthly; And then consider, That it is your duty to come and claim the grace
of Christ, and put in upon your Interest according to your exigency. I say, if
you would live by Faith upon the Lord Jesus, then claim the grace of your
Interest according to the exigency of your state. Sirs, are you interested in
Jesus? then Jesus is yours, all Jesus is yours, all that he is, is yours for
you, and all that he has is yours, and for you. Now, if you would live by
Faith upon him, then come and put in, bring your claim, and say, the power of
Jesus Christ is mine, and the grace of Jesus Christ is mine; it is for me, it is
under special promise to me, and it is under peculiar engagement to me; it is
mine to live upon; I will lean upon the Arm of the Lord's strength, and I will
glory in his fullness in my own emptiness. There must be in the exercise of
Faith a peculiar claim that the Soul must lay unto Christ, and a peculiar
improving, of the fullness of his Interest, according to the emptiness of your
state. And thus Christians you may be supported, whatever you meet withal in
this world. Suppose you sustain a loss, why, in a fresh application to Christ
you will have it made up in him; and if a great failure and disappointment come
in upon you, in a renewed act of Faith upon the Lord Jesus Christ, applying
something of his fullness and sweetness, you will have your condition filled;
and so as it is emptied in the creature, it will be filled with grace, and with
Christ.

SERMON XI.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.


WE are now upon the directing of the Believer that is able in some measure to
make out his Interest in this Jesus, to live upon him, and to rejoice in him in
all trials. Of the Directions, five or six I have already given you, and shall
now proceed.

7. In the seventh place; If you would live by Faith upon Christ, so as to
fetch in joy and comfort from him in every condition, then labor to bring your
will to your condition, and keep your spirit within the confines of the will of
God under all the various disposes of providence. The recoilings and clashings
of our will with our condition, is a main hinderance unto our rejoicing in, and
acting Faith upon the Lord Jesus under a sad providence: And the great reason
why some persons are under such great dissatisfaction in their own spirits,
that they know not how to bear the troubles of their state, is, because their
wills are not brought to their condition; but they go about to bring their
condition to their wills; and when any thing considerable comes in upon them
that does not suit with their wills, it causes royls, disquiets, and
disturbances of spirit, and discomposure of heart, and such a Soul will never
rejoice in Christ in an evil day. Now Christians, if you would get into the
Life of Faith, you must then bring your will to your condition, be what it
will; own the disposing hand of God, that makes the change, whatever your
change is, and yield obedience to the Lord's will, that has the overruling
power of your state, and keep your spirits within the confines of the will of
God; otherwise a cross, or a trial in your outward condition will make a great
alteration in the inward frame of your spirit. I will give you a few Instances
for the clearing of this. Paul was a man that rejoiced and gloried in Christ
Jesus, when he had almost nothing else left him in this world; many times his
heart was made sad among the Churches of Christ that he came to make glad; and
as to losses, who met with more? says he, I was in perils often, and in hunger,
and in distress, and in nakedness; and yet this man he glories in tribulations;
he counted it all joy when he fell into diverse tribulations; how came this
about, that this man was got thus into a rejoicing in Christ Jesus, when the
whole world frowned upon him? He tells us, Phil. 4.11, 12. his will was brought
unto his condition. I speak not, says he, in a complaining way, in respect of
want, for I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, for
I know how to want, and how to abound. Says he, if God empties me, my will is
brought to my condition; I am willing to be emptied; if the Lord will make me
poor, and take away what I have, I am willing to be made poor; my spirit is
brought to my condition: He that can live in the confines of the will of God,
will live comfortably and rejoice in the Lord at all times. Another instance
for this is Job; Job you know was a man that was sorely tried, I think as much
as ever man was upon earth; now Job's will was brought to his condition; and
hence came he to rejoice in the Lord, Job 1.21. Now Job's wife's spirit was not
brought to her condition, she could not tell how to be contented, for she said
unto him, Chap. 2.10. Do thou still retain thy integrity? Curse God and die;
but he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks; what,
shall we receive good at the hand of the Lord, and not evil? As if he had said,
It was the Lord that filled me, and shall not the Lord empty me? We were
satisfied when the Lord was filling of us, and shall we not be satisfied now
the Lord is emptying of us? Another instance is that of good old Eli, 1 Samuel
3.18. Samuel told him every whit, and held nothing from him; and he said, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good: Why, if the Lord will strip me,
says he, I am willing to be stripped; if the Lord will take away my Children, and
take away my comforts, and break up my house; It is the Lord, I am contented;
if the Lord will do so, let him; my will is brought to my condition; Let him do
as seems him good. So David, 2 Samuel 15.26. But if he say thus; I have no
delight in thee; behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good to him. And
thus it was with our Lord Jesus, the greatest instance of all; Father, says he,
not my will, but thy will be done. Let my Father choose for me; I will not bring
my will into competition with his: If he will have me to drink off this Cup, I
will drink it; if he will have me to lay down my life, I will; if he will have
all my glory obscured, it shall be so; if he will have me a man of sorrows, his
will be done, and not my will. You do not know Christians, what an alteration
of heart, and what an alteration of life this living in the will of God will
make.

8. Captivate and throw out all the suggestions of sense and reason upon the
rising difficulties of your state. If that reason speak over your hearts in a
strait, and sense give the ruling word over your spirits in your condition, it
will certainly cause you to repine and murmr, and to sin against God: Sense
and reason are great enemies unto our peace and comfort: If sense and reason
have liberty to speak, and to be heard in your hearts, they will certainly lay
your spirits under a discouragement, and drive you off from the Lord. Thus it
was with Israel when they were in the wilderness, as soon as they were come out
of Egypt, where they had their Rivers and their Pools, and their Ponds of
Water, and where they had their Fleshpots, and were fed to the full: They came
into a howling wilderness, into a dry and barren place, where they had no Wells
of Water, where there was no plowing, nor sowing, then they fell a murmuring
and chiding of Moses, and said, Wherefore have thou brought us hither into this
place to slay us? for it is not supposed to be rational that we can live here
in this wilderness, but if we abide here we must die, Numb. 11.4, 5, 6. And the
mixed multitude that were among them fell a lusting, and all the children of
Israel wept again, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the
flesh that we ate in Egypt freely, the Cucumbers, and the Millons, etc. And
Psalm. 78 19. Yea, they spoke against God: They said, Can God furnish a Table in
the wilderness? And Numb. 20.12. Bebold there is no water for the Congregation;
and they gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and
they chod with Moses, saying, would to God we had died when our Brethren died
before the Lord? and why have ye brought up the Congregation of the Lord into
this wilderness, that we and our Cattle should die there? and wherefore have ye
made us to come out of Egypt, to bring us unto this evil place? It is no place
of sowing seed, or of Fields, or of Vineyards, or of Pomegranats. Here you see
sense and reason spoke over their condition, and how did it lay their Souls
under discouragement? And if you do but review at your leisure, the great
murmurings of this people, when they were in the wilderness; it was something
or other that sense and reason suggested to them under some providence or other
that disquieted their spirits; it was through the suggestion of sense and
reason that Zachartas questioned the truth of the Word of God sent to him by
the Angel about having a Son, Luk 1.18. And Zacharias said to the Angel,
whereby shall I know this, for I am an old man, and my Wife well stricken in
years. It was from the instigation of sense and reason that that unbelieving
Lord did question that great plenty that the Prophet told him should be the
next day, 2 King. 7.1, 2 Thus says the Lord, To morrow about this time shall a
measure of fine flower be sold for a shekel, etc. Then a Lord on whose hand the
King leaned, answered the man of God, and said, If the Lord should make windows
in Heaven, might this thing be? He only argued upon the Prophecy in his own
reason, and in his own sense, and this made him so unbelieving, as to reject
the Prophecy of the Prophet. This sense and reason made the Disciples
themselves to question the intention of the Lord about feeding so great a
multitude as there was, with such small provision as they had, Mark 8.1, 2. In
those days the multitude being very great, etc. At the 14th verse his
Disciples said unto him, From whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? So
that if you would get into this life of Faith, keep down sense and reason, and
cast out their suggestions, which will not bring you near to, but set you
further off from the Lord. Do not say upon a new difficulty, here is no way to
escape, or upon a loss, this or that is gone, and can never be made up to me
again, but throw out the reasonings of sense; if the discouraging suggestions
of sense be resisted, and set by, Faith will then get up, and speak in the
heart.

9. Look through and beyond the discouragements of second Causes, unto the
encouragements of the first Cause; that is always absolute and independent,
and there fix your eye in a strait. Second Causes they are failable, but so is
not the first Cause, that is the efficient of all; and the Lord who is the
first Cause, and efficient of all, oftentimes dries up all creature streams,
and causes visible humane help to fail, that we may see how great the first
Cause is. Though the Lord does ordinarily make use of second Causes, yet the
Lord will so walk toward us, to discover to us that he is not tied to means,
that he is not tied to second Causes; and he oft-times causes visible helps to
fail, that our eyes may be upon him, as the first absolute independent Cause of
all. I will give you an instance for this, and it is that of Israel; Israel was
in the way of the Lord marching toward the Land of Promise; and as soon as
ever they were come into the way of the Lord, that they were entered into the
wilderness, they were brought to the mouth of the Red Sea. Now all second
Causes failed for help; there was not a Ship, nor a Boat to be got to carry the
Hosts of Israel over the water; but the first Cause was not at a strait, and
therefore says Moses from the Lord, Israel stand still and see the Salvation of
God: Now, let not your eyes be upon the second Cause, but upon the first Cause,
and you shall see what a deliverance God can make for you; and he carried all
the Host of Israel, men women and children through the drowning Sea, and not a
man, woman nor child was lost in the passage, and yet there was neither Ship
nor Boat to aid them over. And so afterward when they came at Jordan; the
waters were before them, there was no Boat to swift them over the waters, but
the Lord he commands Israel to go on, and the waters made a lane for them; they
run on heaps on both sides, and Israel has a path made in the great deep for
them. And I will give you an instance now of a good man, a man of great Faith,
and that was Moses; Moses in a considerable strait fixes his eye upon the
second Cause, and pored upon the discouragements of that, and was lost in his
spirit by not looking beyond unto the first Cause, and the encouragements that
the first Cause did administer. It is Numb. 11.19, 20.21. and so on. The people
in the preceding verses, they murmured against Moses, because they had no
flesh; they were come from their full Tables in Egypt, and they had not now
their dainties to live upon, and they did not know now how to be content; why,
says God, you shall not eat one day, nor two, but even a whole month. Now see
what Moses said, at the 21th verse; The people among whom I am are six hundred
thousand footmen, and thou have said, I will give them flesh that they may eat
a whole month. Shall the Flocks and the Herds be slain for them to suffice
them? or, shall all the Fishes of the Sea be gathered together for them to
suffice them, etc. Here is the relation. God tells this whole Congregation that
they should have Flesh to eat for a month; they should eat their bellies full;
they should eat till they could eat no more. Moses had his eye fixed upon
second Causes, and not upon the first Cause, and he questions this; Lord, says
he, how can this be? So many hundred thousands of us; and what, shall we all
have flesh to eat? Now on the other hand, we read of Asa, when a mighty Host
came out against him, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. An Host of a thousand thousand that came
out against him; he looked beyond the discouragements of second Causes, unto the
encouragements of the first Cause, that is absolute and independent, and see
how his spirit held up; And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it
is nothing with thee to save, whether with many, or with those that have no
might; help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy Name we go
against this multitude, etc. He looks unto God the first Cause of all, and he
saw there the Power of God was enough to charge this whole Army, and to engage
against this great multitude that came out against him. And this was the
Prophet's Spirit, and the course that he took here in the Text; all second
Causes failed, and frowned, and administered only discouragement; The Fig Tree
that blossomed not, there was no fruit in the Vine, the labor of the Olive
failed, the Fields yielded no meat, the Flocks were cut off from the fold, and
there was no herd in the stall. Here was a failure of all second Causes, now,
says he, I will look unto the first Cause; I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my Salvation. Christians, let me tell you, that if you lay
the weight of your case upon second Causes, you will never come to rejoice in
Christ Jesus in a strait. Remember therefore, that when such a stream is dried
up, the fountain is full still, and the fountain can send out more ways than
one. The fountain that issued out a stream in such a place, can issue out a
stream in another place; as long as the fountain is full, there is no fear of
want; and if you would come to live upon the Lord Jesus Christ in a strait, you
must keep your eye upon the fountain that is ever full, and overflows.

SERMON XII.
Habakkuk 3.18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my
Salvation.


WE are upon the Directions.

10. In the tenth place, if you would live by faith upon Jesus Christ, so as to
fetch joy and comfort from him under the saddest providence of your state,
then consider the unchangeable love of Jesus Christ that meteth out, and
manageth unto blessed ends all the losses, crosses, trials and tribulations of
your state.

The hard thoughts that we have of our troubles, and the hard thoughts that we
have of the Lord when we are troubled, do drive us off from him, and lay our
Spirits under great discouragements; O says the Soul, live upon Jesus Christ,
and rejoice in him! How can I do that, when he comes out against me as mine
enemy? he writes bitter things against me, he is undoing of me, he is breaking
and spoiling of me; and what! can I rejoice in him? The hard thoughts that the
Church had of the Lord was that that did so much overwhelm her Spirit, when she
came into a low condition, his mercy is clean gone, and he has forgotten to be
gracious, he will be merciful to me no more, his mercies are shut up, and fail
for evermore, and such bitter expressions as these are; and how can we now
rejoice in this Lord; and all this while you understand not the Lord, nor the
design of the Lord, and by your ignorance you come to wrong your own Spirits in
your present condition, by overcharging them with a discouragement that the
providence rightly considered as stated by the Lord, administers not; for do
but consider, that there is unchangeable love engaged in, and mixed with every
adverse providence; the Lord he strikes, and he wounds in a way of love, he
breaks in upon this comfort and the other, and makes breaches in your
condition, in a way of love and grace; the Lord he takes away a creature
comfort from a Christian to make more room in his heart for Christ. The Lord he
puts him into the furnace, that he may purify him from his dross; the Lord he
purges him to make him partaker of his holiness. The Lord he shakes him, and
shakes his creature standing, and his relative standing under a creature
consideration and condition, that he might take faster hold upon Christ Jesus;
he sends out every tribulation upon you, with a charge to do you good, and to
use you kindly; as David when he sent out his Army, gave them a charge, deal
gently for my sake with the young man Absalom: So says Jesus Christ unto every
Cross that befalls you, use my Servant kindly for my sake, treat him well; says
the Lord, unto a loss, work for the gain of such a Servant of mine; says the
Lord, unto such a Cross, do you try, and do you refine, and do you purge, and
do you better my Servant; he says unto such a tribulation; go, and do such
Servants of mine good; there is unchangeable love and grace that meteth out,
and manageth unto blessed ends all the crosses of your condition, Job 5.17.
Behold happy is the man whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty. We say crossed is the man, and broken is the man, and
undone is the man, that is so and so dealt withal; ay; but says God, happy is
the man, there is a blessing under the cross, there is love and grace in the
trial, that thou do not consider (Christian) and this will be more advantage
to thee then all the disadvantages that the Cross can bring in upon thee, in
its self considered, Proverbs 3.12. For whom the Lord loves he corrects,
even as a Father the Son in whom he delights; So as there is love in all the
Lords corrections, and Isaiah 48.10. Behold I have refined thee, but not with
Silver, I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction; I have put thee into
the furnace, says the Lord, there is my love working toward thee, there is my
love speaking to thee, there have I been refining, and purging, and purifying
of thee, to make thee more excellent gold for my use; this is the design of the
Lord, Heb. 12.5, 6. And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaks unto
you, as unto Children; My Son despise not thou the Chastening of the Lord,
neither faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives; and Rev. 3.19. As many
as I love, I rebuke and chasten; and Romans 8.35, 36, etc. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? None of these things shall do it,
says he. So as if you would come to a rejoicing in the Lord in a trying hour,
then consider the unchangeable love of Jesus Christ that does mete out and
manage the Crosses that you are called to bear. It was good for me, says
David, that I was afflicted; and again, says he, Psalm. 116.10. I believed,
therefore have I spoken, I was greatly afflicted; I said in my have all men are
liars, what shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits? Surely the
Prophet had not only the remove of the affliction in his Eye, but also the
design of God in the affliction, that he says, what shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits? I will take up the cup of Salvation, and bless his
name; he has greatly afflicted me, and sorely distressed me. I will take up
the cup of Salvation; and bless his name; here doubtless was an eye upon the
design; well then, if you would come to live rejoycingly in the Lord in all
conditions; consider his unchangeable love that does order and dispose the
trials that you are exercised with.

11. In the eleventh place; Consider the auxiliary relations that Christ stands
in to your Souls, and the grace that is dispensed upon them. You look
Christians in an evil day, below the comforts of your state, and that is the
reason you are so hurried in your own Spirits; you pore upon an emptying
providence, and don't consider the filling relations that Christ is
unchangeably enterered into with your Souls: relations of grace that are
always comforting, and always relieving, and that have new supplies of grace
always springing up in them for your assistance. I will give you a touch of
some of them. The Lord Jesus Christ is called the Father of believers, he was
promised under that name, in Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son
is given, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father. So Isaiah 8.18. Behold I and the Children whom the Lord
has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel; behold I and the
Children, we are the Lords Children. And Isaiah 63.16. Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not; O
Lord thou art our Father, our Redeemer, thy name is from everlasting; this is
spoken of Christ Jesus. Now the relation of a Father, it is a relation of pity;
it is a relation of love, it is a relation of tenderness; when the Lord tells
us he stands in this relation unto us, he tells us that he will exercise the
tenderness, the pity, and the kindness of a Father unto his Child. Now a
Father, a tenderhearted Father, he will consider his Child in all conditions,
in all his streights, and though it be a rebellious Child, yet still he will
consider it, and he will exercise the pity and the tenderness of a Father to
it; this you may see in David to Absalom; Absalom was a rebellious Son that
proclaimed war against his Father, and would have cut off his Father; and yet
see how David's bowels did work toward his rebellious Son when he heard he was
dead; O Absalom, my Son, my Son, would to God I had died for thee, O Absalom,
my Son, my Son; these were the workings of his heart toward rebellious
Absalom; now if there be so much tenderness in a Father in the flesh toward
his Children, much more in Christ to his Children. Says Christ, Luke 11.13. If
ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your Heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask him? Why, the
Fathers in the flesh cannot out-love Jesus Christ, they have not a larger heart
for their Children then Christ has for his; (again) Jesus Christ he is styled
the Husband of Believers; now that is a relation of great care and tenderness;
the faithful, wise, able, loving Husband, how will he defend his Wife, and how
will he provide for his Wife, and how will he safeguard his Wife, and how will
he pity his Wife, in all her exigencies, she shall be as his own Soul, Ephesians.
5.28, 29, 30. So ought men to love their Wives, even as their own bodies, he
that loves his Wife, loves himself, and no man ever yet hated his own flesh;
this is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. So as
all believers they are betrothed and married unto Jesus Christ, and Jesus
Christ as a loving, able, wise, tenderhearted Husband, will secure, and
defend, and provide for those that are married to him, much more then the
Husbands in the flesh can do for their Wives.

Again; Jesus Christ he is our Brother, our elder Brother; Now a Brother under
the law, was not to see any of his younger Brethren under decay, and in a low
condition, but he was to relieve him; if thy Brother be waxen poor, and fall
into decay, then thou shall relieve him, was a Scripture law; now says Christ,
I am not ashamed to call them Brethren; and he will be a most loving,
tenderhearted, faithful Brother unto all his Brethren, whatsoever their
streights and their trials are. Christians, do but propose those aiding,
relieving, auxiliary relations of grace, that Christ stands in to your Souls,
and exercise faith upon them, propose them I say to your faith, and exercise
faith upon them; do you consider in your own imaginations; what if you had such
a Father, so wise, so able, so loving, so tender hearted, how should your heart
rejoice in him! why Christian, you have all that you can imagine in Christ, as
a Father to you! O you would think, if you had such a tender Husband, such a
kind hearted Husband, how would you take comfort in him. Christian, thou have
all in Christ Jesus, that thou can imagine, and much more abundantly, imagine
the lovingest, faithfullest Brother, that ever was upon earth, and thou have
more in Christ Jesus, then can be imagined; Christ stands in all these
relations to thee, and these relations are obligations unto him; according to
the relation will he act and dispense, and according to the obligation of every
relation shall the dispense be, so as he is not only a Husband, but you may
believe that he will do all for you (being betrothed to him) that the relation
of a Husband obliges him to, and he will do all as a Father for you, that the
relation obliges him to, and he will do all as a Brother, that the relation
binds him to. And know Christians, that you can never outlive the love and the
grace of the relations of Christ, neither can you ever burden the love of any
of his relations, you can never overcharge his love; there is a natural love
arising in the heart of a Father toward his Children, a growing, springing
love every day, that notwithstanding many provocations, still the Father keeps
his heart upon his Child; so though there are provocations in your way unto
your heavenly Father, yet his heart is kept toward you, and his heart is the
heart of a Father; and his heart is the heart of a Husband, and his heart is
the heart of a Brother, and you can never burden his love, nor outlive his
grace, nor over-believe the fullness of these relations of grace that he stands
in to your Souls. Now then, if you would come to an exercise of faith upon the
Lord Jesus Christ, then consider the auxiliary relations of grace that he
stands in to your Souls, and what is dispensible upon those relations, and wait
upon him for the fulfillment of all.

12. Again; If you would come to live a life of faith upon Christ Jesus,
rejoicing in him under a strait and trial of providence, then take up a
promise, and believe it upon the bare faithfulness of God, and never dispute
with the difficulty, or apprehended impossibility of it. There are sometimes
great mountains of difficulty that lie before the promise, you must not consult
with these, Christians, but consult with the promises as they are in the hands
of the faithfulness of God, and believe the truth of every promise, because God
has spoken it; how unlikely and improbable soever unto sense and reason the
accomplishment of it is, don't say how can this be? how can such a promise be
fulfilled? It is not likely it should be fulfilled to me, so unsuitable and so
unanswerable; but eye the faithfulness of God that made the promise, and
believe it upon Gods bare truth, because he has spoken it, when you have
nothing else to encourage you to take it up: Thus it was with Abraham, the
Father of believers, Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21. Who against hope believed in hope,
and being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body, now dead, when he
was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs Womb. There
were unlikelyhoods of this promise ever being fulfilled, and if Abraham would
have reasoned according to sense, why sense would have suggested to him that
this promise was a mere fallacy, a mere romance, that there was no truth, no
certainty in it, what! he a hundred years old now, a dead man, almost his
nature quite decayed, and Sarah even going into the grave, almost a dead Woman,
nature quite decayed in her, and what, shall Sarah conceive, and have a Son?
it is not likely, nor probable. Nay, says reason, it is an impossible thing: now
here had been a discouragement to his Spirit, if he had called in sense and
reason, and considered and debated the matter therewith, but he takes up the
promise, and believes it upon the bare Word of God, upon his bare faithfulness;
well says Abraham, I am indeed an old Man, and Sarah my Wife is an old woman,
but God has said I shall have a Child, and I believe it; here is no hope in
nature, but I will believe it against hope, against all discouragement to my
hope; I will believe God that has spoken it is able to perform it, surely it
shall be so; thus Christians, when difficulties and discouragements incompass
the promise, don't dispute with the difficulties that lie in the way, but keep
your eye upon the faithfulness of God, and believe the promise upon Gods bare
word alone.

13. Again; Suit the promise to your present state, whatever it be, and set it
at the head of your trial, and then wait for an accomplishment. I say single
out a promise suitable to your state, and set it at the head of your trial, at
the mouth of your trouble or temptation, and then wait upon the Lord for the
accomplishment of the promise. Thou can (Christian) be brought into no
condition, but there is some promise in the new Covenant that does suit thy
trial, whatever it be; there is no burden laid upon thy back, but some promise
suits the burden; now you must single out a promise suitable to your present
state, and set that at the head of your trial, and keep your eye there, waiting
for the accomplishment of the promise, and hereby your hearts will be raised up
to glory, and rejoice in the Lord alone. Suppose that you were in some
considerable danger, single out some Gospel delivering promise, and set that at
the head of your danger. Suppose Christian that thou have some great burden
upon thy Spirit, single out some Soul reviving promise, and set it at the head
of thy burden. Suppose that you have met with some extraordinary loss, single
out some comforting, reviving promise, some promise of supplies that Jesus
Christ has made, and set that at the door where your comfort went out; and
keep your eye upon the promise of your state, and the promise of your present
condition, and wait upon the Lord for its accomplishment, and by this means
your hearts will in a little time come to be raised, and you will see a new
supply ready to come in upon your empty condition.

14. Again; Propose the communicable Attributes of Christ to your view, as
under an unchangeable reconciliation and obligation unto you. My friends, if
Christ be yours, then all Christ is yours; when Christ gave you an interest in
himself, he made over all himself to you; all the Attributes of his eternal
glorious nature, they are engaged to you, they are reconciled to you, and they
are under an express Gospel Covenant obligation for you. Now, propose these,
and keep them in your view. Consider, the Power of Jesus Christ is under
engagement for you. Consider, the Wisdom of Christ Jesus is engaged to you; I
speak to every Believer in particular; for Christ makes over himself as fully
to one Believer, as if he had but one Believer to make over himself unto. The
Faithfulness of Christ Jesus is engaged to you; the Love and the Grace of
Christ Jesus is engaged to you. Now Christians, if you would come to rejoice in
Christ, then often consider of these; propose these Attributes as under a
special unchangeable Covenant-reconciliation and obligation to you; and
consider also how much there is in every property of his Nature; do but
consider how much there is in the Power of Christ, how much there is in the
Love of Christ, how much there is in the Grace of Christ, how much there is in
the Wisdom of Christ. Christians, there is a fountain in every Attribute of
Christ; there is a fountain of Power in Christ's Attribute of Power; and there
is a fountain of Love in Christ's Attribute of Love; and there is a fountain of
Grace in Christ's Attribute of Grace, and these fountains they are set open for
you, Christians; do but see then, how many fountains you have to go unto; you
complain of want and emptiness, that you have nothing; why here are full
fountains to go unto; all these set open at all times for your relief; do but
propose these (Christians) to your consideration, and your hearts will soon
sally out to rejoice in the Lord.

15. In the last place; If you would come to live by Faith upon the Lord Jesus
in all conditions, then reckon that your All is in Christ, and is always sure
in Christ, though some outward comforts of your condition are coming and going.
Jesus Christ is the possessor of your blessedness; your blessedness is not in
your own hand, nor in the hands of a stranger, but in the hands of Christ; and
the outward comforts of your condition are not your portion, (Christians) they
are not your All, but your All it lies in Christ, and when you have lost an
Estate, your All is still sure in the hands of Christ: When you have lost a
friend, and lost a relation, your All is still in the hands of Christ
untouched; there it is, and it is always sure in the hand where it is lodged.
Now, do but reckon that your comforts lie here, and that the Lord is the keeper
and possessor of all your hopes, of all your blessings and blessednesses, of
all your comforts and consolations, of your whole treasure, and your Souls will
come to be drawn out after Christ to a rejoicing in him. Says the Apostle in
Col. 3.11. But Christ is All, and in All. He sums up all in a few words; all is
in Christ; why then, you that have an interest in Christ, reckon that your All
lies there, and then will your Souls be enlarged to look toward him.

And I might add unto this for a close, That you should look up unto the Lord
the Father, in the sense of your weakness in Faith, or want of Faith to
increase your Faith, or to give you Faith. The Disciples they went unto Christ,
Luke 17.5. and said, Lord increase our Faith. So Christians, you should do;
it is an evil day, a trying day; it is by Faith only that you will come to stand;
and it is Faith that will keep up your spirits: O pray unto the Lord that he
would increase your Faith! Pray for the increase of this grace above all, and
be earnest with him, that he who has been the Author, would be the promoter of
your Faith. And for your encouragement, Christians, let me tell you, that the
more you believe in Christ Jesus, the more,

1. In the first place you will glorify Christ; every act of Faith glorifies
Christ Jesus; it does glorify his Fullness, it glorifies his Alsufficiency, it
glorifies his Advancement and Enthronement at the right hand of the Father; it
glorifies him in his Gospel-Offices, as he is entrusted with the Fullness of all
grace for you. Nay,

2. Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ does engage Jesus Christ to come in for
your help. Every act of Faith does not only glorify him, but engage him; it
will awaken his Power, and cause him to arise and open his hand, and give out
more liberally and freely: He says therefore unto his Servants many times,
According to your Faith be it unto you. Nay,

3. This living upon Jesus Christ is the only way to make your lives
comfortable in this world. What had this Prophet to comfort his heart with, but
only this, the Lord Jesus Christ, resting upon him alone? The Fig Tree, that
was withered, and his creature comforts were gone; emptiness and nothingness
was before him; well, says he, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my Salvation. Behold, this it was that made his condition comfortable;
why Christians, you will never have comfort in your own spirits under a loss,
under a cross, and in a time of temptation, if you have not Faith upon Christ
Jesus, and there fix your Souls. Nay, let me add,

4. In the fourth and last place; That hereby you shall have confirmation, and
establishment, and settlement, in the greatest shakings of providence that may
be brought upon your condition. And therefore O Christians! let me in the
winding up of all once more call upon you to live upon, and to glory in Christ
Jesus alone: As to all your comforts in this world, you cannot promise your
selves they shall abide with you; God may empty you from vessel to vessel, till
he have taken all these away; but now there is enough in a naked Jesus to take
comfort in; there is enough in Jesus Christ alone for you to glory in. O come
and draw your comforts from Christ, and do not draw them from the creature; do
not draw them from secondary helps, but draw them from the fountain; do not sit
down at the streams, but away to the fountain, to the Ocean that is always
full. In every strait have your eye upon Jesus; in every cross keep your eye
upon Jesus; in every loss keep your eye upon Jesus; under every strait and
trial have recourse to Jesus, and acquaint your selves more with him, that you
may be in the Prophets frame here, To rejoice in the Lord, and to joy in the
God of your Salvation.

THE SAINTS Hope in Heaven: In one Sermon.

Together with Freedom from Condemnation in Christ Jesus.

Discovered in Two Sermons, Preached October. 2. 1681. being the last that were
Preached.

By Robert Asty, late Minister of Jesus Christ in Norwi^h.

Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies.

V. 34 Who is he that condemns?

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden for Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near
the Marketplace. 1683.

THE HOPE OF THE Saints in Heaven.
Colos. 1.5. For the Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard
before in the word of the truth of the Gospel.


THis holy Apostle being in bonds for the sake of Christ, understanding by
Epaphras, that this Church (with whom he had taken much pains in the Lord) was
in danger to be carried off from the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, by
some Seducers and false teachers, that would set up the abrogated institutions
of Moses, with the institutions of Christ, makes it his business to confirm
them in the faith that they had received; after the inscription, and
salutation, the Apostle gives thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for what he had done for this people, he declares how much they were
upon his heart, he could not cease praying for them, and he rejoiced in their
faith, and in their love, as you may see, v. 3, 4. We give thanks to God, and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you, since we heard of
your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which you have to all the Saints;
and he speaks of their hope in this 5th verse, which says he, is laid up for
you in Heaven, by hope he does not mean the grace of hope, as it is sometimes to
be taken in the Scripture, but he means the object of hope, or the thing hoped
for, as sometimes hope is to be understood, as in Gal. 5.5. For we through the
Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. And Titus 2.13. Looking for
that blessed hope; So as the hope that he speaks of, which is laid up in
Heaven, is Heaven itself, and the glory and blessedness of it, that did belong
unto them that had laid hold upon Jesus, and upon eternal life in laying hold
upon Jesus. There are some to make out the dependence of these words with the
preceding, do thus understand them; we give thanks unto God for your faith, and
for your love, which is an evidence that you have a hope which is laid up in
Heaven for you. Some others thus, we are rejoiced in your faith, and in your
love, which you have received, and wherein ye stand fast, for the hope which is
laid up for you in Heaven. Some others they understand the Apostle, expressing
in the fourth verse, the causes and grounds of his giving thanks to God for
them, and rejoicing on their account, and that is their faith and their love,
which are illustrated in the fifth verse, both in the final cause, and also in
instrumental cause; the final cause is Heaven, and the blessedness thereof
which their faith and their love will issue its self in; the instrumental cause
is the word of the truth of the Gospel by which faith and love have been
wrought in them; and by which they were making meet for the heavenly
inheritance. It is only a short discourse that I intend upon the words.

The Proposition from the words is this;

Doct. That the Saints have a hope which is laid up in Heaven for them. They
have the glory and the blessedness of Heaven to seed, and to feast their
expectations upon, whilst they are here. There is a world beyond this world,
where the Saints have their treasure, where their great estate, and their
inheritance lies. Some things they have here, but truly as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable; if that there were nothing more then is to be enjoyed here, if
they had not something in reserve to mend their condition, they were poorly
on it; says Christ, John 16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation. The
Saints have nothing but sorrows, trials, temptations, troubles, and afflictions
here: But there is a glory which remains, a glory that is in reserve, that is
to be revealed, that is another manner of inheritance then what is possessed
and enjoyed by them here, Col. 3.4. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God. The life of the Saints is a hidden life, God has hid it from
the world; he has hid their estate, he has hid their riches, he has hid
their glory from the world, they do not know what they are born and entitled
to; but when Christ who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory, as for the men of the world you may see all they have, for
they have their All here. All the portion that God intends to give them, it is
possessed by them here, and therefore they are called men, which have their
portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14. And thus it is said of the rich man in the
Parable, Luke 16.25. That he received his good things in this life. And Abraham
said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, thou
had thy portion, and thy All here; all the comfort, and all the peace, and
all the honor; and all the riches, and all the plenty that ever God intends to
bestow upon wicked men, they have it here; but now, besides all that the Saints
have here, they have a hope that is laid up for them in Heaven. They can look
beyond, and over things that are seen, unto those things that are not seen,
that is, with a carnal eye; they can look from present things that are
perishing, unto spiritual things that are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. Whilst we look
not, says the Apostle at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen, are eternal. We look at those things that are not seen, at the
unseen things of another world, and Romans 5.2. We have access by faith into this
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. We have (says
he) peace with God now, which is something of Heaven let down into our hearts,
but this is not all, but we rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and Romans 8.17,
18. Being Children we are heirs, heirs of God, and Joynt-heirs with Christ; and
says he, there is a glory that shall be revealed, that all the sufferings of
this life are not worthy to be compared with it, 2 Timothy 4.8. There is laid up
for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day, and not to me only, but to all them also that love his
appearing. Now says he, that I have fought the good fight, now that I have
finished my course, now that I am come to the end of my journey, now that I am
a going out of the world, and leaving all that I have here, there is a Crown of
righteousness which is in reserve for me, that is just ready to be set upon my
head; and 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a
lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, which fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for you; It is not known what a Saint is, whilst he is here in this
world, nor yet what a Saint has; what he has in reversion, what he is called
to, and what he shall be put into the possession of, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now
are we the Sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is.

In speaking to this Proposition, we shall show you what Hope the Saints have
laid up in Heaven for them. A few particulars we shall alittle glance upon for
the help of your Faith by the way. But what the Hope of a Saint is, which is
laid up in Heaven for him, is that which no man upon Earth is able to tell you.
The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 2.9. That eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepared
for them that love him. And the Apostle Paul was mounted up into the third
Heavens, and when he came down, he tells us that the glory that was there, and
the high and blessed enjoyments that are there, they were unspeakable, he was
not able to utter them, 2 Cor. 12.4. He was caught up into Paradise, and heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter; unspeakable
words, unutterable words; he was not able to utter them when he was come down
again. He says at the 3d verse, Whether he was in the body or out of the body
he could not tell, but when he was come down again, he was not able to tell
what he heard, and what he saw, when he was in the transport; But yet there is
something that the Word of Truth has made known to us, for the reviving of our
spirits, and the strengthening of our hope whilst we are in our Journey; and
some of those things I shall briefly lay before you. As,

First, In Heaven the Saints shall have the perfection of all grace. Here they
have grace, but grace is under-age; grace is in a great deal of weakness; grace
is mixed with a great deal of corruption, that is, there is a great deal of sin
in the heart with grace; they are not all grace; grace does not stand alone;
grace is not in its full strength; grace here is so low, and so little, so born
down, and so often overtopt with corruption, as that it can hardly be seen by
another, it can hardly be discerned by themselves: That a Child of God is
oftentimes at a loss to know what to make of his condition; he knows not
whether he has any grace or no. Says Christ, Matthew. 14.31. O thou of little
faith! wherefore did thou doubt? The same may be said to us all, O ye of
little faith! O ye of little love! O ye of little patience! O ye of little
humility! O ye of little self-denial! grace is in a great deal of weakness
here; grace indeed lies under a growing promise, and they that have received
but a little, receive it as the earnest of a great deal, but they have only the
earnest here: But now when they come in Heaven, there is perfection; all their
graces are put into perfect strength; there will be no weakness in their love
to God; there will be no short comings in their submission to the will of God;
but in that heavenly state, the Saints are all advanced unto a heavenly
stature, even unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 3
13. till we all come, in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ. And Ephesians. 5.27. That (says he) he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and without blemish. There will be no weakness, no imperfection
in the new man, but you shall be in your full grown state in Heaven,
immediately upon your translation; and therefore the Souls of Just men entering
into Heaven, are said to be in a perfect state, Heb. 12.23. To the general
Assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of Just men made perfect. Here you are
glad to receive now a little, and then a little, and to be adding by degrees:
But there, grace shall be so complete, as there shall be no room for a further
degree, nor for a higher improvement.

2. The Saints have a hope laid up in Heaven, of the glorification of these
vile bodies. Our bodies are now full of corruption, they are earthly bodies,
and they are a great clog and a hinderance unto a spiritualized Soul; but there
shall come a change upon them, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. So also is the resurrection of
the dead; It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; It is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in glory. Ver. 44. It is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body. It is sown in corruption: Many are the co^^upting
diseases that our flesh is exposable to, whilst we live; and such infections
sometimes seize upon the body, as do separate Lovers and acquaintance far from
them; but to be sure, at death, corruption that seizes the body, and makes it
so loathsome, that near relations cannot bear one another. Abraham cries out, O!
Bury my dead out of my sight; and yet she was the Wife of his bosom, that was
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, to whom he wanted no love; yet says
he, Bury my dead out of my sight. It is sown in dishonor, and indeed it lives
so, for much of the glory, and beauty, and fairness of the body of man that was
at first bestowed upon him, is lost. But all the scarrs, and all the blemishes,
and all the disfigurements of our bodies, even all the effects of sin, shall at
once be done away, that that which is sown in dishonor, shall be raised in
glory; and that which is sown in weakness, shall be raised in power; and that
which is sown a natural body, shall be raised a spiritual body; it shall be
spiritual in its temperature, constitution and complexion; it shall be
spiritual in all its operations. It shall be raised to glory, and all the robes
of mortality, and all the rags of its vileness, they shall be left behind.
Lazarus, when he rose out of the grave, he arose with all his grave-cloths
about him, and he came with them out of his grave, because he was to return
again, Joh. 11.44. And he that was dead came forth bound hand and foot with
grave-cloths; Jesus says to them, Loose him, and let him go. The grave had not
done with him: This was not the blessed Resurrection that was under promise,
but he came out of the grave to return again; but now Jesus Christ, when he
arose out of the grave, he arose to return no more, and he left all his
grave-cloths behind him, Joh. 20.6, 7. Then comes Simon Peter, and went into
the Sepulcher, and sees the Linnen-cloths, and the Napkin that was about his
head. The Grave-cloths, the Napkin, and all that he had about him, was all left
behind, because he was to return no more. Now Jesus he arose as the first
fruits of the Saints, 1 Cor. 15.20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that slept. So as you may see in the
Resurrection of Christ what shall be unto the Saints in their Resurrection:
They shall leave all the cloths of their dishonor, and of corruption and
mortality behind them. And Phil. 3.20, 21. These vile bodies of ours shall be
changed, and made like to the glorious body of Christ. Who shall change our
vile bodies, bodies full of corruption, full of weakness, bodies in so much
dishonor, they shall be changed, and shall be fashioned like to the glorious
body of Christ. And Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our selves also who have
the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies. So that this is
another part of the hope that is laid up in Heaven for the Saints, the
glorification of their vile bodies. We shall have part of that glory and honor
upon our bodies, that the Father did bestow upon that body which he prepared
for his Son, when he took our nature: And truly the body of Jesus Christ in
Heaven is the most glorious creature that is there; and it is a glory which the
Saints shall admire for ever; they shall not only admire it in Christ, but
admire it in themselves, as they also shall be made partakers of it.

3. The Saints have a Hope laid up for them of an everlasting Rest. Here is no
Rest in this world, it is full of troubles and tossings to and fro, like a Ship
that is at Sea in a storm; but now in Heaven there is Rest; Rest from all the
troubles of men, Rest from all the troubles of Satan, Rest from all the
troubles of sin; sorrow shall flee from them: All tears shall be wiped from
their eyes, Rev. 21.4. I shall not here tell you how far the Saints may be made
partakers of this that is here promised, on this side Heaven; but to be sure,
it is true of Heaven it self. Glad would a Saint be to get into a corner where
he might sit down and be at rest; but if he take up in this condition, he is
presently disturbed; if he go into another condition, he finds his troubles
follow him; his quarters are continually broken up; he can never be at rest,
but one disquiet follows another, and one trouble takes another by the heels.
But in Heaven there the Saints shall be taken into an everlasting Rest, 2 These.
1.7. And to you who are troubled rest with us. He cheers up these Thessalonians
to whom he writes, under all the troubles that they met withal from men and
Devils, and all their enemies in their way, that were continually disquieting
of their spirits; Well, says he, Cheer up, to you who are troubled rest with
us. He was abundant in labors, and abundant in sorrows and sufferings, but he
comforted himself with this, that there was a Rest that remained for him; and
not for me only, says he, but for you also; rest with us: You shall come into
the same Rest with us. Ministers and People that are faithful in Christ Jesus,
shall all come into the same Rest, a Rest that none of the troublers shall be
able to disturb, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them. The labors and the pains that you take here, they
are very many: We were driven by God into this condition, in the sweat of our
faces to eat our bread; Well, but this is but for this life: You have a Hope
that is laid up in Heaven for you, of a blessed and a glorious Rest, wherein
you shall have freedom from all your labors; you shall have freedom from all
the disturbances and pressures that you have here.

4. There is a fullness of Joy that is laid up in Heaven for all Believers. Says
the Prophet, Isa. 66.11. That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of
her consolation, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of
her glory. If that there be such a time a coming, wherein this may be true of
the Saints here upon Earth, it will be much more so in Heaven; for Heaven will
heighten all; it will heighten all your joy, and heighten all your comfort; and
not only heighten the joy and comfort that you have, but that succeeding Saints
shall have when the whole Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord;
still there shall be a disproportion between Earth and Heaven. When the voice
says, Come up hither, that which follows is, Enter into your Master's Joy,
Matthew. 25.21. Here the Lord, for the bearing up of the hearts of his People,
sends down a little joy into their spirits; he sends down the Comforter unto
them, and he comes, and now and then speaks a reviving word; now and then he
gives a drop of consolation, and it may be it is upon the end of the Rod too,
and this is counted a great matter; and truly it should be so with us. But
there is a hope of another manner of Joy, (or other measures) laid up in Heaven
for you. Joy, it shall be the Air that the Saints shall breath in; it shall be
the very Orb that they shall move in, the very Elements that they shall dwell
in; their hearts cannot hold all; it shall be overflowing, it shall be round
about them.

1. The Joy that is laid up in Heaven for the Saints, it is that that shall be
fully satisfying. They shall have enough of it, they shall be filled with it to
the full, so as there shall be no room for more, Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me
the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. But shall the Saints have enough of this? yes, Psalm.
17.16. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied
when I awake with thy likeness. The Soul has not its satisfaction here; when
it has a little, it is enlarged to bless God, but it has not enough, it would
have more still; a little more communion with God: But in Heaven there is
satisfaction to the full. When I awake, that is in the morning of the
resurrection, when this mortality is blown out of his eyes; when he comes to
open his eyes in the other world, then shall I be satisfied with thy likeness.

2. The Joy that is laid up in Heaven is unmixed. Here there is a mixture with
your Joy, you have a little joy, and a great deal of sorrow; you have a little
peace, and a great deal of trouble; you have darkness with your light, and you
have vexation and crosses with your comforts: But in Heaven there is nothing to
cross, there is nothing to grieve, there is only joy, there is no mixture with
your. joy. It will be pure joy.

3. And thirdly; That Joy that is laid up in Heaven will be permanent. It is
such as you shall sit down in, and that which you shall partake of to eternity.
Here your joy is not only mixed with sorrows, but it meets with great
overwhelmings; it is coming and going; it is partaken of here at great
uncertainties; but now in Heaven it will be always the same.

4. There is in Heaven laid up for you absolute freedom, and full liberty of
Soul in the Service of God. Here it is not so, when the spirit is willing, the
flesh is weak; and how often are our hearts ready to die within us? The Spirit
will not hold out; we can hardly watch with Christ one hour; bodies tire and
spirits tire; but now there will be a fullness of strength in Heaven, and there
will be liberty of spirit, proportionable to all strength, and to all grace;
the Soul will be in absolute freedom for God, and the body under an absolute
freedom too, answerable unto all the freeness of the Soul; now the body is a
great clog to the Soul; it is a great hinderance, that you cannot do for God,
and you cannot lay out your selves for God as you would, but there will be no
weariness in Heaven in your Spirits, though you shall serve night and day,
world without end: the promise is, Isaiah 40.31. That they that wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles,
they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not be faint. The Saints
rejoice as they can experience something of this here, but the fullness of this
promise will be in Heaven, there you shall mount up indeed as with wings, there
Soul and Body shall be in all liberty in the service of God. Now what would
Saints give to have their Spirits in a freedom and full liberty for God but one
day; O they would count it a corner of Heaven, if that they could have their
Spirits set in full liberty for God but one of his days, that they may serve
God, and delight themselves fully in the service of God a whole day. But Sirs,
in Heaven you shall be fully delighted in the service of God to eternity, all
clogs shall be taken off from your Spirits.

5. The Saints have a hope laid up in Heaven for them of an eternal abode in
the glorious palace of their Father; here their dwelling is uncertain, they
have no sure dwelling place upon earth; their Landlords sometimes warn them out
of their Houses, and command them to seek a new dwelling; sometimes God turns
them out of their Houses, they may be driven out of their Houses here by the
Sword, they may be driven out by fire, but the Lord he has chosen Heaven as
the place of their perpetual residence, Deuteronomy. 1.33. Who went in the way before
you to search out a place. The Lord went before Israel in the Wilderness by
Fire, and by the Cloud to search out a place for his People, where they should
dwell: Jesus the forerunner that is entered into Heaven, he is gone before to
search out a place, to choose out a place, and to prepare a place for you, John
14, 2. I go says he to prepare a place for you; and this place that Christ is
gone to prepare, it is in the Fathers House, there shall the Saints abode and
dwelling be for ever; and there is none that shall ever turn them out of that
House, but to eternity they shall peaceably possess it.

6. In Heaven shall be the consummation of the Marriage between Christ and the
believer; here the Marriage is entered upon, Christ and the believing Soul they
are betrothed together, as Hosea 2.19, 20. And I will betroth thee unto me for
ever; but the betrothment here is like a young man, when he betroths a Virgin,
they live asunder after they are betrothed, so Christ and your Souls live
asunder; you are betrothed here by grace, and you come together now and then in
an ordinance, and now and then Christ lets out of his heart unto you, and now
and then you let out of your heart to Christ, and now and then Christ sends you
a token of his love, and a letter of his love, wherein he gives a manifestation
of his love, but still you are asunder; but in Heaven the Marriage shall be
consummated, 2 Cor. 5.6. While we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord, and we live asunder, but says he, when we come to depart we shall be
with Christ, Phil. 1.23. and we shall ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. This
is a blessed day indeed, that will bring Jesus Christ and your Souls together,
never more to be separated, never more to be at a distance, never to be out of
the presence of one another more. Communion with God it is sweet now, and when
Jesus Christ lets out but a little of himself; O the Soul he cries out,
evermore give me of this Bread. O says he, that I were to go down no more, but
this communion is clouded, and the sense of it lost, but when we come to be
dissolved, and to enter into Heaven, then says he, we shall be with the Lord.

7. Again; The Saints have a hope laid up for them in Heaven, of enjoying
fellowship and society with all sanctified ones in Christ Jesus? Heaven will
bring all the Saints together, and keep them in an eternal communion. There are
two things that have respect to the Saints in Heaven.

1. They shall have a full knowledge one of another. And,

2. They shall have communion one with another.

1. They shall have knowledge one of another: There shall be no strangers in
Heaven; indeed it is questioned by some whether the Saints shall know one
another in Heaven; but truly it is out of question with me, for the Saints
shall be all of one Society, they shall be all of one Company, they shall be
all of one entire body, and surely it is inconsistent with the glory of that
state, for one member to have no knowledge of another; if that you be of a
company here upon earth, let the company be 40, 50, 100, or 500, by abode
together, and by converse, and by residence together, and meeting together, you
come to have a knowledge one of another; and can it be thought that an eternal
abode, together in Heaven, will not give you the knowledge one of another; but the
Scripture seems very plain and clear in this case, in Mat. 17.3, 4. Jesus there
takes Peter, James, and John, and goes up into an high mountain, and there he
was transfigured before them; and indeed it was a little corner of Heaven that
he carried them into there; and he brings down Moses and Elias, and Peter
presently knew them, and he said unto Jesus, Lord it is good for us to be here;
if thou will let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias: Peter had never seen Moses and Elias, for they were
dead many years before he was born, and yet as soon as ever they did appear
with Christ, Peter knew them, this is Moses, and this is Elias. Sirs, the
knowledge of the Saints will not be decreased, but heightened in Heaven; some of
you it may be lie under mourning of Spirit for some of your relations that are
gone to Heaven; well, wait but a little while, and you shall know them again;
But let me tell you, you shall not know them after a carnal manner, but after a
spiritual manner, according to that state, 2 Cor. 5.16. Wherefore henceforth
know we no man after the flesh. Christ shall not be known hereafter after the
flesh, and when you come in Heaven, you will not know one another after the flesh,
yet in a spiritual manner you shall know one another, Parents shall know their
Children, and Children shall know their Parents in a spiritual manner, you
shall know those Servants of God that have taken pains with you here, and
helped your Souls on to Heaven. Some of you often think it may be, of Reverend
Mr. Armitage, that labored with you in the Lord, and some of you remember
Reverend Mr Allen, that was the Lords mouth unto you many years; you that have
a hope laid up in Heaven for you, you shall follow them in your time and in
your order, and know them again, and all the Servants of the Lord from one end
of the world unto the other; you shall know those that you have known, and you
shall know those that you have not known, you shall know Moses, and Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs. And then;

2. You shall know them so as to have communion with them, you shall sit down
(which is a note of communion, Mat. 8.11.) with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in
the Kingdom of Heaven; indeed all your knowledge of the Saints, and all your
fellowship with the Saints, it shall all be resolved into the glorifying of
God, so as God shall be uppermost in all, and you shall see God through all,
and you shall triumph in God, and sing praises to God through all; yet as
glorified Saints together, and as members of the same, body; so there will be a
fellowship and communion together in the enjoyment of God, and communion with
him.

8. There is a hope which you have laid up for you in Heaven, of Gods being all
in all to you; in 1 Cor. 15.18. And when all things shall be subdued to him,
then shall the Son also himself be subject to him that put all things under
him, that God may be all in all. The dispensation that Christ has now in his
hand, in that he is the Lord of the world, and the government of it shall be
laid down, when the whole body of believers shall be brought home, and all the
election of Gods grace brought in; yet then shall Christ be glorious in the
eyes of the Saints, but God then shall be all in all; that is, all believers
shall be placed in the immediate presence of God, where shall be the full
display of his glory upon them to all eternity, an immediate and powerful
display of the glory of the Divine Majesty upon their Souls to eternity; here
the Saints can see the face of God but in a glass, 1 Cor. 13.12. For now we see
through a glass darkly; it is but a dim glass that we have here to see God in,
but then says he, face to face. Moses you know did importune the Lord that he
might see his glory, Exodus 33.18. says the Lord at the 20 v. Thou can not
see my face, for there shall no man see me and live; in thy present mortal
state, says God, thou art not able to bear my immediate glory, but I will
cause some of my goodness to pass before thee, to satisfy thee for the present;
So God he makes some discoveries of himself in the glass of some
Gospel-Institution, but now in Heaven there is face to face, in the immediate
presence of the Lord, ever to behold his glory. These are some of those blessed
things that are laid up for the Saints in Heaven, that their hopes and
expectations should be upon whilst they are here.

Appl. I shall now make a little Application of this.

Use 1. If that the Saints have such a Hope laid up for them in Heaven, Then
here you may see the difference between them and the men of this world, who are
taken up with the good things that are here below. They cry out, Who will show
us any good? They look for things that are seen, and that are pleasing to the
flesh, and they look no further. O Sirs! how poorly provided are the men of the
world, with all their hundreds, and with all their thousands, when they have
all their good things here, and they have nothing to come? Do not you see that
the portion of God's People is another manner of portion than the portion of
the wicked in all their plenty and fullness? Says the Prophet, Jer. 10.16. The
portion of Jacob is not like them. So the portion of a Saint is not like the
portion of a Sinner. Though God has not made you rich in this world, and has
not given you the fullness and the honors that the men of this world do
possess, if you have a Hope laid up in Heaven for you, has not he dealt better
by you? Hagar and her Child they are packt away out of the family with a Loaf
of bread, and a bottle of water, and that was their portion and allowance, when
the Inheritance was reserved for Isaac, Genesis 21.14. So the Lord he gives the
good things of this life unto wicked men; he throws them in common unto them,
and they are sent away out of his presence with them, and when the Loaf is
done, and the Bottle is empty, they have nothing more to betake themselves
unto; then they must sit down in eternal misery. Now under all the short
commons that the Saints have here, they have a Hope that is laid up in Heaven.
You see then that the portion of a Saint is not like the portion of a worldly
man.

Use 2. See here the dignity and the honor that the Lord has put upon all his
Saints. The worth of a Child of God is not known here; like his Lord and
Master, he is despised, and contemned, and reproached; they are men and women
of scorn and contempt, of sorrow and bitterness in the world; but there is
honor that the Lord puts upon them, though the world count them the
offscouring of all things, as those Worthies were, of whom the world was not
worthy, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. They had trials of cruel mockings and scourgings;
yea moreover, of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
world was not worthy. And who were these? These were Heirs of Heaven, Children
of the Promise; these were persons that had a Hope laid up for them in Heaven,
and in all their disgraces and contempts here, were waiting for a glory that
was to be revealed. Great honor has the Lord put upon his Saints, in the Hope
that is laid up in Heaven for them.

Use 3. If that there be a Hope which the Saints have laid up for them in
Heaven, a Hope that will hold, then all of you look into your selves, and
examine your Hopes, and see that you be not mistaken in them. There is a Hope
that will stand you in no stead. We read of the Hope of the Hypocrite, that is
like unto the giving up of the Ghost, which is but as the Spider's web, he
shall trust to it, and it shall deceive him. O Sirs! look well to your Hopes
that you be not mistaken; consider whether your Hope be laid up in Heaven,
whether you have cast Anchor within the Vail; examine your state and condition,
to see how it is with you, lest at last you should miss of all this glory that
the Saints hope for; and in the examination of your selves, look to these two
things which the Apostle speaks of in the verse before the Text: One is Faith,
and the other is Love.

First, Look to your Faith, and see whether you have made a true close with
Jesus Christ. True Faith it unbottoms the Soul from all things on this side
Christ, and founds the Soul upon Christ himself. Now if you would know whether
your Hope be good, see whether your Faith be sound, have you taken the Lord
Jesus Christ for yours? for your Prophet, and for your Priest, and for your
King? have you made a close with him? and have you resigned up your selves unto
him? examine your selves about your believing.

Secondly, Examine your selves about your Love. When Jesus Christ came to put
Peter upon the examination of himself, says he, Simon Peter, love thou me?
Simon, love thou me more than these? Do thou love me more than all the
world besides? that is Christ's meaning, more than his Nets, more than all his
employments in the world. So, has God and Jesus Christ the uppermost room in
thy heart? are they principal in thy affections? are they more to thee than all
the world besides? do thou love God, and love Jesus Christ more than all?
Examine your selves by your Faith, and by your Love, and take heed that you do
not take up in a false Hope that will deceive you.

Use 4. Again; If that you have a Hope that is laid up in Heaven for you, then
comfort your selves with this Hope, under all the discomfortures that you meet
withal in the world. The Apostle he makes this use of the point, 1 These. 4.18.
Wherefore comfort one another with these words; With what words? That (says he)
we shall meet the Lord in the Air and so shall be ever with him. Comfort one
another, and comfort your own hearts with these words. You meet with many
losses here, and you meet with many temptations here, and you meet with many
afflictions here, trial upon trial, one following another; well, under all
comfort your selves with the Hope that is laid up in Heaven for you, and
balance all your trials and temptations with the Hope that is in Heaven. And

Use 5. In the last place; You that have a Hope laid up in Heaven for you, see
that you walk answerable to your Hope. This is expected of you, as the A postle
tells you, 1 These. 2.12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you
unto his Kingdom and glory. See that you walk worthy of the Hope that you have
received. Have you a Hope laid up in Heaven for you, of such great things as we
have mentioned, a Hope ever to be with the Lord? then carry it in a way
correspondent to these Hopes, in raised frames, breathings and longings of
heart after God. The Hopes of an eternal enjoyment of God in the world to come,
should fill us with desires after the enjoyment of God here, in those means,
and according to those ways in which he has promised to let out of himself to
his People. You should be continually pressing after the enjoyment of God
mediately, who have the Hopes of the eternal enjoyment of God immediately. And,
says the Apostle, 1 John 3.3. He that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself
even as he is pure. If you have such a Hope, then testify it by laying siege
to corruption, and by seeking to mortify the body of sin and death, that you
bear about you, and correspond with your Hopes in pressing after holiness, and
a growth in all grace; for he that has this Hope, and he that has the Promise
of these things, will be perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. Make it your
business therefore to grow in grace, and to advance in all Holiness, that so
you may abound, and that yet more and more in the work of the Lord.

Christians Freedom FROM Condemnation in Christ.
Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


THIS Chapter is (as one calls it) the Magazine of a Christian's comfort; it is
the Cabinet where many Jewels are locked up, the Ship where much of his Treasure
is imbarqued. The Apostle gives out comfort upon comfort unto Believers here.

1. In the first part of the Chapter he endeavors to comfort them under the
afflictive and discouraging sense that they had of the remaining corruption
that did annoy and pester them every day, showing that it was pardoned and done
away out of the sight of God.

2. He endeavors to comfort them under all their trials, tribulations and
afflictions, that were many, and to be many in this world; and shows them that
there was a weight of glory in reserve, that would more than balance them all.

3. He also endeavors to comfort them against their fears of falling away, or
of God's casting them off, showing of them, that nothing shall separate them
from the love of Christ. And in the close of the Chapter Faith breaks out into
an high act, and he is able to triumph over all in this world, and all the
Principalities of Hell and Darkness that were engaged against him, showing that
in Christ Jesus he was (and all those in his state and condition were) more
than Conquerors through him that had loved them.

In the first verse you have a heart-reviving Proposition laid down; There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. In the following verses, you
have the confirmation of this Proposition; For (says he) the Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death. In
ver. 9. he makes application of all unto those in Christ Jesus to whom he had
written: But ye (says he) are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be the
Spirit of God dwells in you. All you that have the Spirit of God, you are not
in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and therefore there is no condemnation to you;
and he proposes it in such general terms, as that all who have the Spirit, may
take it up, and make application of the comfort thereof to their own Souls. The
Assertion that he lays down in the Text is, no condemination to them that are
in Christ Jesus: Or a Conclusion that is drawn from the whole Doctrine of our
Justification in and by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, of which he had
treated in the preceding Chapters of the Epistle. Now this he concludes from
it, that being accepted in Christ's righteousness, and being in that justified
before God, there is now no condemnation for us; so as you have in the words,

1. This assertion laid down, that there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus.

2. A Mark and Character given, whereby we may come to know whether we are
these to whom there is no condemnation; that is, such (says he) walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit.

In the Proposition or assertion, you may take notice,

1. Of the Subjects, and they are such as are in Christ

2. Of the Predicate, and that is, there is no Condemnation to them. Some there
are that make our being in Christ Jesus our vocation, and they construe our
Non-condemnation, our justification, and our walking not after the flesh, but
after the spirit, to set forth our sanctification. Condemnation, it is the doom
or sentence of a just and righteous Judge against an offender. Now
Non-condemnation, it is the contrary hereunto; that is, to be acquitted, to be
discharged, to have the sentence of death revoked and taken off, and this is
that that God does for all those that are in Christ Jesus; he revokes the
sentence that was gone our against them. There is in the Gospel a cancelling of
our law obligation to die; the Gospel that brings in life, and removes the
death that the law threatened and denounced against us; and so the Proposition
from the first part of the verse is this.

Doct. That all those that are in Christ, they are acquitted, absolved, and
discharged by God.

There is now says he, no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. No
condemnation from God, no condemnation in Heaven for them; God the Father, that
is in Christ a Father of Mercies, and a Father of Forgivenesses, he comes, and
forgives, and discharges them. There are 3 Courts as I may so say; there is the
Court of Heaven, there is the Court of Conscience, and there are the Courts of
Men. Now a Child of God may be sentenced in the two latter, and yet acquitted
and cleared in the former; he may be condemning himself, he may be drawing up
charges against himself, he may write nothing but bitterness against himself,
when he is acquitted before God, he may be accused and condemned by Men; Jesus
Christ was so, counted a Sinner, numbered amongst Transgressors, and yet the
beloved Son of God all the while; but yet there is a time a coming, when all
those that are discharged in Gods Court in Heaven shall be cleared, both in the
Court of their own consciences; and also before the whole world. We shall
observe this method in our brief handling of it.

1. To show you the truth of it from Scripture.

2. To give you the properties of this discharge that is given out by God to
believers.

3. The ground upon which God proceeds in the discharge.

4. The time when the Soul is taken into this privilege, and has the
discharge given out to him.

And then the Application.

1. Scripture clears this; That there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ: they are absolved, they are discharged by God. Believers are so, but as
for all those that are in their Sins, they are under the sentence of
condemnation; it hangs over them, and it follows them wherever they go, John
3.18. He that believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not, is
condemned already; really condemned, he has the sentence really denounced
against him, he is really declared a dead man in the sense of the law, as we
say when the judge has denounced sentence of death against a Malefactor, he is
a dead man, so every one in his sins is a dead man, he is condemned already:
There is indeed this difference between him, and one that is in Hell, he that
is in Hell is condemned and executed; but the sinner upon Earth is condemned
and not executed, The Sinner in Hell is condemned and executed, and there
remains no hope for him. The Sinner upon Earth, he is condemned, and yet there
is hope, that comes in at the door of the Gospel, which gives some probability,
that if he will bestir himself, the sentence may be removed; the patience of
God is exercised, and it is drawn out into a great length, and it is to lead
the Sinner to repentance, Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? After the Sentence, God waits upon the Sinner,
and will not suffer the law presently to take hold, and to do its work: the
hand of Justice that is held from smiting; the Sinner is not presently
executed, and in the patience, in the forbearance, and long-suffering of God,
there is a pardon that is tendered; and a way discovered, whereby the Sinner
may come to get free from the doom that was upon him; but the sentence that
hangs over the head of every unbeliever, as John 3.36. He that believes on the
Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not s^e
life, but the wrath of God abides on him; the wrath of God, that hangs over
his head; it hangs over his head in that ancient sentence that was denounced
against man upon his first transgression, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die; or thou shall die the death: here is the
sentence, here is the doom, and God abides by his word to this day; hereupon
says the Apostle, Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the law, are
under the curse, for it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in
all things, which are written in the book of the law to do them; being under
the works of the law, you are under the curse, because the broken law does
denounce a curse against all the breakers of it; so as all those that are
unbelievers, all those that are under the first Covenant, all those that are in
a state of sin before God, they are condemned already.

But now, all those that are in Christ Jesus, have this sentence of death taken
off, they are absolved and discharged by the Lord, says the Prophet, Isaiah
38.17. For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back; It is spoken by God
after the manner of men; when a man gives out the bond of another, and freely
discharges him of the Debt, the Bond is cancelled and thrown away; it is cast
behind his back for wast-paper, never more to be made use of, the Debt never
more to be brought into question again, nor yet the Debtor upon the account of
the Debt. Now (says he) thou have cast all my sins behind thy back; thou have
given me a discharge, that they shall no more lie against me, Rev. 2.17. To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna. [Manna] of old was a
type of Christ. The Apostle to the Corinthians clears it; Now (says he) he
shall eat of the hidden Manna he shall feed upon Christ, every overcomer shall
have communion and fellowship with Christ; and that is not all, but I will give
him a white stone. The Lord in this expression does allude unto the Custom that
was amongst the Romans; when a person upon his trial was found guilty, he had a
black stone given him in token of his condemnation; and he that was discharged
and cleared, he had a white stone given him in token of his absolution. Now,
says he, I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which none knows but he that receives it. I will discharge him, says the Lord:
Every overcomer, every one in Christ he has a white stone given him by the
Lord. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

2. We shall proceed to show you what are the properties of this discharge,
that the Lord grants unto those that are in Christ.

First, It is a real discharge: It is no imaginary thing. It is a real truth
that the Apostle does here affirm, There is, says he, therefore now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The absolution of a Believer is
as real as his sinning was real, as his condemnation was real; he was really a
sinner, and he was really condemned, on the account of his sin, and he is as
really discharged. You have the word of the Lord for it. The same word of truth
that tells us there is condemnation to every Unbeliever, tells us, that there
is no condemnation to the Believer: But you have not only the Word of God for
it, but you have your discharge under hand and seal: And therefore the Apostle
tells us, that those that believe, they are sealed by the Spirit of the Lord.
The Seal of the Spirit it is God's Seal, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted,
after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation, in whom
also after that you believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise.
And again, Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God whereby you are
sealed to the day of Redemption. He comes and gives you a sealed pardon; he
gives you the Seal of God's pardon upon your own hearts. And hence the Apostle
speaks with as much confidence as man can speak upon a sure testimony, 1 John
3.14. We know that we are passed from death to life, [we know it] says he. And
the Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits that we are the Children of
God, Romans 8.16. There is a report and a testimony of the Spirit of God within;
and there is by the work of the Spirit, and by the hand of the Spirit the
discharge, and the work of God in the discharge sealed upon the Soul of the
Believer, so as he knows as really as he has known that he was a sinner, that
he is discharged from his sins: Though a person may be discharged, and not know
it; for the Spirit of God does not always witness; the Spirit of God does not
always seal: Nay, he may seal, and his Seal may be hid; he may make report,
and give evidence, and this evidence may be lost. Those that have had the
assurance of the pardon of their sins, may lose it again; or it may be some
considerable time after the Soul has been discharged, before he is able to
read his discharge, but the Spirit of the Lord first or last will be a
Witnesser and Sealer to all those that have their discharge, and they shall
know it, and have the comfort of it. It is a real discharge.

Secondly, It is a free discharge. God does all that he does for his People
gratis; there is nothing in them that has procured and bought in the blessing
at the hand of the Lord. But when he comes to discharge a Soul, he does it for
his own Names sake: As Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. I will blot
them out, says God, not for thy sake, for thou have deserved no such thing at
my hand; but I will blot them out for my own sake: I do all that I do freely;
and therefore says he, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace. We are
justified freely by the grace of God. When the sinner deserves the full and
the effectual execution of the sentence that was denounced against him, then
comes the Lord in a way of free and sovereign grace, and he discharges, and he
pardons. As Hos. 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely;
for mine anger is turned away from them. I will love them freely, and I will
pardon freely, and I will pass by, and I will forgive freely. So Col. 2.13. And
you being dead, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses. So we read it: But it may be read, Having freely forgiven you all
trespasses. God freely forgives the trespasses of his People, those that he
takes unto himself, and those that are in Christ; therefore we are called upon
by the Lord for to come unto him without money and without price. Come ye, says
he, that thirst, to the waters, such as have no money, such as have no price
come, and hearken diligently, and your Souls shall live, Isa 55.1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, It is a full discharge which the Lord grants unto his People; a
discharge that takes off all their sins at once, Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. They are not hundreds and
thousands only, but all that you stand guilty of. All sins of omission, and all
sins of commission; all sins against the first Table, and all sins against the
second Table, they are all at once forgiven; all secret sins, and all open
sins; all heart-sins, and all life-sins, they are all forgiven. Hezekiah, he
made Faith of this, Isa. 38.17. For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.
The sinner when he returns to God, comes with a load of sins upon him,
thousands of thousands of sins he brings with him, a multitude of sins, and the
Lord when he receives this guilty Soul, he forgives them all at once. Isa.
55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts:
Or, the man of wickedness, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him, and unto our God, for he will abundantly pardon: Or, as it may
be read, he will multiply pardons. Sins have been multiplied in days of
ignorance, and multiplied in days of knowledge multiplied against all the
strivings of the Spirit, multiplied under many tenders of Christ, multiplied
under many of the beseechings of the Spirit, multiplied in the clear Light of a
Gospel-day: But, says he, this shall not keep off, for I will abundantly
pardon. God's pardon shall be as extensive as all his transgressions were:
Hereupon says the Apostle. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. There is no sin remaining to condemn him of all his repeated
transgressions, of all the thousands and ten thousands that he is guilty of,
there is no condemnation, not one sin left upon the score to condemn him. V.
33. Who shall lay any thing unto the charge of God's Elect? it is God that
justifies. Satan will heap up things against them, but there shall not condemn
them; their own Consciences may bring in Indictment after Indictment against
them; but, says he, there is not any thing that shall stand in record against
them, not any thing that shall be laid to their charge, to condemn them; not
any of their sins, be they never so small, not any of their sins, be they never
so great, that shall remain against them: Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of God's Elect when God justifies? Whereupon says the Prophet, Jer. 50.20. The
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins
of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve.
Their iniquity shall be sought for, and there shall be none found; why? because
the pardon of God reaches every one. Col. 2.13. Having forgiven you all
trespasses. And Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and
their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. I will be merciful,
not to this unrighteousness, or the other, but to all their unrighteousnesses,
to their sins, and to their iniquities. It is spoken of in general terms, that
they might know it will reach every particular. It is a full discharge, in so
much as the believer is counted righteous, he is constituted righteous before
God, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then
Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous; that is in his
justification in Christ Jesus, in which justification he had absolution, and in
the compleatness of his justification before God, by Gods imputative act he was
reckoned, he was constituted righteous.

4. The discharge that God gives out to those in Christ, it is irrevocable. It
is such an act of grace, as God will abide by, as God will never recede from,
no not to eternity, therefore he says, Jeremiah 31.34. I will forgive their
iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more. The believer he is afraid
it may be that something may be brought in against him at last, that
after-reckonings may undo all: No, says God, when I forgive sin, I do it with
this resolve of grace, never to remember it more; and therefore, Psalm. 103.12.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions
from us; east and west can never meet together, so the sins of a believer that
are forgiven by God shall never return again, never return again to his
Condemnation. The sense of them may return again and again for his humiliation,
but the sins themselves shall never return again unto Condemnation; for God
having once blotted them out, will never more write them down: therefore, Romans
11.29. The gifts and callings of God are without repentance. God does all in
wisdom, in righteousness, and in judgment, he knows what he does, he sees all
before, and he sees after at once, and therefore there can never be any
repentance in God, for him to recede from his own act of grace, but having once
absolved the poor sinner, he shall remain so to eternity, Micah 7.19. Thou will
cast their iniquities into the depth of the Sea. That which is thrown in at the
Havens mouth, may be washed up again, but now take a millstone, and carry it into
the vast Ocean, and cast it into the depth of the Sea, and it will never be
seen more, and thus the Lord, to illustrate his own grace, does make use of
such comparisons, to speak to our understanding. This act of his grace is done
in Judgment, and God will never repent of it; it is an irrevocable act.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus.

WE made entrance upon these words, and gave you this Proposition from them.

Doct. That all those that are in Christ, are acquitted, absolved, and
discharged by God.

We have given you the properties of this discharge that God gives out unto the
believer in Christ. And shall now proceed.

Object. But you will say, if that believers be thus fully, and irrevocably
discharged by God; how comes it to pass, that they are the persons that God
does so much afflict in the world, that they are seldom free, but followed with
adversity upon adversity, trial upon trial, and yet all their sins done away?

Ans. I answer: Though Gods People are the People of affliction and adversity,
ordinarily in the world, yet their afflictions are not from wrath, but from
love, and consistent with his pardoning grace; you must distinguish between
punishments that are satisfactory, and punishments that are monitory. You must
distinguish between wrathful proceeds from justice, and fatherly corrections
and chastisements. God does afflict his people upon two accounts in the world,
sometimes for sin, and sometimes for the trial of grace; God (I grant) does
sometimes Chastise his people for sin; that Scripture clears it to me, Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32, 33. If his Children forsake my law, and walk not in my
Judgments, if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will
I visit their transgressions with rods, and their iniquity with stripes;
nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail, etc. Here you see God does chastise for sin, he has
reserved to himself a power so to do, that if his Children break his law, if
they transgress, and walk contrary to it, they shall hear of it, they shall
feel the smart of his rod; ay, but it is such a chastisement, and visitation,
as is consistent with the stability of his Covenant, for that is not shaken
thereby; it is such a chastisement as is consistent with unchangeable love and
grace; and by these afflictions, God carries on his work in them, the more to
humble them, and to recover the Soul, and to bring it to a due consideration of
its self and ways, in order unto a closer walking with God, and sometimes
again, afflictions are for the exercise, the trial, and the improvement of
grace, and all that God might be the more glorified, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Now for a
season if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, that the
trial of your faith being much more precious than that of Gold that perishes,
may be found unto praise and honor, etc. Afflictions stir up patience, and
patience that increases experience, and experience hope; so as under the trial
grace is made to abound, and much glory is brought forth to God.

Obj. Ay, but you will say further; The believer is taken near to God and
forgiven, but he sins again, don't his renewed transgressions break his pardon?

Ans. Renewed and repeated transgressions, they are found in those whom God
pardons, and they may break their peace, and take away the comfort of their
pardon, but they don't null the pardon of God. Their pardon that is continued,
that is renewed as their transgressions are renewed; so as the obligation to
punishment, obligation to Hell, and the wrath of God, that returns no more upon
their head; really before God it returns no more, for the pardon that is given
forth of God takes it off, but the sense of the pardon, and all the comforts of
the pardon may be lost for a considerable while. This seems clear to me from
that of the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.13. David said unto Nathan, I have sinned
against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also has put away thy
sin, thou shall not die. God had blotted out the sin of David, and yet if you
look into the 51 Psalm, you will find there that the comfort of his pardon was
gone, he was not able to read it, nor to make Faith, nor to take any joy from
it. O says he, Verse 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, That seems to be a
strange voice in his ears; the voice of joy and gladness, that he had so often
heard from the Lord; he was a stranger to. O! says he, that I could hear that
voice again. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy
free spirit, V. 12. The joy of his pardon was out of sight, and till God
returned again to him, with fresh consolations; and till the Comforter came
again to visit him, he was not able to apply a Promise, nor to take in the
comfort of his pardon, although the Prophet had told him, that God had pardoned
him. But the obligation to condemnation that does not return: For, says the
Apostle, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous. Christ lies there in Heaven, to secure the state of a
Believer, and he keeps up the torrent and stream of God's love to the Soul,
though the manifestations of that love are under a sovereign overruled and
dispose. But

3. We proposed to give you the ground upon which God does proceed in the
giving out of this discharge unto those that are in Christ. And that is, the
merits and the satisfaction, the propitiation and atonement of Christ himself.
I say, the grounds, or the meritorious and procuring cause of all is, the
propitiation and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. God the Father pardons, but he
must pardon with an honor to his Justice; he must pardon in such a way as may
secure the glory of all the Essential Properties of his Nature made known to
man, either in the first Covenant that is broken, or in the second, in which
forgiveness is promised. And that must be upon a full satisfaction. Now, Jesus
Christ he became unto God a Surety for Sinners, and he took our sins upon
himself, and having made satisfaction, God discharges upon the satisfaction, 2
Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. We are made the righteousness of
God in him, because the Father has made him to be sin for us. The Father was
pleased to take our sins, and to lay them upon Christ, to charge them upon him,
and he bore the punishment, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bore our sins in his
own body. Jesus was herein a Sin-offering unto God, like the Scapegoat that
was but a type of him, Lev. 16.21. Aaron the Priest shall come and lay both his
hands upon the head of the Goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the
children of Israel, and all their transgressions, and all their sins, putting
them upon the head of the Goat, and then sending it away. And this belongs to
Christ, and the Prophet does particularly apply it to him, Isa. 53.6. And the
Lord has laid on him (or the Lord has made to meet upon him) the iniquities
of us all. He has charged all the sin of our nature, and the sin of our lives
upon him; he charges all our unbelief, and all our impatience, and all our
aberrations and wanderings, both of one kind and of another; he charges them
all upon him. Now hereupon is there a blotting out of the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, Col. 2.14. that was contrary to us, and took it
out of the way. God the Father comes and blots out all, but it is upon the
satisfaction that Jesus Christ gives unto Justice; it was upon the price that
the Son of God paid to the Father: Hereupon says the Apostle, Romans 3.25. Whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare
his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, etc. And we are
justified freely by his grace, says the Apostle. And Act. 13.38. That through
this man (that is, the man Jesus) is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins.
And Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins. Redemption from the Law, Redemption from the rigor of Justice,
Redemption from all the wrath of God; this we have through the blood of Jesus.
We are, V. 6. accepted in the Beloved. We are pardoned, we are constituted
righteous, but it is in Christ, Christ Jesus is therefore made righteousness to
us, as he was made sin for us, so we are made the righteousness of God in him.
Righteousness from Christ, through Christ, and in Christ, is imputed unto us;
so as God does all this upon the merits and satisfaction, and the atonement of
his own Son.

Quest. If God does pardon sinners in Christ, and discharge them of all their
transgressions through his blood; then does not God see sin in his People? Do
his People sin, and are they not sinners before him?

Ans. I answer; That God does see all the sin that all his People are guilty
of; they cannot sin unknown to God; he sees every provocation in the heart, and
he sees every step that is set out of the path of his Commandments. But the
Lord he does look upon his People in Christ: As they are considered in
themselves, so they sin against him; but now he accepts them in the Beloved;
God sees them in him, and so covers all their iniquities and transgressions.
Look as it was with Christ, God the Father law no sin in Christ, for he was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners; there was no sin found in
him: God saw Christ without sin, that is, as he was in himself; but as he was
our Surety, so God laid sin upon him, and God saw sin that was upon him; God
did put him under obligations to die for our transgressions; and as he was our
Surety, so sin was charged upon him. Now God the Father, as we are in our
selves, sees us that we sin daily. But as we are in Christ, so we are without
sin. So the grace of God in forgiveness is carried on from day to day,
notwithstanding our daily failings and imperfections. Well,

4. We proposed to consider, when a Soul comes to be received into this
privilege, when he is pardoned and discharged by God; and that is, when he
comes to believe, and to lay hold upon Jesus Christ by faith. I look upon
pardon under a threefold Consideration.

First, In the decree of it, and so it is eternal, for it breaks out of the
eternal Counsels of God.

Secondly, Pardon is to be considered in the purchase of it, and that was in
the fullness of time, when Christ was made a Sin-offering to God.

Thirdly, Pardon is to be considered in the application of it, and that is,
when a Soul is enabled by the Almighty Power of God to go over unto Jesus
Christ, and to believe on him, Act. 13.39. And by him all that believe are
justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. When they were under the Law of Moses, they could not be justified. The
Scripture tells us, there was a time when those that are now discharged, were
condemned. The Scripture is abundant in the testimony of this, Ephesians. 2.3. And
were by nature children of wrath even as others. There is no difference
naturally between you that are pardoned, and them that are gone down to Hell.
There is no difference in your childhood, no difference in your grown Age, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. The Apostle there reckons up very great sinners, and such, says
he, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were some of you, but now ye
are washed, but now ye are justified. Ye were under the sentence of
condemnation, as well as others, but now ye are washed, now ye are pardoned,
now that ye believe; therefore the righteousness by which we are justified, is
called the righteousness of faith, Romans 9. v. 30. What shall we say then, that
the Gentiles which followed not after righteousness have attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith. It is the
righteousness of faith, because it is apprehended by faith on the Soul's part;
it is taken hold of by faith, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we have peace
with God. So as until the Soul comes to believe, to have this faith to rely on
the Lord Jesus Christ for righteousness, he is not justified, Gal. 3.22. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith on Jesus
Christ might be given to those that believe. All concluded under sin, all under
the sentence of condemnation; every Child that is born into the world, is
concluded under sin, concluded under the sentence of condemnation by reason of
sin. But now the promise of Salvation is by faith on Jesus Christ; the promise
of salvation and forgiveness, the promise of righteousness and peace, this is
given unto them that believe. So as when the sinner is translated, when he is
brought over to Christ, when he has faith wrought in him on the Lord Jesus
Christ, then is he pardoned. And upon the loss of your pardon (I mean the sense
of it) upon the renewal of faith, and the stirring up of fresh acts of faith,
is the sense of the pardon returned, and consolation and joy upon the pardon
returned.

Use 1. In the first place; If that God do thus discharge sinners in Christ,
then this calls upon all of you to study this discharge of the Gospel more
fully, that so you may understand this wonderful proceed of Gospel grace. Sirs,
this point is a fundamental point; it is one of the foundational truths and
principles of the Gospel; and therefore whatever you neglect, do not neglect
the study of this mystery. There are other truths that are of great
concernment. There is no truth, no principle of the Gospel, but is worth your
enquiring into: But this is one of the main, and if you be out here, you are
out in all; and the more you know of this, the more savingly you understand
this privilege, the more will you be led into others, and the higher will your
consolation be. This is even a Benjamin, as I may so call it. When Joseph came
to serve his Brethren, Genesis 43.34. He sent Messes to them from his board, and
Benjamin 's Mess was five times as much as any of the other. Truly the
importance and concernment of this truth is such, that you had need study this
point five times more than some others, so much has a dependence upon it. Says
the Apostle, 1 John 4.9. In this was the love of God manifested, to provide a
propitiation and atonement, to provide a blood through which forgiveness of
sins should be dispensed; in this is the love of God manifest, and you should
study this truth, that you may understand something of the height, and depth,
and length, and breadth of the love of God manifested unto you herein. Dive
into this mystery.

Use 2. Labor to clear up your own discharge unto your own Souls. Many are the
doubts and the fears that Believers labor under; and they do arise from their
darkness in this point: Could they but make faith of this, That there is no
condemnation for them, their fears would vanish, their doubts would be
answered, and their Souls would be filled with the joy of God their Salvation.
Now there are some ways whereby this may be cleared up: As

1. There is the Witness of the Spirit of God; and this is a satisfying
testimony unto all that have it. It puts all out of doubt, and answers a
thousand scruples at once; when once the testimony of the Spirit comes within,
all fears they vanish, all mists and clouds that were about the understanding,
they all flee away and are scattered.

2. It is evidenced by a lively faith in the promise of forgiveness; and from
thence the Soul is enabled to take in the comfort of the discharge. And

3. Sometimes our Justification is cleared up unto us from our Sanctification.
But truly that satisfaction that comes in to a Soul through his searches into
the work of Sanctification in the Soul, that satisfaction it is but small; it
is coming and going, because the work of grace upon our hearts is under so much
weakness, and oftentimes cloudy and dark, that a Believer many times can hardly
tell whether he has any grace or no in his heart; but now that that comes in
by the help of the Spirit of God through the actings of faith upon the promise
of forgiveness, and that which comes in through the immediate testimony of the
Spirit of God in our hearts, this is far more refreshing and more satisfying to
the Soul. Well, labor after the assurance of this discharge, that you may know
that you have a part in the promise of forgiveness.

Use 3. You that are forgiven, you whom the Lord has thus discharged, you
ought to walk thankfully, and to live in the admiration of that grace that is
glorified in this act of God toward you, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to
the Lord for all his benefits? We should say so upon all our common mercies,
though never so small; What shall I render to the Lord? I will take up the Cup
of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. This is that we should say
for ordinary mercies, but what shall we say to the Lord for greater mercies?
Thou have been brought up in a Land of Vision, it may be under a religious
education, and have sat under a powerful Gospel Ministry, where thou have been
told of thy sins, and invited and called to return to God, and exhorted to
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet it may be thou wentest on in a way of
sinning against God, ten, twenty, thirty years before God laid hold upon thee,
and after such a long course of rebellion, and after that thou had run out in
all manner of extravagancy, or at least in thy heart did commit all manner of
iniquity, and had it in thy heart to do a great deal more than the preventing
grace of God would suffer thee, and after all this disobedience and rebellion,
in a moment as it were, God comes and pardons all. The Prodigal, a great rebel,
and yet received and embraced in his Father's arms, and not one word objected
against him, but received as if he had never grieved his Father, embraced as if
he had never crossed his Father, as if he had never gone out of his Fathers
house; what wonderful grace is this! Sirs, it is stupendous grace, for God to
make his approach to a poor Soul, and to press forgiveness upon it; for God as
a thick cloud to blot out thy transgressions; as Isa. 44. v. 22. I have blotted
out as a thick cloud thy transgressions. The Lord has blotted out as a thick
cloud thy transgressions, and has caused the Sun of his love to break through,
and to scatter all at once. You should admire the greatness of God's grace,
that so many treasons should be forgiven at once, that so many years
transgression against God should be forgiven at once. I remember when the
sufferings of Jesus Christ were spoken of; when he saw what a cup of wrath
there was in his Fathers hand, it is said, he was amazed and astonished, when
he saw all the wrath that was to be poured out upon him. And was Jesus Christ
amazed when he saw all the wrath that was to be poured out upon him? And do you
see all the grace that the Gospel has brought forth for you? Do you see all
this grace, and does it not amaze you? That God should do so much for such a
sinner as you are, for one so unworthy, for one so undeserving, for one so
provoking as you are. I remember how Abigail was taken with the kindness and
condescension of David, when he sent to her to take her, 1 Samuel 25.41. She
arose and bowed her self on her face to the Earth, and said, Behold, let thine
Handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord. O what! Does
King David send to me? What! David the the Lord's Anointed send after me? It is
more than I deserve, should he make me but a Handmaid to wash the feet of his
servants; she was amazed at his love and condescension. And Sirs, Does not all
the grace of God that is laid out on you, in freeing you from Hell, and in
blotting out of all your transgressions, that they shall never be remembered
against you: Does not all this grace amaze you? I remember a passage of
Solomon, 2 King. 8.27. When God afforded his presence in the Temple, but, says
he, Will God indeed dwell on the Earth? Behold the Heavens, and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him, how much less the house that I have builded! Will
God indeed dwell on the Earth? O! he was taken with the condescension of grace,
that God should stoop so low as to fill that house with his glory that he had
built for him. O Sirs! has God filled your hearts with his glory? with the
glory of his pardoning love and grace? O say, what! Lord, Will thou dwell with
me? What! Lord, Do thou pass by all my rebellion, and all my backslidings,
and will thou receive me into thy love and favor? O! do you magnify, and
admire, and live in the admiration of this grace that has thus wrought for you!

Use 4. Has the Lord pardoned and discharged your Souls, that there is now no
condemnation for you, Think with your selves what returns of love you ought to
make unto this God that has done so much for you. If you were taken captive by
the Turks, and were cruelly used in their bondage, and a friend should hear of
your misery and captivity, and should come to you, and pay the price of your
Redemption, and set you free, and bring you home into your own Country, you
would never forget the love of this man, if you had any gratefulness in you. I
am sure you could not, but all the love that you could manifest to him, you
would always think too little, and would come far short of his to you. But
Sirs, what is the love of such a friend in such a case unto the love of God in
your Soul's case! he has taken off the sentence of condemnation that was
against you, when you were ready to die; he saved you from wrath and Hell, and
assured you that none of your sins should ever rise up to your condemnation;
not any thing shall ever be laid to your charge, because God has discharged
you; all that you can do for this God is but to love him, and you will manifest
ungratefulness indeed if you do not stir up your love to this God, Psalm. 31.23.
O love the Lord all ye his Saints! Ay! they have reason to do it; What! saved
from Hell! delivered from going down to the Pit! thousands and thousands of
transgressions forgiven at once! O! it becomes those that are thus dealt withal
to love God. Sirs, you should love him with a heart-love; you should love the
Lord with all your hearts, and withal your souls; here the whole strength of
your affections should go out; you should love God with a transcendent love;
you should love him above all; you should love him with an abounding love. It
is said of Mary, that she loved much, Luke 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee, her
sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much. Many sins forgiven,
and much love, aboundings of love upon it. The higher your sins were, the
greater is your pardon, and the greater should your love be; you should love
God with a love of complacency, so as to joy in him, and to take up your
delight in him. God loves you with such a love. He is said to rest in his love
toward us, Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he
will save thee, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love.
Now, shall God take complacency in such a poor vile creature as thou art, and
do so much in the greatness of his love for thee, and wilt not thou take up thy
delight in God? You should love God with an abiding love; you should dwell in
your love to God; you should live in love to God. Says the Apostle, Jude v. 21.
Keep your selves in the love of God. Your love to God you should love and
cherish at all times, that you should always live in love to God, and you
should do all that you do in love to God; love him with an abiding love.

Use 5. Again; You whom the Lord has discharged, be always ready to discharge
and forgive others, wherein they provoke and offend you. As the Apostle says
concerning love, 1 John 4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another. So I may say in this case, if God has forgiven us, we ought
to forgive one another. Solomon tells us, (and truly I think it is a Scripture
that a great many do not understand in the practice of it) Prove. 19.11. That it
is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression. Many do not think so; but
they think that it is the nobleness of their spirits to stand to it, and to
argue out the point, and to have satisfaction upon such an injury, and such an
injury; or upon such a provocation, and such a provocation; and he is counted
of a poor pusillanimous spirit that passes over such things, that will bear
affronts, and make nothing of them. But says Solomon, It is the glory. It is
the crown of a man to do it, because the more you forgive others, the more you
manifest the sense of the grace of God in forgiving you. We are taught of
Christ to pray, Luke 11.4. Forgive us our debts as we also forgive every one
that is indebted to us. Can thou say so in thy heart, when thou go unto
God for forgiveness, that thou have forgiven freely thy Brother, thy Sister,
thy Neighbor, that has offended thee, that has wronged and injured thee?
Luke 17.3, 4. Take heed to your selves, if thy Brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him; and if he trespass against thee
seven times a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I
repent, thou shall forgive him. And Mat. 18.23, etc. The Lord there gives us a
Parable of a Servant. The Lord had compassion on him, and forgave him the debt,
and the same servant went out to his fellow servants that owed him an hundred
pence, and he took him by the throat, saying, pay me that thou owe me, etc.
Here is set forth the spirit of the children of men, they would have
forgiveness from others, but they will not forgive themselves. Well, but when
Peter came to Christ, and said, Lord, how often shall my Brother sin against
me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say not unto
thee, until seven times, but until 70 times 7. As often as he does offend, so
often thou shall forgive.

Use 6. Again; This Doctrine calls for an abhorrence of all Papal Masses, as
propitiatory Sacrifices for sin. You that have heard any thing of the grace of
God, in the forgiveness of the New Covenant, do you detest and defy the
Idolatry and the abominations of the Church of Rome, who would pretend to
forgive sins: What is this but to wrong the grace of God? What is this but to
trample upon the blood of the Covenant as an insufficient thing? No, pardon of
sin does not come in at so cheap a rate, as to be bought with money, but it
comes in at the door of free Grace, through the blood of Jesus. Thousands of
Rams, and ten thousand of Rivers of Oil; the firstborn of the body for the sin
of the Soul, will not satisfy, for they and their money will perish together,
that would buy pardon of sin with such a price. Bless God that you know better,
and let it raise up in you an abhorrence of that Religion that would thus
corrupt you.

Quest. Ay, But some poor Soul will be saying, Ah! But how shall I come to get
God's discharge sealed upon my Soul? O! had I but the evidence and witness of
this, all would be well.

Ans. 1. In the first place; Come before God with confessions in thy mouth.
Bewail and spread thy transgressions before him, Psalm 32.5. Says David, I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and my iniquity have I not hid: I said I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin. I confessed, says he, and I said I would confess: He came and judged himself
before God; he came and lamented his sinful condition, and his sin-guiltiness
before God; he lamented and bewailed, he poured out his confessions before God,
and the Lord he came and visited his Soul with pardon, with the sense of
forgiveness.

2. Plead with God for his pardon, and urge his promise for forgiveness. This
is that which the servants of the Lord have done, when they have wanted the
sense of pardon, Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me O God! according to thy
loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions. When sin lay against Israel, and God began to threaten, Moses
steps up and pleads with God for pardon, that God would pardon their sin. So
the Servants of the Lord have all along pleaded with God for pardon in the want
of it: Do you do thus, and urge God with his promise of forgiveness.

3. Have your Eye upon Jesus Christ. Pardon comes through his blood; it is
merited, it is purchased by Jesus Christ; look unto him, and put forth renewed
acts of faith upon him; and in the renewing of thy close with him, and in the
resignation of thy self by faith to him, thou may come to have thy pardon
sealed.

4. Wait upon God in sealing Ordinances. It may be thou have wronged thy Soul
to this day, that thou have walked at so great a distance from God in his
sealing Ordinances; if thou had gone thither, and attended upon God, it may
be thou had had some hint of his pardoning love to thee that would have more
satisfied thy Soul. I remember what God said to Gideon, I only allude to it,
Judge. 7.10, 11. Go and listen, says he, and thou shall hear something that will
strengthen thee. So I say, wait upon God in those Ordinances where God gives
out strengthening grace, and where God seals up his love to his People, and
there thou may have something that may be a feast to thy Soul; there may
thou meet with something that may confirm this love of God to thy Soul, and put
all out of doubt more to thee than ever.

And you that have the sense of God's discharging love in your hearts, I have
two or three words to leave with you.

1. Improve it, improve the sense of it unto an influence to all duties, and to
all obedience to God. Let the sense of his kindness to you, be so improved and
wrought upon your hearts, as it may constrain you to devote and dedicate your
selves to God in your whole course; to lay out your selves in all duties of
obedience to God more than ever. And know, that you can never serve this God
enough; you can never do for this God enough, that has done so much for you;
labor to do more for him than ever, and to serve him with a better heart, and
with a better spirit; to pray more in your prayers; to pray with more fervency,
and to confess with more sincerity, and to walk with God in more exactness; lay
out your selves to the utmost in this work.

2. Extend your pity and compassion unto those that are yet in a condemned
state. Your Souls should mourn over those that are yet in their sins: You know
what it is to be under sin, and you know what it is to be under grace, and
therefore your hearts should be full of compassion to those that are yet in
that state, that by grace you are delivered from. Ebedmelech's compassion and
tenderness to the Prophet is recorded, Jer. 38.11. That he took men with him,
and went into the house of the King under the Treasury, and took with him old
cast clouts, and old rotten rags, and let them down with Cords into the
Dungeon to Jeremiah. O Sirs! your bowels should work toward those that are yet
in their sins. I remember what David promises to God, Psalm. 51.12, 13. Restore
to me the Joy of thy Salvateon, and uphold me with thy free Spirit, then shall
I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. He
would then make it his business to turn sinners to God; he would make it his
business to convince and awaken, and draw others out of their sinful state;
that is, to labor with them, if by any means the Spirit of God may work upon
them; be you full of compassion to others in a state of condemnation. And

3. And lastly; Keep up a humble sense of your great transgressions that God
has forgiven you. I say, keep up, and walk under a humble sense of those
transgressions that God has forgiven you: Sirs, though God has forgiven your
sins, yet you should remember them; you should remember them so as to walk
humbly and softly before God all your days, that you did ever provoke so
gracious a God by such heinous provocations and inormities.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Edward Giles
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Market place.
A Discourse of Divine Providence.

A Word in Season.

Defensive Armor.

A Discourse of the Ordinary Matter of Prayer.

Sermons upon the whole first and second Chapters of the Canticles.

Allen's Way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ.

The Glories of Christ set forth, with the Necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons: By Thomas Allen late of Norwich.

Several Sermons of Timothy Armitage late of Norwich.

Lougher's Precious Promises, the Portion of Overcommers.

The Saint's Ebenezer: By Francis English late of Norwich.

Directions for the Learned to Spell English right.

The History of the Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther.

The Dead Saints Speaking.

A Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcomb.

The English Presbyterian.


