AN ACCOUNT Of the Trial and Examination OF Count Conningsmark; With the NAMES
of the Murderers and persons suspected as Accessaries in the Death of T.
Thynn, Esquire
Who are as follows, viz. Frederick Harder, Chyrurgeon to the said Count. Dr.
Nicholas Dubartin, Doctor to the said Count. Peter Merckman, all Three
Committed and suspected as Accessaries to the said Murder. Amien Berg,
committed for want of Sureties, to give Evidence against the said persons, who
was the Captains Man, and discovered the Gun, being left behind in his Lodging
till they came back. Captain Vratz, Geo. Boroski, AND John Stern. Were the
Bloody Murderers, which they confessed. Boroski and Stern were the said
Captains Men.

THE Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex, having on Saturday the Twenty
fifth of February, had a Bill preferred to them, against Count Charles John
Conningsmark, Vratz, Boroski, and Stern, as the Inhumane Actors of that
Barbarous and Unmanly Murder, (the Three last being actually concerned in it)
and against Harder, Dubartin, and Merckman, as the Accessaries in abetting and
concealing the same; unanimously returned them Billa vera; upon which, about
Nine of the Clock this morning, being the Twenty Eighth of this instant
February, they took their Trials in the Old-Bailey, being brought from Newgate
to the Sessions House, which was as follows.

The first that were brought were the Three Murderers; some time after them,
the Two persons that were suspected to be privy in it; and immediately after
the Count, whose Beauty and Youth drew sorrow from all persons that were
Spectators; his Countenance seemed very composed, and his looks did show him to
be under a particular dissatisfaction. The Count came from Newgate in a Coach,
and so was guarded into the Court.

The Prisoners being brought to the Bar, and the Jury called over, the
Indictment was read, they being Indicted in this Order, by the Names of George
Boraski, Christopher Vratz, John Stern, and Charles John Conningsmark, for that
they on the Twelfth of February, 1681. not having the fear of God before their
eyes, etc. did Maliciously, and of Malice forethought, Assault and Murder
Thomas Thynn Esquire in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields. After the reading
the Indictment, some time was taken up in interpreting the words of the
Indictment to the Prisoners at the Bar, by Sir Nicholas Johnson, whom the Court
assigned to be their Interpreter: which being done, they were severally asked,
whether Guilty or not Guilty? to which they all pleaded, Not Guilty; and being
demanded how they would be Tried? they answered, by God and a Jury of half
English and half High Dutch; the Count desired by his Interpreter, on the
behalf of himself and the rest of the Prisoners at the Bar, that those
Englishmen that were to be of his Jury, might be neither Sir Thomas Thynn, or
any other that were related to, or had any dependence upon Mr. Thynns Family;
in answer to which, my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, bid Sir Nicholas assure
them, they should not. He desired likewise, that he might have the Panel, that
so when the Jury was called, he might know the better how to except against,
which was granted. He excepted against about Twenty, and those Englishmen that
were called, he asked them all if they had any acquaintance with Mr. Thynn. The
Jury being Sworn, the Foreman whereof was Sir William Roberts, the Indictment
was read to the Jury, and they directed to inquire, whether George Boraski,
Christopher Vrats, and John Stern were Guilty or not Guilty of the Felony and
Murder whereof they stand Indicted; and if they find them Guilty, what Goods
and Chattels they had when the Murder was committed, or if Not Guilty, whether
they fled for the same, and if they did, they were to inquire what Goods and
Chattels, as if they had found them Guilty, and that if they should find cause
not to find George Boraski, Christopher Vrats, and John Stern guilty, who are
in this Indictment charged as Principals in this Felony and Murder, you are
not to inquire further concerning Charles John Conningsmark, who is charged as
an Accessory, by abetting and procuring the same. Then the Indictment was
learnedly opened, first by one of Lincoln's Inn, and then by Sir Francis
Withins, who also learnedly urged the heinous aggravations of the Crime; first
from the Dignity and usefulness of the person Murdered, and secondly from the
bold and impudent, as well as barbarous and cruel manner of committing the
Murder; which being done, the Evidence for the King was called in and Sworn;
the Evidence was very full against them, some tending to prove that Capt. Vrats
entertained Boraski and Stern as his Servants, and that they took Horse and
rid out together Armed, Boraski with a Blunderbuss, and Vrats and Stern with
Pistols, and that the Pistol which was taken up near the place, and soon after
the Murder was committed, was Vrats's. The Coachman who drove Mr. Thynns
Coach, and some others, proved they were all Three in Company, and that they
road up to the Coach together, and that Vrats stopped the Coach while Boraski
discharged the Blunderbuss into the Coach, and that then they rid away
together. There were many more Witnesses Examined on both sides, but the matter
of fact appearing so plainly, the Jury after having been some time in debate,
returned, and found the Three Assassinates Guilty of the Murder; as for the
farther particulars, we refer you to a more large account.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. 1682.


