At a Court holden at the Hospital of Bridewell, on Thursday the 16th. of
August, 1694. being Election Day.
Ordered,

THat the Thanks of This Court be given to Mr. Atterbury for his Sermon on This
Day, preached in the Chapel of This Hospital; and that He be Desired to Print
the same.

J. Mount.

The Power of Charity to Cover Sin. A SERMON Preached before the President and
Governors of Bridewell and Bethlehem, in BRIDEWELL-CHAPEL, August xvi. 1694.
Being the ELECTION-DAY.

By FRANCIS ATTERBURY, Student of Christ-Church, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
Their MAJESTY'S.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIV.

The Power of Charity to cover Sin. A SERMON Preached at BRIDEWELL-CHAPEL.
August 16 th. 1694.
I St. PETER iv. viii. Charity shall cover a multitude of Sins.
GOD be thanked, the frequent Returns of such Pious Meetings as These in this
Rich and Charitable CITY, have made the General Argument of CHARITY, its
Nature, and Chief Properties, its several Grounds and Reasons, so well
understood, that to Entertain You with a Discourse at Large, on That Subject,
would be a very needless and useless Attempt. So many Eminent Pens have gone
before in This Way, as have left it very difficult for those who come after,
either to say any thing which They have not said, or not to say That much worse
which They have.

Upon This Account; and because indeed I take General Discourses, for the most
part, to be like Large Prospects, where the Eye is lost by the wide Compass it
takes, and sees so many Things at once, that it sees nothing distinctly; I have
chosen at present to point Your Thoughts only on One Particular Property of
This Great Virtue, which has been not often handled, I think; and even Then,
not always well understood: It is That which the Apostle St. Peter proposes to
Us in Those Few Words I have read to You, -- Charity shall cover a multitude of
Sins.

Few as They are, They will sufficiently employ our Thoughts at This Time, if
we consider in the First place, the several Senses that have been given of 'em,
and satisfy our selves, which of These it is that ought to be taken: If,
Secondly, We free That One True Genuine Meaning of the Words from the
Exceptions that lie against it. If, Thirdly, We establish the Truth laid down
upon its Proper Grounds and Reasons. And if, Lastly, We make some few useful
Deductions from it. After this is done, the Little Time that is left will
properly be spent in Applying what has been said more immediately to the
Occasion of This Present Assembly.

I. Charity shall cover a multitude of Sins.

There is scarce Any man, I believe, who hears These Words, that is not ready
to frame to Himself This Sense of 'em; That the Virtue of Charity is of so
great Worth in the Sight of God, that Those Persons who possess and exercise it
in any Eminent manner, are peculiarly Entitled to the Divine Favor and
Pardon, with regard to numberless Slips and Failings in Their Duty, which They
may be Otherwise guilty of. This Great Christian Perfection, of which They are
Masters, shall make many Little Imperfections to be overlooked and unobserved;
it shall Cover a multitude of Sins.

This, I say, is the Account, which every man naturally gives himself of These
Words, upon the First Hearing 'em; and it is for That very Reason probable,
that This is the True and Genuine Account of 'em. For, supposing the Original
Text to be well and clearly rendered in Our Version, It will, I am of opinion,
by generally found, that That Sense of any Passage, which, after attending to
the Force of the Words, and to their Coherence with what goes before, and what
follows, First occurs to the Mind, is by much the Justest and Truest.

This has not however been always thought a Good Rule in the present Case. For
several Pious and some Judicious men, finding the Words, in their plain and
familiar meaning, to carry somewhat a suspicious sound with 'em, and to border
a little (as They Thought) on the Roman Catholic Doctrine of Works Meritorious,
have therefore taken some Pains to give a Different Interpretation of 'em.

I shall Offer First to Your View These mistaken Senses, ere I come to That
which I think we should rely upon; because They certainly propose Clear and
Apposite Truths to us, though perhaps not Truly arising from the Passage now
before Us.

First then, the Words have been understood to contain an Account of that
Particular Instance of Charity, which we call Goodnature: by which we pass by
little Slights and Injuries, interpret Things to the Best Sense, are not apt to
Take or Return an Affront, not forward to Publish or Believe an ill Report of
any One: by which we turn our Eyes always toward the Best side of a man, and
choose rather to look on his Virtues, than his Failures; and by which we
constantly interpose our Good Offices, wherever we Think They may be
Serviceable, either to the composing Old Differences, or Preventing New Ones.
And This Sense is grounded upon a supposed Relation there is between These
Words in St. Peter, and Those in the Proverbs; Hate stirs up strife, but
Love covers all Sins.

Now, though indeed, in Our Translation, and in the Original Hebrew, as it Now
stands, there is some Similitude between these Two Passages, yet in the
Septuagint-Version, (from whence the Apostles usually Quoted) they are not so
Like, as to make it probable that the One ought to be Expounded by the Other.

To strengthen, which Criticism, we may observe, that This Sense of the Words
is by no means Full enough to bear the Weight of that Solemn Preface with which
the Apostle introduces 'em: But above all things (says He, in the Words
immediately before the Text) have fervent Charity among your selves: for
Charity shall cover a multitude of Sins. If they were above all things to have
Fervent Charity among themselves, it could not be for This Reason alone,
because Charity would render 'em inoffensive toward Others, and not easy to
be offended Themselves. For though This be a very good Degree of Virtue, and very
fit to be enjoined, because not frequently practiced; yet can it not deserve
that peculiar Emphasis and Stress that is here laid upon it. Especially, if we
consider it as succeeding the mention of those more important and necessary
Duties to which the Apostle exhorts 'em in the preceding Verse, the being
sober, and watching unto Prayer: Above all which, it cannot be supposed, that
the Duty of conversing with one another according to the Rules of Humanity and
Goodnature should be enjoined.

The Words therefore have, in the second place, been thus also interpreted.
Charity shall cover a multitude of Sins, i. e. says the excellent Grotius; it
will have a mighty Influence in reclaiming Sinners from the Error of their
Ways; the Consequence of which is, That the Sins of Men thus reclaimed are
pardoned or covered. Charity, which is an exalted. Love of God and our
Neighbor, will make us industrious in procuring Glory to the One, by the
Salvation of the Other. It will create a mighty Zeal for the Interests of
Virtue, and the Honor of the Gospel, and the Good of Souls; and it will run
through all the Difficulties that lie in the way toward so good an End, with
Readiness and Pleasure. It will not be frightened from making Attempts even on
Those of the first Rank in Wickedness, the Worst and most Hardened of Men,
because it knows that Their Revolt from Sin to Virtue (if it can be compassed)
will be of mighty Consequence to Religion, and will probably draw whole Troops
of Common Sinners along with it: The Sense They have of their Own Sins being
covered, will make Them also eager, in their Turn, to cover those of Other Men.

This is a very Good and Pious Sense of the Words, but (I believe it will be
allowed me) no very Easy and Natural One: They must be racked before they can
be brought to confess This Meaning. However it was what That Judicious Person
was led into by a Former Explication He had made of a Parallel Place in St.
James; which I shall crave leave to produce at length, and to comment upon,
because I take it to be the Key of the Text, which easily and readily lets us
into its True Meaning.

Brethren (says St. James at the Conclusion of his Epistle) f any One of You do
Err from the Truth, and One Convert him, let him know, that he which converteh
a Sinner from the Error of his ways, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall
hide a Multitude of Sins. He intended to shut up his Epistle with recommending
to 'em One of the most important and useful Virtues, That of endeavoring the
Conversion and Reformation of Men. And He intended also to stir 'em up to the
Exercise of That Virtue by the most powerful Motives he could think of: What
are They? Why first, That He who converteth a Sinner from the Error of his
way, should consider that he saves a Soul from Death; and then, secondly and
chiefly, That he shall [also] cover a multitude of Sins. Whose Sins? What those
of the Converted Persons? Nay, but That is already expressed, and much more
than that in the foregoing Motive, He shall save a Soul from Death: for surely
the saving a Soul from Death, necessarily includes and presupposes the
Remission of its Sins. It must then be meant, of His Sins who makes, and not of
His who becomes the Convert: And Thus indeed, this Last Clause carries a New
Motive in it, distinct from That of the Former; and such an One as rises above
it, and touches those more nearly to whom it is addressed; and was therefore
sit to be proposed in the Last place, and to be left as a sting in the Minds of
Those to whom the Epistle was written. As if he had said at length, Let Him
know, that He shall, by This Means, not only save a Soul from Death, (though
This it self be a very Great and Desirable Thing) but shall also (which more
nearly concerns him) secure to himself on this account the Pardon of many Sins.

Now the Words here of St. James are exactly the same with Those of St. Peter
in my Text; and the Occasion upon which They are introduced, and their
Dependence on the Context is much the same in both Places; except only that
They are used in my Text as a Motive to Charity in general, but in St. James,
with regard only to One main and eminent Branch of it, the Conversion of Souls:
What therefore St. James means by 'em, is meant also by St. Peter: and
therefore That most Obvious and Easy Sense, which I mentioned at the Entrance
on This Discourse, is, in all probability, the Truest: And, as such, I shall
take the Liberty here once again to repeat it. It is This, That the Virtue of
Charity is of so great Value in the sight of God, that They who possess and
exercise it in any Eminent Manner, are peculiarly entit'led to the Divine
Favor and Pardon, with regard to numberless Slips and Failings in Their Duty,
which They may be Otherwise guilty of. This great Christian Perfection of which
They are Masters, shall make many Little Imperfections to be overlooked and
unobserved: It shall cover a multitude of Sins.

I fear I have been tedious in settling the Sense of the Words: but it was no
more than was requisite, in so important a Point, so little insisted on from
the Pulpit; and which may be thought liable to some Just Exceptions.

II. These I am now in the second Place to propose, and shall endeavor to
remove. The Doing of which will give me an Occasion of clearing the Sense, and
limiting the Bounds of this Truth more exactly and fully.

The Great Exception against This way of Expounding the Text, is, that it gives
too great a Color to the Roman Catholic Doctrines of Merit and Supererogation;
and seems to lessen the Worth of That Only True and Proper Satisfaction for
Sin made by our Savior on the Cross. For, at This Rate, what need of Remission
of Sin in every Case by the Blood of Christ, since We our selves are in Good
Measure capable of making the Atonement? We, who have it, it seems, in our
power, by the Exercise of a Particular Virtue to secure a Pardon to our selves
for Neglecting all the Rest; and can blot out the Remembrance of an Ill-spent
Life, by a few Acts of Charity at the Close of it. As if God were so much
beholden to us for our Good Deeds, as to be bound for Their sakes to forgive us
our Ill Ones! Or, as if the Performance of Our Duty in One Case, could make any
manner of Amends to Him for our Nonperformance of it in Another! This, say
They, is very Easy and Comfortable Divinity!

To take off the Force of This Objection, it will be requisite to consider
these Two or Three several Things.

First, We must Explain our selves a little more particularly, what we mean by
that Charity, to which the Promise of the Text is made; What it is in the
Nature and Extent, and what in the Intention and Degree of it.

As to its Nature and Extent, it must be understood to signify not barely Acts
of Relief to the Poor and Needy, as the Vulgar and Confined Use of the Word
imports; but more largely, all the several ways of Universal Benesicene and
Kindness, by which one Man can be serviceable to another. Further, it expresses
not the Outward Material Act only, but must be supposed to take in also, the
Vital Form of it, that Inward Principle of a Sincere Love toward God and Man,
from whence it regularly slows, and separated from which, the mere external Act
is a Lifeless and Useless Performance. And Then, even of Charity thus Largely
understood, it is not a Common Degree that is meant here; It Is to a Fervent
Charity, to a mighty and extraordinary measure of it, that this mighty and
extraordinary Blessing belongs.

Secondly, Even of Charity thus Qualified; it is not said, That it shall cover
a multitude of Sins, how Gross and Heinous soever; The Words of the Text do by
no means carry us to assert thus much concerning it: but only (as You have
heard 'em Explained to You) seem to say, that it shall be our Excuse for many
Lesser Neglects and Failings in our Duty, many Sins of Infirmity, Surprise, and
Daily Incursion: In a word, for such Offenses only, as are consistent with a
state of True Charity; and sure Those cannot be very Gross and Presumptuous
Ones. For He, who lives in the Perfect Exercise of that Fervent Charity, which
the Text speaks of, abounding Inwardly and Outwardly in all the various
Instances and Expressions of it, and in those several Virtues and Graces which
do naturally and necessarily attend it: I say, who ever he is, that is
thoroughly possessed and acted by this Divine Principle of Love, he cannot be
supposed capable of the Grossest Commissions, while he is under the Guidance of
it: And as for Those, he had fallen into before the attainment of this Gift,
They were certainly remitted also and covered before the attainment of it;
else, doubtless, he had never attained it. So that no Great Guilt of any kind
can well be thought to harbor in that Breast, where true Charity dwells.

Indeed, it is not universally certain, that whenever God remits the Guilt of
Sin, he remits the Punishment too, (The Temporal Punishment, I mean) For Wicked
Men, upon their Return to Virtue, do not seldom find, to their Cost, that a Sin
may be pardoned, and yet all the Ill Consequences of it not prevented; and can
therefore often trace the Steps of their Former Misdoings, in the several Evils
of Life that afterward befall 'em. And in This Sense therefore it may be, and
is probably true, that Charity shall cover many Sins, even of the first
Magnitude; i.e. it shall prevent the Temporal Inflictions due to 'em, and
often, even after Pardon obtained, following upon 'em: But it properly removes
the Guilt only of those Frailties and Infirmities of a lesser size, which can
be thought consistent with a state of Charity. And therefore to except against
the Doctrine laid down, as encouraging the Charitable Man to expect Remission
of all manner of Sins, how great and how numerous soever, is to load it with a
Difficulty which does not, and cannot belong to it. But

Thirdly, Even as to These slighter Omissions and Failings, it is not
pretended, that They are done away by Acts of Mercy and Charity in any sense,
but what includes the Application of the Merits of our Savior's Blood, the
only Fountain of Satisfaction for all Kind of Sins, for the Least as well as
the Greatest. It is True indeed, that the Blood of Christ is that alone which
expiates Sin: But This hinders not, but that God may make such and such Acts of
Ours the Conditions and Grounds (as it were) of applying the Virtue of that
Blood to us. And Thus Our Good Works, though they are not the Meritorious, yet
may they become, if I may so speak, the Occasional Cause of Pardon and Grace to
us. And if This be establishing the R. C. Doctrine of Salvation by Works, then
has our Savior Himself, I fear, established it, in that Divine Form of Prayer,
in which he has taught us to say, Forgive Us Our Trespasses, as We forgive
Those that Trespass against Us. As We forgive Those! i.e. Inasmuch as, on That
very account (among Others) because we forgive Those that trespass against Us.
Where we see the Exercise of One Great Instance of Charity, Forgiveness of
Enemies, is made the Ground of our asking and expecting Forgiveness from God.

Fourthly and Lastly, It follows not, that because so Vast a Recompense is
promised to a Fervent Charity, that therefore the Exercise of it is in the way
of Supererogation, so that we might have let it alone without Fault or Blame.
We may be strictly, and by the very Letter of the Law, obliged to it; and yet
it may include so high a pitch and perfection of Virtue, and one so seldom
attained, that God may think fit, wherever it is attained, mightily to reward
it; and to encourage us in doing our Duty in some One Great Point, by an
assurance, that in many smaller Ones he will not be Extreme to mark what is
done amiss by us. Our Gracious Master deals with Us in This Case, as a Man
oftentimes does with his Servant; If he be Trusty and Faithful to him in a
Business of Great Concern and Moment, (though it be but his Duty to be so) yet
shall That piece of Eminent Service excuse a Thousand Neglects and Failings
upon Other Occasions.

There is yet a Second Objection, though indeed so slight an One, as, after the
Former has been removed, is scarce worth mentioning. It is taken from that
Saying of our Savior's, That They will Love much, to whom much has been
forgiven. -- Just contrary to which the Text as expounded by Us, seems to say,
That They who do love much, shall have much Forgiven 'em. But These Two Truths
are easily reconciled. For it is not hard to understand, How That, which is the
Cause of a Thing in One Respect, may be the Effect of it in another. And
accordingly it may be very true, that He who is Forgiven much, will, for that
very reason, Love much: And it may be as True, that He who thus Loves much,
because much has been Forgiven him, shall, on that very account, have much
more Forgiven him. It Is just the same Case as between Me and My Friend. I may
passionately love him, because he has pardoned me the Great and Many Injuries I
formerly did him, while we were at Enmity: And again, the Knowledge he has of
my Love may incline him to pass over any Future Injuries I may happen to do him.

III. The Doctrine being thus fixed at Large, and freed from Exception, I go
on, as I proposed, in the Third place, to enquire into the Grounds and Reasons
of this Wondrous Efficacy, so particularly attributed to the Exercise of
Charity: For we read not that God has annexed this Promise to any Other Grace
or Virtue of the Christian Life whatsoever, but to This only, That it shall
cover Sin; Of which These several Accounts may with some Probability be given.

First, That This was really a Fitter and Properer Return to be made to
Charity, than to any Other Virtue; because it adjusts and proportions the
Reward of Acting to the Act it self; and makes the Duty of Man toward God, and
the Blessing of God upon the Performance of That Duty, to have a near Relation
and Resemblance to One another. I explain my self Thus -- The Chief Employment,
the highest Point and Perfection of Charity is, to pass by the Offenses and
Injuries of Men; to pardon the Malice of our Enemies, and the Ingratitude of
our Friends. To Him therefore that attains to this Height of Virtue, God has
very aptly and suitably promised, that his Faults and Offenses too shall be
pardoned: As he deals with his Neighbor, so will God deal with Him: Mercy
shall be showed upon Him, who shows Mercy: If we forgive Other Men Their
Trespasses, then will our Heavenly Father forgive Us Our Trespasses also.

There is, You see, here a strict Analogy betwixt the Reward annexed, and one
Great Instance of the Virtue enjoined: which is God's Method of putting us in
Mind of what we are to Do, by his Promises as well as his Commands; and of
exciting Us to endeavor after a Perfection, not easily attained, by assuring
Us, that the Exercise of it, shall, in the very same kind, return doubly and
trebly into our Own Bosom.

But, Secondly, the Good and Charitable Man is peculiarly entit'led to the
Pardon of many Sins, because he is in a peculiar manner liable to incurr the
Guilt of many: either from that Natural Frame and Make of his Mind, that
disposes him to this Virtue; or from the very Exercise of the Virtue it self.
Charity is grafted always on Goodnature, and a Sweetness of Disposition: which
though it be a Temper of Mind very lovely and desirable; yet is it such an
One, as in the Circumstances of our present Imperfect State has its
Infirmities; and is what makes Conversation dangerous to us in a World where we
are surrounded with Temptations. It hinders us from arming our selves with that
obstinate Resolution of Mind, that stubborn incomplying Virtue, which is
requisite to preserve a Man undefiled and blameless. It makes Us easy and
yielding to Common Customs, and Received Opinions; Ready to comply with a
Thousand things (of which we are not exactly well satisfied) upon the pure
score of good Nature, and because we cannot allow our selves to be troublesome.
And being found and known to be of this Easy and Complying Temper, This very
thing will invite Ill Spirits, and Ill Men, to make their Attempts upon us.

And then the Exercise of the Virtue it self, especially where the Principle of
it is strong, lays us open to several Failings. It makes us omit oftentimes the
Duties incumbent on us from our Professions and Callings; and perhaps neglect
to take care of Those, whom it is the First Point of Charity to take care of,
our Children and Families. It warms us with such a Zeal for doing Good, as
breaks out sometimes into Acts, not reconcilable to the Rules of Discretion,
Decency, and Right Reason; and which do real Dis-service to the Cause of God,
instead of promoting the Honor of it. St. Francis's Charity went a little too
far, when it employed it self upon Birds and Beasts; the Virtue was not at all
beholden to him for being showed in such a Dress, as, instead of rendering it
desirable in the Eyes of Men, made it look ridiculous. Indeed Love (the Spring
Head of Charity) as it is the sweetest of All Passions, so is it One of the
strongest too; and, if it have the Reins but once given to it, will go near to
run away with its Rider: That is, If a Due Care be not taken of it, it will
exalt our Fancy so high, and disorder it so much, as to put it out of the Reach
and Rule of the Governing Powers of the Mind. And then what wild Work does
there follow upon it! Instead of Wise and Rational Ways of Beneficence, foolish
Undertakings and unpracticable Designs! Instead of a manly and sober Form of
Devotion, all the Extravagant Rants and silly Freaks of Enthusiasm! Witness the
Lives of many a Good Saint to whom the Church of Rome has allowed a place in
her Calendar. Finally, the Charitable Man, who Loves every thing, does not fail
sometimes to Love his own Virtue too; I mean, that he is apt to over-rate the
just Price of it, and too much to undervalue every thing else in comparison of
it. A Man may be so much struck with the Beauty and Excellence of Charity, as
to forget, that Faith also is a Virtue as well as That, and thereupon to make
shipwreck of it. Thus, I say, the Good and Merciful Man being particularly
disposed toward some Infirmities, is a particularity comforted with a Gracious
Assurance of their Pardon.

Thirdly, God seems on purpose to have placed this Mark of Distinction upon
Charity, to show, us how tender and careful He is of Our Welfare; what Bowels
of Love and Compassion he has for Us: Since That is His Favorite Virtue, the
Virtue he chiefly delights in, and delights to reward, the Exercise of which is
most sweet and comfortable, most useful and advantageous to the Sons of Men. He
designed by This Convincing Instance of his Goodness to prove to us, that he
was not an hard and rigorous Master, that enjoined us Commands, for his Own
sake, and purely for the pleasure of being Obeyed; but that his great Intention
was to twist our Duty and our Happiness together: And therefore by how much
more our Ease and Happiness was concerned in the Practice of One Virtue than of
that of another, so much stronger Ties and Engagements to it was he resolved to
lay upon us.

Fourthly, Charity is particularly available to procure a Remission of the
Guilt of Sin, and a Relaxation of the Punishment due to it: because it
particularly engages the Prayers of all Good Men, in our Behalf; and of all
Those Persons to whom the Instances of our Goodness extend. A Kind and
Beneficent Man as He is a Common Blessing to Every Body, so is He blessed in
Common by Every One that knows him: All Men are ready to Implore the Mercies of
God, Spiritual and Temporal, upon the Merciful-minded; especially the Poor and
Miserable, (whose Prayers God has in a particular manner promised to hear) are
constant and earnest Intercessors at the Throne of Grace for him. So that,
whereas the Possessors of other Virtues stand chiefly upon Their Own Bottom for
the obtaining Pardon and Grace, Every Man almost becomes a Supplicant for the
Merciful and Liberal: And no wonder therefore if such United Requests prevail.
But

Fifthly, and principally, God has made This Promise to Charity, and to no
Other Grace of the Christian Life, because it is really the chief and most
Excellent of Graces: and the most Excellent Thing ought to have the most
Excellent Reward. It is the first Perfection of the Mind, preferable to Faith
and Hope, in Dignity, in Use, and in the Length of its Duration, as St. Paul
has taught us to reason concerning it. It is called the Great Commandment, the
End of the Law, and the Fulfilling of the Law: and it is really what it is
called. For where This Divine Grace is enjoyed in any full and eminent measure,
there no Moral Attainment of any kind, can be totally wanting. Charity is the
Queen of Virtues, and the Rest are of Her Retinue and Train, as it were;
constantly attending on Her, appearing and disappearing with Her: and well
therefore, as a Queen, is the invested by God with that Sovereign Prerogative,
the Power of Covering Sin. It is Her Nature to be comprehensive of, and
abounding in many Duties; and therefore is it Her Reward also to be a Skreen
for many Failings. Charity is said in Scripture to establish a True Friendship,
and to create a Real Likeness between God and Man: God passes by the Faults
therefore of the Charitable, as a Friend does those of his Friend; and the
Great Resemblance of the Divine Nature, that shines out in him, hides all
Lesser Unlikenesses, and makes 'em not to be discerned.

It Is difficult to stop on so Noble a Subject; and yet more difficult to
express ones self becomingly and well: The Tongues of Men and Angels, as they
are said to be a Worthless Gift, in comparison of Charity, so are They not All
able to set out Half the Worth and Excellence of it. St. Paul has done
something toward it, in the XIIIth. of the Is It. to the Corinthians, and to Him
I refer You.

IV. It remains now that I should make Those Few Inferences I intended from the
Whole; and then direct All that has been said particularly upon the Occasion of
this Present Assembly. And

First, The Truth we have been upon suggests to us One Argument against Their
Opinion, who hold Justification, and all the Graces of the Gospel to be
conveyed to us by Faith alone; in such a sense as excludes any manner of Regard
to be had to our Works in it. For if Justification be a putting a Man into a
state of Favor with God by remission of Sin, and Acts of Charity be Works,
then do Works contribute to Justification. This Point goes generally for a
Speculative Nicety, not worth insisting upon: But sure They who think it so,
have not well considered, what Influence it has experimentally had upon
Practice and a Good Life, in many of its Assertors. Some Spiritual Libertines
of the Antinomian Way, have by it undermined the very Design of the Gospel; and
set us free from the Necessity of being Pious, Just, or Good, in any other
Principle, but that of pure Gratitude only. And in Those who do not go to
these Mad Heighths, yet the Persuasions They have about Justifying Faith, are
observed mightily to lessen their Esteem for Good Works: and from esteeming
them less, to come to practice 'em less, God knows, is a very Easy step, and
almost an unavoidable One! Witness the Celebrated Institutions of a Great
Divine, where Faith is the solemn Subject of every Page, but Charity scarce
mentioned at all, never insisted on: And accordingly as Charity is little
mentioned there, so are the Rules of it little observed; which do not, I think,
at all consist with a bitter invective way of Writing.

Which leads me to a

Second Inference also, That if a Spirit of Charity shall cover a multitude of
Sins, then may we assure our selves, that the contrary Temper, a Spirit of
Hatred, Malignity, and Ill Will, shall cover a multitude of Virtues; i.e. They
shall be no Virtues to Him that has 'em: Neither God nor Man shall regard 'em
as such, if Charity does not Crown 'em. Charity covers many Sins, because it is
so noble and so excellent a Virtue: What Virtue then beyond this can there be
found, of price enough, to cover the Sin of Uncharitableness?

Thirdly, From the Promise made in the Text, We may learn the wondrous Goodness
and Condescension of God. He has a right to all the highest Instances and
Degrees of Virtue that it is possible for us to put on; and when we have
practiced 'em to the utmost, we have done but what we were strictly obliged to
do: And yet so far he is pleased to abate of this Right, as to accept the
Performance of One Great Duty in lieu of the Omission of many Others. An Act of
Grace and Kindness which is enhans'd to Us, by considering, that Reason never
did or could make this known to the Heathen World; although the Gospel has now
Revealed it to Us. Nay, remarkable it is, (as I observed to you before) that
this Great Duty, which is to compensate as it were, for all Our Failings, is
the most pleasant and delightful Employment that belongs to us; the most
agreeable to our Nature, and the most useful to our Fellow Creatures. Let us
not complain therefore of the strictness of the Rule we are to walk by, and of
the Hardships, which in our Christian Warfare we are to undergo. The Rule is
strict indeed, -- but then, as Great Helps and Assistances are given us to live
up to it, so great Abatements and Allowances (we see) are made at last, if we
do not. There are indeed Difficulties to be undergone: But sure the Labor of
Love is none of 'em. -- That, as it makes a kind of Atonement to God for all
the Faults we commit, so does it make an Amends to Us for all the Troubles we
are at, in every other part of our Duty. It gives an Easiness to that Yoke, and
a Lightness to that Burden which is laid upon us.

Fourthly and Lastly, If the Doctrine laid down be good, then have we in it the
plainest and most quickening Motive in the World to the Exercise of this great
Duty of Charity, -- such an One, as exceeds the United Force of all the
Arguments that ever were offered in this Case; and of whose Power if a Man can
be insensible, all Other Motives will doubtless be lost upon him. The wise Son
of Syrach thought he had made a reasonable Plea for Charity, when he said, Lay
up Thy Treasure according to the Commandments of the most High, and it shall
bring Thee more Profit than Gold. Shut up Alms in thy Storehouses, and it shall
deliver Thee from All Affliction, It shall fight for Thee against Thine Enemies
better than a mighty Shield, or a strong, Spear. But how Flat, and Cold, and
Unmoving is All This, when compared with the Life and Energy that is in Those
Few Words; -- It shall cover a multitude of Sins!

This Motive indeed has been carried too far, and abused to ill Purposes by Men
of another Communion, who, by the Help of it, have made the most Impure and
Profligate Wretches hope for a General Forgiveness of all Their Sins, so They
were but Liberal enough to the Church in their Wills; and settled such a Revenue
upon it, as should make a Good Number of Holy Fathers think it worth their
while to say Daily Masses for the Soul of the Depatred.

And how Gross a way soever This is of Expounding the Text, it has proved a
very Gainful One to Those who made use of it; For perhaps half the Wealth of
the C. of R. may justly be attributed to it. A strong Persuasion of the Truth
of this Exposition, seems to have been that very FoundationStone, on which a
very Great Part of Her Charitable Buildings have been Erected.

The Ministers of the Reformed Church indeed dare not go so far in inviting You
to Works of Charity and Mercy: But This They dare, and do affirm, -- That a
true Principle of Charity, is that Qualification of Mind, which of all Others
is most grateful and acceptable to God; and such as at the Day of Final
Retribution He will have a Particular Regard to, so as to make no severe
Scrutiny into that Man's Faults and Failings, who has Eminently Lived and
Practiced by it. And This They Think sufficiently intimated by Our Savior's
Account of the Process of that Day: Where the Only Head of Inquiry he
mentions, is, What Good and Charitable Deeds we have done to any of our Poor
Brethren: Which implies thus much at least; That That will be the Chief Point
upon which we shall be examined; and that Our Acquittal as to Neglects in Other
Parts of Our Duty, will depend very much upon Our being able to give a good
Answer to it.

And I hope this Assurance it self, is a sufficient Encouragement to Charity,
without Our needing to strain the Words of the Text to such a Gross Sense, as
no Wise Man can believe that they ought, and no Good Man would wish that they
might be taken in.

V. There is indeed One Further Sense of the Words, than has Yet been
mentioned; to which they may however be innocently and truly extended. They
have been hitherto considered only as containing a Particular Promise to
Particular Men: They may be understood also with regard to Those Blessings
which Public Charities procure on Public States and Communities. For it is
true also, that Acts of Charity shall Cover the Sins of Cities and Kingdoms, as
well as Those of Private Men, if Cities and Kingdoms unanimously agree to
perform 'em.

Our Fathers, it is to be thought, were of This Opinion; and were powerfully
acted and influenced by it, in erecting These Charitable Foundations.

They could not but see that the Wealth of the Church, though it was really
grown too Great, and was by some Rich Lazy Orders in it scandalously employed;
yet had been retrenched, on This Account, beyond what needed: and had not been
applied afterward to any Religious or Public Use; but was squandered away for
the most part upon Favorites, and upon such as fell in with the Honest Zeal of
Our First Reformers, not out of any Principle of Conscience, but the mere
Design of enriching Themselves. The Sense of This, doubtless, affected deeply
the Good and Pious Men of Those Times; and made them very Earnest and Active to
procure some part of These Church-Spoils to be set aside to Charitable Uses:
that Retribution, as it were, might, by This Means, be made to God, of what had
been torn away in too Large Proportions from his Worship and Service: To speak
plainly -- that by a True Spirit of Charity Those Sins might be Covered, which
a Spirit of Lust and Avarice, under the Pretense of Reforming the Abuses of
Charity, had caused!

And These Endeavors of Theirs God blessed so wonderfully, that some Millions
of Money were, in a Few Years, contributed toward erecting and endowing in all
Parts of our Country, Hospitals and Houses of Charity. This sufficiently
baffled the Caluminies, and stopped the Mouths of Our Adversaries of the Church
of Rome; Who cried Us down, as Men that were Reforming away Good. Works, and
turning all Religion into a Notional Faith. How Other Protestant Countries have
freed Themselves from that Imputation I am not able to say: sure I am, Ours
delivered it self so well of it, as to turn the Edge of the Objection back upon
the Church of Rome it self; that first managed it against us: For upon a Fair
and Impartial Computation it appears, that there were Greater Expenses upon
Public Works of Charity (such I mean as we are at present discoursing of) in
Sixty Years after the Reformation, than had been in Five times that Number of
Years, while Popery stood: some have added, than there were from the Conqu^st
down to King Edward the Sixth; that Good and Excellent Prince, the Great
Promoter and Encourager of These Works; and Who is not to be mentioned, without
particular Honor, in This House, which acknowledges him for Her Pious and
Munificent Founder.

I cannot but observe to You here, that it was the Ruling Part of This Great
City, with a Good Bishop of London, and Martyr for the Protestant Religion, at
the Head of 'em, that Together stirred up that Young Prince to set upon so
publickspirited a Design. And it is natural for me also at the same Time to
wish, that That Honorable Body may thus heartily always continue to join Their
Endeavors and Interests with Those of Their Right Reverend Diocesan, in
promoting Public Charities, and Public Blessings of any kind, either in
Church or State.

Indeed it must always be remembered, to the Honor of That Great Body, That as
Her Foundations of Charity (such as we are speaking of) are larger, for ought I
can find, than Those of any Other City in the Christian World; so They were All
raised and endowed, either directly by Her Own Members; or, if by Other Hands,
yet at Her earnest and importunate Suit. So that the Fabrics and Revenues of
This Kind, that belong to Her, are not only (as in Other Parts) the Useful
Ornaments of the Place, but so many standing Monuments also of the Great Piety,
and Unparalleled Bounty of Her Ancestors. It was They who solicited the
Cause of the Poor and the Infirm, the Lame and Wounded, the Vagrant and
Lunatic, with so particular an Industry and Zeal, as had those Great and
Blessed Effects, which we at This Day see and feel. A Zeal, never to be
forgotten by Men! and which we hope God also will never forget! But, when he
comes down to Visit for the many Ill Effects of Wealth misapplyed, will, for
the sake of it, Visit in Mercy; and consider the Multitude of Her Charities as
well as That of Her Sins; Graciously allowing the One to be in some Measure a
Cover to the Other!

But I have not Room to speak of All These Benefactions at large, and am called
upon, by the Occasion of this Present Assembly, to say somewhat more
particularly of Those of This Place.

I think it, by no means, a fit and decent thing to vye Charities, and to erect
the Reputation of One upon the Ruins of That of another: This is, for the sake
of Charity to forget the True Character, and Essential Properties of it; which
are, as St. Paul tells us, to be kind, and not envy, not to vaunt it self, or
be puffed up, not to behave it self unseemly. However, This, I think, I may
say, with Modesty and Truth, to the Advantage of That Charity to which we
belong; That, though the Bottom of Wealth it stands on be not so Large as that
of Others, yet is it in the Design of it so Comprehensive and Full, as not any
where, I think, to be paralleled.

Here are Supplies to Outward Want and Necessity liberally imparted; The Poor
and Fatherless, not only taken Care of, but so bred up, as to be able to be
useful to the Commonwealth, and perhaps to take care of many Others. Here Idle,
Useless, (and therefore Necessitous) Persons are taught the Rest of Lessons,
Labor; inured to it, and made aquainted with it; and then sent out with such a
Stock of Industry, as will do 'em more real Service than any Other Kind of
Benefaction, if They will but make use of it and improve it.

Here, Loose Men and Women are reduced by wholesome Discipline, and Vagrants by
Confinement: Punishment it self is made an Instrument of Mercy and Goodness;
and as Meat is in some measure provided for the Belly, so is there a Rod for
the Back of Fools. This Particular Instance of Charity would deserve to be
enlarged on: It is a Noble and untrodden Subject; and may ask Your Patience, on
some Other Occasion: But the Time to which I am confined, is now almost run
out; and there are yet Other Instances behind to be Insisted on. For

Here, not only External Necessities are relieved, but Inward Wants also are
supplied; not Ill Manners only are outwardly corrected, but Ill Dispositions
also are bettered, Ill Minds reformed. And One single Instance in this kind is
not confined to the Person that receives the Benefit, but is a Real Piece of
Service to an whole Community. It puts a stop to a spreading Plague; nay, it
gets Ground upon it, by making Those, who have had the Infection, turn
Physicians to Others, by their Example, and Future Good Manners.

Nay, Here, Men recover their Understandings as well as Their Virtues; that is,
They recover Their Very Selves; and are made once again Members of the Rational
Creation, able to See and Know their Duty, and to Guide themselves by that
Knowledge of it; to pay once again their Rational S^^vice to God, and to
maintain a Civil Intercourse with Men.

And, on this Particular Head, that Worthy and Learned Person, deserves a
Grateful mention, who has, by his Eminent Skill assisted the Hospital to be
Charitable in This Way, to much greater Numbers of Lunaticks, than have been
known to be Cured in Former Times.

So that this Great Receptacle of Miserable Objects of every kind, seems to be
like that Medicinal Pool at Bethesda, where there were Virtues proper for every
Malady, all Infirmities were equally Cured in Those who had the Happiness to
get into it. I can carry the Parallel no further, I thank God, -- For the
Prudence and Vigilance of its Governors, as it hitherto has, so, I question
not, always will take Care, that (Contrary to what happened to the Impotent Man
in That Story) They who have most need of the Pool, shall ever have the
Happiness to get first into it. Impartiality is the Soul of Mercy as well as
Justice; and adds Further Degrees of Use and Beauty to the most Useful and
Beautiful Thing in the World.

To give You therefore the true Character of This Great Benefaction, in little
-- Charity is That which comprizes almost all Kinds of Virtues; and This
Foundation, That, which takes in almost all Sorts of Charities!

But though all the Chief kinds of Beneficence are here pursued, yet many
Miserable Objects in Each Kind are not possible to be reached, with that
present Stock of Charity, which belongs either to This Hospital, or to all Her
Other Rivals in This Labor of Love, put together. God open the Hands of the
Rich, and direct the Hearts of the Merciful, to build upon the Foundation Their
Forefathers have laid; and to supply what is wanting, to complete Their
Designs: Approving Themselves Thus, the True Heirs of their Piety and Bounty,
as well as of their Wealth: Else, These Great Buildings and Endowments of
Theirs, like the Virtuous Acts and Achievements of the First Founders of Noble
Families, will become a Reproach, rather than be an Honor, to a Degenerate and
Worthless Posterity.

Consider with Your selves how God has blessed this City for the sake of the
mighty Works that have been done in Her -- I say, for the sake of 'em. -- For
let a Man carry his Thoughts back to that Time, when these Good Designs were
first set a foot and framed, and He shall find that from Thence the Rise and
Growth of This City in Trade, Wealth, Interest, and Greatness, is precisely to
be dated.

May it grow on in the same Proportion! and by the same Means also! That is,
May there still be found such a Number of Charitable Persons in it, as will
Continue the Character that has hitherto belonged to it; and by That means
secure the Continuation of God's Blessings upon it. May Charity go on to have
its Perfect Work, not Living merely upon the Old Stock, not continuing at a
stay, but Growing and Increasing still, as the Necessities of Some Men
increase, and the Abilities of Others to Relieve 'em! And thus spreading it
self to a wider Compass, it shall assuredly also procure a Greater Share of
God's Mercies, and cover a greater Multitude of Our Sins.

That This may be the Case, the Good and Merciful God grant, through the Great
Steward and Dispenser of his Mercies, Christ the Righteous! To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Adoration,
and Praise; Now and Ever! Amen!

FINIS.

