Brief and plain discovery of the Laborers in mystery, BABYLON Generally
called by the name of QUAKERS With a description how the subtle Serpent
deceived them, and made them become proud boasters, calling the tower of Babel
which they are building in their imaginations Mount Zion. With a desire of
their return to him that has confounded their language with a few words in
Love and new sincerity to the People, which they in scorn call Egyptians; from
her that has seen a Theif in the right Hand, and another in the left, and now
desires to embrace Christ the truth, that suffered between them, and remain a
well wisher to all People.

Elizabeth Atkinson.

Printed by P. L. in the Year. 1669.

COurteous Reader, if those few lines shall happen into thy hand, who art yet a
stranger to our proceedings, and should question why I walked so long amongst
them as nine years, and now declare against their principles and practice, I
shall endeavor to satisfy thee with this brief account: after the Lord began
to work upon my soul, and encouraged me in the hope of my redemption, then did
I desire to walk with those that I thought were nearest unto the Lord, and
hearing of this people to cry out against all others that were not of their
persuasion, that they were all out of the way, and likewise hearing them speak
of high seize in themselves, that they were come to the new Jerusalem,
the City of the living God.

Then did I think these were the fittest people to direct me thither, wherefore
I was resolved to follow their directions and examples, then they preached that
we had a light within us, that showed us good and evil, and that I knew was in
me: then they said if we would mind that, it would lead us out of all evil,
thus they set us to feed upon the Tree of knowledge, which indeed was good, but
not for food: but the subtle twining Serpent called it the Tree of life: thus
by harkning unto them was I deluded and blinded to forsake my first love, which
was already espoused unto me by promise, though I had not present enjoyment,
and I with many others have ignorantly followed a stranger, and if the Lord
called unto us at any time to show us where we were; and we began to harken and
stand still a little, then did they tell us tha we were grown sloathful,
because we would not go along with them, then we complained that we saw little
difference between them and the world, except in outward show; for one would
overreach another, and others were envious and backbiters, and many others
things I might name that ought not to be so much as thought of amongst Saints,
then would they slight it over, saying, that we had let in prejudice, that made
us look out at others, we must mind our own condition, thus did they many times
draw us in again, calling good evil, and evil good, saying, it was the Enemy
that would lead us back into Egypt, when it was the Lord that in his mercy
followed us seeking our return, whom I now trust will preserve us.

That we return no more unto folly, now the Lord at last having discovered unto
me the wiles of this old Serpent, I am constrained by his love in my heart to
publish it for the good of others, for when the snare is discovered it is the
better avoided, and though we cannot add any thing to our Maker, because in him
all fullness dwells, yet it is his will that we should improve our talent for the
benefit of our fellow servants, and in obedience to my Lord that has commanded
us to serve one another, in love have I written this desiring the welf are of
all the creation of God, thy friend to serve thee in the love of God.

Elizabeth Atkinson.

THe Lord called the children of Israel out of Egypt, and bid them borrow the
Jewels of the Egyptians: and not long after, of their ornaments they made them
an Image, and called it God, ye people called Quakers, of a truth God has
called you out of the broad way of wickedness, and many Jewels were you adorned
with, but you went not far before you committed Idolatry with them, concluding
your selves to be saved by your works: which were but your ornaments in your
journey, slighting the Lord that had called you to a habitation of rest,
wherefore the Lord that commanded there Jewels to be taken from them and ground
to powder, has taken yours from you, and now your nakedness begins to appear:
for though you have gotten counterfeit ones, they are so thin that we begin to
see through them

For those that for a time practiced honesty in their callings, are now turned
deceivers: and those that for a time were content with their own wifes, are now
turned Adulterers: lusting after other men's, yet these retain your form, though
they are out of the power of Godliness, and though for a time you may content
your selves with the works of your own imaginations, yet God will not be robbed
of his honor, for because of your provocations he is discovering you to the
view of all people, and if the Lord should call me out of this Tabernacle of
clay, yet he will double the portion of his spirit upon others to testify the
truth. For he that works will work until he that lets be taken out of the
way the will of my God be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, the Scribes and
Pharisees trusted in their righteousness as well as you, yet they remained
condemned, because they would not believe in the Son of God, yet these would be
guides, though Christ calls them blind ones, but there was and is some humble
beggars that lie at the feet of Jesus for the opening of their eyes, but these
will be cast out of the Assembly, yet he will be glorified whether you will or
no,

I could wish you were sensible how the pride of your imagined knowledge has
puffed you up, thinking to climb up into heaven by your building, which is seen
to be but Mystery Babylon, though you have raised it very high, for it i^ not
built upon the rock Christ.

If you were not so heady and high minded, you would be willing to learn as
well as to teach, Job. 34. 32.
Job the servant of the Lord said, what I see not teach thon me, but ye say we
see and desire to know no more, but except you come down in Humility from the
high Tower of Mystery Babylon, you will not see your mistake at the root, which
is the cause of all these bad fruits that are growing amongst you, In the
beginng God made the world, by Christ the word, and the bright shining of his
life was the light of men, this was by creation, and this Christ is indeed the
true light that enlightens every one that comes into the world: and by this
light man knew the will of his Maker, but being disobedient thereunto he fell
into the wrath of God, it being the just reward of his rebellion but the Lord
being full of compassion toward the work of his hands, sends his beloved Son
out of his bosom to tread the wine press of his wrath, and redeem poor
miserable man again out of it, and herein is the rich mercy, and admired loving
kindness of the Lord, unto the Sons and Daughters of men, but what will become
of those that tread this mercy under foot, it was by faith in the promise of
this Redeemer, that all the Saints were saved under the dispensation of the
Law, for they believed he that had promised was faithful, therefore their
belief was the ground of their obedience, and not their obedience the ground of
their belief, and when the fullness of time was come, that the promise came to
be fulfilled, many would not believe that he was the Savior, for had they
believed him, they would have received his doctrine, for those that truly
believe in the Lord Jesus, will have good works spring up in them as the fruits
of their faith if they abide in it.

As the fruits of unbelief is crucyfying the Lord of glory, wherefore when his
Disciples were convinced, they labored withal diligence to convince them that
he was the Christ, John in his testimony bears record to the people that he was
the very Christ, by whom the world and all things therein was made, whose light
shined in them to know the will of their maker, but we have all disobeyed him,
and become children of wrath, wherefore Christ came to be a sacrifice for sin
for the whole world, if they will believe in him, these things by the light
within are showed to us, but for this doctrine you have broched, to mind only
the light within, saying it is the Savior, you have erred not knowing the
Scripture, nor the power of God, for the light within is but the manifestation
of him who is the Savior, it does indeed show and discover to man how he lies
condemned for his disobedience* but this is not the satisfaction for thy sins O
man, but it is Christ that has satisfied the Fathers justice, for he trod the
wine press alone, without us, though he manifests it in us, for though we see
our selves fallen into the wrath, yet it is he whose light shines in all
places, that m^st lift us up out of the horrible pit, if this glance only which
shines in our hearts had been sufficient, God would not have sent his son to
shed his blood for our transgressions: but he was the sacrifice that all the
Types and Figures under the Law pointed at, and those that looked for salvation
waited for, and desired to see, these dyed in the faith, having seen the
promise afar off, but not obtained it, but what will remain for those that
neglect so great salvation.

But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, do you not tread the blood of
the Covenant under feet, that scoffingly say, if that were it that washed at
Jerusalem, there had need have been abundance of it, to sprinkle so many
consciences, which does sufficiently show your sensual earthly spirits, that
knows not the mystery of faith, by which the woman was healed that had the
bloody issue, touching the hem of his garment, and yet the spirit of Lucifer
has so far exalted some of you to say you are equal with God, which is
contrary to the testimony in Scripture, that says, when we have done all we
are unprofitable servants, for we have done, but that which was our duty to
do. What can we add to God, in whom all fullness dwells, we are to be obedient
unto him who can kill and make alive, which I am sure you cannot do, God is
light, and in him no darkness at all, but the light in you may be darkened, and
great is that darkness, why are ye so foolish to deny the fountain because you
have had a little taste from the stream, shall the plant say because it was
refresht by the beams of the Sun, I am equal with the Sun, surely no, this
would not be right, for though Christ who was equal with God came in ^he form
of a servant, and in the likeness of sinful flesh calling his Disciples
brethren, yet it was not testified of any of them, that the Godhead dwelt in
them bodily, neither did they call themselves the seed, but they acknowledged
themselves bought with a price: by him who is the seed in whom the God-bead
dwelt, but the Serpent thinks to cover himself with bringing Scripture though
he preverteth it to a wrong sense, for though they comforted one another in the
hope of the enjoyment of what he had purchased for them, if they did abide in
the faith to the end, saying as he was, so are we in this present world,
knowing that as he endured the contradictions of wicked men, and trials, and
tribulations amongst unbeleivers, so they contented themselves to be used like
unto their Lord, seeing and knowing right well, that all those unbeleivers lay
in wickedness, and they by faith in their hearts had the earnest of a better
possession, which the first born of God that could not sin, because the seed
remained in him, purchased for them, but Satan has crept in amongst you,
being transformed like to an Angel of light.

And now being deceived, you labor to deceive others: calling your selves
Saints, and your immaginations truth, and teling people they must be perfect,
though I know many of you to be grievous Hypocrites, not walking in the fear of
the Lord; with a perfect heart: for though you speak high swelling words, as
though you were inspired with an infallible Spirit, calling the light that
shows good and evil Salvation, which is but a glance from him who came to be
Salvation. For all that would believe in him, we may refresh our thirsty Souls
by the way in the stream but if we will be cleansed, to go up into the City of
God, we must go unto the fountain, we see that you subtly persuade us to rest
under a Covenant of works, which neither you nor your Fathers ever kept, and so
to set down short of the Fountain of our mercies.

If a man that is forewarned by the Master of the house; will out of curiosity
meddle with an Instrument that will wound him, he must apply then himself to
the Physician if he will be cured; for the knowing that he should not have done
it, will not cure him, but augment his pain to think of his folly, that he
would not be ruled by him that knew the danger, neither will the light or
knowledge of our duty save us from the punishment of our disobedience, but man
must go to the Physician of our Souls for cure, and if we believe and follow
his directions we shall be certainly cured.

I have not written this to strengthen the hands of evil doers that say they
believe and do not but that people might not build upon a wrong foundation as
this people has done: and though I expect no other but hatred for telling you
the truth, yet I remain a Lover of your Souls, and desire your return to him
that first called you

Elizabeth Atkinson.

IN the love of God that he has shed abroad in our hearts, do I come to give
you a visit, who profess nothing but the common belief, that is, that ye shall
be saved by the Merits of Jesus Christ, I beseech you to consider your
condition while it is called to day, before the night come upon you, and let
not the Devil deceive your souls, persuading you that you have faith when you
have not: how shall we believe you have faith, when we see not the fruits of it
brought forth, for all things are known by their fruits: and this we know that
the fruit of faith is righteousness, and to do as we would be done unto, but
truly Friends, ^^ear that many of you are so far from having this experience of
the work of God: that you have not yet considered it.

Therefore for your sakes, am I willing to declare something of he loving
kindness of my God toward my soul: I in times past as well as others have
harkned to ^he inticements of this subtle Serpent; and disobeyed my maker
until the cool of the Evening, that my God was pleased to call unto me, and
then was I as^amed: and when I came to be sensible how I was fallen into the
wrath of God by my disobedience, then did my God appear with a comfortable
promise of redemption, which caused a great joy to spring upon me, that the
Lord that I had provoked by my disobedience, should mercifully offer a Covenant
of peace, and reconciliation: but this condition was joined to the Covennat,
that I should harken diligently to the voice of Christ, the Mediator of the
Covenant, and this was the Doctrine, he that will be my Disciple must follow me
in the regeneration.

Now Friend^ this know, that since the Lord was mercifully pleased to call unto
me, I have found the Law made manifest in me* which made me see sin to be
exceeding sinful: and though under this schoolmaster, I have remained in hope,
yet I do acknowledge I have many times deserved the rod, though I can truly
say, I have not stubbornly or wilfully offended, but by the subtil^y of the
Enemy have been drawn into snares, which has caused my Soul to lament, for
this was often set before me, they that sin wilfully after they have received
the knowledge of the truth, their remains no more sacrifice for sin.

Now Friends if any of you have heard the call of God, and desire to make your
election sure, wait upon him that has called us, with earnest Prayers and
supplications, for our God that has promised deliverance to the Captives,
says, He will be sought unto, and he will cut the work short in righteousness
for the E^ect sak^. Acquaint your selves with the Scriptures, and slight them
not, as the manner of some is, saying, they had known as much if they had had
no Scripture, which is a plain Demonstration of their slighting the giver, for
all Scripture is given forth by inspiration, and was profitable for
instruction, which the wise man loves, though the fool hate it, and through
faith in Jesus Christ are able to make us wise to Salvation: for though Life
and Salvation be not in the Scripture, yet they truly testify of him* who is
the Life and Salvation of all them that believe, and abide in the faith to the
end; they were given for our learning, (and we know that the gifts of God are
not in vain, but to be received with thanksgiving, we have the comfort to
find our selves companions with the Saints of old.

In our spiritual travel's and our experiences since we set our faces Sion
ward, and as we come to be experienced in the Mystery, we find it to agree with
the history, which adds strength to our hope above all things, let us pray
earhestly that we may be endewed with a right spirit, for there is many spirits
gone forth into the world secretly, working strange delusions* but the Lord is
discovering this old Serpent though he transform himself into several shapes:
appearing in some like sheep in their behaviors, but come to try them, and you
shall find them full of all subtilties far from the real innocence of sheep,
and these are strong builders in Mystery Babylon: for though they slight the
Scriptures, yet to shelter themselves they will many times bring Scripture,
though in a confused manner, only to maintain their opinions and imaginations:
and when they are confuted by plain Scripture, they will put it off by
evations, either turning it into an Allegory, or telling you, you have nothing
to do with that Scripture, but the time hastens apace that all secret things
shall be revealed upon the house top* some others this old Serpent has deluded
after another manner, lulling them asleep in security, persuading themselves
all is well, because Christ dyed for sinners, and this the Devils know, for
they believe and tremble, but friends be not so deceived, to think you are come
to the end of the warfare, before you have begun to fig^t under Christ's banner,
retire thy self in stilness into thy quiet chamber, and see if thou art not
taking part with the Enemy and doing him service, and if thou find it so
then thou art not a servant of Christ, for no man can serve two Masters, as the
Spirit of the wicked one works in the children of disobedience to do evil, so
does the Spirit of Christ work in the believer to do well, for he works the
will and the deed, and if thou find not thy will to be changed and
regenerated, that whereas formerly thou did obey the Tempter, now it is thy
whole delight to obey thy Maker, if it be not so with thee thou art not come to
the beginning of the work viz. to fight under Christ's banner, for though he be
the Captain of our Salvation, yet we as good Soldiers must fight under him,
being armed with that Armor he gives us, which is the shei^d of Faith, and the
breast plate of Righteousness, now seeing the time draws near that we must
all appear before the Tribunal seat of the righteous Judge, who will reward
every one according to their deeds, not their words, those that have been
faithful to their Captain, though never so little were committed to their
trust, shall enter into the possession he has purchased, but those that are
found under the banner of the Enemy, though they may cry Lord, Lord, and say
they have prophysied in his name, and cast out Devils, yet they shall not
enter, many have been called, but they are not all chosen, for by the subtilty
of the Enemy transforming himself, they have been deceived and this has been
by not keeping humble and low, to follow the Lord, as he would ^ently lead,
exerciseing them under what dispensation he pleases but they would come
before, elimbing in their heart, and this has wearied them, and caused them to
slumber, and then did this painted guide step before them and now they are
following him and will not see their mistake, for he blinds them with a seeming
righteousness, because they should not look under his vizard, and this puffs
them up with pride, saying they are the people and none besides them, it will
be hard for these to be renewed, and brought down again to the acknowledgment
of the truth. Except they hearken to the voice of the Lord behind them, which
calls them back again, saying this is the way walk in it, now you that have
not yet heard the voice calling you out of the broad way, stand still and
hearken until thou hear him call unto thy soul, and when thou have his mercy
tendered unto thee, proffering thee the Covenant of peace, and reconciliation
believe him, but run not before him, for he is faithful that promises, and
mind the condition of the Covenaut, and follow wim with thy eye fixed upon him,
and if he will have thee under a School master for a while be content and learn
thy lesson, for as thou come forward, thou growest nearer to the Mark of the
high calling, for he is the end of the law, therefore let us press forward in
faith and patience that we may come to the end of our race with joy. O that we
may never forget to wait upon the fountain of wisdom, for our Enemy, is
subtle but praises be to the Lord for ever that does discover his devices, and
as he has discovered the mystery of iniquity, so I trust he will water us with
the dew of Heaven, that we may grow in ahe mystery of Godliness, and this is my
desire who am a lover of the souls of all people, though not of the Sectarian
contention.

Elizabeth Atkinson.

FINIS.

