THE SPIRITS VOICE Concerning HIMSELF: OR, A Faithful and Clear DISCOVERY Of
the Operations of the SPIRIT IN The Hearts of the Saints.

Omnes enim quando oramus, mendici Dei sumus, ante januam magni patris familias
stamus, imo etiam prosternimur, supplices ingemiscimus aliquid volentes
accipere, and ipsum aliquid ipse Deus est.

August. de verbis Domini, Sermon. 15. Ad omnem sanctam operationem ab homine
peragendam, requiritur, non modo gratia regenerationis hominem habitualiter
disponens, sed and motio Dei gratiosa, ipsum actualiter movens, sine qua vel
sola, licet propter grataim regenerationis dicatur posse been operari, fieri
non potest, ut actubene operetur.

Twiss. Vind. Gratiae, etc. BY PETER ATKINSON, Minister of the everlasting
GOSPEL.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Lock for the Author, 1659.

To the Christian Reader.
IN trial of spirits (Christian Reader) keep always in mind this necessary
Truth concerning the Spirit of Truth, which is, Joh. 16.14
That the Spirit of truth glorifies Jesus Christ; Hence thou may safely
conclude, That those spirits that deny Jesus Christ, that rob him of his glory,
are not of God. Those that with the Arians, Familists, and Paul Best, (none of
the best) deny Christ's Divinity; or with the Eutychians, his Humanity; or with
the Nestorians, teach that he bath two persons; or with the Monothelites, that
he has only one Will; or with the Macedonians and Valentinians, that he
brought his Body from Heaven; or with the Socinians, deny his incarnation and
satisfaction for sin; or with the Quaker deny justification by the sufferings
of Christ at Jerusalem; these do not glorify, but dishonor Christ, and so are
not led by the holy Ghost. This Caution may be one preservative against poison;
If thou would know more concerning the holy spirit, read over this little
Treatise; the time will not be long, thy labor (J hope) will not be lost; it is
short; good reason; the world is full of Books. The Communion of the Holy
Ghost be with thee. Amen.

Thine ^.P. ^

THE SPIRITS VOICE CONCERNING HIMSELF.
ALthough some scoff at the Saints of God in reference to their having the
spirit of Grace in them; and others deluded and presumptuous, boast of the
Spirit of God, who are indeed inspired with an evil spirit, as Zedekiah the
false Prophet, 1 King. 22.24. and some audaciously assert, That grace may be
lost, and the spirit taken away from such as are truly Saints; yet the truth
is, the spirit of grace is in all those, only in those, and never departs from
any of those, who are indeed born of him, and renewed by him.

Search Divine Records, you shall find how God has promised to pour his spirit
upon his people, Isa. 44.3,4,5. as also that he shall not depart from them,
Isa. 59.21. He is said to be given unto them, Romans 5.5. To dwell in them, Romans
8.11. 1 Cor. 3.16. to abide with them, John 15.16. They are the habitation of
^od by his spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. the House of God, Heb. 3 6. they are the temple
of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. yea, their bodies are the temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
6.19.

Now for the prevention of self-deceiving, and for our singular comfort and
encouragement in God's ways, let us diligently examine our selves whether the
spirit be in us, by these blessed effects of the spirit following.

1. They that have the spirit know all things, as the Apostle says, 1 John
2.20.
Ye have an unction from that holy one, (that is the spirit from Christ your
Head) and ye know all things; in the Syriac it is, Ye know, or discern every
man; as if St. John had said, Ye know those false Teachers that went out from
us, and were not of us; and it is according to that of our Savior, Ye shall
know them by their fruits, partly by their pride contention, separation; partly
by their Doctrine; for if any man do Gods will, he shall know the doctrine
whether it be of God; the Saints know false Doctrine so as not to know it, own
it, but disallow it; They know not (says Christ) the voice of strangers: Also
they know false Teachers by the fruit of their Doctrine in their followers,
which is neglect of duty, looseness of life.

But this is not all, for in the 27. verse the spirit is said to teach them so,
that they needed not that any man should teach them; and its said also, That he
had thus taught them; see the words, that is, They needed not that any man
should teach them any other thing, any otherwise then the spirit had taught
them. Now for the spirits teaching, observe how God is said to send his word by
his spirit in his Prophets, Zech. 7.12. the spirit of the Lord was upon Christ
to preach the Gospel, Luke 4.18. and the Apostles are said to speak the things
of God in the words which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. therefore the
Holy Ghost taught the Saints by the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles; and so
the words of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, are the words of the Holy
Ghost; these words he teaches and makes known unto the Saints, other words
they needed not know; none are like these, nor more words, these make wise unto
salvation.

Further, they know all things necessary to be known; they know the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; they know Christ and him crucified; they know
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that being rich for their sakes, he
became poor, that they through his poverty might be made rich. They know that
they are translated from death to life, that they have everlasting life, that
all things work together for their good.

2. The spirit of God being in a man, does bear witness with his spirit that he
is a child of God, Romans 8.16. These two spirits, the spirit of man
spiritualized, the conscience purged from dead works, which is a thousand
witnesses; and the Holy Ghost (the spirit of truth) joining with man's spirit
for confirmation of this necessary truth, do make use of the spirit's words in
Scripture, and the spirit's work upon man's heart, after this manner.

Those that come out from amongst the ungodly, are separate, and touch not the
unclean thing; they are God's children, he has promised to be a Father to
such, and that they shall be unto him sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.16,17. But
thou art (say these witnesses to a man) come out, art separate, do not touch
the unclean thing, therefore thou art a child of God. Further, they testify
after this manner; Those that are poor in spirit mourn, hunger and thirst after
righteousness, are blessed, and so Gods children; but thou art poor in spirit,
do mourn, hunger and thirst after righteousness, Ergo, thou art a child of
God. And thus these that receive Christ to them, he gives power to become the
sons of God; those that love those that are begotten, are also begotten of God,
and are his own dear children; but thou (say these witnesses to a man) have
received the Lord Christ (though with a shaking hand) love dearly God's
children, therefore thou art a child of God.

3. The spirit of God is the spirit of promise, and the godly are said to be
sealed therewith, Ephesians. 1.13. God has given his people promises, confirmed
these promises by oath, added thereunto outward seals, Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord; and as though this were not sufficient, he gives an inward seal,
the spirit of his Son; the spirit discovers unto them the fullness and freeness
of the covenant; the preciousness, certainty, and infallibility of the
promises; so they are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, and hereupon
being sealed, they set to their seal that God is true, John. 3.33.

4. The spirit also in the godly, seals them unto the day of redemption. Ephesians.
4.30. The day of Judgment though it shall be a day of wrath to the wicked, yet
it shall be a day of redemption unto the Saints; they shall then be redeemed
from the grave; they shall all be fully and everlastingly delivered from all
evils; the spirit of God assures the Saints hereof; so that when they hear
Christ say, Surely I come quickly; they do no say, God forbid; but Amen, Even
so come Lord Jesus.

5. Accordingly the spirit is the Earnest of our inheritance; Ephesians. 1.14.
Believers are heirs, heirs of a country the Patriarchs sought after, a House
whose builder and founder is God; a Kingdom that cannot be moved; an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven
for them; the spirit of God given to the Saints, is the earnest of this
country, house, kingdom, inheritance; somewhat of it securing unto them the
whole in time; the first fruits of a plentiful harvest.

6. If the spirit of God be in us, he sheds (says the Apostle) the love of God
abroad in our hearts: Romans 5.5. He gives us to behold what manner of love the
Father has showed unto us, how he loved us first; how his love is undeserved;
how it is abundant; how of children of wrath and hell, he has made us children
of God, heirs of God, coheirs with Jesus Christ, how it is an everlasting love:
God will not of a most merciful Father become a most inexorable Judge, as the
Arminians says: hereupon God lifts up the light of his countenance upon us, we
feel his love, our hearts are warmed and ravished therewith, so that we return
love for love, yea we love God above our lives.

7. Another effect of the spirit of God, is seasonably to comfort the hearts of
the children of God: I will pray the Father, (says Christ) and he shall send
you another comforter, John 14.16. he comforts the Saints concerning all their
sins committed, evils suffered, the displeasure of God, assaults of Satan,
malice of men; against the Law in the members rebelling, that body of death
pressing, and all spiritual wants pinching and grieving.

8. Another blessed effect of the spirit of God, is Joy: The kingdom of God
(says the Apostle, Romans 14 11.) consists not in meat and drink, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: this Joy is in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3.3. in God's favor, Psalm. 4.7. in the word, Psalm. 119.111. Thy
testimonies are the rejoicing of my heart, in hope of the glory of God, Romans
5.2. It Is a joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. It Is a joy that a
stranger shall not meddle withal, Prove. 14.10. and that no man shall take from
a child of God, John 16.22. It Is a joy attained by the written word: These
things (says John) I write unto you that your joy may be full, 1 John 1.4.

9. The good spirit of God helps the infirmities of the Saints, Romans 8.26.
strengthens them with strength in the inward man, Ephesians. 3.16. they of
themselves are infirm, weak, afflictions are a burden too heavy; Satan and the
old man are too strong; the work they have to do is too great; through the
presence and assistance of the spirit they have strong consolation in the midst
of troubles, their faith is strengthened, they give glory to God, their love is
strong as death, which many waters cannot quench; and notwithstanding the
difficulties and impediments of holy duties, they are resolved to go on.

10. Accordingly the spirit of God emboldeneth believers to appear for the
truth and ways of God, Acts 4.8.13. We are of our selves timorous, prone to
shrink and shame all: the holy spirit of God is wont to put courage into the
godly, that they dare hazard both Estate and life in the cause of Christ.

11. Likewise the spirit of God makes intercession for the Saints with
groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26,27. they know not what to ask as
they should, the spirit of God is the spirit of prayer, and helps them not
only to say, but cry Abba Father: Gal. 4.6. to cry day and night: Luke 18.7.
to cry to God with their whole heart: Psalm. 119.145. We groan (says the
Apostle) being burdened: 2 Cor. 5.4. burdened with the body of death, sins,
temptations, afflictions, oftentimes with the sense or fear of God's
displeasure, and come thus burdened into God's presence, and pray to God with
groans, yea groans that cannot be uttered.

12. The Saints with open face beholding the glory of the Lord, are by the
spirit (says the Apostle) transformed into the same image, from glory to
glory: 2 Cor. 3.18. the Saints are glorious in this world, their glory is
spiritual, it consists in the image of Christ and of God, in righteousness and
true holiness, the spirit does change them from one degree of this glory unto
another, till they be perfectly glorious in the kingdom of heaven.

13. And as the spirit transforms into the image of Christ, so he is wont to
bring the words of Christ (which they have heard) to their remembrance, John
14.26. this is not below the spirit of God, for he is the spirit of the Son,
and the Son's words are his words also; therefore he helps the weak and
slippery memories of the Saints, brings God's word to their remembrance, that
thereby they may resist satan, answer gainsayers, edify and comfort one
another, preserve themselves from sin, and comfort themselves in a time of
trouble.

14. Further, the spirit of God leads the saints, Romans 8.14. they cannot stand
but as he upholds them; they cannot go but as he leads them, he leads them in
the old and good way, in the way of truth, in the way of God, of holiness and
righteousness: in the way of wisdom, humility, meekness, uprightness, peace: In
a word, in the way of Gods commandments, the way of heaven: I will put (says
the Lord) my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments, and do them, Ezekiel. 6.27. And this he does by his
voice in the Messengers of Christ sounding in their ears, and his power and
gracious influence upon their hearts.

Now concerning the Law, called the Commandment, two commandments, ten words;
know this for thy future and eternal good, That Adam through his lost the image
of God, conformity in heart, and life to the Law: Christ as Priest (besides
other things) has purchased conformity to the Law: God in Christ has promised
this conformity: Christ as a Prophet he reveals the Law; as a King, subjects
man's will unto it; and for this cause puts his spirit in the hearts of his
people: God gives them faith whereby they believe, that God according to his
gracious covenant will pardon their sins, and put his Laws in their minds, and
write them in their hearts, give them to obey the Law, and repentance also,
even sorrow for breaking the commandments, with an endeavor of obedience;
therefore the Antinomian in slighting of the Law of God, (I speak not of it as
a covenant of works) slights Christ's three-fold-Office, slights the covenant
of Grace, the Office of the holy Ghost, bewrayes his want of the Divine nature,
the image of God, the new man, which is subject to the Law of God, and to have
a carnal mind, which neither is, nor can be subject to the law; he knows not
what Faith is, what repentance means. O Antinomian, that say Christ must be
all and man nothing; is Christ the Lord thy God? and do thou worship him?
according to that Psalm. 45.ii. And whether art thou of the number of those that
every where call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord? according to that 1
Cor. 1.2. 2. Whether is Christ thy leader and commander? and do thou obey
him? as it is Isa. 55.4. He commands thee to repent, believe, ask, seek, knock,
strive to enter in at the strait gate, to deny thy self, take up thy cross, to
watch and pray, to say, Hallowed be thy Name; thy kingdom come, thy will be
done, etc. to say, Forgive us our trespasses: to pray in good earnest for
pardon of thy sins daily: Do thou obey Christ herein? if not, though thou
say that Christ is thy all, yet thou do but mock Christ, and make him
nothing. I fear thou dreamest (according to a discovery of thee, and such as
thou art) that Christ was but a mere man, and that coming unto God by faith, he
was godded with God, and that herein he is an example and pattern unto us, and
thou imitating Christ herein, thou likewise art godded with God, equal to
Christ, yea past him in respect of any further use thou have of him, and a
Christ to others: O Antinomian, God ere long will awake thee out of thy dream
concerning his Son and thy self, fear shall surprise thee, the terrors of God
shall compass thee, trouble and anguish shall take hold upon thee.

15. The spirit of God is a free spirit, and does establish the people of God:
Establish me (says David) with thy free spirit: he is free in his operations,
he blows where he lists; his influences and breathings are gracious, Psalm.
51.12. he frees the spirits of the saints for, and in duties of piety and
mercy; he does stablish, strengthen, and settle the saints according to the
promise, 1 Pet. 5.10. he does not suffer the souls in whom he dwells, to be
unstable souls, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, to turn Anabaptists, seperatists, Quakers, Blasphemers; to turn with
the dog to the vomit, and the sow to the wallowing in the mire, and the unclean
spirit to return with seven other spirits worse then himself, that so his
latter end should be worse then his beginning.

Lastly, they that are possessed with the holy Ghost, are far from sinning
against the holy Ghost, yea they are troubled at the thought of that sin; this
sin is not as some fancy, when a man will not be convinced by miracles that
Jeius is the Christ: this sin is after illumination, conviction: It is says
Christ, a word against the holy Ghost; it is blaspheming and reproaching the
holy Ghost, as we read expressly in the Evangelists; those that after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world by the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, do
depart from the holy commandment given unto them, and wallow in sin, that sin
willingly after they have received the knowledge of the truth, do despite (it is
said expressly) to the spirit of grace, and are guilty of this sin: see Heb. 10.
2 Pet. 2. The Pharisees sinned against the holy ghost in saying that that
spirit by which Christ spoke and wrought Miracles, was an unclean spirit: Mark
3: 28,29,30.

And do not our Quakers (those I mean who were enlightened) sin against the
holy ghost, in saying that that spirit in Christ's Ministers by which they
preach, which is the same spirit, is an unclean spirit, a Devil?

Yea; they that are possessed with the holy ghost are not only far from sinning
against the holy ghost, but they are afraid of those sins we read of in the
Scriptures, viz. Tempting, resisting, and vexing of the holy spirit of God; yea
further, of quenching, or grieving of him; and when as through sin he is
grieved, their spirits are grieved, their souls are greatly troubled, they cry
out, Take not thy holy spirit from us, Psalm. 51.11.

But some may say, It seems that some that are enlightened taste of the
heavenly gift, are made partakers of the holy ghost, fall away, and so fall
short of heaven.

I answer, The seed of saving grace once sown in the heart of a man though it
be but as a grain of Mustard Seed, does never perish, but through the spirit of
grace is still preserved; this grace in the very first moment it is infused,
created, differs much from that we call common grace; it is a thousand times
better, a fruit of God's eternal love, purchased with Christ's blood, and
promised only to such as God sprinkles with this blood, Ezekiel. 36.25,26. and
differenceth a man's duties from the duties of the ungodly, both in respect of
the manner and end; as also though it be but a dram, it denominateth a man
gracious, and in time is prevalent against corruptions. The spirit of God may
(in reference to the glory of God, and the churches good) inlighten the
reprobate by the Ministry of the word, so as he may be much affected and
reformed, yet he never attains a new heart, a good and honest heart, he never
becomes a new creature, all his reluctance and duties are in reference to
himself; his faith is feigned, his love is feigned, he himself but a wretched
hypocrite at the best; there is always a vast distance even betwixt him and
the broken Reed; betwixt his grace (if you call it grace) and the smoking flax;
the root of the matter is not in him, neither any good thing toward the Lord:
Jehu though he was zealous for the Lord, and Judas forward for the poor, yet
they had no spark of true grace: Solomon when he was at the lowest, had a
spark, though no more, and that buried under many ashes: he had somewhat of the
Divine nature, they nothing of that nature; his did differ much from theirs,
even in the species, form, and esse thereof.

Hence it necessarily follows, that they who are not enlightened, know not all
things necessary to be known unto salvation, are not comforted, sealed, have
not the love of God shed abroad in their hearts, do not boldly profess the
truth, do not call upon the Name of the Lord with groans, do not walk in the
ways of God, etc. however they may pretend to the spirit of grace, yet they
never had, neither as yet have him dwelling in them.

Further I add, that they which speak evil of the Scriptures, are void likewise
of the spirit, for the Scriptures are the words, inspiration, and breath of the
spirit of God; holy men of God spoke (says the Apostle) as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20,21. Paul tells us, that the words of David, Psalm.
95.7. are the words of the holy ghost, Heb. 3.7. As the Holy Ghost says,
Harden not your hearts: the holy ghost is said seven times in the second and
third chapters of the Revelation, to speak unto the churches those words which
St. John from the mouth of Jesus Christ writ unto the churches.

Lastly: Jude says expressly, that such as despise Dominion, speak evil of
Dignities, go in Cain's way, run greedily after the error of Balaam, gainsay
with Core, that speak great swelling words, and separate themselves, are
sensual not having the spirit. There is a separation lawful, warrantable
necessary he members of the church of Corinth are called out from among the
Idolatrous heathen, and commanded to separate from them, 2 Cor. 6. but not any
member of the church of Corinth was commanded to come out of the church it
self, or to separate from the body thereof, though it was very corrupt, such a
separation is expressly forbidden in the Book of God, Heb. 10.

It Is lawful, yea necessary, to separate from the church of Rome, it is Babylon,
out of it we are called: this heavenly call we have so far obeyed, as that we
are condemned for heretics, have resisted unto blood, many have been burnt at
stakes: Have they charity and the spirit of God, that dare forsake, and also
condemn our Assemblies?

But some may say upon the reading of this Discourse, What means should we use
that God may pour down his spirit upon us?

I answer, We must ask the spirit of God: Christ says, Luke 11.13. If ye who
are evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to those that ask him? It Is duty, not
presumption to pray for him.

2. We must attend upon the word, it is the chariot of the spirit, and turn also
at God's reproof: Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my reproof, says the Lord: Behold I
will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.

3. We must thirst after the Water of life, the spirit of God: I will (says
the Lord) pour water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will
pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring, Isa. 44.3.

4. We must believe on the (...) God, Christ inviting the thirsty to come unto
him, and promising water of life unto them: John 7.37,38,39. It Is said, This he
spoke of the spirit which they that believe on him should receive.

5. Let us distinguish betwixt that new heart and spirit which God according to
his promise puts in his people, and God's holy spirit which he has promised to
put within them: We must necessarily distinguish betwixt grace, and the spirit
of grace; the new creature, and the Creator: The Lord says in Ezekiel. 36.26. A
new heart will I give unto you, and a new spirit will I put within you: And
verse 27. he adds another promise, and says he, I will put my spirit within
you. And the Apostle Romans 8.9. says, Ye are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit, if so be the spirit of God dwell in you: Now if any have not the spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. Distinguish also betwixt the spirit's being in a
man in respect of his essence, and in respect of his influence and operations:
The Lord promises in many places (says Orthodox Downam in his Christian
Warfare) to give unto us his holy spirit, which is not only to be understood
of the gifts and graces of the spirit, but also of the virtue and efficacy of
the spirit dwelling in us.

Let us also lean upon the good spirit of God, trust in him for direction,
guidance, assistance in all things, let us give him glory herein, and he will
be with us, quicken, settle, lead and perfect us. To whom with the Father and
his dear Son Jesus Christ, be glory for ever. Amen. Amen.

REader, because some pages are vacant, I thought good to put down certain
railing speeches of the Papists against our Protestant-Ministers, that it may
appear to all our hearers that the Quakers are either disciples to the Papists,
or their confederates, or at the least led, or rather misled by the same spirit.

Some of their railings are these that follow: The Devil possesses you. The
spirit of the Devil is within you. The Devil reigns in your hearts. Ye are
moved by the instinct of Satan. The Devil has you fast bound. Ye are the
children of the Devil. Ye are the limbs of Antichrist. Ye are the practiced
Ministers of Antichrist. Your Babilonical tower. Ye are fast bound in Satan's
fetters. Ye have learned of the Devil. The spirit of Satan is in you. Satan
holds you captive. Thou Heretic Judas, Beelzebub. You are Miscreants.


These railing speeches, with many others, are gathered out of the writings of
Mr. Harding and other Popish-writers, by those two famous Divines, B. Jewel,
and D. Willet, and are set down in B. Jewel's Defense of the Apology of the
Church of England, and Dr. Wil-let's Four Pillars of Popery.

Call to mind good Reader, what railing speeches thou have heard out of the
mouths of the Quakers, and compare them with these railings of the Papists, and
then judge whether they or we be more popish.

FINIS.

