The Original and Growth of PRINTING.
COncerning the Time of bringing this Excellent ART into England, and by whose
Expense and Procurement it was brought; Modern Writers of good Reputation do
most Erroniously agree together. Mr. Stow, in his Survey of London, speaking of
the 37th year of Henry the sixth his Reign, which was in 1459. says, That the
Noble Science of PRINTING was about this time found in Germany at Mentz by John
Guttenberg a Knight, And that William Caxton of London Mercer, brought it into
England about 1471. And first practiced the same in the Abbey of St. Peter at
Westminster; With whom Sir Rich. Baker in his Chronicle agrees throughout. And
Mr. Howell in his Historical Discourse of London and Westminster, agrees with
both the former in the Time, Person, and Place in general; but more
particularly declares the place in Westminster to be the Almory there; And that
Islip Abbot of Westminster set up the first Press of Book-Printing that ever
was in England. These three famous Historians having filled the World with the
supposed truth of this Assertion, (Although possibly it might arise through the
mistake of the first Writer only, whose Memory I perfectly honor) makes it the
harder Task upon me to undeceive the World again: Nor would I undertake this
Work, but under a double notion; As I am a Friend to Truth, and so it is unfit
to suffer one Man to be entitled to the worthy Achievements of another. And as
a Friend to my self, not to lose one of my best Arguments of Intituling the
King to this ART in his private Capacity.

Historians must of necessity take many things upon trust, they cannot with
their own but with the Eyes of others see what things were done before they
themselves were, Bernardus non videt omnia; It Is not then impossible they
should mistake. I shall now make it appear they have done so from their Own, as
well as from other Arguments: Mr. Stows Expressions are very dubious, and the
matter expressed very Improbable; He says PRINTING was found in Mentz, which
presupposes it was practiced some where else before, and lost: And further,
That 'twas found in the Reign of Henry the sixth, in 1450. and not brought into
England till Eleven years in the succeeding Reign of Edward the Fourth, being
twelve years after, as if it had been lost again. If this be true, there was as
little Rarity as Expedition in obtaining it, the age of twelve years time
having intervened, and so indeed it might be the Act of a Mercer rather than a
more eminent Person: But when I consider what great advantage the Kingdom in
general receives by it, I could not but think a public Person and a public
Purse must needs be concerned in so public a Good. The more I Considered of
this, the more inquisitive I was to find out the truth of it: At last, a Book
came to my hands Printed at Oxford, in 1468. which was three years before any
of the recited Authors would allow it to be in England; which gave me some
reward for my Curiosity, and encouragement to proceed further: And in
prosecution of this Discovery, the same most worthy Person who trusted me with
the aforesaid Book, did also present me with the Copy of a Record and
Manuscript in Lambeth-House, heretofore in his Custody, belonging to the Sea,
(and not to any particular Archbishop of Canterbury;) the Substance whereof
was this, (though I hope, for public satisfaction, the Record it self, in its
due time, will appear.)

Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury, moved the then King Henry the
Sixth, to use all possible means for procuring a Printing-Mold (for so 'twas
there called) to be brought into this Kingdom; the King (a good Man, and much
given to Works of this Nature) readily hearkened to the Motion; and taking
private Advice, how to effect His Design, concluded it could not be brought
about without great Secrecy, and a considerable Sum of Money given to such
Person or Persons, as would draw off some of the Workmen from Harlem in
Holland, where John Guttenberg had newly invented it, and was himself
personally at Work: 'Twas Resolved, that less then one Thousand Marks would not
produce the desired Effect: Toward which Sum, the said Archbishop presented
the King with Three Hundred Marks. The Money being now prepared, the Management
of the Design was committed to Mr. Robert Turnour, who then was of the Robes to
the King, and a Person most in Favor with Him, of any of his Condition: Mr.
Turnour took to his Assistance Mr. Caxton, a Citizen of good Abilities, who
Trading much into Holland, might be a Creditable Pretense, as well for his
going, as stay in the Low Countries: Mr. Turnour was in Disguise (his Beard and
Hair shaven quite off) but Mr. Caxton appeared known and public. They having
received the said Sum of One Thousand Marks, went first to Amsterdam, then to
Leyden, not daring to enter Harlem it self; for the Town was very jealous,
having imprisoned and apprehended diverse Persons, who came from other Parts for
the same purpose: They staid till they had spent the whole One Thousand Marks
in Gifts and Expenses: So as the King was fain to send Five Hundred Marks more,
Mr. Turnour having written to the King, that he had almost done his Work; a
Bargain (as he said) being struck betwixt him and two Hollanders, for bringing
off one of the Workmen, who should sufficiently Discover and Teach this New
Art: At last, with much ado, they got off one of the Under-Workmen, whose Name
was Frederick Corsellis, who late one Night stole from his Fellows in Disguise,
into a Vessel prepared for that purpose; and so the Wind (favoring the Design)
brought him safe to London.

'Twas not thought so prudent, to set him on Work at London, (but by the
Archbishops means, who had been Vice Chancellor, and afterward Chancellor of
the University of Oxford,) Corsellis was carried with a Guard to Oxford; which
Guard constantly watched, to prevent Corsellis from any possible Escape, till
he had made good his promise in Teaching how to Print: So that at Oxford
Printing was first set up in England, which was before there was any
Printing-Press, or Printer, in France, Spain, Italy, or Germany, (except the
City of Mentz) which claims Seniority, ^s to Printing, even of Harlem itself,
calling her City, Vrbem Moguntinam Artis Typographicae Inventricem primam,
though it is known to be otherwise, that City gaining that Art by the Brother of
one of the Workmen of Harlem, who had learnt it at Home of his Brother, and
after set up for himself at Mentz.

This Press at Oxford was at least ten years before there was any Printing in
Europe (except at Harlem, and Mentz) where also it was but new born. This Press
at Oxford, was afterward found inconvenient, to be the sole Printing-place of
England, as being too far from London, and the Sea: Whereupon the King set up a
Press at St. Albans, and another in the Abbey of Westminster, where they Printed
several Books of Divinity and Physic, for the King, (for Reasons best known to
himself and Council) permitted then no Law Books to be Printed; nor did any
Printer Exercise that ART, but only such as were the Kings sworn Servants; the
King himself having the Price and Emolument for Printing Books.

Printing thus brought into England, was most Graciously Received by the King,
and most Cordially Entertained by the Church, the Printers having the Honor to
be sworn the Kings Servants, and the Favor to Lodge in the very Bosom of the
Church; as in Westminster, St. Albans, Oxford, etc. By this means the ART grew
so famous, that Anno prim. Rich. 3. cap. 9. when an Act of Parliament was made
for Restraint of Aliens, from using any Handicrafts here, except as Servants to
Natives, a special Proviso was inserted, that Strangers might bring in Printed
or Written Books, to sell at their pleasure, and Exercise the ART of Printing
here, notwithstanding that Act: So that in the space of 40 or 50 years, by the
special Industry and Indulgence of Edward the Fourth, Edward the Fifth, Richard
the Third, Henry the Seventh, and Henry the Eighth, the English proved so good
Proficients in Printing, and grew so numerous, as to furnish the Kingdom with
Books; and so Skilful, as to Print them as well as any ^^yond the Seas, as
appears by the Act of the 25 Hen. 8. cap. 15. which Abrogates the said Proviso
for that Reason. And it was further Enacted in the said Statute, That if any
person bought Foreign books Bound, he should pay 6 s. 8 d. per Book, etc.

But Printing became now so dangerous to the Commonwealth, That there were more
Books Burnt in Ten years, then could be Printed in Twenty: So that it Concerned
the Prince altogether as much to Suppress the Abuse, as it did before to Obtain
the Use of Printing; And had there not been a Reserve of Licensing such Books
as should be Printed still remaining in the Crown, they might have published
the wickedness of their own Imaginations with Authority. But Queen Elizabeth at
her very first Entrance to the Crown, finding so great Disorders in Church and
State, by reason of the abuse in Printing, Secures in the first place the Law
and the Gospel, of both which the Kings and Queens of England have Inherent
Right as Heads of the Church, and Supreme of the Law; and not only in their
public, but private Capacity, as Proprietors; the Power and Signiory of this,
under Favor, cannot be severed from the Crown: The Kings being the Trustees of
the People, who have formerly taken an Oath at their Coronation, That they
shall keep all the Lands, Honors, and Dignities, Rights, and Freedoms of the
Crown of England, in all manner whole without any manner of minishment; and the
Right of the Crown, hurt, decayed, or lost, to their Power shall call again
into the Ancient Estate. Which Oath, the said Queen kept inviolably, and lived
the more quietly for it all the time of her Reign, and died in Peace. True it
is, they may, and do gratify their Friends and Servants, in giving them the
Emoluments and Profits that arise from Printing; but the Power they cannot
alienate from the Crown, without losing the most precious Stone out of their
Diadem. To show you one Example for all: The said Queen, the first Year of her
Reign, grants by Patent the Privilege of sole Printing all Books, that touch
or concern the Common-Laws of England, to ^ottel a Servant to her Majesty, who
kept it entire to his Death: After him, to one Yestweirt, another Servant to
Her Majesty: After him, to one We^^^t and Norton; and after them, King James
grants the same Privilege to More, one of His Majesty's Clerks of the Signet;
which Grant continues to this Day; and so for the Bible, the Statute-Laws, the
Book of Common Prayer, Proclama^^ons, as much as the Grammar, the Primme^, etc.
are all (...) by Kings and Queens, not only to gratify their Frien^^ and
Servants, but to preserve the Regal Power and Authority (...) Foot, and these
Books from being Corrupted.


