THE GRAND CHARTER OF Christian Feasts, WITH THE Right Way of keeping them.

IN A SERMON PREACHED AT A Meeting of several of the Natives and Inhabitants of
the County OF BUCKINGHAM, In the Church of St. Mary Le-Bow, Nov. 30. 1685.

By Lewis Atterbury D. D. Rector of Milton in the said County.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Wilkinson at the Black-Boy over against St.
Dunstans Church, 1686.

IMPRIMATUR.

Z. Isham R.P.D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris. 1686.

TO MY HONORED FRIENDS, The Honble Jam. Herbert, William Andrews Esquire; John
Backwell Esquire; Owen Norton Esquire; Roger Price Esquire; Thomas Atterbury Esquire; Mr. John
Saunders, Mr. Edward Carter, Mr. Thomas Woodcock, Mr. Benjamin Parrot.
STEWARDS of the Buckingham-shire Feast.
Worthy Sirs,
THE particular respects I have for each of You personally (as well as my due
regard to those unanimous desires, by which I was summoned to Your Service)
entitle You solely to the following Sermon, which was preached at Your joint
instance, and is now published for Your satisfaction. Promoting Charity and
mutual Society is a Design beyond exception, and the proper Expedient to heal
and compose our present Animosities and Divisions.

That your Generous Endeavors may be successful, and the commendable Example,
You have given, effectually followed, is the constant desire and daily prayer of

GENTLEMEN, Your very humble Servant, Lewis Atterbury.

1 COR. V. 8. Let us therefore keep the Feast, not with the old Leaven, neither
with the Leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and Truth.


THE Jews, formerly Gods only People, who had the custody of his Sacred Oracles
( Romans 3.2.) a Privilege peculiar to them; He showed his words unto Jacob, his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation,
and for his judgments they have not known them, Psalm. 147.19, 20.

These had their solemn Feasts on several occasions, and most of them appointed
by God himself.

Three times in the year every Male was, by Gods especial Command, to appear
before him at Jerusalem, and none to come empty handed, viz. at

1. The Feast of unleavened Bread or the Passover at the beginning of Harvest,
on the 14th of the month Nisan or Abib, answering to part of our March and
April.

This 14th was called t pscha, the 15th ort to pscha, and the 16th deutra to
pscha, as Levit. 23.11. where, what is rendered the morrow after the Sabbath, is
to be understood the morrow after the Passover. For in those Feasts, which
consisted of many days, the first and last were termed Sabbaths.

On this deutra, the beginning of their Harvest was offered a sheaf of the
first fruits to sanctify all the after-fruits thoroughout the Land ( Levit.
23.10.) and until this was offered, they were neither to eat nor reap the Corn.

2. The Feast of Weeks at the end of Harvest called Pentecost (because the
fiftieth day after the second of the Passover, which fifty days were the time
of their Harvest) on this Pentecost were offered two Wave-Loaves, Levit. 23.17.
not only as an Eucharistical oblation, but in token of the Harvest finished.

3. The Feast of Tabernacles kept seven days, from the 15th. of the month Tisri
to the 21st. Deuteronomy. 16.13, 15. and Levit. 23.34. which time they dwelt in
Tabernacles made of Boughs, after the manner of Arbours, Plutarch says
principally of Ivy; but we find mention in the Bible of four distinct kinds (
Levit. 23.40.) thought to be the Citrine, the Palm, the Myrtle, and the Willow.
And this in memory of their Forefathers dwelling in Tents and Tabernacles, as
is clear from Levit. 23.43. which is properly rendered Booths, (not as the
Caldee Paraphrase, the shadow of a Cloud, in memory of the protection of the
Israelites by a Cloud in the Wilderness) or as others, to thank God for their
Vintage gathered in at that time of the year.)

The Sacrifices offered were seventy young Bullocks, every day alike, only
differing in the number, thirteen the first, twelve the second, eleven the
third, and so forwards, according to the Languages of the seventy Nations
setting forth their coming in all under the Government of the Messiah, the hope
and expectation of the Gentiles.

God required also

The New Mons, the Expiation, the Sabbatical year, and the Jubilee.

1. The Feast of the New Mons, the First day of the seventh month Tisri,
Levit. 23.24. The seventh month according to their Sacred, but the first
according to their civil account, and may be termed their New Years day.

In this as, in all the New Moons,

1. They repaired to the Prophets, 2 Kings 4.22.

2. They neither bought nor sold, Amos 8.4.

3. They had especial Sacrifices ( viz. two Bullocks, a Ram, and seven Lambs,
and one Kid of the Goats) besides the daily Sacrifice, Numb. 28.11.15. But

1. In this (besides all the aforesaid Sacrifices) there was offered moreover
one Bullock, one Ram, seven Lambs, and a Goat, Numb. 29.1, 6.

2. They likewise blowed with Trumpets, Psalm. 81.3. some think in memory of
Isaac's delivery by a Ram. Or,

(2,) (As St. Basil) to mind them of the delivery of the Law, for the Trumpets
made of Rams Horns, Josh. 6.4. Or,

(3.) As others of the Day of Judgment, which shall be with the Sound of a
Trumpet, Matt. 24.31.

2. The Feast of Expiation (commanded Levit. 23.27. Chap. 16.30. Numb. 29.7.)
to be the tenth day of the month Tisri, our September, when sailing dangerous,
Acts 27.9.

On this the Priest confessed to God his own and the Peoples sins, and
disburthened them on the head of a Scapegoat, in imitation of which the
Grecians, it is said, used to expiate their Cities by throwing down some
condemned persons from the Precipices into the Sea, offering them to Neptune,
with these words, (...), Be thou a reconciliation for us, and sacrificing men
in time of Pestilence, which they called kathrmata, both which words the
Apostle makes use of 1 Cor. 4.13. as Budeus observes with allusion to their
Customs.

3. As every seventh day was to be a constant Sabbath, a Rest, as the word
Schabbath (from whence our English word Sabbath comes) signifies and is applied
Synecdochically to the whole week, Luke 18.12. and to all Festivals, Ezekiel.
20.21. but usually taken for the seventh day of the week which God has set
apart for his service, called (if some other solemn Feast fell in with it)
Sabbathum magnum, as John 19.36. an High-day, the Feast of the Passover
happening on it that year.

So every seventh year was to be a Sabbatical year, Levit. 25.8, 9.

The Sabbath Day signified that they themselves were the Lord's, and therefore
they ceased from their works to do God's, and the year signified that both they
and their Land were the Lord's; for this year their Land was neither tilled nor
manured, Levit. 25.4. though the owner might gather for the maintenance of
himself and family, yet he was not to sow or hedge his field, or lock up his
Corn-yard, but let all be common; and then Creditors were to be discharged
their debts, whence it was called the Lords Release, Deuteronomy. 15.1. And this,

1. To keep in a dependence on Providence.

2. To mind of Adams happy estate in Innocence.

3. To shadow the everlasting Sabbath we are to expect in the Heavens, and this
possibly the ground of Rabbi Elias his opinion, That the World would last six
thousand years, according to that of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.8. two thousand
inanitatis, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand under the Messiah,
which however curious, yet, spoken by a Jew, one of their Rabbis, may serve to
convince the Jews, that Christ is come, and the Law ceased.

4. Their last Feast of Divine Institution was the Jubilee celebrated every
fiftieth year, Levit. 25.8. after seven Sabbaths of years, called so, not from
Jubal the first Inventer of Musical Instruments, Genesis 4.21. but from Jobalim,
the Rams Horns sounded at that time, Levit. 25.19.

1. Then ( viz. on the tenth day) they released Servants.

2. Lands restored to the first Owners who sold them.

3. A true distinction of Tribes preserved by Lands restored, and Servants
returned to their Families.

4. As Grecians computed by Olympiads, Romans by Lustra, Christians by
Indictions, Jews by Jubilees.

5. Mystically it notes our Jubilee by Christ, by whom a door of hope into
Heaven, re-entry thither, and the sound of the Gospel.

They had also their Purim, or Feast of Lots, beginning the 14th. of Adar (our
February) and ending the 15th. ( Esther 9.21.) instituted by Mordecai in
remembrance of the delivery of the Jews from Haman.

And the Feast of Dedication, practiced Nehem. 12.27. at the setting up of the
Wall of Jerusalem, and made a yearly Festival to be kept eight days from the
25th of the month Casleu (answering in part to our December) by Judas
Macchabeus, 1 Maccab. 4.59. on the Consecration of the Altar.

It is mentioned by St. John, Chap. 10.22. that it was Winter, and Christ then
at Jerusalem.

THE PATRIARCH Abraham made a great Feast at the weaning of Isaac, Genesis 21.8.
and Laban at the marrying of Leah, Genesis 29.22.

The Jews made Feasts of the Remainders of their Sacrifices, and the Christians
had their Love Feasts to succeed the Lords Supper, their Banquets at the
public Meetings of the Church to testify and nourish brotherly Love;
continued near two hundred years after Christ, and then laid aside because of
their great Abuse, 1 Cor. 11.

There is, the Royal Preacher tells us, Eccles. 3.4. a time to weep, and a time
to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance: We are allowed to Feast as well
as commanded to Fast, and God has given us his Creatures to this end, Bread to
strengthen, and Wine to cheer man's heart, and Oil to make his face to shine,
Psalm. 104.15. Solomon, Eccles. 3.4, 13. tells us, it is the gift of God, nay,
Chap. 2.24. that there is nothing better for a man then to eat and drink and
enjoy the good of all his labor: And yet there is a sort of morose Brethren
that are ready to censure our Christian liberty, ( Gal. 2.4.) and put a bad
construction on our laudable and well warranted Meeting, Quorsum haec perditio?
Wherefore, they say, is all this waste? There are men of this Generation like
those our Savior speaks of, Luke 7.32. that if we pipe will not dance, if we
mourn will not weep, will make us offenders, be our deportment what it will,
never so moderate, never so well governed.

John the Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine, and yet they
said he had a Devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and he is
censured as a gluttonous man, a friend of Publicans and sinners; but Wisdom is
justified of her Children.

We leave these Cynicks to surfeit on their folly, and, whiles they dig in the
Earth, and hide their Talent, without either comfort in it, or improvement of
it, ( Matt. 25.) Our cruise of oil shall not fail, nor our barrel of meal
waste, though we thus spend of the one, and use the other, 2 Kings 17.4.

Therefore let us keep the Feast. The Feast here meant by St. Paul is the
Passover, the Jews second Sacrament, of which we meet with three Acceptions.

1. It is taken for that yearly Solemnity which was celebrated on the 14th day
of Nisan or Abib, our March, and called simply the Passover, or the Passover
of the Lamb, because on that day toward the evening (or inter duas vesperas,
as Numb. 28.4. ( viz. declinationis and occasus solis, not vesperam solis and
luminis) the Israelites were commanded according to their Families to kill and
roast a Lamb, and eat it in their private houses.

2. It signifies that yearly Festivity which was celebrated on the 15th of
Nisan, and may be called the Passover of the Sheep or Bullock, Deuteronomy. 16.2. or
the Feast of the Passover, as Numb. 28.16, 17. toward which Feast it was that
Josiah gave such a multitude of Lambs, Kids, Sheep and Bullocks.

3. It is taken for the whole Solemnity, beginning the 14th, and ending the
21st. of the same month, Luke 22.1. Now the Feast of unleavened bread drew
nigh, which is called Passover: so that in this Acception it contained the
Feast of unleavened Bread also. But to speak properly, the Feast of unleavened
Bread was a distinct Feast from the Passover, For

1. The Passover was to be kept on the 14th day of the first month at even, on
which they were (as is confessed) enjoined to eat unleavened Bread with the
Lamb; but the Feast of unleavened Bread began not till the morrow following,
viz. the 15th, and lasted seven days, of which only the first and last were
Holy Convocations, in which they might do no servile work, Levit. 23.5, 6, 7, 8.

2. The Passover in the Age following its Institution, might not be killed and
eaten in any other place, save only where the Lord did choose to place his Name,
which afterward was at Jerusalem. But the Feast of unleavened Bread the
Hebrews thought themselves bound to keep in every place, wherever they dwelt,
if they could not be at Jerusalem; and the eating of it, they say, depended not
on the eating of the Passover, but was a Commandment by it self: and both agree
with the occasion of our present meeting, if we either consider 1. The
Original. Or, 2. The Manner of its Observation.


1. The Original, Gods miraculous Preservation and Deliverance of the
Israelites from Egyptian Bondage and Darkness, and the destroying Angel his
passing over their Houses, and sparing them and their Children when he smote
the firstborn of the Egyptians, ( Exodus 12.30.) and drowned Pharaoh and his
Host in the Red Sea, whiles the Israelites passed thorough it as by dry Land,
(as Heb. 11.29.) where both are mentioned. For the word Passover comes not, as
some of the Latin Fathers, ( viz. Tertullian and Ambrose) from the Greek word
pscho to suffer, because Christ's Sufferings and Passions are now celebrated at
this time, but from the Hebrew word transitus or transitio, a passing over:
which Etymology we have given by God himself, Exodus 12.27. And has not God
passed over us? Are not several of us, as Brands plucked out of those flames,
which reduced the greater part of this large City to Ashes? Were not we spared,
whiles the Pestilence that walks in darkness, and Destruction, that walks
at noonday, swept away others?

The Plague and the Sword destroyed their thousands and ten thousands, and yet
we are alive to praise God, as at this day.

God has visited several places with blasting and mildew, and rain has been
withholden. We have lately felt unusually severe Winters, and had unseasonable
Summers, of which Viols of Gods wrath we have but tasted, whiles others have
drunk more deeply.

It is not long since we were threatened with stormy Winds and Tempests from
North and West, and these Euroclydons descended on several places with confused
noise, and many garments were rolled in blood, [ Isa. 9.5.) whiles we, and
other Inhabitants of the County we belong to, felt none of these Hurricanes,
heard only the sound of it, as a going on the top of the Mulberry-trees, were
permitted to stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord.

After Wars and Rumors of Wars; former sad confusions, and late menacing
disturbances, we renew this Solemnity upon Gods restoring to us a Public
Peace, our Ancient Regal Government in State, and the Apostolical, Episcopal
Government in the Church. And thus the Originals of the Feasts agree.

2. There is also a suitableness in the manner of the Observation.

It is not to be kept with old Leaven, etc. Then which I know no better
direction for the right using and improving this and all other Solemnities of
this Nature.

Leaven is properly that which secretly and speedily soures the whole lump of
dough, altering the Nature of it. Sometimes it is used in a good sense,

1. To denote the Kingdom or Church of Christ on Earth, increasing secretly and
by degrees both in number of Persons and Graces of the Spirit, Matt. 13.33.

2. The Doctrine of the Gospel, the Word preached, which alters a man's
Nature, first turning his heart, and changing his inward, and then reforming
his outward man.

Sometimes (as here) Leaven is taken in an ill sense, and so used,

1. To represent the unsound Doctrine of Heretics, corrupting the sweetness of
heavenly Truths with their false Glosses: called also Hypocrisy, because such
Doctrines are false, deceitful, and impious, and make their Fautors and
Fomentors Hypocrites, Matt. 16.6. Luke 12.1.

2. Corrupt, vicious persons, which with their company and communication infect
others, 1 Cor. 15.33.

Old Leaven is the same with the old man, Romans 6.6. Fermentum in massa, innata
vitiositas, Original sin, with the depravation, the whole naughtiness of our
sinful Nature with its sinful effects and bitter fruits, whatevet it is that
has a faculty of corrupting others, whether it be Doctrine or Example; it
follows

The Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, which is exegetical, an illustration of
the former, kaka ka pinera malitiae and versutiae, craft added to wickedness,
malus est qui male, nequam qui cum dolo agit; hence the Devil is called subtle,
poner, as some from pnoma, ago, facesso, nobis facessit negotium, 1 John 2.12.
Ephesians. 6.16. he has his wiles and stratagems, his cunning crafts.

Of sincerity and Truth, an expression taken from counterfeit Wares, such as
need the false light of a dark Shop to put them off. There must be Purity or
Holiness, plain dealing, and singleness of heart.

The Christians have their Passover; ortzomen, festum agitemus, let us keep
the Feast, not typically, only for a day, as at present, or for seven days, as
the Jews the Passover, but spiritually throughout the whole course of our
lives.

The Ceremony of the Jews putting away Leaven out of their houses, during the
time of the Feast, signifies, that from the first day we believe in Christ
thorough the whole course of our lives, we should purge our selves from evil
Doctrine and corrupt Manners.

The spiritual estate of Christians is the true accomplishment of the Jewish
Passover; nay every Congregation should put away those that are scandalous, as
1 Cor. 5.5. applied by the Apostle.

Also the Ceremony of the Leprofie,

1. If doubtful, shut up till certain, Levit. 13.44.

2. If clear, dwelling alone without the Camp, figures lively the
Church Censures.

1. Suspension, whereby men are separated from some Holy things, until their
perverseness appears, 2 Timothy 3.9.

2. Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5.11, 13. Matt. 18.17.

(...) in Lege Mosis est abstinere ab omni opere, ut Deo sacra siant, to rest
from bodily labors; In mystico sensu, ita perpetuo Deo servire, ut omnia opera
sint sacrificia, Isa. 66.23. to serve God devoutly; and thus (...) Festum,
nihil aliud est quam ea agere quae oportet fieri. A good conscience is a
continual feast, Prove, 15.15. in a word to feast aright is Ephesians. 4.22, 23.

The two Birds used in the cleansing, Levit. 14.5, 6; 49, 50. signify that
neither Christ's Manhood without his Godhead, nor his Godhead without his
Manhood could purge sin, John 6.53, 63.

To make our Feast regular, we must take in the Context.

Purge out the old Leaven, that you may be a new Lump, as ye are unleavened.

The Apostle St. Paul thought very well of the Corinthians, that they were
unleavened, right for the main. It is not esse debetis per professionem, you
should be so; but you desire and take care to be so: Cavetis ab omnibus per
quae corrumpi mores solent, and yet calls on them to purge themselves. There
are remainders of sin in the holiest and eminentest Christians, in many things,
Jam. 3.2. and Eccles. 7.20. Give me leave then (without offense) to recommend
the same duty to you, of whom I am persuaded the best things, and such as
accompany Salvation, Heb. 6.9.

The Jews were very exact, there was

1. Expurgatio Fermenti, cleansing all Vessels and Household Stuff two or three
days before.

2. Inquisitio Fermenti, searching every corner, to a Mouse-hole with a
Wax-candle the night before the Passover, till the fourth hour after
Sunrising, as Buxtorfe.

3. Exterminatio or Conflagratio from the fourth hour to the sixth.

4. Execratio, of all seen or not seen, cleansed or not cleansed; nor are the
best Christians less concerned to look about them, lest there be any root of
bitterness springing up to their trouble, whereby themselves and others may be
defiled, Heb. 12.15.

We often change our bread and our water, and, however sound and wholesome the
Country may be we come from, we are in danger of infection from the different
Airs we breathe in, or may receive Contagion from some of those many persons we
converse with, and a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump.

God made man upright, but he has sought forth many Inventions. Good Wheat was
laid in at first; but, whiles men slept, the Enemy sowed Tares, Matt. 13.27.

When there was no King in Israel, every man did what was good in his own sight.

That Anarchy and those Confusions, under which this Nation of ours has
groaned for several years, have given too much opportunity to the evil Willers
of our Sion to unsettle, divide, distract, and corrupt several of its Members.
And therefore First,

1. We are to beware of the Leaven of Atheism.

It Is scarce credible in such a Land as ours, amongst us who have had the
Noon-day-light of the Gospel, as well as all other advantages for the
improvement of our natural Light and acquired Knowledge, that any should dare
to question so clear and undeniable a Truth: the Heavens and the Earth may be
astonished at this; The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handy work, Psalm. 19.1. The invisible things of God from the Creation
of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse, Romans 1.20.

We have in our selves a demonstration, quaelibet herba Denm. the most minute
Creature speaks a Deity, much more the frame of man, who is fearfully and
wonderfully made, Psalm. 139.14.

And yet, besides practical Atheists (which all sinners are ( Psalm. 36.2.)
there are in our days to be met with those that set their mouths against
Heaven, and their tongue walks thorough the Earth; How, say they, does God
know? and is there knowledge in the most High? Psalm. 73.9, 11.

What Luther abhorred himself for thinking, we have Monsters belch out;
Horribilia de Deo, terribilia de Fide. David's Fool or wicked man was modest in
respect of the Atheists of our days, he whispered to himself, said in his
heart, There is no God, but these avow it in their Principles.

All such are indeed without hope and without the true God to serve him and
depend upon him, but are slaves to a false one, the Devil, called the God of
this World, the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that works in the
children of disobedience, and has blinded their minds, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should shine in unto them;
Such shall find God hereafter in his Justice, when there will be no place for
Repentance.

It will be then in vain to call to the rocks and mountains to fall on them,
and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb: it will be bootless to plead they are
the workmanship of his hands. They are a people of no understanding; those that
live and die in such an open defiance of God and their duty, he that made them
will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor,
Isa. 27.11.

When men of such Principles fall in our way, we must do more then shun them
our selves, we must be zealous in so great a matter, withstand them to the
face, Gal. 2.11. write a cross on their doors, and set a mark on their persons,
that others may avoid them.

If the Leprosy was in an house, none were to sleep in it; and if in garments,
they were to be burnt with fire.

2. The Leaven of Rebellion, and it is no wonder, when men have cast off the
fear of God, they should prove false to their Prince. Tears and Prayers are the
right Weapons of the Church.

That thundering Legion that stormed Heaven with their Prayers, and rose not
from their knees, until God gave them rain; laid down their Arms, and offered
their lives to death, rather then they would oppose their Prince, or deny the
True God, and worship Idols.

And it is the glory of our Religion, and the Church of England in an especial
manner, that it gives not the least countenance to Disloyalty, and admits of no
color or pretense of resistance whatsoever.

The Scriptures we own are as plain and full as words can express, every Soul
is to be subject to the higher Powers for Gods sake, and for Conscience sake,
and those that resist, resist the Ordinance of God, and shall receive damnation
to themselves, Romans 13.1, 2. Tit. 3.1. and 2 Pet. 2.13.

David's heart smote him for the cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, and we
are advised, in prudence, as well as confcience not to curse the King, no not
in our thoughts; for God has the Sacred persons of Kings so much under his
protection, that he often goes out of the ordinary way of his Providence, and
works a Miracle rather then Treachery against them should presper, Eccles. 10
20. A bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall
tell the matter.

These filthy Dreamers that despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, they
are spots in all Feasts as well as those of Charity, Jude 12, 13. Clouds they
are without water, carried about with wind, trees whose fruit is withered,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots, raging waves of the sea, foaming out their
own shame, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darknoss for
ever.

3. The Leaven of Herod, or the Leaven of Faction, Fox like Subtleties, or
contagious Principles.

Herod was a subtle Fox, as our Savior calls him, Go tell that Fox, a Slave to
Ambition and Lust, and a Creature to Coesar, on whose pleasure he held his
Dignity. He heard John Baptist, and pretended to hearken to him [ Mark 6.20.)
but sacrificed him to the jealousy of Herodias. He desired to see Christ;
possibly to satisfy his curiosity, or to have been magnified by some Miracle
he hoped to have done him, or rather to dispatch him, as we find it suggested
to our Savior, Herod seeks to kill thee, a Copy Herod his Predecessor had set
him. He tampered with the Magi (Matt. 2.) that he might find out him that was
born King of the Jews, on a pretense to worship him; but, how he would have
made him a Deity, appears by his butchering afterward, for his sake about
fourteen thousand, all the children of that age about two years old and under
in Bethlehem.

The Herodians were Parasites in their Courts, that varied their Religion with
them, made one of the Herod's a God, and kept his Birthday, heard our Savior,
and proposed ensnaring questions to entrap him.

And such are our Seekers in Discipline, Abetters of Faction, those who fit up
Religion after men's Humors to serve a turn, mould up Gods Worship with Herod's
and Jeroboams ends, and watch for our halting.

Herod would be exalted, arrays himself in costly Apparel, gets into the
Throne, courts the Applause of the Rabble, and is pleased to be the Idol of the
People, though he dies their Martyr, and is eaten up of worms, Acts 12.20. Like
Saul to Samuel, come what will, yet honor me before the Elders of Israel.

Jeroboam must have his Conventicles, and sets up his Calfes in Dan and Bethel;
makes a rent in the Church to patch up the slaws of his Title to the ten Tribes.

Korah, Dathan and Abiram were too proud to obey Moses and Aaron, and would set
up Independency under a pretense of zeal for God and the Privileges of the
People. Hear their Canting, All the Lords people are holy, Numb. 16.3.

Diotrephes loves the pre-eminence, and makes such a Schism, that St. John
cannot be received, though a beloved Disciple, a Bishop, and an eminent
Apostle, 3 John 9.

The Instances of Schism and Faction amongst us have been too many for me
either to recall or recite. We have had attempts on our Doctrine, our
Discipline, our Worship, all slandered and misrepresented by men of different
Interests and Opinions, the Word of God miserably wrested by some, and excepted
against by others, traduced as a dead letter, supplanted by Traditions, and
subordinated to Enthusiasms; our Sacraments have been questioned, their
Original disputed, and their number and way of administration impeached, our
Churches have been profaned, our Liturgy decry'd, Episcopacy struck at (and
for some years removed) root and branch. The very function of the Ministry
proclaimed useless, and their maintenance burthensom, a yoke intolerable;
though no man pays of his own amongst us, unless his piety excite him to be a
Benefactor.

As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so men of corrupt minds, and Reprobate
concerning the Faith, do still resist the Truth, rent the seamless Coat of
Christ, and disturb the Peace and Government of the Church. And all this with
an Hosanna, The Lord be glorified. A solemn pretense to do God service, Isa,
66.5. John 16.2.

It is very sad that Religion should be abused to serve men's corrupt and
sinister designs, but no more than foretold, and continually practiced by ill
men, as well as by the Devil, who, upon this occasion can be content to appear
in Samuels Mantle, (1 Samuel 28.14.) and transform himself into an Angel of Light.

This I can say boldly, Had it been as easy to gratify men's Interests, and
satisfy their Humors, as it is to answer their Arguments, the breaches in our
Church and State had been all closed long e're now.

God has smitten the great house with breaches, and the little house with
clefts, Amos 6.11. which divisions of our Reuben call for sad thoughts, great
searchings of heart; but this is our comfort, the Devil has his Limits, and
God who has made the sand a Boundary to the waves of the Sea by a perpetual
Decree, so, that though they roar and lift up themselves, they cannot pass over
it, he has limited his Instruments, these Children of the Devil, and Enemies
of all Righteousness, that will not cease to pervert the ways of God, Acts
13.10. when their Ephah is full, and their sins ripe, they shall proceed no
further, but their folly shall be manifest to all men, as that of Jannes and
Jambres also was, (2 Timothy 3.8.) or as it fared with Elymas, who was stricken
with blindness, God shall send them strong delusions, and give them up to
seared Consciences, they shall split themselves on the rocks of Superstition
and Atheism, or loose themselves in a Labyrinth, the mazes and mists of Error,
and at last seek about for some to lead them, Acts 13.11.

God has given us many sad Examples; Let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he fall, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.

For the Glory of God and Honor of our Country, let us persevere in Religion
and Loyalty.

4. The Leaven of the Sadducees, or the Leaven of Doctrine, Matt. 16.5.6.

The Doctrine of the Pharisees had its Leaven, but the Sadducees were were most
tainted.

The Sadducees called in question Angels and Spirits, denied rewards or
punishments after this life, held the Soul was annihilated at death, believed
not the Resurrection, maintained free will and liberty of prophesying, allowed
of no Scripture but the Pentateuch, the five Books of Moses, (Matt. 22.23. Mark
12.18. Luke 20.27. Acts 4.1.) and therefore our Savior convinces them out of
Exodus, Chap. 3.6. Matt. 22.32.

Hymeneus and Philetus, who say the Resurrection is already past, viz. that
there is no Resurrection but the spiritual, that of the Soul from sin, or the
renewing of the state of the World under the Gospel. These and all other
profane and vain bablings are to be shunned, 2 Timothy 2 16. for they will increase
to more ungodliness, and their words will eat as does a canker.

The Athenians spent their time in hearing and telling some new thing, Acts
17.21. and it is the Character of our Novellists, that they have itching ears,
and heap to themselves Teachers, which argues they are carnal, cannot endure
sound Doctrine, and have not the Spirit, as the Apostle determines, 2 Timothy 4.3.

For our parts, we are to continue in the good old way, confirm our selves in
the Truths we have heard and been assured of, hold fast the form of sound
words, and contend for the Doctrine delivered to the Saints.

If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to godliness, he
is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness: from all such, St. Paul tells us, we must withdraw our selves, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.

5. The Leaven of the Pharisees, or Hypocrisy. The Pharisees were full of
corrupt Glosses, addicted much to Superstition, prescribed Phylacteries, tied
themselves to Phrases and Observances, and little else, were all for leaves and
no fruit, and taught for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Matt. 15.9. But, Woe
to him that says to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach:
behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in
the midst of it, Hab. 2.19.

The Pharisee had the Hypocrite (leaven) in his face, to make him look sour,
that men might see he had fasted.

Rabbi in his tongue and rancour in his heart, they would speak Christ fair,
when they came to entrap him, and give him with Judas a kiss, and an hail
Master, at the same time they betrayed him; they are all Gabbatha, whited
Sepulchers, beautiful without, but Golgotha, full of rottenness, sculls and
dead men's bones within, pay Tithes of Mint and Cummin, and neglect the greater
matters of the Law, compass Sea and Land to make their Proselytes, shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither enter themselves, nor suffer others,
make long Prayers for a pretense, and devour widows houses, cleanse the outside
of the cup, but stuff the inside with extortion and excess.

Our Religion teaches us another Lesson, that bodily exercise profits
little, and that we should exercise our selves to real godliness, which has
the promises of this life and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. God is a
Spirit, calls for truth in the inward parts, and will be worshipped in Spirit
and in Truth, John 4.24. Man judges by the outward appearance, but God looks
to the heart, 1 Samuel 16.5.

From those who have but a form of godliness, and deny the power, we are to
turn away, 2 Timothy 3.3.

6. The Leaven of Covetousness and Oppression. We must not curse the deaf, or
lay a stumbling block before the blind, we are to injure none; but it is
barbarous to wrong those that cannot help themselves, or know not when we hurt
them: this is to turn judgment into gall, and righteousness into wormwood.

We are to oppress none but the Man of Sin, and covet only the best gifts.

When the noise of Arms was so loud, that the voice of the Law could not be
heard, Demetrius and his Crafts-men, such who served not God, but the Diana of
their Interest, carved to themselves largely out of other men's Estates, catch
as catch might, 'twas a levelling Age, the Bishops Lands were made Lay-Fees,
and the Tithes of the Church were in great danger of being gathered into a
common Treasury, the better to support the Public Faith: Encroachments were
made generally, and most on the Rights of the Church, which, having now had the
continuance of many years, it is not easy to find them out, and it is harder to
recover them; Sacrilege is grown rife, and of so potent an Interest, that he
had need be a man of courage that dares arraign it for a sin. It was an
observation of an eminently wise man, the Oracle of his Age, That though Truth
can never be justly blamed, yet he that follows it too close at the heels,
may have his teeth struck out, not only be forced to loose his hold, but made
incapable of fastening ever after.

But if men will not consider, God will remember. There is a woe reserved for
him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house; For the stone shall cry
out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, Hab. 2.

One Acre of ill gotten Land entails a curse upon a whole Estate, and some men's
houses (as the Learned Spelman observes and proves) might have continued longer
in their Names and Families, if they had not set their nests on fire by coals
thus snatched from the Altar. May Nehemiahs resolution be taken up by every one
of us, That we will not forget the house of our God, Nehem. 10.39.

As the Partridge sits on eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that gets
riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his
end shall be a fool, Jer. 17.11.

When our Savior became Zacheus his Guest, and brought his welcome with him,
Salvation to his house ( Luke 19.5.) he received him joyfully, and, that he
might purge himself from the Leaven of oppression, he makes a fourfold
restitution to all that he had wronged by any false accusation.

Whoever they are that at any time meet with a Babylonish garment, or Acans
wedge amongst their own or others stuff, it should be their care to see them
restored to their proper owners and uses, and (where that cannot be done)
returned to God and his poor. It is the blessing of God makes rich.

Whatsoever we would that men should do unto us, that should we do unto them,
for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matt. 7.12.

7. Farther, The Leaven of corrupt Society: Men either unsound in their
Principles, or vicious and irregular in their Practices; evil Doctrine is
against Truth, evil lives are against walking in the Truth, and evil company
leads to both. No man can touch pitch, but he must be defiled, Evil
communications corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33.

We are (if possibly) to live peaceably with all men, and may hold a commerce
with men of different Religions, promise to do them good and no hurt, and be
ready to do them kindnesses, Genesis 26.29. but we must not so help the ungodly,
as to love them which hate God, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. A league of amity is not to be
held with the Sons of Belial, men of desperate Principles and Lives are not to
be taken into our bosoms; If we will fear God and the King, we must not meddle
with those that are given to change, with such we are to have no familiar
converse, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5.11.

Our eyes are to be on the faithful in the land, and our delight in the just,
Psalm. 16.5.

He that abides in a perfect way may abide with us.

Those who thus walk with wise men shall be wise; but a companion of Fools
shall be destroyed.

8. Lastly, The Leaven of Malice and Wickedness: Malice, like Leaven, makes men
swell one against another, envying and strife breed confusion and every evil
work, and come not from above, but are earthly, sensual and devilish, Jam. 3.

By Nature since the Fall, man is of a wrathful, revengeful, contentious
disposition, we are, as ravenous beasts, apt to bite and devour each other. It
was an evil Character the Prophet gave of that people, Jer. 9.4. that every
brother would utterly supplant, and every neighbor walk with slanders, and I
wish there were no such thing amongst us; Our late unnatural Wars have altered
very much the estate of this Nation, and made deep impressions upon our very
Natures.

Differences in Judgments have bred coldness of Affections, and our Civil Jars
have wrought strangeness in Relations. We have seen (what our Savior foretold)
divisions in Families, as well as in the Nation, five in one house divided,
three against two, and two against three, Matt. 10.35. The son against the
father, and the daughter against the mother, and the danghter-in-law against
the mother-in-law, a man's foes often those of his own house, no safety in
relying on either Neighbor or Brother; nay men were not secure, unless they
kept the door of their lips from her that lay in their bosoms, Mic. 7.16.

And this the product, not of Religion, but Corruption. The wisdom that comes
from above is, first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
full of good fruit, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

By the Spirit man's Nature is altered, Isa. 11.6. The wolf shall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard lie down with the kid, the calf, and the young lion, and
the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them.

When Jerusalem was the glory of the whole world, it was a City compact
together, and the Citizens all of one mind, Psalm. 122.3.

Where Unity is wanting, men can have neither comfort nor safety to live by
each other; the quicker men's parts, the more cunning they are to outreach and
undermine; and the greater their power, the more mighty they are to oppress.

It Is a security to this Island that it lies by it self, divided from other
Nations, called by one a Great Beast, that cannot be destroyed, without being
accessory to its own ruin; and it is our great danger to be divided amongst our
selves; two are better then one, and a triple cord is not easily broken.

Our business this day is Union and Society, such Meetings as these are of a
reconciling Nature. It Is high time to lay aside all invidious names, all unkind
distinctions.

Let not any such Shiboleths be so much as named amongst us.

All bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, and evil speaking must be put away from
us with all malice, and we are to be kind to one another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4.32, 33.

We are all Englishmen, we are Countrymen, there must be no difference, no
strangeness amongst us, for we are Brethren; to go higher, we are Christians,
We have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, and should
keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 3.4, 5. This is to be a
new Lump, all of a piece.

In Heaven where the blessed Angels and Spirits of men made perfect (the Church
Triumphant) abide, there is a sweet and constant agreement; and in the purest
times of the Church Militant, the Believers were all of one heart and one mind,
Acts 4.32. nay, it is the mark whereby our Savior would have his Disciples
known from the rest of the world, and from Hypocrites, their loving one
another, John 13.35. And 'twas practiced in the primitive Times to the glory of
the Gospel, and astonishment of their Adversaries, See (say they) how the
Christians love one another.

From henceforth let me beg, that this may be the only contention amongst us,
who shall be the sincerest Christians, the most Loyal Subjects, the truest
Friends, and the most useful Countrymen.

Let as many of us as be perfect, be thus minded, and if any be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal this unto them.

And thus we are duly qualified to make a Feast.

Epulemur; So some expound, what others render celebremus, Keep a Feast, and
both proper, the word reaches both, we cannot keep a Feast, unless we make it.
A Feast implies a Banquet, provision more then ordinary upon some solemn
occasion, to remember some great Mercy of God, and withal to cheer the heart.
When God bestows signal Mercies, he expects suitable acknowledgments, Psalm.
50.15.

And great cause we have to Feast, to bless God, and rejoice before him.

As Christians, so from the Argument in the Context, Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us. The Birth of Christ was Tidings of great joy to all people,
Luke 2.10. and was celebrated with the Halelujahs of the heavenly Host. His
Incarnation was a Mystery hid from Ages, which the Angels desired to pry into;
but, if he had not been bruised for our iniquities, we had not been healed from
them, Isa 53.5. It is our security and rejoicing that he has suffered, and is
risen again for our Justification, Romans 8.34.

As Englishmen (besides those many National deliverances before mentioned) we
are to praise Him for giving us our Lot in the Garden of Eden, the Paradise of
the World, the Nursery of Arts and Learning, a Goshen for light and knowledge,
not only of the Volumes of Nature, but of the Books of God; enriched with all
those Blessings that may make our lives comfortable here, and us happy
hereafter.

For our particular Country, we may say our Lines are fallen in a pleasant
place; whether we view our Chiltern or our Vale, consider Pastime, Health, or
Profit, we have a goodly Heritage, well watered, as the Garden of the Lord: Our
dwelling is the Fatness of the Earth, and the Dew of Heaven from above, Genesis
27.39. We have a Benjamins share in those many Blessings, which God has heaped
upon this Nation.

It is not enough to bring forth the best Robes, the costly Ring, to kill the
fatted Calf, and to eat and drink, and to be merry, and to give our Fragments
to the Poor, ( Luke 15.21.) though all this be proper at such a time as this;
This is not all, the principal part is behind, Psalm. 50.13. we must offer unto
God thanksgiving, and pay our vows to the most High: This shall please God
better then an whole Hecatomb of Oxen that have horns and hoofs, Psalm. 69.31.

We are not to keep,

1. An Epicures Feast, To eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; eat only
for eatings sake: Indulgere Genio, to indulge our selves, and gratify our
palates, this is to make a God of our Belly, and to glory in our shame, such
are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.19. Job sent for his Sons, and
sanctified them continually after Feasting, Job 1. And whether we eat or drink,
or whatever we do, we are to do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. and to
this end we must not

2. Keep a Feast, like Nabal, who held a Feast in his house, like the Feast of
a King, yet had nothing but a churlish Answer to spare, not so much as a Good
word to give.

Whiles we drink Wine in Bowls, we must not forget the Afflictions of Joseph.

Nehemiahs Rule was, They should eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send
portions to them for whom nothing is prepared, Nehem. 8.10.

And the Royal Psalmist, at his Feast, upon the bringing back the Ark, dealt to
every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a Loaf of bread, a good
piece of Flesh, and a Flagon of wine, 1 Chronicles. 16.3.

I know these good Examples were not well followed, sometimes large Portions
were sent to the disfurnishing of the Table, and incommoding the proper Guests,
and some stayed away to receive greater shares, then they should have had, if
present, which lessened the Appearance; and these were the occasions of the
Laodicean Canon to regulate this Abuse, and alter the Custom.

I need not either question or direct your Charity. The Wisdom of this Age has
found out a better Method to gather and dispose (with Judgment) of what is
given to good and charitable Uses; yet, seeing you have thought fit to call me
hither, I shall take the freedom (in a word or two more) to be your
Remembrancer.

No man is born for himself, but for God and for his Country, and each of us
should so live, that we may bring Glory to one, and be of Use in the other.
It Is below a reasonable Creature to cumber the Earth, and bring forth no fruit,
Telluris inutile pondus.

David's question is to be every good man's care, to be rendering to God for all
his benefits, Psalm. 116.11.

We vindicate our Religion, and convince the World that we are more then
Solifidians, when we show our Faith by our Works; To be barren in them argues
Leanness in our Souls, Psalm. 106.15.

Our Country is fertile, our Soil fat and rich, we credit that, as well as show
our own tenderness, when our Compassions are enlarged.

Zacheus gave half his Goods to the Poor, and the Primitive Christians sold
their Houses and Possessions, and put all into the Apostles hands for the use
of the Church. Every Sabbatical year, and at the Jubilee, the Jews released
Servants, cancelled Mortgages, and discharged all Debtors. God requires no such
great things from us, yet expects from every one some Return; Every one has
his Talent.

Those that are not able to build and endow Churches, or erect Hospitals, may
repair the living Temples of the Holy Ghost, give Dorcas her Coats, put
somewhat into the Conclave Silentum, the poor man's Chest. The Widows Mites are
kindly taken, those that cannot give themselves, may persuade, and direct to
others that are more able; If there be first a willing mind, something may be
done, and it is accepted according to what a man has, and not according to
what a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

He that gives to the Poor lends to the Lord, and what we may spare cannot
be put into a surer hand or better way of improvement, for he will surely pay
it again, to some thirty, to some sixty, to some an hundredfold; what we do to
Christ's Brethren, He takes as done unto himself, and will not suffer a cup of
cold water given to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, to loose its reward.

No man ever lost by thus serving God: He that tells our wanderings, and puts
our Tears into his Bottle, keeps a Book of Remembrance for our Prayers and
Almsdeeds. To do good and to communicate, therefore, I beseech you, forget not,
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Glory, Honor,
and Power hence and for ever, Rev. 7.12. FINIS.

