A safe and easy Method for supplying the want of Coin, and raising as many
Millions as the Occasions of the Public may require. Humbly offered to the
consideration of the present Parliament. With some Remarks upon the Bank of
England, Dr. Chamberlain's Bank, the Land-Bank, so called, and the National
Land-Bank.
Ego certe reip. non deero; and quicquid acciderit, a quo mea culpa absit,
animo forti feram. Cic. Cornificio.
IT cannot be denied, that the want of good Coin gave rise to the several Banks
now on foot, by which many private Persons have enriched themselves, and more
probably expect it, not without benefit to the Public: It being evident, that
every Sum paid by Bill of Credit is in effect, for the time the Bills do pass,
so much Money added to the Coin of the Kingdom. But it is to be presumed, that
the Parliament will give a check to that endless increase of Bills of Credit,
which, upon the failure of any of the Banks to answer in Specie, when generally
called for, may prove a greater mischief than that which they would remedy.

If therefore a way can be found to supply the want of Coin by Credit, and that
Credit to have so true a Foundation, that it shall certainly be made good in
specie, and that within few years, which has not been pretended to by any
Proposer of Banks, this may at the least deserve to be considered in
Parliament: where what is crudely proposed may be maturely digested and
improved, by the collective wisdom of the Nation.

Wherefore it is proposed,

1. That a Fund of 500000 l. per an. more or less, according to the Sum to be
raised, be settled for eight Years, or if for a longer time, a less Fund; and
this may be of such a nature, as may give general satisfaction: but to name a
Fund which may be rejected, might prejudice a Method applicable to any good
Fund.

2. Let the Money arising by the Fund be paid into an Office, to be erected at
London, or within the Suburbs, to be called the Crown-Bank, or Publick-Bank:
For which Office let there be as many Commissioners, or Directors, as the
Parliament shall think fit; they to be entrusted to appoint Collectors, and
other Officers, and to ascertain their Sallaries, and the like.

3. At that Bank let there be drawn on Vellom, or Parchment, or thick Paper,
made there, and imprinted with Greek, Hebrew, or some other particular
Characters, in a Mill for that purpose, so many Bills from 5 l. to 100 l.
signed by 5 Commissioners or Directors at the least, as shall make up as many
Millions as are wanting: let each of these Tickets have its particular Number,
and the Year expressed in which it is to be brought back into the Office, and
there discharged: Let the pieces of Vellom, or Parchment, or thick Paper, be
cut in the middle of the Impression* and let that part which has the other half
of the Impression be kept in the Office, having upon it the same Number with
the other, and a Memorandum of the Sum contained in it, and be signed as the
other.

4. Let all the Bills be current at the Vallues expressed in them, and
immediately pass in all Payments as lawful Coin, and be Assignable, and to be
Lent out at Interest as Money. But if any Bill be not brought This to secure
the coming in of the Bills* yet they that are to come in last will be of like
benefit with the first, (...) the last pass for Money, and may be disposed of,
or put out at interest from the beginning.
back into the Office in the Year appointed for it to come in, let it from
thenceforth be wholly void: And after the Bills have been brought in, and the
Money upon them paid, and the Account for that Year passed* let them be
Cancelled.

5. Let the Mill where the Vellom, or Parchm^nt, or thick Paper, is imprinted,
be framed at the place where it is to be used. And let it be Capital for the
same, or any other of that kind, to be found elsewhere at any time* or there
unbroken after the whole Number of Bills making up the appointed Sum, together
with the Counter-parts, have been once imprinted; or for any Persons to
counterfeit any of the Bills, or the Impression on the Vellom, or Parchment, or
Paper, or so to imprint more pieces of Parchment, or Vellom, or Paper, than the
appointed number.

6. To prevent the confusion and uncertainty of hurrying in all the Bills of
each Year at the end of each Year; let the Bills of the Year be brought in at
any time after the first six months; and if the money which should pay the same
be not come into the Office, let the Commissioners or Directors, give Bills of
Credit upon Vellom, or Parchment, or Paper, of another Impression, for so much
money as every Bill carries, payable within six months at the farthest, with
Interest at 4 l. per Cent. till payment. And let it be Actionable, and highly
Penal for them to refuse or neglect payment, if there be Cash for it, or not to
give such Bills if Cash fail, or to imbezil the money, or to postpone Payments,
or to employ it to any other use or purpose, than the payment of the Bills in
the first place, next to the defraying the annual Charges of the Bank, and let
the overplus be paid into the Exchequer.

7. In case the Fund shall be deficient in any Year, let what is wanting to
clear the Bills and the Charges of the Office, be paid out of such money as
shall be in the Exchequer; and if it be not paid before the then next
Parliament, let it be supplied our of the next public Tax.

8. Let the Commissioners or Directors at the end of every Year Account to the
Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, who are to
transmit the Account to Parliament.





Specie.



London cannot be assured of the contrary.



Commissioners being required, there can be no part of England where the Hands
of some of them will not be soon known.

Specie: And if the Public should be charged with some Counterfeits, the Loss
will bring no sensible inconvenience; nor can it bear any proportion with the
vast benefit of such an increase of the Wealth of the Nation, so seasonably
applied.

Bank of England, and all other Banks; which yet men are very ready to venture
upon, with a much less certain prospect of receiving Money for Bills of Credit,
or what may yield money when they have occasion; which leads me to the
consideration of the most promising of the other Banks.

Of the Bank of England.
The Bank of England has raised the King 1200000 l. and perhaps has saved him
200000 l. in the Remittances of money. This has a Fund of 100000 l. per An. for
12 years absolute, and for ever till redeemed by Parliament; which is in effect
a perpetuity, and if employed as above for 100 years, is worth 10 Millions.

This Bank is said to have paid 1200000 l. in to the Exchequer in Money and
Bills, before one Third of it was advanced by the Subscribers: and to this day
but 60 l. per Cent. is paid in; and yet that 60 l. sells for 100 l.
notwithstanding large Dividends, and the loss perhaps of 200000 l. by the
foreign Exchange, besides such Bills as they have publicly made known to have
been counterfeited, and all wherein they have concealed their Losses.

This has been done by the help of Bills of Credit, though there could be no
certainty but money might be called for faster than it came in: Nor is it
certain, as it would be in the Crown-Bank, that the Credit shall not extend,
not only beyond the Fund, as it has already, but farther than they can Answer
in payments. Tho foreign Merchants may take their Bills, because of their
commerce here; it is visible that it has not yet obtained Credit with the Bank
at Amsterdam; for if it had, it could not have lost so much by the Exchange;
nor is it to be supposed that it ever will gain full Credit there, because of
the extent of its Credit at home beyond the real Fund.

Of Doctor Chamberlain's Bank.
Doctor Chamberlain's Proposal as far as I can look into the Mystery, is this.

IF a man makes over 150 l. per annum. for 150 Years, to secure the payment of
100 l. yearly into his Office, in money or his Bank Bills, for 100 Years; and
also pays 1000 l. in Money at 4 payments, 400 l. at settling the Estate, 300 l.
at the end of the first year, 200 l. at the end of the second 100 l. at the end
of the third; he shall have Bills for 6000 l. including his own 1000 l. of
which 1000 l. when he seals, 1100 l. at the end of the first year, 1200 l. at
the end of the second, 1300 l. at the end of the third, 1400 l. at the end of
the forth, besides 2000 l. in Bills, which with his 400 l. advanced shall
immediately be paid to the Treasurer of the joint Stock in Trade, to which 600
l. must be added as it comes in, and the party must pay 5 ^. per cent. yearly
for the whole 8000 l. for the charges of the Office; and if men will lend
Money, he proposes for 1000 l. to pay 1400 l. in 4 years. Where its observable.

1. Whereas the Office pretends to but 5 ^. per cent. it is a full fifth of the
whole value, for it is 2000 l. Bills to the parties 8000 ^. except his own 1000
l. and it is better than a third of what he receives to dispose of, should we
admit that his bills will circulate.

2. He is so far from supposing that these Bills will ever be paid in Specie,
that he makes no manner of provision for it, but allows the annuity, which is
the fund for the Bills, to be paid in Bills: and so the Bills are to carry
themselves from the Bank and to the Bank, without any Circulation or Profit.

3. The Circulation, if any, must be performed at the very beginning by one
upon seven and an half, 400 l. being all that is to be paid till the end of the
first year to circulate the 1000 l. in Bills received by the party, and the
2000 l. in Bills put to the stock of Trade; unless what is accidental upon the
coming in of Moneys lent, which in truth, clogg the Bank with 50 ^. per annum.
loss for every 1000 l. and that money will be no more than is requisite to
clear encumbrances upon Estates subscribed.

And if any part of the 400 l. first brought in be employed in Trade, that,
before profitable returns, leaves the less to circulate the Bills, and if half
be employed in trade 1 l. must circulate 15 l.

4. If the Annuities were to be paid in Money, which would be very hard upon
them who have the Bills dead by them; yet the distance of 100 years makes it
very questionable what 150 l. per annum shall hold out 100 l. per annum in all
Events.

5. If this were practicable, it would be far from answering the great end
which the Doctor does, or ought to propound, of lessning the burden upon Land;
for either men with encumbred Estates must not come in, or if they do, they
will greatly abate the possibility of circulating the Bills.

Suppose a man of 150 l. per annum owes 1000 l. and takes up the 1000 l. which
he must advance; or suppose only the first 400 l. be in Money, but for the rest
he may bring the Bills he received from the Bank.

In the first case, he has occasion for five times as much money as a man of a
clear Estate brings to the Bank; if only the 400 l. be to be paid in money, then
indeed he will have occasion for less then 4 times as much as the other brings,
but by the same rule there may never be more than the first 400 l for every 150
l. per annum. subscribed to circulate all the Bills. But if the man owe 1500 l.
he is excluded from all benefit of this Bank.

6. The Lender will expect better security than can be found here. Shall he
resort to his own money? That is lent out to subscribers of Land. Shall he go
to their Land? that is made over to answer the Annuities to the Bank in its
Bills or Money: If in Bills they are never likely to yield money; if in Money,
that must be laid out to purchase Bills, and they are to be cancelled; If to
the Stock in Trade; that is first to answer the interest of 3000 l. to every
subscriber of 150 l. per Ann. and let the Lender catch the rest where he can.

It is needless here to object the want of sufficient certainty, that the Bills
of Credit shall come in upon any other account than their lying dead; or that
the Governors of this Bank shall not mismanage in several particulars, which
might require parliamentary provisions.

Of the Land-Bank so called.
The Lin^olns-Inn, Exeter-Exchange, Asgill Bank, or whatever Name you will give
it, rather than that which it assumes of Land-Bank, has a Subscription of
500000 l. with which 4 expeditious Gentlemen who are Directors and slanding
Council, pretend to pass so many real Securities as shall make to the Bank 30
l. per Cent. at 3 l. 10 s. per Cent. but as it is said 1 l. per Cent. more goes
for the Writings, and Mr. Asgil and another have 5000 l. Credit in the Stock
for the Invention; so that they and the Council are sure to get well if the
Bank should have no Credit beyond the Sum subscribed, in which case the Bank
would not get 2 l. per C^nt. considering the Charges, the Time the Money must
lie dead before Securities pass, and the 2 l. per Cent. upon their Bills, as
long as they pass. However they propose to themselves to raise 30 l. per Cent.
by Bills of Credit, upon the particular Estates conveyed to the Bank, which
Bills are to carry 2 l. per Cent. interest from 6 months to 6 months, and to
charge Men's Estates till 6 months notice for their coming in: yet if
Landed-men could have money no where else at their Rate, and there were no
flaws in their Settlement, they might not be much out in their reckoning.

But I cannot see how they can ever lend to the value of their Subscription,
because,

Bank much better sounded, and with fairer pretentions to a Parliamentary
Establishment, which will lend at 3 l. 10 d. per cent. and where the Borrower
may clear his Estate when ever he pays his Money; nor is it improbable that the
Bank of England, and such other Banks as are, or may be on foot, will so sink
interest, that money will be commonly had elsewhere at the same rate, nay is
already often let out at 4 l. per cent.

vid. The printed Settlement.
The settlement empowers a servant of the Bank to charge any man's Estate in
the name of the Trustees; they declare themselves chargeable only with wilful
Fraud: how then shall a man be secured against the Servants, granting out
double the due number of Bills, where all that receive them shall have a like
claim to be satisfied out of the Estate?



1. The Subscription Money all but 10000 l. for insurance must be supposed to
be lent out in Mortgages, and no Estate can or ought to be a security that an
other man's Estate shall be cleared upon bringing his Money.

2. Though they have acted a good while, it does not appear that the 10000 l. or
any part of it is yet laid out, notwithstanding their Covenant or Promise to
purchase with it a present Fund for insurance.

3. That Fund is to be farther supplied only with 10 s. per cent out of such
interest as they shall receive; which, if the whole 500000 l. were let out,
would be but 2500 l. per annum, and if but 100000 l. but 500 l. per annum,
which must be charged with bad Bills as well as with the good ones lying out,
and possibly with a charge yet more heavy from the defects of their settlement.
Besides the Subscribers will certainly expect to be first served with at least
2 per cent. before they will suffer any part of the profits of the Bank to be
laid out for this purpose.

4. No security is equal to the actual clearing an Estate, when the money due
upon it is paid: and it will be impossible for many to raise the Money by the
sale of any part of the Estate, or otherwise, unless the Estate can be assigned
over absolutely clear at the time of payment.

Trustees, but only particular Estates respectively, some of which may fail;
the apprehension which any man may justly have, that his Bill is charged upon
such an Estate, must needs hinder the currency of their Bills.



Shall he sue the Trustees? They declare before hand they will be answerable
only for Willful Fraud. Shall he lay hold of the Fund for insurance? That is
yet in the land of Promise, and where ever it is, will be loaded with clearing
the Borrowers Estate from Supernumerary or other bills lying out, and with
making good bad Bills, besides this of paying Bills when the Estate on which
they were charged is gone. Shall the Trustees be obliged to assign any one of
the other Mortgages? They are to bear only their own burden of Bills, and
enough too, if their design could take.



I take it by neither: And that this may appear by a bare representation of the
projected Settlement.

vid. The printed Settlement.
The legal Estate is settled upon the present Trustees, and that by a new term
not known in our Law, is to attend the equitable Interest, which is to vest in
New Trustees to be chosen from time to time, and that by virtue of their
Election, without any actual transferr or assignment; and they to whom the
equity was never transferred, are to charge an Estate to which they have no
Title; and this not by their immediate act, but by their Servant receiving
power from them, and that in and by the name which they assume without
Authoriry, not being incorporated; and this charge is to be made barely by the
Servant's reference to a Book where the Estate is entered, though that reference
names not the party whose Estate they would charge, nor yet the Estate, least
the Bills upon that Estate should not pass. These bills not being personal
charges;

Bankers man?

Lawyers, as to the Merchants?

l. to a man, who after settling his Estate to the use of the Bank, according to
this new contrivance, mortgages to an other who knows nothing of the first
mortgage, for 10000 l. Bona Fide paid.

Trustees to assign the legal Estate to him, and exclude the new Trustees from
an Equity, which had been no otherwise vested in them than as above? And what
regard in this case, would the Court of Chancery have to the intended charge
upon the Estate, by that blind and inauthoritative reference to a Book of
entries?

Or suppose the Trustees to whom the state was conveyed, and are likely to be
disobliged by being voted out of the trust of the Equity, which is designed to
govern the Legal Interest, should join with the Mortgagor in assurances to
others; who would be in the best condition those other persons or the Bank?

Of the National Land Bank.
In such difficulties are these Gentlemen involved, by running in the Dark
byond their Guide, Mr. Briscoe, who sometime before they set up had made a very
rational Proposal, for turning all the Land of the Kingdom which shall be
conveyed to Trustees for the use of the Bank, into a living Stock, and easing
others of their excessive Loads; by bringing a million of money to circulate 4
millions of Bills, charged upon Land and Money, the whole Fund making good
every Bill.

Yet no Man's Land is to continue in longer than he pleases, but he may
withdraw it at any time, paying the money which he has taken up there, and his
proportion of loss if any has then happened. And whether he has occasion for
money or no, he is to take up one Years Revenue of his Land, that the Bank may
be the first Mortgagee, if after settling his Estate he should borrow
elsewhere, and then take up money of the Bank. Indeed Mr. Neal has added to
this, Bills for an other Years Revenue, to be lent the Bank as so much Cash:
But I do not see how these Bills can yield more Credit than those which the
Directors have power to charge upon the whole Fund, and consequently upon every
particular Estate.

But as the Bills are likely to be current to the value of the Fund, and all
the Land mortgaged to the Bank, for so much as is borrowed becomes Fund, though
not entitled to Profit and Loss; the Fund for making good the Bills, may
extend as far as the Occasions of the Landed-men; and therefore the Bank's
Bills may pass as far, with the help of such money as will flow into it. When
the Values of the Lands and the Titles are ascertained, they cannot fail of
being a Fund of Credit for 3 4 ths of the value; and therefore he who
subscribes 100 l. per Ann. is to have credit for 1500 l. and his share in the
Bank accordingly, and yet shall receive the yearly Income, paying his
proportion of loss, and such Money or Bills as he takes up; and as the Interest
which himself pays is part of the profits in which he shares, it is highly
probably that he cannot pay 2 l. per Cent. after the first year, and after that
would receive more per Cent* than he had paid.

On the other side, he that subscribes 1500 l. shall have equal Advantages with
the subscriber of 100 l per An. and 3 l. per Cent. for the whole from his first
payment, nor can his money be called in faster than at 10 quarterly payments:
But if he choose to pay faster, he may have Interest at 3 l. per Cent. for all
above the payment then due; yet some of the present Directors lodge many
Thousands there without interest.

And if we may conjecture by the increase of Credit in the Bank of England,
which. has a much less, and less certain Fund, it is not to be thought that more
than half the subscription-money need be called in, and then they will have 6
l. per Cent. certain besides their share in the profits.

Though these payments may seem too slow to set the Bank in credit, especially
after the Coin is regulated, and men will be less fond of Bills than they have
been; yet such a Fund can never fail of commanding money where it is needful;
nor will men unnecessarily call for money, while they can have so good Bills;
especially if this Bank were established by Ast of Parliament: in consequence
of which it would soon become a Registry for most of the Lands in the Kingdom,
and if it were made so for such as would voluntarily enter their Lands and
Encumbrances, or the Claims which they have; and were 100000 l. per An* settled
for 40 Years for 1600000 l. to the public (whereas the Bank of England has in
effect a perpetuity for 1200000 l. it would make this Bank no mean Rival to
that of Amsterdam; besides the raising Land to 40 Years purchase generally, and
that in Bank to much more.

Nor can it be thought that the Landedmen, who must needs have the prevailing
Interest in Parliament, can long neglect those Advantages, which would set them
upon an equal bottom with the Traders and Usurers.

The most weighty Objections which I have met with against this Bank are these
two.

Landed-man may withdraw his Estate.

their going out; and therefore are upon equal hazard*

Monied-man may have Credit for 3 4ths of the value of his whole Subscription,
and extend that Credit in Bank bills; and if this use of his Stock would not
for that time be like a Withdrawing so much; yet if he should never be able to
bring this back to the Bank, this might be worse than a Landman's withdrawing
his Land.

l. actually conveyed, and in effect brought in, to every 1500 l. subscribed in
money when but a 10th. part is paid in, and possibly there may never be 4* 10ths
more. And if any Landed men should withdraw, the Benefit that is expected, and
would be certain, when ever Estates to the value of 2 or 3 Millions were
settled, would bring in enough of clear Estates, when they saw the certainty of
receiving their Revenue, and yet having large Interest, as if they had advanced
1500 l. for every 100 l. per Ann.

If the Estates are encumbered, it must be under 3 4ths of the value, or they
cannot be admitted into the Bank; but if all the Subscribers of Land took up
the 3 4ths, the monied Man's profit would be the greater, and such men the Bank
is sure of till they can pay their money, and in the mean while it has their
Estates as a Fund of Credit, not only for that money, but for the remaining 4th
which the Land-Bank, so called, cannot pretend to, any farther than as a
Security for the money borrowed upon the respective Estates.

Bank of England, and the Land-Bank so called, which is the possibillity of bad
Titles, and counterfeit Bills.

l. per Cent. were cleared, that would be 150000 l. which no man can imagine
should be loss'd in any year. And there is no doubt, but the reasonable
expectation of a much greater gain, will induce numbers of prudent men to
venture with clear Estates. However the Bank could stand without them, and no
man who owes 1500 l. or 1000 l. upon 100 l. per An. can possibly be discouraged
from such a method of lessening his burden; nor is it to be thought, but many
would come in, if it were for no other end, but to set an example for such a
National Good, as has been wanted for many Ages. vid. The Letter from a Citizen
concerning the Land-Bank.


Indeed Objections have been published by some body concerned in the Land Bank
so called, which have so little in them, and so much mistake plain fact, that
they hardly deserve notice, as,

Briscoe proposes 3 millions Fund, one in Money, two in Land. When the proposal
is for 5 millions, and but one in Money. So that whereas the profit to the
moneyed man is supposed to be one 3d. besides his 3 l. per cent. it is but one
5 l. of the whole.

l. per cent. and letting it out at 3 l. upon which he raises a vain
calculation how many millions at 1 l. per cent. clear profit must circulate to
make 6 l. per cent to the Subscribers.

Not considering that this would be an Objection against their Bank; for if
neither can extend its credit beyond the money in Bank, or advanced in Specie;
it were to no purpose to pretend to a Bank of Credit.

But suppose the million subscribed in money should circulate but the single
value of the original Fund, which is all as money to help circulation, this
would turn to much better account than with reason can be expected in their
Bank, as will appear by the next Objection.

l. per cent. gain, raises the moneyed man's Interest but to six, and yet makes
the landed man borrow money for nothing.

Whereas if this be done with half the subscription money paid in, the mony'd
man has at the rate of 12 l. per cent. and then he need not envy the landed man
the advantage which is not gained by the money only, but advanced by the credit
of the Land; which, as was before observed, is 2000 l. actually conveyed to
1500 l. subscribed, and but half that paid and perhaps much less, when yet, if
I mistake not, the moneyed man shall have credit to supply his occasions for
three forths of his Subscription.





Can they ca^l in the money too fast? This cannot be faster then at 10
quarterly payments, whereas the landed man conveys his Estate at first, and the
more money is called in, the more is supposed to be let out at interest, which
each shares in according to his proportion* Can it be thought the landed men
will the rather incline to put the money out upon bad securities? that becomes
a charge upon their own land, and whatever advantages they make to the Bank,
redound to the others benefit; and they who have the largest stake there will
be more concerned for improving the stock, than they who may venture a little
there, the better to raise the much greater interest which they have elsewhere:
and yet no landed man, how much soever he has subscribed, can have* (...) then
5 Votes.

Bank, which is the inconvenience and hazard that Mr. Briscoe's subscribers may
meet with, by an unpresidented settlement of their Estates.



I must needs say it has not appeared to me, that ever any body before Mr.
Briscoe proposed a practicable Scheme for this, and yet Sir William Petty seems
in the year 1682, to have had something of the like kind in view, when to the
Question.

Sir Will. Pe^^^'s quantulum cu^que concerning Money.
What Remedy is there if we have too little money?

He says.

We must erect a Bank, which well computed does almost double the effect of
our coined money; and we have in England materials for a Bank which shall
furnish stock enough to drive the Trade of the whole commercial World.

The hint of so great a Man is not to be despised at least shows, That Banks of
Credit are vid. Mr. John Blackwell's Essay toward carrying on the War against
France.
not to be looked on as vain projects. In this belief I am farther confirmed, by
perusing a Treatise now in my hands, wherein a Person of great Judgment and
Experience not only holds, That it is necessary at this time for the Parliament
to appoint Bills of Credit, but that they may be effectual with only
Parliamentary Security, without any particular present Fund.

And if I am not much mistaken, it appears by what I have observed of other
Banks, that the Crown Bank which I propose, to supply the present Exigencies,
is liable to no Objection, but what will fall upon the best of the others: and
that all but the National Land Bank labor with Objections which cannot be
urged against this. For the recommending of which it may be observed.

1. That here is an absolute certainty that the Credit shall never be stretched
beyond its real and certain Fund, which shall yield in Specie all the Money for
which it gives Credit.

2. Till the Money is paid by the public, the Bills will be as Money, and
passing as such from one to an other, are as capable of yielding interest: and
consequently there will be no need of the Crowns, paying interest, when it at
the very first pays Bills, which are current, not only because they shall in
their time be paid in Money, but in the mean while are as true a Medium of
Trade and Profit. This therefore in few years time would save the Nation some
Millions as well as yield Millions for the present occasion.

3. Whereas it will be some years before the benefit of the best of the other
Banks can be diffused over the whole Nation; this may be in few weeks, as soon
as the Bills can be finished, and delivered out.

4. If there be any apprehension that other Banks may be too powerful, or may
be a means of engrossing Commodities, and enhansing their Prizes; this has its
certain limits, and reaches no farther, than the necessities of the public
require.

5. Forwardness to close with invitations to honest profit, may lead the
Directors of other Banks to pass bad Titles, or what was fairly adventured may
miscarry: But the Crown-Bank proposed is, in its nature, as firm and stable as
the Foundations of this Monarchy; which can never be moved, but by such a
Calamity as should leave us no visible means of continuing a protestant Nation,
or free people.

FINIS.

