An Exhortation to all People. Moderate Reader, be serious, and mind these
following things, and then I believe thou will Judge charitably of them.
THe true Church is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the pillar and
ground of Truth, 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.15. Howbeit the most high
dwells not in Temples made with hands, Act. 7.48. The Saints Bodies, they are
the temple of God, and God dwells and walks in his own Temple, 1 Cor. 3.16. and
6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16. And what house will ye build unto me says the Lord? is not
Heaven my Throne, and Earth my Footstool? Act. 7.4^, 50, 51. And the true
everlasting High Priest rules in us, Christ Jesus, (the Saints Teacher) who was
not made after the Law, of a Carnal Commandment, but after the power of an
endless Life, and so remains a Priest forever, Heb. 7.24. etc. And Christ said,
Come unto me, and learn of me, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. The true Baptism is inward
by the Spirit, for as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ, Gall. 3.27, 28, 29. And there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all; who is alive all, through all, and in you all,
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. And by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, 1 Cor.
12.13. And the true Communion is inward in the Spirit, and Jesus said unto
them, I am the Bread of Life, and except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood,
ye have no Life in you, Joh. 6. from 48. to 59. And the true worship of Christ
is in the Spirit within his People, for he said, they that will worship God,
must worship him in Spirit and Truth, read his Conference with the Woman of
Samaria, Joh. Chap. 4. and Romans Chap. 8.

Now upon the whole matter, I do say and affirm, that Christ is within his
People, and that he was and is the Saints Teacher, and as he is the true
Teacher, so he will continue to be the last* and whosoever set up Hireling
Teachers, and follow them, and neglect Christ's teachings in their own Bosoms;
such Teachers are the False Teachers, which Jude the Servant of the Lord in his
general Epistle testified against. And such are they now, and of the same
Nature and Generation with the Scribes and Pharisees, which Christ Jesus
pronounced so many Woes against, as in Mat. 23. let that be minded, for they
are seen with the Light of Jesus, which manifests all things, of what sort it
is.

And let the Hireling Priests of these times, Professors or Profane, such as
have charged us (who in scorn are called Quakers) to be Denyers of the
Scriptures; let sober People judge whether they or we be the denyers of the
Scriptures, in Life, Practice and Conversation, let them be denied and turned
from, provided the Scriptures without wresting may be judge therein; for to the
Spirit of God and them, we shall appeal, that what we hold, profess and
practice, they shall justify us therein, rightly understood spiritually, and
lay aside your outward Laws, and carnal Weapons; and let Gods Divine Royal Law,
and Spiritual Weapons, decide this great Controversy in these things that
concern Eternal Salvation and Damnation. For all the Children of the Lord are
taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness are they established, as in Isa.
54.13, 14. Jer. 31.33, 34. thus it is written in the Prophets; And they shall
be all taught of God; every Man therefore that has heard and learned of the
Father, comes unto me, says Christ, Joh. 6.45. And the Grace of God which
brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, and this Grace of God teaches the
Saints to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lust, and to live soberly and
righteously in this present Evil World. And all who turn from this Grace, they
turn into Wantonness, and so deny the Lord that bought them.

And as the Apostle writ in his Epistle to the Romans, Because that which may
be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it to them, Romans 1.19.
so that it is clear and evident by the S^riptures of Truth, that the true
Teacher Christ is within People, and cannot be removed into a Corner, nor does
no more. And this is the Judgment and Doctrine of all Christ's Faithful
Ministers, who are called, chosen, and sent of him, as the Apostles and
Disciples were.

And therefore the Lords chosen People can say, away with all covetous Hireling
Teachers, for they are useless, and let them learn to labor with their hands,
as the Apostles did, and as the true Ministers of Christ now do, and so let the
Gospel of Christ Jesus be free, and not chargeable to any people.

Some things offered to the Consideration of all you who are called Magistrates
and Rulers over the People, and to all your under Officers, and your Hireling
Teachers of all sorts, who pretend the Scripture to be your Rule, who with your
outward Laws, do Force and Compel many such as absent from you in your Worship,
to join with you therein; which thing never was the practice of the Lord's
People in any Age, recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, and so out of the Order
and Rule of the Scriptures.
ANd your Church (as you call it) was it not the Papists Old Masse-house? and
by them builded when they were in Power? Is it not so filled, and the Assembly
therein with People that live in Pride, Pleasures, Persecution, Drunkenness,
Lying and Swearing, and such like Sins? and that you still say you are
Miserable Sinners, erring and going astray like lost Sheep, and doing that you
should not do, and leaving that undone which you should do, is not this your
weekly Confession, and daily Practice? let God's true Witness in all sober
People answer; and if so (then for my part) I dare not join with you therein,
nor be a Member of that Church, whatever I suffer be it,

And I am apt to believe, that you may make Hypocrites to come and join with
you, by your forceing Laws, but take heed they be not such, as if they had
opportunity and power, would turn against you and destroy: has there not been
some appearances thereof both in former and latter Years? But those whom the
Lord has redeemed and brought into his Spiritual Worship, ^^not bow to any
Likeness, Image, or outward Form of Worship, where the Power and Presence of
God is wanting; for it was the Apostles Exhortation to turn away from such as
had a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof: Neither can the Redeemed
of the Lord conform to your way of Worship; for the same Apostle says to those
he writ to, But be not ye conformed to the World, but transformed, by the
renewing of your Mind, etc. as in Romans 12.2. Neither can we fashion our selves
according to the course of this World, which passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. And our
Kingdom is not of this World, even as our Lord and Masters was not of this
World; for we seek another Kingdom, Eternal in the Heavens; whose Maker,
Builder and Upholder is God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. And all that we desire from you who
are in Authority, that you would let the Spirit of God and the Scriptures be
your rule in all your actings, and if we digress from the same upon an equal
trial, then let the Transgressors suffer according to Law; For the Law was
added because of Transgression, and is not to be laid upon a righteous Man; but
unto the Lawless and Disobedient, to the Ungodly and Sinners, etc. as in the 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. And the Law of God is Just, Holy and Good, as was in the
beginning, which is to fear and serve God above all things, and to walk humbly
before him, to deal Justly and to love Mercy, to do to others as we would be
done unto. And here is the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel of Jesus answered,
which was in the beginning, and which will never come to an end: And whosoever
goes from this Law of the Spirit, goes out of the order and rule of the
Scriptures.

Neither is our warfare and Weapons Carnal, or destructive to the Bodies of
any; but Spiritual and Mighty, to the pulling down the Man of Sin, the grand
Enemy of the Soul, for we desire not to contend with Flesh and Blood; but for
the Faith which once was and now is delivered to the Saints. This is our
Warfare, and therefore ye ought in right reason, and by the rule of the
Scriptures, to let us live peaceably by you, and not to turn your Swords
against us; for the Magistrates Sword was and ought to be for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the praise or them that do well, and in so doing then you
are in the place of true Justice, and so in the order and rule of the Spirit of
God and the Scriptures, which all People upon the face of the whole Earth is
out of, which does that to others, which they would not have others do unto
them; for whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do you so unto them;
this is the order and rule of the Spirit of God and the Scriptures; and when
these things come to be minded and practiced, and then will Persecution about
Religion cease and come to an end, and all Persecuting Laws will be laid aside,
and Righteousness will run down the Streets, like a mighty stream, and the
knowledge of God will cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Seas; this is
that the Righteous pray for, wait for, and live in hopes (in Gods time) to see
the same fulfilled.

And now a little to examine (comparativly) of the dwellings of Gods Enemies in
former Ages, and in this our Age, against the Lords People and Servants;
whereby the moderate Reader, may come to have an insight and understanding by
this present Relation.

Was it not the High Priest, the Chief Priest, and the Captain of the Temple
with his Officers, that rose up against the Apostles, and Imprisoned them;
saying, Did not we straightly command you, that you should not teach in this
Name? (viz. Christ) read Act. 5.17. and take counsel at the good Man Gamaliel
therein mentioned, then it may tend to your good.

And may it not truly be said, that the Chief Priest and Rulers, and the baser
sort of Men, were the greatest Persecutors in the days of Christ and his
Apostles? let the Scriptures and Gods faithful Witness in all sober Men answer.

And was it not the Chief Priest and Rulers that set Saul forward in his
Persecution, till the Lord struck him down, that he fell to the Earth; and
after his Conversion, when he came to preach Christ Jesus, then the learned
Jews took counsel to kill him, but the Lord so ordered it, that they were
disappointed thereof, and he delivered Paul, Act. 9.

And how did the Persecuting Jews when they saw Paul in the Temple, stir up all
the People and laid hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel Help, etc. Act.
21.27. etc.

And is not this Persecuting Spirit at work in this our Age? Yes, for it is one
and the same through all Generations, For as it was then, so it is now, he that
is born after the Flesh, persecutes him that is born after the Spirit, these
are the two Births as in the first of Joh. 12, 13, 14. verses.

And in Acts 23. when Paul began to plead his own cause, you may read how the
High Priest Annanias commanded them that stood by him, to smite him on the
Face; and have not many Faithful Friends had the like usage from the Priests in
this Age. In which Chap. you may read how the Jews had banded together and
bound themselves under a Curse, saying, They would neither Eat nor Drink till
they had killed Paul. But you may read how the Lord prevented these Bloody
Persecutors, and delivered him.

And in Act. 24. you may read how that Ananias the High Priest, descended with
the Elders and others, who informed the Governor against Paul, How they had
found him a pestilent Fellow, a mover of Sedition among all the Jews,
throughout the World. Read the Chap. throughout, there you have his Examination
before the Chief Captain Lysias, and how he was sent to Foelix the Governor,
who for doing the Jews a pleasure left Paul Bound.

And in Chap. 25. you may read how the High Priest, and the Chief of the Jews,
informed Festus against Paul, and how they laid in wait to kill him; but there
was so much Nobility and Charity in Festus, upon Paul's Examination, that he
would not grant what they desired, read the Chapter throughout. And in Act.
Chap. 26. you may read his Confession, and the relation or manner of his
Conversion before King Agrippa; and as he spoke for himself, Festus said with a
loud Voice, Paul thou art beside thy self, much Learning does make thee Mad.
But he said, I am not Mad, most Noble Festus, but speak for the word of Truth
and Soberness, etc. And King Agrippa said, Thou have almost persuaded me to be
a Christian, read the Chapter throughout.

Now observe, did not some of those whom you Christians call Heathens show more
Christian-like usage in that Age, then many of the Rulers in England has done
in this Age, yet would have the name of Christian Magistrates. But the true
real Christians are followers of Christ in the Regeneration; not in the oldness
of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit, For the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. And it is not the Name that makes a
Christian, but the Nature, not the 1st Nature, for that is Earthly, Sensual and
Devilish; but the 2d Nature, the new Nature regenerated and born again, for
Christ Jesus said, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom if
God; that which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of the
Sprit ^ Spirit, marvel not that I said unto you, ye must be born again, etc.
Joh. 3.3. to 8.

This persecuting Spirit was always blind, it was blind in the great professing
Jews, who pretended a Law, whereby to put Christ to Death in that time; it was
blind in the great professing Presbyterians, who pretended a Law against us to
persecute us thereby, (but the Lord had no hand in those Laws, further then
permission) and it is well if the Rulers in this Age proceed not to Blood,
against a Harmless and Innocent People, for Professing Christ Jesus and
Worshipping him, in the way of his Spirit, who was sent from the Bosom of his
Father, Not to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.56.

And does not Englands Rulers pretend a Law now, (and is it not contrary to
Christ's Law) not only for spoiling of Goods, but also casting into Prison, by
which many have suffered to Death, which comes near to Blood, and is not this a
mark of Satan the Destroyer, Rev. 2.10. for Christ Jesus nor his Servants never
cast any into Prison. Let the Spirit and Scriptures of Truth be judge in those
things, for to them I shall appeal, and methinks these times answer much, and
^^ parallel with the Apostles times, in matter of Persecution; and it is the
desire of my heart (if it were the will of God) that the Understandings of
Englands Rulers might come to be opened with Divine Wisdom, that thereby they
might come to see and discern betwixt those that serve God acceptably, and
those that serve him not, and so put a difference betwixt the Precious and the
Vile; for is not Antichrists Kingdom of Sin and Unrighteousness grown to a
great height? and does not Wickedness abound? and is not Christ's Kingdom of
Righteousness too too little regarded; so that he that departs from Evil is
become a Prey? and this the Lo^d sees, and in his own time will put an end to
Sin, and finish Transgression, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and this
will be the joy of the Upright in Heart, whose Confidence is in the Lord alone.
And I say again, the true Worship of Christ is Spiritual; which he set up above
1600 Years since, (and never changed it) read John 4. from 20, to 25. And where
two or three, many or few, meet together, and worship together in the Spiritual
Worship, there is Christ in the midst of them; and no other Worship will the
Righteous God accept of, but that which is performed in Spirit and Truth; all
other Worships in his sight will be found Idolatry, For God that made the
World, and all things therein, dwells not in Temples made with Hands, read Act
7.48, 49, 50. And Christ said, I in you, and you in me, so the Spirit of God is
not to be limited to time or place; and to day, if ye will hear his Voice,
harden not your Hearts, etc. This is not to hear the voice of a Mortal Man, but
the voice of the Immortal God within all are to hear; this is the true
Everlasting Prophet, which Moses the Man of God spoke of, and he that will not
hear this Prophet Christ Jesus, and receive his Teaching shall be cut off, etc.
the Apostle says, because they do not receive him and his Spiritual Teachings,
But to as many as receive him, to them ^ power to become the Sons of God. born
again of the Immortal word of Life, ^ lives and abides forever; but this was a
mystery to old Nichodemus. In his ^ and it is a mystery to all Natural Carnal
Wisdom at this time; For the N^ Man by all his Wisdom, receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither ^ because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2.11, 14. Here is living word^ a dying Man; yea, dead as to the World, and the
Vanities and Rudiments ^ of, yet living unto God, by Jesus Christ, who is my
Life and the length o^ Days; who am a lover of the Souls of all People; one
who is, and has ^ Traveller toward the Heavenly and Spiritual Canaan, who by
Christ Je^ redeemed and brought out of the Broad way, which leads to
Destruction, ^ the narrow way which leads to Life, and out of the Worlds
Customs, ^ passess away, into the Saints practice, which will never decay; and
from ^ the Covetous Hi^elings and Worlds Teachers, to the teachings of Christ
Je^ in Spirit and Truth, and for these Mercys my Soul shall Bless and Praise
the Lo^, and that for evermore.

Writ in the 8th month, in the Year of Christ, 1684. And in the 80th Year of my
Age T. Atkinson.
POSTSCRIPT.
EDward Wilson, who art a Justice of Peace, within Westmorland; neither thee, ^
formers, (as thou styles them,) have proved Friends Meetings, (whom thee in
sco^^ ^kers) to be Seditious Conventicles, or any way tending to the breach of
the Peace of ^ But on the contrary they are quiet and peaceable; and tend to
Peace, in the God of Peace ^ they meet, to serve and worship him in Spirit and
Truth, as he requires of them. Read Jo^ 21, 22, 23, 24. So that all, that thou
and thy Informers has done against a harmless People, ^ the Envy of your Hearts
against the Lord, his Truth and People, in spoiling their goods, ^ into Prison:
Is it not a Work of Satan the Devil, Rev. 2. and 10. Who is the A^ Destroyer,
Rev. 4.11. There read your selves, and consider if you are not comprehend^^ ^
Light of Jesus.

And therefore, now a warning to you (from the Lord of Life and Glory; who will
re^ ^cording to your deeds:) Cease from your unrighteous and unchristian like
Actions, (...) ^pentance before the Door of Mercy be shut against you; for an
Account you must give to (...) ^ous Judge of Heaven and Earth. These are true,
and living Words, from a dying Man to the World and the vanities thereof: But
living unto God by Jesus Christ, who is my (...) length of my Days.

Tho. Atkinson.



THE END.

