At the Sign of the ELEPHANT Within a Door or two of the Golden-Posts Tavern at
Charing Cross,
Dwells a Person that Writes all the usual Hands of England, and Teaches to
Write a good Hand in a Months time, his way of Teaching absolutely differing
from all Masters, as to his concise Method and pains taking; he having Taught
many from 7 and 8 years of age to 50, to write in a Month or six Weeks at
farthest to great perfection; for in his way of Teaching, the Scholar cannot
miss of Writing an exact and true Hand: By reason for want of a right grounding
and pains taking on the Masters side at first, in the knowledge of the reason
and humor of Hand and Pen, how the Letters are leaning and depending one upon
another, that the Scholars writes not sooner and better then they do; for in
most of the Hands of England, from 5 or 6 Letters Infallibly does the whole
Alphabet depend, and in making some one Letters, there is no avoiding the
making 4 or 5 exact Letters, and so easy and plain, that Young Ladies and
Gentlemen of 7, 8, and 9 years of age, has in a month or six weeks at
farthest, readily attained to such Perfection, as to be judged to have learnt
Months or Years: who ever is pleased to discourse the Professor hereof, may
receive a more ample satisfaction.

Shorthand also he Teaches with great expedition, he having abreviated,
corrected, and amended the same, to make it the more facile, easy, and plain to
the Learner.

The Author makes and sells a curious sort of shining Ink, an Ink that is
everlasting, that decays not in Paper or Parchment, that neither Moth nor Mice
will touch or come near.

Likewise a Liquor may be had of the Author, that recovers any loss or decayed
Writing, either in Paper or Parchment.

Also any Writing or Business may be fairly Writ and Copied to great content.


