Advertisement.
THere is lately Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, these Two Books following.

I. An Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes. Together with
some Animadversions upon a Book writ by Sir Edw. Herbert, Lord Chief Justice of
the Court of Common Pleas, Entitled, A short Account of the Authorities in
Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales 's Case.

II. The Power, Jurisdiction, and Privilege of Parliament; And the Antiquity
of the House of Commons Asserted: Occasioned by an Information in the King's
Bench, by the Attorney General, against the Speaker of the House of Commons.

As also a Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of
England; occasioned by the late Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes.

Both Writ by Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath,
and late one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.

A DEFENSE Of the Late Lord Russel's Innocence, By way of Answer or Confutation
of a Libellous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, An ANTIDOTE against POISON; WITH Two
Letters of the Author of this Book, Upon the Subject of his Lordship's Trial.
Together with An ARGUMENT in the Great CASE Concerning Elections of Members to
Parliament, Between Sr Samuel Barnardiston Bar. Plaintiff, AND Sr Will. Soames
Sheriff of Suffolk, Defend' In the Court of King's Bench, in an Action upon the
Case, And afterward by Error sued in the Exchequer-Chamber.

By Sir ROBERT ATKYNS, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, And late one
of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1689.

TO THE READER
HAving, about five Years since, had Applications made to me by diverse Friends
and Relations of that Most Excellent Person, the Late LORD RVSSEL, when his
Troubles befell him, and while he was upon his Trial, to give him the best
Assistance I could in my Profession, and to Instruct him how to manage his
Defense: And the like Assistance being afterward desired from me, by many more
Persons of the best Quality, who soon after fell into the same Danger: I living
at some distance from London, did venture, by Letters, to send the best Rules
and Directions I could, toward the making of their Just Defense, being
heartily concerned with them. The Copies of which Letters of mine, being very
lately come to my Hands, with an Intention to have them likewise Published
together, with that Discourse or Argument that concerned that Honorable Lord,
I thought it might be some help to such as may possibly hereafter fall into the
like Danger and Trouble, being by the strict Rules of Law denied the benefit of
Council in Capital Crimes, as to Matters of Fact and Proofs, at an easy Rate
to be instructed, by the Advice contained in these Letters, how to manage their
Defense. This prevailed with me to Publish the very Letters themselves, being
merely upon the same Subject with the larger Discourse, upon the Title and Head
of High Treason.

First LETTER, CONCERNING My Lord Russel's TRIAL.
SIR,
I Am not without the Apprehensions of Danger that may arise by advising in, or
so much as discoursing of Public Affairs; yet no fear of Danger shall hinder
me from performing that Duty we owe to one another, to Counsel those that need
our Advice, how to make their just Defense when they are called in question for
their Lives, especially if they are Persons that have by their general Carriage
and Conversation appeared to be Men of Worth, and Lovers of their King and
Country, and of the Religion Established among us. I will follow the Method you
use, and answer what you ask in the Order I find in your own Letters.

I cannot see any disadvantage or hazard by pleading the general Plea of Not
Guilty: If it fall out upon the Proofs that the Crime is only Misprision of
Treason, and not the very Crime of Treason, the Jury must then find the
Prisoner not guilty of Treason, and cannot upon an Indictment of Treason find
the party guilty of Misprision, because he is not Indicted, for the Offense of
Misprision, and Treason and Misprision of Treason are Offenses that the Law
has distinguished the one from the other, and the one is not included in the
other; and therefore if the Proofs reach no farther then to prove a Misprision,
and amount not to Treason, the Prisoner may urge it for himself, and say that
the Proofs do not reach to the Crime charged in the Indictment, and if the
Truth be so, the Court ought so to direct the Jury, not to find it.

Now being present in company with others, where those others do consult and
conspire to do some Treasonable Act, does not make a man guilty of Treason,
unless by some Words and Actions he signify his Consent to it, and Approbation
of it: but his being privy to it, and not discovering it, makes him guilty of
Misprision of Treason, which consists in the concealing it, but it makes him
not guilty of Treason; and if the same Person be present a second time, or
oftener, this neither does not make him guilty of Treason, only it raises a
strong suspicion that he likes it, and consents to it, and approves of it, or
else he would have forborne after his having been once amongst them: But the
strongest suspicion does not sufficiently prove a Guilt in Treason, nor can it
go for any Evidence: And that upon two Accounts.

First, The Proofs in case of Treason must be plain and clear and positive, and
not by Inference, or Argument, or the strongest Suspicion imaginable: Thus says
Sir Edward Coke in many places in his third Institutes in the Chapter of High
Treason.

Secondly, In an Indictment of High Treason, there must not only be a general
Charge of Treason, nor is it enough to set forth of what sort or species the
Treason is, as killing the King, or levying War against him, or Coining Money,
or the like, but the Law requires that in the Indictment there must be also set
forth some Overt or open Act, as the Statute of the 25th of Edw. the 3 d. calls
it, or some Instance given by the Party or Offender, whereby it may appear he
did consent to it, and consult it, and approve of it; and if the bare being
present should be taken and construed to be a sufficient Overt or open Act, or
Instance, then there is no difference between Treason and Misprision of
Treason; for the being present without consenting makes no more then
Misprision, therefore there must be something more then being barely present to
make a man guilty of Treason, especially since the Law requires an Overt, or
open Act to be proved against the Prisoner accused. See Sir Edward Coke's third
Institutes fol. 12. upon those words of the Statute, (per overt fact) and that
there ought to be direct and manifest Proofs, and not bare Suspicions or
Presumptions be they never so strong and violent, see the same fol. in the
upper part of it upon the word (Proveablement) and the Statute of the 5 of Edw.
6. Chap. 11. requires that there should be two Witnesses to prove the Crime, so
that if there be but one Witness, let him be never so credible a Person, and
never so positive; yet if there be no other Proof, the Party ought to be found
Not Guilty, and those two Witnesses must prove the Person guilty of the same
sort or species of Treason. As for Example, if the Indictment be for that
Species of Treason of Conspiring the King's Death. Both Witnesses must prove
some Fact, or Words tending to that very sort of Treason; but if there be two
Witnesses, and one proves the Prisoner Conspired the Death of the King, and the
other Witness proves the Conspiring to do some other sort of Treason, this
comes not home to prove the Prisoner guilty upon that Indictment, for the Law
will not take away a man's Life in Treason upon the Testimony and Credit of one
Witness, it is so tender of a man's Life, the Crime, and the Forfeitures are so
great and heavy.

And as there must be two Witnesses, so by the Statute made in the 13th year of
His now Majesty, Chap. the 1 st. (Entitled for the Safety of His Majesty's
Person) those two Witnesses must not only be Lawful, but also Credible Persons.
See that Statute in the 5 th Paragraph, and the Prisoner must be allowed to
object against the Credit of all, or any of the Witnesses; and if there be but
one Witness of clear and good credit and the rest not credible, then the
Testimony of those that are not credible must go for nothing by the Words and
Meaning of this Statute: See the Statute. Now were I a Iury-Man, I should think
no such Witness a credible Witness, as should appear either by his own
Testimony, or upon proof made by others against him to have been Particeps
Criminis, for that proves him to be a bad, and consequently not so credible a
man; especially if it can appear the Witness has trapann'd the Prisoner into
the committing of the Crime. Then the Witness will appear to be guilty of a far
higher Crime then the Prisoner, and therefore ought not to be believed as a
credible Witness against the Prisoner, for he is a credible Witness that has
the credit of being a good and honest Man, which a Trapanner cannot have, and
this Trapanning proves withal, that the Trapanner did bear a Spite and Malice
against the Person Trapanned, and intended to do him a mischief, and designed
to take away his Life. Shall such a one be a credible Witness, and be believed
against him? God forbid.

Then again, It cannot but be believed that such Persons as have been guilty of
the same Crime, will out of a Natural Self-love be very forward and willing to
swear heartily and to the purpose, in order to the Convicting of others, that
they may by this Service merit their Pardon, and save their own Lives. And for
this reason are not so Credible Witnesses, such as the Statute of the 13 of
Car. 2. does require. Read over the whole Chapters of Sir Edward Coke of High
Treason, and of Petty Treason; for in this latter of Petty Treason there is
much matter that concerns High Treason.

I wish with all my Soul, and I humbly and heartily pray to Almighty God, that
these Gentlemen that have given so great proof of their Love to the True
Religion, and of the just Rights and Liberties of their Country, and of their
Zeal against Popery, may upon their Trial appear Innocent, I am so satisfied of
their great worth, that I cannot easily believe them guilty of so horrid a
Crime. I pray God to stand by them in the time of their distress;

I wish I might have the liberty fairly to give them the best assistance I
could, in that wherein I might be any way capable of doing it. I beseech
Almighty God to heal our Divisions, and Establish us upon the sure Foundations
of Peace and Righteousness. I thank you for the favor you have done me, by
imparting some Public Affairs which might perhaps have been unknown to me, or
not known till after a long time, for I keep no correspondence.

When there is an occasion, pray oblige me by a farther account, especially
what concerns these Gentlemen: And though I have written nothing here but what is
Innocent and Justifiable, yet that I may be the surer against any disadvantage
or misconstruction, pray take the pains to transcribe what Notes you think fit
out of this large Paper, but send me this Paper back again enclosed in an other
by the same hand that brings it.

There is nor ought to be no such thing as Constructive Treason, this defeats
the very Scope and Design of the Statute of the 25th of Edw. 3. which is to
make a plain Declaration, what shall be adjudged Treason by the Ordinary Courts
of Justice, the conspiring any thing against the King's Person, is most justly
taken to be to conspire against His Life.

But conspiring to Levy War, or to Seize the Guards is not conspiring against
the King's Life. For these are Treasons of a different Species.

Your Faithful Friend and Servant R. A.

The Second Letter.
SIR,
I Thank you for the unexpected Account you gave me by your first Letter, but
this exact Narrative you have now sent me of the Trial of the Honorable
Excellent Person my Lord Russel has exceedingly obliged me. It was a thing I
much desired, but I knew not from what hand to gain it, for I was a little
impatient to hear what could be proved of so foul a nature as High Treason
against a Person of whom I had ever entertained a very high esteem; and though I
had a very small and short acquaintance with him, yet no Man that has known any
thing of the Public Affairs, or of our late Transactions could be a mere
Stranger to his great Worth. He had as great a Name for a true and honest
English Gentleman, and for good Temper, and Prudence, and Moderation, as ever I
knew any Man have, and was generally beloved by all that love our Religion and
Country. I presume your Relation of the Proofs at his Trial is certainly true
in every part, and in the very words, and it is a thing that might be had by
many hands, the proceedings being so public, and I suppose deliberate:
Presuming it to be true, this I will affirm, that upon this Evidence, both that
against him, and for him, (might I have been permitted to have made his defense
for him at his Trial after the Evidence given) I could easily have satisfied
any equal and understanding Judicious Man, that my Lord ought to have been
acquitted, and had I been one of the Jury that tried him, I make no doubt I
could clearly have convinced all my Fellows (if they were Honest and
Indifferent.) that they ought not to have found him Guilty. The Species or sort
of High Treason that the Witnesses inclined to prove against him, was a
Conspiracy with others to Leavy War against the King.

The two first Witnesses, viz. Rumsey and Sheppard, tho what they say may raise
a strong suspicion upon my Lord, and make it probable that he was guilty, yet
neither of them do come home and close to the Person of my Lord Russel, as they
do (I confess) against the Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir Thomas Armstrong and
Ferguson.

The first does not affirm, that the Lord Russel did join in the discourse, or
agree to any thing in the Consult, but only says, he was present, which extends
no farther then to make a Misprision of Treason, and this too not directly and
positively as Legal Proof ought to be, to convict a Man of Treason; the later (
Sheppard) when he applies what he swore to the Person of the Lord Russel only
says, He believes the Lord Russel was there at that time when the discourse he
speaks of was used, which is a very imperfect uncertain proof, and not positive
enough; so that neither of these were full Witnesses. As to the Evidence given
by the Lord Howard against my Lord Russel, it is strange to me, (as the
Evidence is stated) that any Credit should be given to it, that he should be
believed against those Execrations, that (it seems) he had so solemnly, and so
lately used to the contrary of his Evidence: especially when by giving this
Evidence, he must merit his own Pardon, and save his own Life, which extremely
takes off from the credit and weight of his Evidence.

What Mr. West says, in rference to my Lord Russel, was but bare opinion and
hearsay, and is no proof at all in Law; so that instead of two plain, direct,
manifest, and positive and two credible Witnesses as the Law requires in
Treason, here is not in my opinion so much as one positive Credible Witness.
The Lord Howard (as your Case and Narrative states it) is not credible, though
direct and positive. None of the other three are positive, though more
credible. In the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third of Treasons, the word
(Proveablement) as Sir Edward Coke observes upon it, in his Third Institutes,
fol. 12. imports direct and manifest proofs, not presumptions and conjectures,
and (as may be added) not probabilities; and so the words (per overt fact) do
(as he observes) strengthen that sense of the word (Proveablement) and the Act
of Treasons made since this Kings time, requires there should be two credible
Witnesses. Now, though the Lord Howard was not by the Evidence offered against
him by the Lord Russel utterly disabled from being a Witness, yet I will be
bold to say, it made him no credible Witness in this Case. That the Lord Russel
made no use of these things in his Defense, though a man of Parts, is no wonder
to me, the ablest Man under that Terror, and upon so speedy a proceeding, and
where it is impossible to be so composed and free from distraction, may easily
pass by many just advantages, which a stander by with less abilities might
quickly have apprehended. I am far from rflecting upon the Court that Tried
him, this matter that I observed, rested principally upon the Jury. And he is
found Guilty and Condemned, and it may be before this comes to your hand, put
to Death too; if it have so hapn'd (as possible it may) that the Earl of
Bedford, and his other great Relations have prevailed with the King for a
respit of the Execution, I wish and heartily beg of Almighty God, that these
Considerations may yet be made use of to the King, (with whom it then rests) as
Tabula post Naufragium, to save the Life of this Noble Lord. Much more then
this may be said, were there such an opportunity before the King, (and I so
intend it and no otherwise) and if I might be any ways serviceable in it, I
would come up to London barefoot, rather then neglect so good an Office. And I
ever thought it a severity in our Law, that a Prisoner for his Life is not
allowed the assistance of a grave and prudent Lawyer, or some other friend to
make his defense for him, even as to matter of fact, as well as to Law. I know
it is said, the Court is of Council for the Prisoner, but for my part, I should
never desire to depend upon that only. I know what this is by experience. If
the Case be in any part of it mistaken, I have lost all my observations, and
beg your pardon for all this trouble; it is out of the great Honor and Zeal I
have for that good Lord, but the Narrative you give is very ably and well
composed, and in very good Method, and I think could not have been better done,
which inclines me to think it very true also. I could be contented the Earl of
Bedford (to whom I am known) might have the view of this Letter, if it come not
too late, and may be thought of any use; I heartily thank you for your favor,
which obliges me to be,

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, R. A.
July 21. 1683.
A DEFENSE Of the Late Lord Russel's Innocence, By way of Answer or Confutation
of a Libellous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, An ANTIDOTE against POISON.
1. THE Pamphlet styles it self An Antidote against Poison, but it is so far
from deserving that Title, that it may be truly said, That the Antidote it self
is the rankest Poison.

We read in History that the Noble Emperor called Henry of Luxenburgh was
poisoned in the Sacrament, and Pope Victor was poisoned in receiving of the
Chalice: Who could have suspected such horrid Villainy in the Administration of
such sacred and solemn Rites? who could without Horror and Amazement contrive
the mingling of a deadly Poison with the Bread and Water of Life? to make those
consecrated Elements (which ought to be the Savor of Life unto Life) to be the
dreadful Messengers of sudden Death? Surely had those outward Signs been
changed into the very Body and Blood of the Lord of Life, (as they that acted
in those Execrable Villainies professed to believe) there must needs have been a
Miracle wrought in altering likewise the Substance and malignant Nature of
those Poisons, that they should not have wrought those direful Effects; which
yet they did. There appears the like wicked Policy in the Author of this
Pamphlet, who under pretense of prescribing an Antidote against Poison, under
the Vizar and Disguise of preventing Mischief, does most deceitfully infuse the
worst of Poisons; and labors to intoxicate a whole Nation. This Author would
have the World believe that the Noble Lord in the composing of his Speech was
wholly governed by his Confessor, and that the Compiler of it was infected with
those Doctrines, that the Northern Climate has of late furnished us with. The
very Language and Spirit of Coleman! Sure the Soul of Coleman is by
Transmigration entered into this Author; it is easy to guess at his Religion.
He supposes all that were present at my Lord's Trial must needs be surpised to
find the Truth of the Case so untruly and unfaithfully set down in my Lord's
Speech. But whoever will take the pains to read the Trials published by
Authority, (which no man will suspect of Partiality toward the Person Tried)
will receive abundant Satisfaction in the Truth of what was said by the Lord
Russel, and discover the shameless Impudence of this Malicious Author.

The Indictment (as we find it printed at large in the Trial, fol. 29.) charges
the Prisoner, that he intending to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and to
move War and Rebellion against the King, and to subvert the Government, and to
depose or put down, and deprive the King from His Title and Kingly Name of the
Imperial Crown of His Kingdom of England, and so bring and put the King to
Death and Destruction.

2. Nov. 34. Car. 2. and at other times Maliciously and Traitorously with
diverse others did Conspire, Compass, Imagine, and Intend, 1. To deprive the
King of His Title and Government. 2. And to kill the King, and to subvert the
Government. 3. And to move Insurrection and Rebellion against the King.


And to fulfill and perfect these Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings and
Imaginations, The said William Russel did meet together with diverse other
Traitors, and Consult, Agree, and Conclude, 1. To move and stir up Insurrection
and Rebellion. And, 2. To Seize and Destroy the King's Guards.


The Operative and Emphatical words of this Indictment, are the Intending,
Conspiring, and Concluding.

The things Intended, and Conspired were, 1. To move and stir up War and
Rebellion against the King. 2. To Depose the King. 3. To Kill the King. And in
order to the Accomplishing of these horrid Crimes.


The things Concluded on were, 1. To move and stir up Insurrection and
Rebellion. 2. To seize and destroy the Guards. This is the very sum and true
Method of the Indictment, if it be truly printed in the Trials.


Note, Here is no open Act or Deed charged to be done by the Lord Russel,
unless his meeting together with others be meant to be an open Act or Deed; but
then again that Act of Meeting terminates merely in Consulting, Agreeing, and
Concluding. They met only to Consult, Agree, and Conclude, but they acted
nothing in pursuance of that Consulting, Agreeing, and Concluding, for any
thing that appears in the Indictment, so that the Meeting properly has not the
nature of an Acting or Action, or of a thing done; but the Effect of the
Indictment is, that the Lord Russel and others did Consult, Agree, and Conclude
to do something, but the Indictment stops there, and goes no further, for it
sets not forth any thing done at all, so that here is no Overt Act or Deed, and
therefore the Indictment is void, for there is no Act charged but Meeting, and
that was merely in order to Consult and Agree, and they did agree upon a thing
to be done, but it is not said they did it, or did any thing toward it, I
repeat this the oftener that it may be the better understood and minded, being
very material, read the Indictment.

The Indictment is grounded upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 2. (the old
Statute of Treasons.) So the Attorney General declares himself, fol. 49. of the
Trial.

Now let us see how far this Charge in the Indictment will make my Lord guilty
of any Treason within that Statute.

The Body of that Statute of 25 E. 3. of Treasons is printed together with
(...) see the Trial, fol. 50. so that it need not be repeated here, though^
there are some other Clauses in that Statute not printed in the Trial.

The occasion of making that Statute appears to be the variety of Opinions,
that then were, what should be accounted Treason, and what not, which was very
mischievous to the Subjects, and gave too great a Liberty to the Judges of the
Ordinary Courts.

To Cure this mighty Mischief, and to prevent that Arbitrary Power of Judges,
this excellent Statute makes a Declaration what shall be adjudged Treason by
the Ordinary Courts of Justice, not but that there might be like Cases or other
Facts amounting to Treason, besides those there Enumerated, but those other
Facts or Treasons must not be adjudg'd by those Ordinary standing Courts, (such
as the Jail-delivery of Newgate, and the Court of the King's Bench at
Westminster itself are) but in such Cases those Courts must forbear proceeding,
and the Case must be reserved for the Determination of the King and Parliament:
see that Statute in the printed Statutes at large.

So that the Court of Jail-delivery at Newgate must Judge only and proceed upon
no other Treasons but what are there Enumerated and Specified.

Now the Treasons in that Statute Enumerated and Specified (for the word
(Specified) is the very word used by that Statute) are these.

1. Compassing or imagining the Death of the King. Queen. Prince.
2. Violating or Carnally knowing the Queen. King's Eldest Daughter Unmarried.
Prince's Wife.

3. Levying War against the King, (not a Compassing or Imagining to levy War)
but an Actual levying War. It must be a War begun, and several other sorts of
Treasons are there Specified, not to our Purpose to be recited.

The Statute further requires that the Person Indicted be Proveably attainted
of some one of these Teasons by Overt Deed, that is some open manifest Act, or
Deed done, which must of necessity also be expressly set down in the Indictment,
and fully and clearly proved at the Trial by two Witnesses.

See Sir Edw. Coke's third Institutes in his Chapter of High Treason, fol. 12.
in his Exposition of the words of that Statute, ( Per Overt fait) and there
fol. 5. upon the words, ( Fait Compasser) he tells you the Nature of that Open
Deed that the Statute intends. It must be a Deed, and not mere Words; it must
be a Deed tending to the Execution of the Treason imagined: That Deed must be
an open Deed; that is, it must be fully proved and made open and manifest at
the Trial by clear proof.

So that if the Indictment fail of setting forth one of those Treasons that are
there enumerated, it is not a good Indictment upon that Statute.

If it do set forth one of those Treasons, yet if it do not set forth some open
Deed done by the Party indicted, that is, such a Deed as does properly and
naturally tend to the execution of that sort of Treason set forth in that
Indictment. In such case also the Indictment is not good.

If both these, viz. the Treason intended, and a proper suitable open deed be
well set forth in the Indictment (which make a good Indictment) yet if that
very sort of Treason intended and that open Deed or Fact so set forth in the
Indictment, be not also fully clearly and manifestly proved upon the Trial
against the Prisoner, he ought to be acquitted.

It will not suffice either to prove it by one Witness, or to prove any other
sort of Treason (not charged in the Indictment) nor any other overt Deed, other
then what is so set forth in that Indictment, though it be by never so full a
proof, but upon that Indictment the Prisoner ought to be acquitted, if that
special Treason, and that special overt or open Deed set forth and expressed in
that very Indictment be not fully proved.

Now let us examine the Indictment in this Case against the Lord Russel, and
the proofs against him as they are published by Authority, and observe how they
agree with the Statute, and how the Indictment and Proofs agree the one with
the other.

It may be admitted that here is in the Indictment against the Lord Russel, a
Treason sufficiently charged and set forth, viz. one of the Treasons specified
in that Statute of 25 Edw. 3. namely, That the Lord Russel did compass and
imagine the death of the King. This is not denied; but it is duly charged in
the Indictment. For those other Charges in the Indictment, viz. his intending
to depose the King, and his intending to move or levy War and Rebellion against
the King; these are inserted into the Indictment as Aggravations of that horrid
Crime of intending to kill the King, or as open acts of the other, but of
themselves alone, they are no distinct substantive Charges; nor are they any of
the Treasons specified in this Act, upon which Act this Indictment is solely
grounded. For though by the Act of 13 of this King that now is Chap. 1. entitled
( An Act for the Safety and Preservation of the King's Person;) it is made
High Treason (during the now King's life only) to compass or imagine to Depose
the King; or to compass or imagine to levy War against the King: If such
compassing or imagination be expressed by speaking or writing, (although without
any open Deed) yet the Lord Russel was not Indicted upon that Statute, (as the
Attorney General himself acknowledged openly at the Trial) but only upon the
old Statute of 25 Edw. 3. So that those late made Treasons are not to our
purpose.

So that the only Treason charged in the Indictment as a substantial Charge,
is, that of imagining to kill the King. And so the Lord Chief Justice agrees in
his Direction to the Jury. See the Trial, fol. 61.

But, where is that other Requisite, that other most material part of the
Indictment, of the open Deed or Act? without which the rest serves for nothing.
For it is not enough by this Statute to make a man guilty of conspiring or
imagining the death of the King, unless the Party indicted have expressed that
Imagination by some open Deed; and that must be plainly set down in the
Indictment too, or else the Indictment (as was said before) is no good
Indictment. And it must appear to the Court, upon the Indictment, not only to
be an open Deed, but such a Deed as has a natural aptitude and tendency to the
Execution of that very Treason so imagined. And there is no such set forth in
this Indictment, and therefore the Indictment it self was insufficient and void.

And that which seems to have a color of an overt Fact, or open Deed set forth
in this Indictment, was not fully and sufficiently proved neither; and then
though the Indictment had been sufficient, yet for want of due proof, the Party
indicted ought to have been acquitted.

To these two Points or Matters, shall the ensuing Discourse confine it self:
And if this undertaking be made good, the Antidote will appear to be a rank
Poison; the Lord Russel's Speech justified, and his Innocence and Loyalty
cleared, and his Honor vindicated.

The overt Fait or open Deed set forth in the Indictment (if there be any) are
the things said to be consulted of, agreed and concluded on, viz. To move and
stir up Insurrection and Rebellion. 2. To seize and destroy the Guards. (Peruse
the Indictment carefully.)

Now neither of these are open Deeds in the nature of them.

The first, which is to stir up Insurrection and Rebellion; this is a distinct
Species of Treason it self, it is the same with a levying of War (specified in
this Statute of 25 Edw. 3. which is the only Statute we have to do with in this
Case of my Lord Russel) and if it had been set forth in the Indictment as a
Deed done, or thing acted; that is, if it had been laid in the Indictment, that
the War was actually levied, or the Insurrection or Rebellion actually raised
or stirred up, (as it is not, for it is only mentioned as a thing agreed and
concluded on, and not done) yet it had not been a sufficient proper overt Fait,
or open Act, to make it a good Indictment; because (as is said before) levying
of War is a distinct species from that of compassing to kill the King; and
therefore cannot be made an overt Fait or open Deed, to manifest an Imagination
of killing the King. For that one species of Treason cannot be a proper open
Act to another species of Treason, as will be proved hereafter.

Sir Edward Coke in his third Institutes, fol. 14. in the third Clause or
Paragraph of that Folio, tells us, That the Connection of the words are to be
observed, viz. (thereof be Attainted by overt or open Deed.) This, says Sir
Edward Coke, relates to the several and distinct Treasons before expressed;
whereof that of imagining to kill the King, and that of levying War against the
King, are two distinct Species of High Treason. And therefore says Sir Edward
Coke, the one of them cannot be an overt Act for another; that is, levying of
War cannot be an overt Act, for that sort of Treason in imagining to kill the
King; much less when the Indictment does not charge it as a War actually
levied, but only an agreement or conclusion for levying a War. Such agreement
can be no open Deed to manifest an intent or imagination of killing the King.
This is the main question between us.

The other only color or pretense to an Overt Fait, or open Deed, must be that
of seizing or destroying the King's Guards: for no other but these two are set
forth in the Indictment, or look any thing like overt or open Acts.

And this latter is nothing like to an Overt Fait or open Deed, in the nature
of it, for it is not said to be done, but only agreed on, and concluded on to
be done. If it had been but alleged in the Indictment, that in pursuance of
this agreement or conclusion of the Conspirators, a View was accordingly taken
of those Guards, and reported to the rest (whereof the Lord Russel was one)
that it was feasible; (whereof there is some color of proof against some of
them) this had been more to the purpose: but being laid so imperfectly as it
is, the Indictment itself must needs be insufficient, for the reasons before
given.

But, alas! the Noble Lord is gone, and he is gone from whence he would not be
re-call'd, a place of infinite Bliss and Glory, out of a spiteful malicious
World: It is we, it is the King and Kingdom, it is the whole Protestant part of
the World that suffers the enestimable loss of him. Not to speak of the
unspeakable grief of his dear and disconsolate Widow, and other Noble
Relations: Factum infectum fieri nequit. So that we may seem to labor in vain,
and it comes too late; but something may be done for the benefit of his hopeful
Posterity, and some small satisfaction may be made to his Noble Family, by a
Writ of Error for reversing of this Attainder, and the avoiding of the Record;
for the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 2. extends only to such Attainders for
High Treason as then had been before the making of that Statute, and does not
hinder a Writ of Error in this Case, if the King will sign a Petition for it.

But to examine this last Overt Fait or open Deed a little further:

Viz. To seize and destroy the King's Guards.

The Guards; what Guards? What, or whom does the Law understand or allow to be
the King's Guards, for the preservation of his Person? Whom shall the Court
that tried this Noble Lord, whom shall the Judges of the Law that were then
present, and upon their Oaths, whom shall they judge or legally understand by
these Guards? They never read of them in all their Law Books. There is not any
Statute Law that makes the least mention of any Guards. The Law of England
takes no notice of any such Guards; and therefore the Indictment is uncertain
and void.

The King is guarded by the special Protection of Almighty God, by whom he
Reigns, and whose Vicegerent he is: He has an invisible Guard, a Guard of
glorious Angels.

Non Eget Mauri jaculis nec arcu;
Nec Venenatis gravida sagittis. (Creed) Pharetra
The King is Guarded by the Love of His Subjects.

The next under God and the Surest Guard.

He is Guarded by the Law and Courts of Justice.

The Militia and the Trained-bands are his Legal Guard, and the whole Kingdoms
Guard.

The very Judges that Tried this Noble Lord were the King's Guards, and the
Kingdoms Guards, and this Lord Russel's Guard against all Erroneous and
Imperfect Indictments, from all false Evidence and Proof, from all strains of
Wit and Oratory mis-applied and abused by Council.

What other Guards are there? We know of no Law for more, King Henry the
Seventh of this Kingdom (as History tells us) was the first that set up the
Band of Pensioners: Since this the Yeomen of the Guard, since them, certain
Armed Bands commonly now adays (after the French Mode) called the King's
Lifeguard, rid about and appearing with naked Swords to the Terror of the
Nation, but where is the Law? where is the Authority for them?

It had been fit for the Court that Tried this Noble Lord on this Indictment to
have satisfied themselves from King's Council what was meant by these Guards;
for the alleging and setting forth an Overt fait, or open Deed in an
Indictment of Treason must be of something that is intelligible by Law, and
whereof Judges may take Notice by Law: and herein too the Indictment fails and
is imperfect.

But admit the Seizing and Destroying of those who are now called the King's
Lifeguard, had been the Guard intended within this Overt fait, or open Deed;
yet the Indictment should have set forth that de facto, the King had chosen a
certain number of man to attend upon and Guard His Person, and set forth where
they did attend, as at White Hall, or the Mews, or the Savoy, etc. and that
these were the Guard intended by the Indictment, to be seized and destroyed,
that by this setting forth the Court might have taken notice Judicially what
and who were meant; but to seize and destroy the King's Guards, and not show
who, and what is meant, makes the Indictment very insufficient.

So much as to the Indictment itself.

In the next place let us look into the Proofs as they are at large set forth
and owned in the printed Trial, and let us consider how far those Proofs do
make out the Charge of the Indictment, viz. the Compassing and Imagining the
Death of the King, and how far they make out that Overt fait, or open Deed
(such as it is), of seizing or destroying the King's Guards, in order to the
effecting of that Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King, and it must
appear by Proof to be in Truth so intended by the Conspirators, and levelled to
that end, for if it were done, yet if it were done quite to another intent and
purpose, and not to that of Compassing the King's Death, it does not come home
to this Indictment.

There are but three Witnesses that can be thought to bring the matter home,
and to fix any thing upon the Lord Russel, Col. Romsey, Mr. Sheppard, and the
Lord Howard.

It is true, two of the three, that is Col. Romsey, and the Lord Howard
positively prove a Traiterous Design, or a Discourse at least by some of the
Company of making an Insurrection or Rebellion, or (to speak it in the Language
and Phrase of this Statute of 25 E. 3.) of levying a War against the King, (for
all these signify one and the same thing) and they prove the Lord Russel was
sometimes present at those Meetings; but is that enough? Admit he were present
and heard the Debate of it; (which yet is not fully and directly proved) yet if
he did not join in the Debate and Express, and some way signify his
Approbation of it, and consent to it, it makes him not at all Criminous. It is
true, his after concealing of it might have made him guilty of Misprision of
Treason, but that is a Crime of another nature, and is another distinct Genus
of Crimes, of which he was not Indicted.

Col. Romsey as to the Overt fait (as they would make it) says there was some
Discourse about seeing what Posture the Guards were in, and being asked by one
of the Jury, by whom the Discourse was, he answers, By all the Company that was
there, (whereof as he said before the Lord Russel was one) So that my Lorld
Russel may (I agree) be understood to be one that discoursed about seeing what
posture the Guards were in. Nay the Colonel says all the Company did debate it,
and he says further, the Lord Russel was there when some of the Company
undertook to take the View of those Guards, and being asked by the Attorney
General to what purpose the View was to be, the Colonel answers, It was to
surprise our Guards, if the Rising had gone on.

The Chief Justice observing to the Witness that he ought not to deliver a
doubtful Evidence, and to speak it with Limitations, that made it not so
positive, as by saying, (I apprehend so and so) then the Colonel grows more
positive, and says further, that a Rising was intended; but afterward he says,
there was no debate of the Rising. At last the Witness being asked by Sir
George Iefferies whether the Prisoner were present at the Debate concerning the
Message from the Lord Shaftsbury to the Company then met, and the Answer
returned to it: He flatly says the Prisoner was present at that Debate, (which
Debate did indeed concern the Rising) being asked by the same Person whether my
Lord was averse to it, or agreeing to it. He answers like an Echo, Agreeing to
it. Nay, then he says my Lord Russel did speak, and that about the Rising of
Taunton, and that he did discourse of the Rising, but what were his words?
Being questioned again by the Chief Justice, whether my Lord did give any
Consent to the Rising, He answers still like an Echo, My Lord did: And this
last Answer, is the weighty part of his Evidence, if there be any weight at all.

Now mind the defect of the Witness's Memory in some other most material
Passages. He thinks the Lord Gray did say something to the same purpose, with
the Answer delivered by Ferguson to the Lord Shaftesbury's Message.

He does not know, (says he) how often he himself (the Witness) was at Mr.
Sheppard's House, where this Debate was. He says he was there more then once,
or else I heard (says he) Mr. Ferguson make a Report of another Meeting to the
Lord Shaftsbury. And then he says that this was all at that time that he
remembered, and before this he had said no more against the Lord Russel, but
that he was present, and after this upon much Interrogating of him, he proceeds
to tell a great deal more, indeed all the rest that has been before observed to
proceed from him. And after all, he says he thinks he was not there above a
quarter of an Hour. He says he was not certain whether he did hear something
about a Declaration there, or whether Mr. Ferguson did report it to my Lord
Shaftesbury, that they had debated it. And the Witness speaking of a View to be
taken of the Guards, to surprise them: the Lord Chief Justice seems to be
surpised at that word: The Guards! he never met it in all his Books. What
Guards? why you know it is mentioned in the Indictment; but he might yet very
well ask what Guards: And the Colonel answers, The Guards at the Savoy and the
Mewse.

The Colonel says, He thinks the Duke of Monmouth, and the Lord Gray, and Sir
Thomas Armstrong were the persons that undertook to view the Guards. And he
thinks Sir Thomas Armstrong began it, and Mr. Ferguson. And he says further
Direction was given to take a view of the Guards, if the Rising had gone on,
(as it never did) and then he mentions the very day that had been appointed for
the Rising, viz. the 19th of November; and that the Message from the Lord
Shaftsbury was, he thinks, a matter of a Fortnight before that day, or
something more; for he thinks it was concluded Sunday fortnight after my Lord
Gray met. The mention of my Lord Russel's consent to this Rising, comes in at
the last, and after many questions asked him, and not till that very particular
question was put to him, and he answers in the very same words as the question
was asked. The Chief Justice asked him in these words, Did my Lord give any
consent to the Rising? The Colonel's Answer was Yes my Lord he did. But how did
my Lord Russel signify that Consent? what words did he use that may clearly
express it? For this is the pinching Proof if it had been certain and cleared
by remembering the manner of his Consenting, or how it did appear. Why was not
this put home to the Witness? This is the Material part of his Evidence,
without which the rest had not come home to the Prisoner: And why did not the
Witness deliver this of himself, and before his giving this home Evidence he
had said, That was all at that time that he remembered: And this was at the
same time with that of the Message, and of the Discourse about Viewing the
Guards. He afterward doubts whether he was any more then once there with that
Company, or whether he heard Mr. Ferguson report things to the Lord Shaftsbury,
which shows a wild kind of Memory in a Witness, and the Colonel is no Fool, nor
Baby; so that there is but one time positively spoken of by this Witness. How
strangely uncertain is he in the Matter of the Declaration, to which he was
Examined? A most noted thing, and he cannot tell whether he heard any thing of
it there, or whether Mr. Ferguson told him of it. It is to to be suspected too,
that what he has delivered positively at last so late in his Evidence, and
after so much Interrogating of him, was but mere hearsay too, and then it would
not have been any Evidence. He has not it seems a good distinguishing Head or
Memory, as a Witness ought to have in case of Life, and a Life of so high a
value as this of that Noble Lord.

And many other Material Passages this Witness delivers under that Limitation
as ( he thinks).

The Rising was intended, but never took effect; and the View was no more then
appointed and undertaken; but the Seizing of the Guards, as this Witness says,
was not to be unlesss the Rising had gone on; which it never did. He speaks
nothing of any View made of the Guards, or any Report upon it: but he swears my
Lord Russel consented to the Rising. That is his stabbing Evidence; but by what
words, or how he signified his consent, not a word, though mighty material.

But what is this Conspiracy for a Rising? and a Conspiracy to seize the
Guards? (in case the Rising had gone on:) What are these to the Crime charged
in the Indictment against the Lord Russel for conspiring the death of the King?

Here is not a word of any such matter, nor of seizing the Guards in order to
it, no not one word.

And that is the only material part of the Indictment (as shall appear more
plainly hereafter.)

The second Witness, Mr. Sheppard, mentions the meeting (at his House) of the
Duke of Monmouth, and among the rest, the Lord Russel, and they discoursed of
surprising the Guards, and that the Duke, the Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas
Armstrong, (as he remembers) went one Night to view the Guards, and the next
Day at his House they said it was very feasible, if they had strength to do it.
And then he says there was two Meetings there, and, as he remembers, my Lord
Russel was both times there. Being asked by the Attorney General, besides the
seizing of the Guards, if there were any discourse of a Rising. He answers, He
did not remember any further Discourse; for he was often gone out of the Room.
And this is the effect of that he says.

If any thing of this comes near my Lord Russel, it is those words, first
giving an account of who they were that were met, and that my Lord Russel was
one of them, he says the Substance of their Discourse was how to surprise the
King's Guards. This may be true, if one or two of the Company only discourses
it; for it does not necessarily affirm that every one did speak in that
Discourse. He does not mention one word spoken by my Lord Russel, nor that he
approved of, or consented to any thing. At the worst, for any thing that he
says, it can be but Misprision: He can say nothing as to the Intended Rising.
Now Colonel Romsey's Evidence is altogether of that Rising, and the Seizing of
the Guards, was to have been if the Rising had gone on; and this was at the
same time that Mr. Sheppard speaks to, and yet Mr. Sheppard being asked if
there was any Discourse of a Rising, he answers, he did not remember any
further Discourse.

Nor does Colonel Romsey certainly remember any thing of a Declaration read
amongst them, whether he heard it there, or whether by Mr. Ferguson's Report of
it to my Lord Shaftsbury, which is one of the principal things that Mr.
Sheppard speaks to, (besides that of seizing the Guards.) And as to the
Declaration, Mr. Sheppard says, he cannot say my Lord Russel was there when
that Declaration was read.

So they agree in nothing but in the Discourse of seizing the Guards, and that
my Lord Russel was then present.

So that as yet the sum of the Proof by Colonel Romsey is that my Lord Russel
consented to the Rising, which is too general, and the sum of the Proof by Mr.
Sheppard is that my Lord Russel was present in Company when the Company
discoursed of Seizing the Guards, but he knows nothing of the Rising.

The third Witness (the Lord Howard) discourses much about a Conspiracy to
rise, but he speaks most (of what he says) by Report from the Earl of
Saftesbury, and from the Duke, so it goes for no Evidence against my Lord
Russel, and the Chief Justice did the Prisoner that Right, as to declare as
much to the Jury; and the Lord Howard cleares the Duke from any such horrid Act
as the Killing the King; the Duke said he would not suffer it; and if the Duke
be Innocent in that, it is probable that my Lord Russel and the rest of the
Company that met had no discourse about Killing the King, nor any Thought that
way, which yet is the great and only Substantial Charge of this Indictment,
which must still be minded and observed.

My Lord Howard does indeed prove two several Consults, one at Mr. Hambden the
youngers, the other at my Lord Russel's about the middle of January last, and
after, and that my Lord Russel was at both, and these Consults were of an
Insurrection, and where to begin it, and of providing Arms, and Money, and of
sending into Scotland to settle an Understanding with the Lord of Argile; and
being asked what my Lord did say, he answers thus, viz. Every one (says he)
knows my Lord Russel is a Person of great Judgment, and not very lavish in
Discourse. But did he consent? was a Question asked by Sir George Iefferies,
the Lord Howard answered, We did not put it to the Vote, but it went without
Contradiction, and I took it that all there gave their consent, that my Lord
Russel joined in the choosing a Council of Six, that he approved of his being
chosen for one, that he said one word in these two Consults, there is not any
Proof by the Lord Howard, only he says, He took it that all there Consented. Is
that enough? Oh strange Evidence!

I will not here take Notice, or Examine how far the Lord Howard is a Credible
Witness in this Case, but rfer the Reader to the Testimony of my Lord of
Anglesey, Mr. Howard, and Dr. Burnet: or how far any of the three Witnesses are
to be believed, having all three upon their own Testimony been Participes
Criminis, and it is supposed have their Pardons, or are promised Pardons: Not
that this is offered to disable them quite from being Witnesses, but surely all
things considered it much lessens their Credit in this Case; nor does it make
them the more Credible because no other Witnesses can be had: But then consider
that most Excellent Character given of the Prisoner by Persons of Honor, and
of the highest Esteem for Ability and Integrity, and such as contradicts and is
inconsistent with the Charge of the Indictment, and whatever is of weight in
the Evidence against him, and especially if you give any credit to the Lord
Howard himself, who upon his Oath does declare, as in the presence of God and
Man, That he did not believe that either the Duke of Monmouth, or my Lord
Russel had any design to Murder the King; which is the only effectual Charge of
this Indictment. These things considered, it seems very strange to me how the
Lord Russel could be found guilty of a compassing and imagining the Death of
the King; for so is the Verdict.

This answers most of the Observations made by the Author of the Antidote upon
my Lord Russel's Speech, restraining the Expression, as he says, of his
Innocence to the design upon the King's Life, and to killing of the King, and
of his omitting to mention the general Rising: which as this Author boldly
affirms, was fully proved upon him; and that my Lord's Professions of his
Innocence, as to any Plot upon the King's Life, or to kill the King, or his
knowing any thing thereof, these (says the Author) are no plain declarations of
his Innocence, as to the Crime charged and proved upon him, of conspiring and
consulting to raise an Insurrection. Nor was there any need of my Lord's
answering that, for it was little material.

How uncertain, how dis-agreeing, how unapplicable to the Charge of the
Indictment those Proofs are, has been fully observed already; and the Author
grossly mistakes in his Judgment, when he takes the conspiring and consulting to
raise an Insurrection, to be the Crime charged in the Indictment; for (as was
observed before) the Charge of the Indictment is, the compassing and imagining
to kill the King; and that of a Conspiracy to raise an Insurrection, or to levy
War, is none of the Crimes or Treasons enumerated or specified in the Act of 25
E. 3. and therefore could not be the Crime charged in the Indictment, which is
grounded only upon that Act of 25 E. 3. (as the Attorney General acknowledges)
for it is an actual levying of War, and not a conspiring only to levy War, or
raise an Insurrection, that is the Treason specified in that Act of 25 E. 3.
and therefore the mention of other things are but by way of aggravation for the
more ample setting forth of the Crime charged, which is of compassing the
King's death, and that the conspiring to make an Insurrection, cannot be an
open Deed to prove a compassing the King's Death, has been already spoken to,
and shall be yet more fully.

Nor is the Author more mistaken in his Observations upon the matter of Fact,
and his unwarranted Conclusions and Inferences raised from thence, then he is
in his Determinations of matters in Law arising from that Fact.

The Death of the King (says the Author) in that Law of 25 E. 3. is not
restrained to killing of his natural Person, but extends as well to his civil
Death as natural: As to conspire to Depose the King, to Imprison him, or laying
any force or restraint upon him; these (says the Author) are all High Treason,
for compassing his Death, natural or civil. If so, why then we are at never the
more certainty for this excellent Law of 25 E. 3.

I agree, that Conspiring to Depose the King, to Imprison him, are Treasons;
but it is not so plain that they are Treasons within this Law of 25 E. 3. upon
which this Indictment is grounded. It is true they are made Treason by the late
Act of 13 of the now King, and have by several temporary Acts (such as this of
13 Car. 2. is) been made Treason: but this proves that they were not judged by
those Parliaments, that passed those temporary Acts, to be Treasons within the
Statute of 25 E. 3. For why then were these temporary Acts made? What need was
there of them? Sir Edward Coke 3 Inst. fol. 9. in the last Paragraph but one,
of that fol. says, A Conspiracy to Levy War, is no Treason; he means within the
Act of 25 E. 3. but it has been made Treason since Sir Edward Coke's time, viz.
by 13 Car. 2. And let it be remembered, that the great end of making this
excellent Law of 25 E. 3. (as appears by the Preamble) was to avoid
uncertainty, and variety of Opinions, and to prevent the Arbitrariness of
Judges, in the ordinary Courts; and the Act takes care, that doubtful Cases,
such as are not plainly within the enumeration of the Act, are to be reserved
for the Judgment of the King and Parliament. And herein consists the excellency
of this Law: Quoad fieri possit, quam plurima Legibus ipsis defineantur: Quam
paucissima' Iudicis arbitrio Relinquantur. And as the Learned Lord Bacon in his
Advancement of Learning, fol. 447. says, That is the best Law, which gives
least liberty to the Judge; He the best Judge that takes least liberty to
himself: Misera est servitus ubi jus est Vagum. And this Law is a declaration
of Law, and therefore ought not to be extended to like Cases in the
construction of it: And it is made in the punishment of the greatest Offenses,
and is as Penal as a Law can be; and therefore ought not to be expounded by
Equity, that is, to be extended to like Cases.

It is true, the Opinion of the Judges has been, That Conspiring to Depose or
Imprison the King, is a compassing or imagining the Death of the King. And if a
Man declares by Overt Act, that he will Depose or Imprison the King; this, says
Sir Edward Coke, 3 Just. fol. 6. upon the word ( Mort) is a sufficient
Overt Act, for the intent of killing the King: Mind him well, he does not say
that Conspiring to Depose or to Imprison the King, is an Overt Act, to prove
the Conspiring the King's Death; which is the Opinion the Antidoter maintains,
and for which he cites all his Cases afterward cited. But Sir E. Coke says,
That Conspiring to Depose or Imprison the King, being declared by Overt Act,
this Overt Act is also a sufficient Overt Act for the intent of killing the
King.

It is one thing to Conspire to Depose the King.

And another thing to declare, that Conspiring by some open act: they differ as
much as thinking does from acting. Now in this Case of the Lord Russel, the
Author of this Antidote, and some others (as appears by the Printed Trials)
would have us believe that very Conspiring to Levy War, is an Overt Act to
prove the compassing and imagining the King's Death: For which there is not the
least ground from Sir Edward Coke. First they are different Species, as Sir
Edward Coke observes in his third Institutes, fol. 14. the third Paragraph; and
therefore (says he) the one of them cannot be an Overt Act for another. That
is, Conspiring to Levy War, nay the actual Levying of War too, is one Species
of Treason, cannot be an Overt Act for the compassing the Death of the King,
which is another Species of Treason. But this is that the Antidoter labors;
only says Sir Edward Coke, the Overt Act of the one, may be an Overt Act for
another sort or Species of Treason.

And I agree it, if the Overt Act in the one sort of Treason, may as fitly, and
as properly in its own nature, and as equally be also an Overt Act in the other
sort, and had a tendency to the execution, of that other sort; and it also does
appear by the proofs, to be so intended by the Conspirators: As for example,
Actual seizing of the King's Guards (not a Conspiring to seize the King's
Guards, and such Guards as are not plainly set forth in the Indictment what
they are) may in its nature be an Overt Act, to make manifest the compassing of
the King's death, and is an Act proper enough, and has in its nature a tendency
toward the execution of the Conspiracy to kill the King; but then it must be
proved to be so intended and designed; that is, in order to the killing of the
King; but if it appear otherwise upon the proof (as here it did) that it was
not so intended, but designed merely in order to a Rebellion, and Levying of
War (for which also it is as apt, and proper in its nature, and has as great a
tendency that way). Then it cannot be applied nor made use of as an Overt Act,
to prove the compassing the King's Death (as in this Case of my Lord Russel's
it was). For this, (as Sir Edward Coke well says, fol. 14. the latter part of
the third Paragraph of that fol.) would be to confound the several Classes or
Species of Treason; and the Confusion of Species is abominable in Nature.

And where Sir Edward Coke seems to comply with the Opinion and Practice of
some Judges, that the Overt Act of Deposing may be a good Overt Act of Killing
(which with the distinction that I have offered, is just enough) yet he has
some hesitation; for he concludes that Opinion of his with these words, fol. 6.
in his third Instit. upon the word ( Mort) But (says he) peruse advisedly the
Statutes of 13 Eliz. cap. 1. And why those Statutes? Because by those Statutes
Conspiring to Depose the Queen are made Treasons; which needed not (as has been
observed already) if they were Treason, within that Clause of Compassing the
King's Death, within the Statute of 25 E. 3. The like may be observed in many
other such temporary Laws, as that of 25 H. 8. cap. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 13. 28 H.
8. c. 7. 1 E. 6. cap. 12. and 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 11.

And it is worthy observation, though by way of a short digression, that in many,
if not in every one of these temporary Laws of Treason, there is an express
Clause and Provision still, that concealment, or keeping secret of any
High Treason, should be adjudged Misprision of Treason: As if there were great
need of that Caution, least the Judges might judge concealing of Treason, for
High Treason.

Now to show the tenderness that the Judges heretofore showed in the expounding
of this Statute of Treasons, of 25 E. 3. and how cautious they were in
extending it beyond the strict sense and letter of the Statute: Read, the Case
in Mich. 19. Hen. 6. fol. 47. Case 102. A Man was Indicted in the King's Bench
of Petty-Treason (which is declared too by the same Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2.)
for killing his Mistress, whom he served: And because the words of this Statute
of 25 E. 3. declares it Petty-Treason where the Servant kills the Master, they
were in doubt whether it ought to be extended to the Mistress or not: And there
the Judges of the King's Bench (before whom the Case was) sent to the Judges of
the Court of Common Pleas, then sitting, and to the Sergeants there, to know
their Opinion of the Case: And by Advice of all the Judges of both Courts, it
was adjudged Petty-Treason for the Servant to kill the Mistress, not only
within the meaning, but within the very words of that Statute, for Master and
Mistress are in effect but one and the same word, they differing only in Gender.

Sir Edward Coke says, 3 Instit. fol. 20, and 22. The Judges shall not judge a
simili, or by equity, by argument, or by inference of any Treason, but new, or
like Cases, were to have been rferred to the determination of the next
Parliament: Vbi terminatae sunt dubitationes Iudiciorum: says Bracton.

Let us in the next place examine the Authorities in Law, and Book-Cases, cited
by this Author of the Antidote, and see how far they make good his Opinion,
that meeting and consulting to make an Insurrection against the King, or raise
a Rebellion (which is the same with Levying War, within the words of 25 E. 3.)
though the Rebellion be not actually raised, is High Treason, within this Law of
25 E. 3. for so he proposes the Question, fol. 5. of his Book, and if he does
not confine his Argument to that Statute, he says nothing to the Lord Russel's
Case.

To prove that Meeting and Consulting to make an Insurrection against the King,
or raise a Rebellion within the Kingdom (though the Rebellion is not actually
raised) is High Treason within the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. cap. 2. (which put all
together, is the Position the Antidoter maintains.) He cites the Case of
Constable, mentioned in Calvin's Case, Sir Edward Cokes 7th Rep. fol. 10. b. and
thence infers, that whatsoever tended to the Deposing of Queen Mary, was
adjudged Treason for compassing her Death.

And this no man denies, and it agrees with the Judgment of Sir Edward Coke, in
his Chapter of Treason, fol. 6. upon the word ( Mort) where he says, He that
declares by Overt Act to Depose the King, does an Overt Act of Compassing and
Imagining the Death of the King, and so says Sir Matthew Hales Pleas of the
Crown, fol. 11. toward the latter end. But what is this to the point in hand,
which merely concerns a Meeting, and Consulting to make an Insurrection, or
Raising a Rebellion, which is the same thing with Conspiring to Levy War?
Conspiring to Depose the King, and Conspiring to Leavy War are different
things. As conspiring to Leavy War, is clearly held to be a distinct Treason
from Conspiring the death of the King; and therefore the former of these (as
has been before observed) cannot by Law be an Overt Act of the latter, as
appears by the said Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown, fol. 13. toward the
latter end. Nor was Conspiring to Leavy War without an actual Levying of it,
any Treason within the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. upon which Statute only the
Indictment of the Lord Russel is grounded, as is acknowledged by the Attorney
General; and therefore to supply that defect, the Statute of 13 Car. 2. does
expressly make it to be Treason, but the Lord Russel was not Indicted upon that
Statute of 13 Car. 2. and for this reason he ought to have been Acquitted upon
this Indictment, grounded only upon the Statute of 25 E. 3.

And if practicing with a Foreign Prince to make an Invasion, (when no Invasion
followed, as the Case of Doctor Story was) Dier 298. be all one with Conspiring
to Levy War, when indeed no War is raised. It is out of all dispute, that such
Practicing and such Conspiring cannot be Treason within the Statute of 25 E. 3.
though it be Treason within the Statute of 13 Car. 2.

In the Case of the Lord Cobham, 1 Iacobi, there was more in the Case then
Conspiring to make an Insurrection, (which is all that the Author of the
Antidote takes notice of) there was also an actual Rebellion raised, as appears
by the said little Treatise, styled The Pleas of the Crown, fol. 13. for the
People were there assembled to take the King into their power, as that Book
puts the Case of the Lord Cobham.

And so it is in the Case of the Lord Gray, for there they not only Conspired
to make an Insurrection, but further to seize the King, and get him into their
power; which is a direct Conspiring against his Person, which naturally tends
to the destruction of his Person, and is the same with Conspiring his Death, as
has been usually expounded: but it is otherwise merely to Conspire to make an
Insurrection, which can be no more than conspiring to Levy War. The Case of Sir
Henry Vane and Plunket, had many other Ingredients to mount them up to Treason,
which difference them from my Lord Russels Case.

As to the point of Misprision of Treason, with which the Author of the
Antidote concludes, I have fully declared my opinion already, in the former
part of this Discourse, and I think plainly evinced, that though the Noble Lord
might be present, while others might between themselves privately debate
matters, and conclude upon them, yet it did not clearly appear by any proofs
that this Noble Lord ever gave the least consent to what was so concluded,
without which consent it could not amount to Treason, but at the most be a
Misprision only. Nor must any Man's Life be taken from him, upon presumptions
or probable Arguments, but by plain, direct, and manifest downright Proofs.
But a more strong, and indeed a violent presumption lay quite the other way,
that this Noble, Prudent, and Pious Lord, could never be guilty of such a
Crime, as to conspire the Death of King Charles the Second; it was extremely
against his Interest so to do, for the Life of that King, so long as it
continued, by the blessing of God was the great security, both he and all good
Protestants had against the greater danger that might happen by the change
arising by the Death of that King, of loosing our Religion, and all our Civil
and Religious Rights, as the experience we have lately had, has sadly taught
us. And if any thing were consulted between this Excellent Lord, and those with
whom he met, as is more than probable, it was how to secure themselves against
those dangers they saw so near approaching, if the Life of King Charles the
Second should fail, there was so great a cause to fear them, considering who
was like to succeed in the Throne.

FINIS.

