A True Relation OF A YOUNG MAN About Seventeen Years of Age, who was struck
Dumb for the space of Twenty Four Hours, Because he would not believe what was
said unto him.

By THOMAS ASTRY.

WITH ALLOWANCE.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, living near the great North Door in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1671.

A True Relation Of a Young Man about Seventeen years of Age, who was struck
Dumb for the space of Twenty four Hours, because he would not Believe what was
said unto him.
Reader,
I Have a strange thing to acquaint thee withal, concerning my Son; which was
made known to him the 20th day of September 1671. And and it is as true as it
is strange; the Lord has been working so powerfully upon my heart, that I am
constrained to give the world this True Account, and it is likely to be handed
out unto thee by an unworthy Servant, and also by a very weak hand; but it does
come from a very warm and enlarged heart; For the Lord has said, that his
strength is made perfect in weakness, and has wrought my heart into such a
frame, which does encourage me that he will assist me to make known unto thee
the truth, and nothing but the truth, so far a, the Lord has made it known
unto me; And whosoever thou art that read these lines, I earnestly beg it of
the Lord, that thou may believe these truths: And that thou may not be
unbelieving; For it was for Unbelief that my Son was struck Dumb, as I shall
give thee an account at large hereafter,

Only, I shall desire in the first place to give thee an Account what he wos,
which may be answered in these words; That he was a Disobedient, Stubborn, and
undutiful Child, for which my heart was much alienated from him: The following
Account will satisfy thee; Insomuch that I had given him over for lost, for
ever having any hopes or Comfort from him.

If Father and Friends cannot prevail, we are apt to give such a Child over for
lost for ever; But blessed be God, He did not give him over, but meets with him
by a strong hand, and by an Almighty power; And if he shall Work, none shall
Let; If He speak but the word, the most Rebellious shall be made willing to
come in, and close with the Lord Jesus upon his own Terms. For he says, that
he has Gifts laid up even for the most Rebellious as in the 68. Psalm. and
the 18. ver. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity Captive, thou
have received gifts for men; Yea, for the rebellious also that the Lord God
may dwell among them. Let not Truth be slighted, although they come to you in a
very plain Dress; embrace them, and the Lord work it powerfully upon thy heart,
as it has been upon mine; and if thou shall receive any good by it, give God
the Praise and Glory of it, and I have my end and aim in it; And I fearing that
I shall neither have time nor strength to give every one a particular account
by word of mouth, I have thoughts to have it Printed, whereby I might give
every one satisfaction; that may come to make enquiry into the truth of it.

MY Son going to School to Christ's Hospital, there were 10 Boys sent to the
East India, (as he told me) and ever since he has had a mind to go Beyond Sea;
He has asked when I would put him forth Apprentice? and I told as soon as I
could provide my self with an Apprentice, then you shall go as soon as I can
provide a Master for you; I cannot tell how to spare you before I have an
Apprentice my self; He also knew that I had no body to do the least kindness
for me: He saw that I was sickly and weak, so that in my thoughts, and in the
Opinion of others, that I should not recover; But the Lord brings to the
brink of the Grave, and raises up again, blessed be name of the Lord: But my
condition was not at all considered or minded by him. There was a friend of
mine that did give him good Council, as he had others that did the like Office
of love; and says, that he should be a dutiful Child to me, and give me
content; He also telling him that I should be willing to do any thing that
might be for his good; and if he were more minded to go to Sea, than for a
Trade here, I should be willing to it; he replied to my Friend, I should be
glad to hear my Father say so; I cast my eyes upon him, and saw tears run down
his Cheeks; so I said unto him, be a good Child, and as soon as I have an
Apprentice, I shall be willing to place you out, for your good, and that with
speed. I being a little better in health now, than what I had formerly been; so
not long after he commits a fault, and I thought he did deserve to be corrected
for it, and I did so; and after I gave him the Key of my Lodging-Chamber. I
being then at my Shop, they being distant from each other, but he did not go
home, but went below the Tower, and there be crossed the water, and that night he
went as far as the Half-way-house toward Graves-end by the Thames side; and
going into the House, he called for a Pint of Beer or Ale, and some Bread, and
while his stay there to refresh himself, he falls into discourse with two
Hoy-men as they proved after; and in his Discourse enquires what Ships were
going out; they demanded what Ships did he lack? he told them any Ships that
were going to Virginia, or Jamaica, or any place to the Western Plantations,
for he had a great mind to travail, and this was in Septem. 1669.

So they seeing him in good Apparel, and perceiving his design, they made a
strict enquiry of him what he was, supposing him to be an Apprentice; and
further, what Friends he had, and where they lived? he told them, his Father
was living, but his Mother was lately dead; These two men being bound for
Feversham in Kent, to fetch Timber, they agreed to take him with them; and at
their return, to deliver him to his Father, so he went aboard with them, their
Vessel lying by waiting for the Tide; but their Voyage being longer that tune,
than what was usual, it being above a month before their return; in which space
of time I laid wait all about the City for the discovery of him, and went
twice to Graves-end to search some Ships that lay there, and beyond, and all
other Ships that were outward bound for Virginia, Jamaica, or any of the
Plantations that were in the River; and I being both very weary, and doubtful
of hearing of him, I was resolved to desist from searching any more at present:
so after this, the Hoy returned, and the Man sent his Wife to me according to
his first resolution? who enquiring if I had not had a Son gone from me? I
answered, I had; she replied, if you will go with me as far as VVapping, you
may see him; which news was very welcome to me, for I had been at a great
expense of Money, time, and trouble; for by water, up, and down, in and about
the City, I believe 200 miles at least; and during his absence, I had no body
but my self to do any thing in my Trade; so when I saw him, I chid him for his
disobedience, yea my bowels earned to him; He was amassed to see me, for it was
upon a sudden that I went down to VVapping, immediately after the Hoy came to
the Wharf; so I took him home with me. He staid with me all the next Winter,
and the Spring; and in the Summertime toward Harvest-time, he takes his
opportunity on a Sabbath day; I being hearing the word of God, and he went with
me; but he seeing me secure for a while, takes another journey, and that was
about 90 Miles into Warwickshire, by the way he went to an Uncle of his, my
Wifes brother, to whom he gives an account, that he had taken that journie in
hand on purpose to him, that he would be pleased to be instrumental to his
Father on his behalf, that he might be placed out; he writ to me concerning it;
I writ to him, it was my resolution as soon as I had an Apprentice, to provide
for him; so after many Letters had passed betwixt us, he was persuaded to
return again to me; and after some stay with me, he goes away again on a
Sabbath day some 5 mile off, but returned again of himself; and indeed all this
while I was unprovided of a Boy, for I could not hear of one till this last
Summer but we not liking each other, we parted; and I have another Boy; since
his coming, I had a resolution to enquire out a Master for his going to Sea, as
soon as the Boy was bound. About Bartholomew-tide last, he committed a fault,
and I reproveing him for it he seemed somewhat stubborn, and withal gave some
words that I did not approve of; so I struck him, he resisted again and struck
me, which did increase my passion, and caused me to correct him severely, so to
be clear of me he cries out Murder, at which noise some Neighbors came in,
and when they understood that he had been so disobedient as to strike his
Father, they very much blamed him. So I held him fast till I saw that he was
somewhat abated in his stubborness, and then let him loose, and did treat him
with mild words. At last he became quieter, and in few days after asked me
leave to go to the Fair, I granted it: And when Southwark Fair came; he desired
me to give him leave to go thither also: At which desire of his, I was much
troubled he should not be satisfied with the former Liberty I had given him at
Bartholomew-tide. But he continuing his request still to me, at last I did
grant he should go; though not very willing. So on Wednesday in the Afternoon
the 20. of September 1671. He went into Southwark Fair, and found it to be a
dirty place, did not like it, but goes in to see a play: And when he come forth
of the place, he walked about in it a little, but took no delight in it, and
was troubled that he should come to see it. He returns to came homewards, and
upon London Bridge in the open place, he makes a stand, looking toward the
Tower, upon the Boats and Ships, and leaning upon the place, there were two
Boys came and stood by him, one on his left Hand, the lesser of them puts
forth a Riddle and says tell me what is this, that flies as swift as an Arrow
out of a Bow, and carries his Bridle under his Tail, this was a ship under
Sail, there was a man that stood by him on his right hand and he turned himself
toward the Sun; and said to my Son before the Sun be down, that shall be tied
that was never tied before, and before the Morrow Sun be down, that shall be
loose that was never tied before. One of the Boys being very earnest with the
Man, says, I pray you Sir, tell me the meaning of this, but he would not. So
the Boys went away toward Southwark, the Man and my Son staid at the same
place, the Man says to him, it was a fine thing to be a Traveller, and my Son
says to him, I hope I shall go very suddenly to Sea, and he says to him, have
you your Friends consent, Yes says he? The Man says to him he would not have
him go to Sea, for if he did, he would have a great fit of sickness naming the
Flux, and that would cost him his life. Says he, why shall I be any more sick
than any body else? It would be so, how do you know it? He said he knew it very
well. If you do go, the Ship and all the Men, shall go safe to the place where
it was to go, and should all come home safe again, only he was excepted, for it
should cost him his life. He asked him whether he did believe him, he says,
no, he did not believe him, nor would not, but he would go to Sea, he
endeavored to persuade him to live in London, and it should be well for him,
and my Son says, hang London, I will go and Travel. So when my Son takes his
leave of the Man upon the Bridge, he puts off his Hat in a jearing and deriding
way, and says unto him, I thank you for your good Council, but in his Heart at
that time he did not intend to take his Council; and so parts from him, and he
thought the Man had stayed there at the place where he parted from him. So my
Son coming homewards, and when he came just to the Corner of Thames Street the
Man overtook him, and says, no further yet? And he says, no, so my Son
seeing of him and speaking to him of a sudden, was afraid, and he says be not
afraid, I will do you no harm. So the Man turns with him at the Corner, and
after turns with him into St. Michaels Lane, that comes into Crooked Lane, and
so into Cannon Street. The Man was speaking what a fine place this City was, if
it were all built and inhabited, and that the building in it was more stately
than those of Paris, and in other Countries. When he drew near to Queens-street
Corner, they had some Discourse, but cannot remember what those words were at
present; but he told the Man he was a Liar. The Man was a little before him,
and goes over the Kennel, at the end of Queens-street, as though he would have
gone along Watling-street. My Son turns up at the Corner of Queens-street,
and begins to run away from the Man, and presently had a great pain took him in
the Calves of his Legs: So that it forced him to stand still: and stooping
down to feel on his right Leg that most pained him, he looks over his left
shoulder, and seeing the man gone he was glad he had lost his Company, and cast
his Eye on his right Hand, there the Man was come even with him, and seeing
him, he was afraid. The Man said, be not afraid so they come up that Street,
and crossed over to the other side of the way, but he kept as it were a loof
off from the Man. But when they drew near to come into Cheapside, the Man step
before him, and takes him by the Cloak, and says unto him, be not afraid, do
you believe what I have said unto you. My Son answered, no, I do not believe
you, nor I will not believe you what you say, Do you not remember that
Zacharias wear struck dumb, naming that it was in the first Chapter of Luke, my
Son says, I do remember there is such a place, but that was, because he did
not believe the Angel that told him what should come to pass, and he said, it
may be so with you, and he said to the man, are you an Angel, so the man gave
him no answer, and broke off that discourse, and came toward Cheap Side, and
when my Son parted from the man and began to come homewards, he heard the man
say, it shall be so. So my Son turned back to have called to him, but could not
speak, and stood at the corner looking after the man, and saw him turn at the
corner the same way as they came together. So the man being out of sight he
turned now to come home toward his Fathers house. I do verily believe my Sons
Heart was full of sorrow, and how to declare it he could not then, still he was
troubled that he should answer the man in such a scornful and deriding way, and
that he should answer him so thwartingly. So he came home to me about five a
clock, and I being buisy in the shop I said nothing to him, but I wondered he
came home so soon, but he went directly up stairs into the Kitchen, the Maid
being there he looks about him, as though it was some strange place unto him,
Says the Maid to him Thomas, methinks you have made great have home; be sat
down by the Table and struck his hand twice upon it, she says Thomas, how do
you do? are you not well? what makes you so heavy? have you had an ill day to
day? you did use to speak to us when you came in? what is the matter with you?
now his Sister hearing the Maid urging of him to speak, she said to him,
brother, will you not speak to us? I coming into the room seeing him lean on
his elbow, bearing is head up with his hand, I thought he had been weary with
his walk. I said unto him, can you find nothing to do? must you sit still? go
down and help the boy to shut up the shop, and as I spoke he went down, knowing
nothing of his being dumb: He helped the boy to shut up the shop, his sister
being there, said to him, brother, has any body met with you, and cut out your
tongue? he turning toward her, put forth his tongue, and made signs to the boy
with his hand for a pen and ink. The boy comes up stairs to me, and says, I
think Thomas has lost his tongue, presently comes up again, and says,
Master, I think Thomas has lost his tongue: his sister comes up also, Father,
I think my brother has lost his tongue: I sat still by the fire, and none of
these messengers did move me, I thought he was not minded to speak to them. But
the Maid going down of her own accord, says to him, Thomas, why will you not
speak to us? you will make your Father angry, tell us, what is the matter with
you? he was then writing in a piece of paper, and turns that paper to her,
wherein was writ these words; I cannot speak, and shaked his head. Whereat she
was much troubled, and coming up says to me, I fear all is not well with
Thomas: Hearing of this it struck me to the heart, then I went down to him, and
laid my hand upon his head, and said, Child, how do thou do? he turns a
paper to me, wherein was writ, I cannot speak. I was greatly amazed, and
affrighted: his hand moved toward his Heart, he shoke his head, his
countenance was exceeding sad, his tears ran down from his Eyes: These all gave
in their Testimonies, that they were sorrowing for the sad Condition that had
befaln him. Methinks, I have the sight thereof always in my Eyes, in my
thoughts, and on my Heart, Hand, Head, Countenance and Tears, these all have a
loud and speaking voice: And often since he was dumb, it draws Tears from
mine Eyes. I casting my Eyes upon his Paper the second time, I saw he had writ
underneath those former words, I cannot speak, speak you and I can understand.
So when I saw them, I said unto him, Child, give me an account, where you have
been since you went out, and who you have been withal, and he ^hen did give me
an account to this Effect, but since, he has given me a larger account, as the
Lord has brought those things into his mind. The next day as I was reading by
him in the Afternoon, the window being open, he cast his Eyes upon the Sun,
very earnestly for a time; I thought he might have been affected with what I
was reading off, but he was only viewing of the Sun as he confessed afterward,
He immediately pulls out his Ink-horne and began to write, but could not
proceed for looking on the Sun; the Maid observing, that his Lips did move
much, and lifted up his Hands, she beckoned to me to observe him, what he was a
doing; I rose up, to look in his Face, his Back being toward me, but turning
about I saw tears running very fast from his Eyes, I took him in my Arms; and
said unto him, be not cast down, at what time thou art afraid, trust in God, as
David says, in the 56. Psalm the Third Verse, I found much comfort in these
words, who among you that fears the Lord and obeys the voice of his
Servant, that walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God, in the ^0. of Isaiah 10. verse. While my
Son was still weeping he Coughed three times, and at the last time something
gave a jerk, as though it had been the breaking of a string, which hurt him a
little. Whereupon, his Tongue was loosed, and he spoke, and said, blessed be
God, I can speak, and then he told to me what the Man said to him on
London Bridge, That before the Sun be down, that shall be tied that was never
tied before, and before the Morrow Sun be down that shall be loose that was
never tied before. This was remembered by him not above half an hour before he
spoke. My Son faith, the man said he was a Seaman, he was a man of a middle
Statute, his Clothes under his Coat was of a sad colored Silk watered, a sad
color Cloth Coat with Gold Buttons, with a Crevait plain, twice about his
Neck, a Cain in his Hand with a silver Head, and a Sword by his side.

Thus Reader, I have taken care to make good my promise to thee, that I would
declare the truth and nothing but the truth, the Lord give a blessing that it
might find warm entertainment in thy heart, as it has done in mine, the Lord
work it powerfully upon every soul in my Family, for he only brings light out
of darkness, and good out of evil, as I can experience it at this day, for thou
art a Wonder-working God.

My Son has said unto me, if he had not been struck dum, he would never have
told me any thing what this Man had said unto him, but he would have gone to
Sea. But since the Lord has been pleased to give him his speech, he has said,
he will not now go to Sea, for he has seen the Hand of the Lord has been
against him in a wonderful manner.

FINIS.

