AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL AND EXAMINATION OF JOAN BUTS, For being a Common WITCH
and INCHANTRESS, before the Right Honorable Sir Francis Pemberton, Lord Chief
Justice, at the Assizes holden for the Borough of Southwark and County of
Surrey, on Monday, March 27. 1682.
SHE was indicted by the name of Joan Buts, late of Yoel, in the County of
Surrey, for that she being a common Witch and Inchantress, and not having the
fear of God before her eyes, but moved by the instigation of the Devil, she did
by her wicked and devilish Art, bewitch Mary Farmer, and brought her into a
languishing Condition; in which languishing Condition she continued until she
died.

She was indicted a second time, for that she being a common Witch and
Inchantress, etc. she not having the fear of God before her eyes, but guided by
the Instigation of the Devil, she had by her wicked and devilish Art, bewitched
Elizabeth Burrige, and brought her into a languishing Condition, etc. To both
which Indictments she pleaded Not Gulty; and for Trial, put her self upon God
and her Country.

The Witnesses being sworn, the Parents of Mary Farmer swore, That their Child
being taken ill in an extraordinary and violent manner, the Neighbors told
them it was bewitched, and p^swaded them to go to Dr. Bourn, which they did,
and Bourn told them, That their Child was under an ill Tongue, and advised them
to save the Child's water, and put it into a Bottle, stopping it close, and bury
it in the Earth, and to burn the Child's Clothes, assuring them, that then the
Witch which had done her the hurt, would come in; and that accordingly they did
so; and when the Child's clothes was burning, Joan Buts came in, and sat her
down upon a Stool, looking with ^ most frightful and ghastly Countenance* and
being asked by a Woman that was there present, what she ailed? she answered,
She was not well, nor had been out in seven weeks before; why would you come
out now then, said the Woman? I could not forbear coming to see you, said she;
and with that, she threw down her Hat and tumbled down, wallowing on the
ground, making a fearful and dismal noise; and being got up, she fell a cursing
in a most horrid manner. To this purpose swore diverse others, who were present
at the same time.

Elizabeth Burrige, who was one of the persons bewitched, swore, That going out
of her Masters house in the evening, toward the Barn-door, she saw a Goose, or
some such creature, coming toward her; whereat being much affrighted, she run
in a doors, telling them what she saw; whereupon, her Mistress, with some others
of the house, went out to see if they could see any thing; and being out, there
were stones thrown at them from every side, and they could not see from whence
they came; so that they were forced to retire into the house; and hav^ng shut
the door, the stones were thrown as fast in at the window, and yet not one
Quarrel of Glass broken. Her Master swore, that she being in the middle of the
Room, she suddenly screamed out, saying, Something is got into my back, when
going to her, he pulled out a great piece of Clay from about the middle of her
back, stuck as full of pins as ever it could hold. The Maid swore also, That
going the next morning a milking, she saw Joan Buts, bedagling her self among
the Bushes; whereat being affrighted, she came home and told them, that she had
met such a woman that used to come a begging to the house, she not then knowing
her name; but they told her, it was Goody Buts. Her Master swore likewise, that
sending her up stairs, to fetch him something out of a Trunk, she called out,
Master, here is Goody Buts; but going up stairs with several others, they could
not see her, but they saw several things in the Chamber move out of their
places, there being no body near them; and that coming down stairs, an Andiron
that stood in the Chimney, removed out of its place, and flying over their
heads, fell down before them; and that the Maid crying out again, that
something was got into her back, he took out another great piece of Clay, stuck
as full of thorns as the other was of pins.

Others swore, That they had diverse times taken out pins from the Arms, and
other parts of Mary Farmar; which was also proved by diverse others that had
seen them taken out.

And one of the Evidences swore, that he heard her say, That if she had not
bewitched her, if all the Devils in Hell could help her, she would bewitch her.

She pleaded, she was innocent, and that those things that were sworn against
her, were not true. My Lord asked her, if she did not speak those words: she
acknowledged she did: but my Lord, said she, I am a passionate woman, and they
having urged me, I spoke those words in passion, my Lord, but I intended no
such thing.

She said of one of the Witnesses, whose name is Hakeing, and reputed to be a
very sober man, that he had given himself to the Devil Soul and Body. My Lord
Chief Justice asked her, How she knew he had done so; to which not being able
to give any answer, my Lord cheked, and told her that she must not abuse the
Witnesses at that rate. There was in all about Ninteen or Twenty Witnesses
against Her. And the Trial was near three hours long. The Jury having been some
time out, returned and gave in their Verdict that she was not Guilty, to the
great amazement of some who thought the Evidence sufficient to have found her
Guilty; yet others who consider the great difficulty in proving a Witch,
thought the Jury could do no less than acquit her.

LONDON:

Printed for S. Gardener. 1682.


