AN ACCOUNT OF THE Trial and Conviction OF Sir John Friend, FOR HIGH TREASON In
Conspiring the DEATH of His Most Sacred Majesty, King WILLIAM, and the
Subvertion of the Government. etc.
At the Sessions House, in the Old Bailey: On Monday, the 23d. of this Instant
March, 1696. Before the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice Holt, the Lord
Chief Justice Treby, etc.
NEver was Conspiracy, more happily, and more fully discovered than the late
horrid Design for the barbarous Assassination of His Majesty's Person, the
Invasion of the Kingdom, and Subversion of the Government, and consequently the
Protestant Religion; when beside the Number, and withal the Credit of the
Witnesses, we have the public Confession of the Dying Criminals themselves, ex
ore suo, making their own voluntary self Condemnation; and ever justifying both
their Accusers, and their own Execution; as their own Papers, delivered to the
Hands of the Sheriff; and since Published by Authority suffitiently testify.

But to Balance the Case between the three Unfortunate Romish Zealots, viz.
Charnock, King, and Keys,, that have already received Justice, and the present
Criminal Sir John Friend, now brought to the Bar of Justice, in order to
receiveing it, we have this unhappy Difference between them; That, of the Two,
this unfortunate Gentleman lies under (if possible) the much more heinous, and
less pitied Circumstances; For though there can be no Apology for Guilt so
Barbarous on either side, yet certainly it must be an infinite Aggravation of
the Crime in Sir John Friend, professing himself a Member of the Protestant
Religion; whereas the other Three Convicts were all Papists, and consequently
were mislead by some Impulse of Blind Zeal, a Bigoted Superstition that might
animate this Conspiracy, in favor both of their own Altars, and their darling
Champion of them the late K. J -- 's: But Sir John Friend, under his contrary
Capacity, when Embarked in the same Black Cause, besides the Blot in their
Scutcheon has this additional Stain in his, viz. Not only of such perfidious
^^d shameful Treason against his King and Country, but even against himself;
for no Protestant can list under such a Bloody Banner, but in realiiy must be
an Actor in his own, as well as his Countries Ruin: And certainly it must be no
common Infatuation that could misguide and ensnare a Man into so horrid and
likewise so stupid a Confederacy, where the Phrenzy of Rebellion edges and arms
the drawn Sword even against our own Throats.

And if there can be Degrees of the most Capital Sins, it lies a a little more
heavy upon this unfortunate Offender, who with that Mass of Wealth, and those
Smiles of Fortune, should nevertheless debase himself to the engaging in so
wicked a Cause, when Profligate Lives and Desperate Fortunes (one would think)
should only be tempted to Fish in Troubled Waters.

It has been Remarkt, that never were more Generous, and those Repeated,
Tenders of Mercy offered, than to Sir John Friend, from the King's own Mouth,
upon his Examination before the Council; but his Obstinacy, and hardened Denial
of his Offense, and some other ill Ascendants over made him, reject the Royal
Clemency, till too late to be recalled, which has brought him to this
deplorabel Scene.

Being brought upon his Trial, on Monday the 23d. of this Instant March, after
Ten in the Morning, which continued till Two in the Afternoon. The greatest
Stress of the Testimony against him, besides his General Assistance in the
Conspiracy, was his Acceptance of a Colonels Commission for Raising a Regiment
of Horse; it being proved by Capt. Porter and Mr. Blair, that he had chosen all
his Captains, (who were all mentioned) and had met them at several Taverns and
elsewhere in this City, and had Paid several Sums of Money for carrying on the
cause: The Evidence was Full and Plain against him; besides one of hi^ own
Letters was produced to confirm their Testimoy: He endeavored to invalidate
the credit of the Witnesses, as being Papists, but that was Overruled. In
short after a long Trial and Full Hearing the Jury went out, and soon
Returning, brought him in Guilty.

The Court then Rising, and Adjourning till to Morrow, at which time we expect
to hear Sentence Pronounced.

London, Printed for Edward Steel, in the Strand, 1696


