THE LIVES Of all the Princes of Orange; FROM WILLIAM the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces.

Written in French by the Baron Maurier, in the Year 1682, and published at
Paris, by Order of the French King.

To which is added the Life of His Present Majesty King William the Third, from
His Birth to His Landing in England.

By Mr. Thomas Brown.

Together with all the Princes Heads taken from Original Draughts.

Chara Deo Soboles. Virgil. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

To his Honored Friend THOMAS CHAMBERS OF Hanworth, Esquire
SIR,
THough I know what a just aversion you have to the common strain of
Dedications, yet with the usual assurance of an Author of the Town, I have
presumed to inscribe this History to you; so much too powerful was either my
gratitude or my interest for the Complaisance I ought to have had for your
Modesty. As I have received too many Obligations at your hands not to endeavor
at some sort of a requital (if Addresses of this Nature don't rather serve to
increase the Debt than to acquit it) so I am too well acquainted with your
Temper to offer at any thing that may look like Flattery. It Is I confess
somewhat hard to be avoided upon these occasions, and few Patrons quarrel with
the poor Slaves, that make these Applications to them, for being too liberal of
their Incense. But you need not fear any such dreadful Entertainment from me:
For contrary to the received Practice of all my Predecessors in Dedication, I
intend not to say one Word in your Praise. Nay what is more surprising, instead
of being a Panegyrist I here come publicly to reproach you, and that freedom
as gross as it looks, I know you will much sooner excuse than being praised.

I must therefore, (though it is much against my inclination to be the bearer
of ill News) take the boldness to inform you that the World speaks very strange
things of you, and such as I am afraid you will find it a difficult matter to
justify without the affectation of being singular. It complains in the first
place that in a time of Universal perfidiousness and degeneracy, when the
profession of Friendship serves only to usher in some piece of Treachery with a
better grace, you have the opiniatrete to be sincere and undesigning; that at
an Age wherein others of your quality wholly abandon themselves to their
pleasures, and generously neglect the pursuit of every thing besides, you are
so illnatured as to use them only en passant, and cannot be brought to allow
that Learning sits ill upon a Gentleman; and lastly, that amidst so vast a
Wealth, which uses to have no other effect upon the rest of Mankind, but either
to make them neglect themselves or despise others, you obstinately continue to
be unfashionably virtuous and condescending. I could tell you of several other
objections of the like terrible importance that are frequently made against
you, but as by these I have mentioned, you may sufficiently judge what
malicious Worlds thinks of you, I shall forbear to recount the rest.

And now Sir, if I may be permitted to speak something of the following
Translation, I hope it is a Present not altogether unworthy of your Acceptance.
There is this at least to be said in the behalf of it, which very few done out
of the same Language can pretend to, and that is, the extreme Scarcity as well
as Excellence of the Original, there being (as far as I can inform my self) not
above four or five of them in England. That very Book which my Friends and I
made use of, (for you must give me leave here to inform you, that I have but a
small share in this performance) and is now in the Possession of a Learned
Gentleman, had formerly passed the Hands of King Charles the Second; for he
having received a mighty Character of it, was so impatient to read it over,
that he could not stay to be furnished with one of them from France, but sent
to borrow this. As for the Author, though I ingenuously own that I am so
uncharitable to his Countrymen, as to believe they are for the general part as
unfit to write History as Dutchmen are to write Epic Poems (for Dutch Epic
Poetry is downright. History disguised with Meter, and French History, as far
as Fiction will make it so, is downright Poetry,) yet he has happily escaped
the Genius of the rest of his Nation, who are so apt to run out into strange
Loveadventures, and other Chimera's even upon the most solemn occasions, and,
as appears by his Writings, was a Person of great Quality, Probity and
Experience. If he has any fault it is this, that he is now and then too much
upon the Narrative, but his Old Age will excuse that Infirmity. As for the
rest, he was a passionate Lover of Truth, and an Adorer of true Merit,
wherever he found it, whether in Catholic or Hugonot. Difference in Religion
not being able to prepossess him to any Man's disadvantage, if he were
otherwise valuable. In short, he has discovered several important Matters of
State, which, till he revealed them, were Mysteries to all the World, and I
shall but do him justice when I say that he has joined the unaffected
Simplicity of Philip de Comines, to the Veracity of the great Thuanus. The last
Life has been done by a modern Hand; but though it does not come up to the
former, seems to be written with great Impartiality and Freedom.

I have thus given you a short Account of the Author: It now remains that I
should conclude, which I find I must do in a different manner from most
Dedications: For whereas they generally end with some devout Wishes for the
Person, to whom they address; you have been so eminently well treated both by
Nature and Fortune, that I can wish you nothing but what you possess already.
Therefore not altogether to depart from so ancient and received a Custom, I
will pray, but it shall be for my self, who need it most. My first Petition is,
that you would be pleased to forgive all the defects in the Translation, I mean
in my own Part of it; and my second, that when your Candor has forgiven them,
you would once more employ it, and pardorn this Presumption in,

Sir, Your most Humble, and Most Obliged Servant, T. Brown.

The TABLE.
A.
DUke of Alva sent to succeed the Duchess in the Government of the Low
Countries, page 19. Establishes a Council of Twelve, called the Council of
Blood, p. 20, 21. The Archduke Brother to the Emperor Rodolphus, chosen
Governor of the Netherlands, p. 64. Amsterdam surrendered to the States, p. 65.
Duke of Anjou invited into Holland, p. 73. Retires into France, and dies, p.
113. Arminius and Gomarus, their Quarrel, p. 160, 161, etc.
B.
BArnevelt's Story, p. 156, 157, etc. Bon besieged, p. 240, 241. And taken, p.
242. Marquess de Bellefonds, banished by the French King, p. 251. Battle of
Senef, p. 256.
C.
COligny (Gaspor de) His Character, p. 3. Coeverden lost, p. 231, retaken, p.
232. Coligny (Lovise de) Her Life, p. 137. Cambray besieged and surrendered, p.
280.
D.
DOn John of Austria, made Governor of the Low Countries, p. 57. His Story, p.
58, 59, etc. Surprises the Castle of Namur, and Charlemont, p. 61. Defeats the
Army of the States at Gemblours, p. 65. Dies of Grief, p. 67.
E.
COunts Egmont and Horn Executed, p. 20. Q. Elizabeth loved to be thought
handsome, p. 153, etc.
F.
FRench King almost over-runs the United Provinces, p. 214.
G.
CArdinal Granville, his Character and Story, p. 14, 15, etc. Name of Gueux (or
Beggars) whence the Rise, p. 17. Grave besieged, p. 265. and taken, p. 269.
Ghent taken, p. 291.
H.
HAerlem taken by Famine, p. 42. Henry Frederick born, p. 114. His Life, p.
177, etc. His Children, p. 178.
I.
INquisition declares those guilty of High Treason, who had not opposed the
Heretics of the Netherlands, p. 19. Ipres taken, p. 291.
L.
COunt Lodovick, etc. presents a Petition to the Governess of the Low
Countries, against the Inquisition, New Bishops, etc. which at first is
slighted, p. 17, 18, etc. Lewis de Requesens made Governor in the place of the
Duke of Alva, p. 44. Leyden relieved by breaking down the Dykes, p. 45, 46. and
the University settled there, p. 47.
M.
MArgaret of Austria, made absolute Governess of the Low Countries, with Orders
to Establish the Spanish Inquisition, and several new Bishoprics in the
Netherlands, p. 14. Mons surprised, p. 32. and retaken by the Spaniards, p. 34.
Count de la Mark, takes the Brill with several other Cities, p. 36. Middburg
taken by the Spaniards, p. 44. Maurier traduced at the French Court, etc. p.
120, 121, 122. Maurice Prince of Orange, his Character, p. 125. raises the
Siege of Berghen ap Zoom, p. 129 and 140. takes Breda, p. 130. and Sluise, p.
134. defeats Arch Duke Albert, p. 135. and the Lord de Balancon, p. 138. his
Description, p. 148, 149, 150, etc. Maestricht besieged by the French, p. 235.
and taken, p. 236. Mansfeld's Story and Character, p. 141, 142, etc.
N.
NArses (the Eunuch) his Story, p. 8. House of Nassau their Genealogy, p. 9,
10, etc. The Netherlands demanded to have all the 'Spanish Forces drawn out of
the Low Countries, p. 14. Nimighen Treaty, p. 273.
O.
OStend taken by the Spaniards, p. 134. St. Omers surrendered to the French, p.
285.
P.
KIng Philip the Cause of the Disorders in the Low Countries, p. 8. His
Description, p 13, 14, etc. Perpetual Edict concluded between the States and
Don John of Austria, p. 60. Prince of Parma made Governor of the Low
Countries, p. 68. King Philip published a Prescription against the Prince of
Orange, p. 74. Philip William of Nassau, his Life, p. 115. taken by force out
of the College of Lovaine by King Philip, p. 115. shut up in a Castle in Spain
at 13 Years Old, p. 116. released, and sent to bring the Infanta Isabella into
the Low Countries, p. 117. marries Eleanor of Bourbon, p. 118.
S.
STates General Consent to a Toleration of both Religions, p. 66. Request the
Duke of Anjou and Alemon to be their Lord and Protector, p. 73.
T.
Treaty of Peace set on foot at Breda, p. 48. Treaty of Peace at Ghent, p. 50,
51, and^. Treaty of Peace at Nimighen concluded, p. 297.
V.
MArquess Vitelli, his Character and Epitaph, p. 28. Valenciennes taken by the
French, p. 279.
W.
WIlliam the First of Nassau his Birth, p. 3. the Favors showed him by Charles
5th, p. 4. made Generalissimo at 22 Years Old, p. 5. builds Charlemont, and
Philipville, p. 5. supports the Emperor at the Resignation of his Empire, and
is recommended by him to the King of Spain, p. 6. his Description, p. 12.
Retires into Germany, p. 19. Raises an Army there, which is defeated near the
River Ems, p. 24. Raises another of Twenty Four Thousand German Horse and Foot,
p. 25. which refusing to follow him into France to assist the Hugonots, he
disbands, p. 27. Enters the Low Countries with a great Army, and is received
into Ruremond, Malines, etc. p. 33. Acknowledged Governor of Holland, Zealand,
etc. by the States, p. 38. banishes the Romish Ceremonies out of the Church, p.
39. received into Brussels in great Triumph, p. 62. lays the Commonwealth of
the United Provinces, p. 68. publishes his Apology against King Philip's
Prescription, p. 75, 76, 77, etc. Marries Lovise de Coligny, p. 113. killed at
Delft, p. 115. his Funeral, p. 119. William Count de Buren, Eldest Son to
Prince William, seized at the College of Lovain, and carried Prisoner to
Spain, p. 23. William Henry of Nassau, his Birth, p. 211. deprived of the
Offices belonging to his Family, p. 212. chose General of the Army, p. 215. and
restored to all the other Commands belonging to him, which Cornelius de Wit
opposes, p. 220. Prince William takes Naerden, p. 237. falls sick of the
Smallpox, and recovers, p. 270. besieges Maestricht, p. 275. and raises it, p.
277. Marries the Princess Mary, p. 288. Attacks, and almost Routs Luxemburgh
near Mons, p. 298. Cornelius de Wit, and his Brother killed, p. 224. William
the Second born, p. 203. besieges Amsterdam, p. 206. dies of the Smallpox,
208.
THE Author's Preface.
THE Reader, whoever he is, must not expest in these Memoirs, to find a gay, or
rather an impertinent Discourse, fill^d with New Terms, which some presumptuous
little Authors, who mind nothing but bare words, call fine Language. These
people are to understand that I was never bred at a College, and that the
little Skill I have in Languages I received from Masters at home, or from
common use in Conversation. I never read one single Line of Priscian, or of any
other Grammarian. Their Lexicons, and their Syntaxes, which my Father was used
to call, The Plague of Youth, are as much unknown to me as the Isle of Pines. I
never was able to comprehend what a Gerund or a Supin meant, and though perhaps
I use them upon occasion, I neither know how to define or describe them. I have
not without a great deal of pleasure read the Quintus Curtius of Monsieur de
Vaugclas, whose solid Virtue, and extraordinary Sweetness, as well as his
inviolable Fidelity to his Friends, I esteem; although I was never able to
edify much by his Remarks upon our Language. And, what is more than all this,
having had the misfortune to debauch my own Natural Language, during my long
abode in Foreign Countries, where I was bred; as also by my long stay at
Main, where their Language is extremely vicious; and thinking it not worth the
while to spend money to no purpose at Court, and to feed my self with Vain
Expectations, my Reader ought not to be surprised if he meets in this Work some
terms and manners of speaking that have not received the Approbation of our
Modern Critics, who make no Scruple to condemn a good Book upon the account of
one word which they have banished out of conversation, or an Expression which
does not carry with it (to use the style of these Foplings) the delicacy of
Language.

Therefore I humbly desire these Gentlemen to (...) me alone, since I have been
so ingenuous as to lay open my Infirmities before them; and by way of Requital,
I here give them full possession of the Eight Parts of Speech, all the
Grammars, and all the Dictionaries, with all Remarks and Observations
whatsoever, upon Languages in the World, upon this condition, that they will
leave things that are above their capacity to persons of better Judgment and
Experience. For to deal plainly with them, It Is a sad but a certain Truth, that
these Coyners, and Admirers of New Words can attribute no other sort of merit
to themselves, than what belongs to those Mechanics that make good Tools, by
the help of which excellent Statuaries form admirable Statues, and famous
Architects erect Noble Structures.

For my own part, I have a great Respect for those people that can speak
regularly and justly upon all Occasions, but I cannot endure those Vain
glorious ^sops, those Would-be-Criticks, who in the Ruels of Ladies use to damn
the best Compositions in the World, and all for the sake of one Term or Phrase
that has the ill luck to displease them. I would not have so wild an Inference
drawn from this, as if I were of Opinion that it is impossible for a man to
write solidly and politely at the same time. No, I have more Sense than that
comes to, and preserve as great a Veneration for those Illustrious Persons that
possess both these Talents, as I have an Aversion and Contempt for those puny
Grammarians that are made up of nothing but Pride and Insolence.

It Is not for such unthinking Insects as these to judge of an History. If I had
the ambition to desire fit and competent Judges for these Memoirs, I should
wish that the Famous President de Thou, and those celebrated Brothers the
Messieurs du Puy, and that the President Ardier might come again into the
World. The latter of these was a long time Secretary of State under Mr. d'
Herbaut, his Uncle. His Dispatches were so Natural, but at the same time so
strong and Masculine, as were all the public Declarations that passed under
his hands; That Mr. Conrait, a man generally esteemed in the World, and who
knew the Value of Things extremely well, has told me several times, more than
Thirty Years ago, That the Kings of France ceased to speak with a Majesty
befitting their Empire, ever since they did not explain themselves by the Pen
of Mr. Ardrier. I shall forbear to speak more largely of this Illustrious Man,
who was a singular Friend of mine, and to whom I have Infinite Obligations,
till I meet with a fitter Opportunity.

The greatest part of those Histories that have appeared in the World, are
properly speaking, nothing else but so many Panegyricks composed by Interessed
Hands, that elevate Vice and Iniquity to the Heavens. Of this Character are the
Works of Paterculus and Machiavel, who propose Tiberius, and Caesar Borgia,
that in True History were downright Monsters, as Examples fit to be imitated.
Directly opposite to these Retailers of Unjust Commendations are a sort of
people that deal in Pasquils, and yet have the Impudence to style themselves
Historians. These mercenary, or partial creatures, make no conscience to attack
Virtue it self, and have frequently represented the most excellent Princes that
ever wore a Crown, as Tyrants and Wicked Persons: Witness so many Histories,
and so many Printed Satyrs of the Huguenots upon Catholic Princes, and among
the rest upon Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, for no other Reason but
because that excellent General made War against them. Witness so many
Cart-loads of scurrilous Invectives composed by Monks, and other Superstitious
Catholics against Queen Elizabeth of England, the most glorious Princess that
ever wielded a Scepter. For to these hotheaded passionate Bigots it is
sufficient for you to be of a Party, or of a Religion contrary to theirs, to be
defamed, condemned; and pursued with a Thousand Calumnies.

These ridiculous Monsters vainly endeavor to render Queen Elizabeth odious
and execrable to all posterity, for putting Mary Queen of Scots to Death,
although it is a notorious Truth, that the abovementioned Unhappy Princess was
of so unquiet and turbulent a Spirit, that she could not forbear to embarras
her self with Q. Elizabeth, who was much more powerful than her self; and by
that Ill advised Conduct was the occasion of her own Ruin. The Truth of this
Assertion cannot be called in question, as being confirmed by the Testimony of
Monsieur de Castelnau, Intendant of her Affairs in France, and Ambassador in
England, who tells us in his Memoirs, that she owed this Ill-management to the
Cardinal of Lorrain, his Uncle. Nay, after she was Prisoner in Eng^and, she
continued to keep a correspondence with the Malcontent party there, who
endeavored to disturb the Repose of that Kingdom, so far as to attempt the
Life of Q. Elizabeth. Which obliged her to bring her to a Trial where she was
condemned by more than Forty Judges, the greatest part of them consisting of
Earls, Barons, Peers of England, Officers of the Crown and Members of
Parliament. Notwithstanding all this, her Sentence was for a long time
respited, and Q. Elizabeth had never dared to execute her, if she had not been
persuaded to it by France. For I have heard my Father say, That both Friends
and Enemies concurred, out of different Views, and Interests, to bring that
unfortunate Princess to the Block. Monsieur de Bellievre, who was sent Envoy
Extraordinary into England, in appearance to solicit for the Life of this poor
Queen; for which purpose he carried large Instructions with him, told him, That
he had quite contrary Orders under Henry the Third's Hand, to persuade Q
Elizabeth to behead this Common Enemy both of their Persons
and Kingdoms. All which the King was forced to do out of an apprehension, that
if Mary Stuart, who was not only Heir to Q. Elizabeth, but much younger than
she, should come to succeed her; the Guises, her Relations, who Governed her
absolutely, and who by their great Number of Creatures made his Crown shake
already at home, being supported by the united power of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, would in the conclusion make a second Childeric of him. For those of
the League had the Insolence to change the King's Device, which was Manet
ultima Coelo, into Manet ultima Claustro. The King's meaning was, That after he
had enjoyed upon Earth the Crowns of France and Poland, he hoped he should wear
a Third in Heaven. But these of the League publicly declared, That they would
bestow a Third Crown upon him in a Cloister. And as a Learned Gentleman of that
Age had enlarged upon the King's Device in this fine Hexameter, Qui deditante
duas, triplicem dabit ille Coronam


The Fury of the Leaguers thus paraphrased it in the following Distick. Qui
deditante duas, unam abstulit, altera nutat,
Tertia tonsoris est facienda manu.


Besides this in a private Cabal held by those of that party, where this
Execrable Design was proposed, it happening that one in the compan^, who was more
moderate than the rest, demanded, Who should be the Man that durst put the King
in a Cloister? The Cardinal of Guise, who was of a hot fiery constitution,
after he had reproached him for his faint ^eartedness, roundly told him, That
were the King in his hands, he would for his head between his knees, and
immediately make him a Monk's Crown with the point of a Poiniard. An A^r (...)
cost him very dear; for after Henry III had caused Monsieur de Guise, his
Brother, to be executed, and was considering with himself what he should do
with the Cardinal, whom he had ordered to be apprehended: Col. Alphonso d'
Ornano, Father to the Marshall of that Name, having put him in mind of these
cruel words, and remonstrated to him, That the living Brother was infinitely
more dangerous than he that was now dead, had ever been; the King swore he
should dye, and immediately sent Monsieur de Gaast, Captain of the Guards, with
positive Orders to dispatch him.

This secret Solicitation of Henry III. against Mary Stuart, his own Sister in
Law, Queen of Scotland, and Dowager of France, makes it appear, That to
preserve our selves we often sacrifice our Allies and Relations, and even
Religion it self to Interest, and Reason of State. Witness what the aforesaid
Q. Elizabeth heretofore told my Father, That she held her Life by the Courtesy
of King Philip II. her Brother in Law, although he was the greatest Enemy she
had. Upon this consideration she kept his Picture in her Bedchamber, and made
him be looked upon by all the World as her Savior. And in effect he hindered
her Sister Mary from putting her to death. For Q. Mary, Second Wife to K.
Philip, being a great Catholic, and very infirm, had reason to fear that her
Sister Elizabeth, who was a Protestant, when she came to succeed her, would
banish the Catholic Religion out of England, as afterward it happened, and
therefore mightily pressed the King her Husband to cut off her head, she being at
that time Prisoner in the ^ower of London. But. K. Philip o^d the motion with
all his power, fearing lest Mary Stuart, Heir to Q. Elizabeth, who then was
married to K. Francis II. should one day beco^ Queen of Great Britain, by Right
of Succession and joining it to France, as it would unque^ionably happen if she
had any children, by the Union of so many Kingdoms, a formidable power would be
erected, that would u^erly ruin and confound his vast design of an Universal
Monarchy.

At this very juncture the Spaniards make Religion truckle to Interest; and
those Grave Gentlemen who have so often in their Writings reproached us for our
Alliances with Heretics, and particularly with Holland and Sweden, in order to
recommend themselves with a better grace to the Court of Rome, at present look
upon the Hollanders as the greatest support of their Monarchy, permitting them
to preach publicly in their Cities; Nay, to show what a consideration they
have for these people, Admiral d'Ruyter, a little before his death, got a great
Number of Hungarian Ministers to be released out of the Gallys of Naples,
whither the Emperor had sent them, at one word's speaking to the Marquess de
Los-Velez, the Viceroy.

Thus any body may perceive, that it is Interest only that governs the World,
and that a great Captain had reason to say, That Princes commanded the People,
but that Interest commanded Princes: Which is so palpable, so apparent a Truth,
that the most sacred things among men, have been often devoted to this wicked
principle, and the greatest part of Crowned Heads observe the Rules of Justice
and Religion no farther, than they find them consistent with their dearly
beloved Interest.

As for what remains, if any scrupulous person shall think sit to quarrel with
my Memoirs for comparing William Prince of Orange and Admiral Colligny, who
were both Heretics, and both Rebels, to the greatest Heroes of Antiquity, yet
I would not have him conclude that I have the least leaning toward Heresy and
Rebellion, to which I have an equal Aversion. My meaning is, That it is a Sign
of as much, if not more Virtue, to make ones self a Prince of a private person;
than to be one, and being weak, to resist mighty powers; than to gain Batles,
being born to a Scepter, as Alexander and Gustavus Adolphus were. Kings owe
their Victories to the Valor of their Captains and Troops, and sometimes to
the Winds, and to the Sun; that is, to mere Fortune. Thus Cicero speaking to
Caesar, tells him, That he acquired more glory in pardoning Marcellus, and
restoring his Enemy to his Estate and Dignities, than if he had gained a great
many Battles, because his Soldiers and Officers would attribute the principal
honor of it to themselves: and for an undeniable Argument, That the gaining of
a Battle is owine to the Experience and Courage of the Soldery. the Prince of
Conde, who had as much personal Bravery as ever any man in the World had, after
he had defeated at Rocroy the old disciplined Regiments of the Low Countries,
and those of the Empire at Nordlingue. durst not appear in Guyenne before the
Count of Harcourt, who had but a small Body of old experienced Troops with him,
although the Prince had twice the Number of New raised men.

Difference in Religion ought not to diminish our Esteem of any man. We have
seen several good Catholics of very shallow Understandings; as for Instance,
the Cardinal de Pelleve, who as he was once haranguing the States General,
broke off abruptly, and made nothing on it, which gave occasion to the following
Lines: Seigneurs Etats, excusez le bon-homme,
Il a laisse son Calepin a Rome.
Excuse the man, and don't pronounce his doom,
Poor Soul! he left his Calepine at Rome.



On the other hand, we have seen some Huguenots; as for Instance, Monsieur de
la None, whom the most celebrated Writers have compared to the greatest men of
former Ages. As for my self, I adore extraordinary Merit, wherever I find it,
be it in an Heretic, in a Rebel; nay, even in an Enemy. The Duke of Less,
Viceroy of Naples, has left an Eternal Monument of this Generous Maxim behind
him, by erecting a magnificent Tomb in St. Mary's de la Nove, at Naples, to
Peter of Navarr, with this Inscription:

Petro Navarro Cantabro, solertissimo in expugnandis Urbibus duci, Consalvus
Ferdinandus Luessae Princeps, Ludovici filius, Magni Consalvi Nepos, quamvis
Gallorum parts secutum, Pio Sepulchri muncrum honestavit, cum hoc habeat in se
praeclara virtus, ut ctiam in host sit admirabilis.

This Hero honored Virtue in an Enemy, in a Rebel, and in a Deserter; and not
thinking it sufficient to commend him in private, erected a Noble Mausoleum to
his Memory.

Caesar was not less regarded at Rome, because he was an Epicurean, than if he
had been of any other Sect of Philosophers, who held more favorable Sentiments
of the Divinity and of his Providence; And in our days we more esteem the
Poetry and History of George Buchanan, for all he was a notorious Heretic, than
the flat insipid Verses, or jejune Histories of several good Catholic Authors.
Generally speaking we follow the Opinion we sucked in with our Milk; and as to
matters of Religion, it is a plain case, that we implicitly embrace the
Sentiments of the Doctors of our acquaintance, and believe upon the Faith of
other people, without searching into the bottom of things. But although it has
been a man's misfortune to have evil parents that have educated him in a false
Religion, yet this does by no means destroy his Moral and Heroic Virtues, which
apparently discover themselves in an extraordinary Genius.

Rebellion is full as detestable as Heresy, for it is a barefaced revolting
against our Sovereigns, who are the Images, or Representatives of God upon
Earth. Nevertheless, one may say, in defense of William Prince of Orange, That
Philip II. occasioned the defection of the Low Countries, by his contempt of
them, and by violating the privileges of those Provinces, which the Emperor
Charles V. his Father always governed with Clemency and Mildness.

And as for what respects Admiral Coligny, whom I compare to the Prince of
Orange, although it has been frequently said by his Enemies, who were both
numerous and powerful, That he served himself of the pretense of the Reformed
Religion, the better to cover his ambition: And after them Davila has asserted
as much in his History; yet setting all prejudices aside, it is certain he was
firmly persuaded of the truth of his belief, and that the principle Motive of
his rising up in Arms was to support and defend it. His most familiar
Acquaintance, who pryed diligently into his behavior, never so much as
questioned it, and the ardent prayers he poured out at the moment of his death,
as well as several Letters to his Confidents and Relations, which are the
faithfullest Pictures of the Soul, do sufficiently demonstrate it.

And here I cannot forbear to exclaim at the Massacres of St. Bartholomew,
wherein abundance of good Catholics were sacrificed to the Revenge of their
Enemies Thus it was generally condemned by all honest men both in France and
elsewhere, except the authors of that barbarous butchery, and their dependants.
A Latin History lately Printed with the King's Privilege, speaking of this
bloody Execution, has these words, Atra illa dies quam Sequana non abluat suis
undis. And Monsieur Hardouin de Perefixe Bishop of Rhodez in his History of
Henry IV as he mentions this Massacre, calls it the most abominable Action that
ever was, and wishes, if it please God, that nothing like it may ever happen
again. I don't pretend to injure the memory of King Charles IX. nor of the
Queen his Mother, but only say that this Action has been universally detested
without naming any names: However, if it were necessary to espouse one party or
other on this occasion, in my opinion a good Frenchman would do much better to
interest himself for Henry our present King's Grandfather, who ran so great a
risk of his Life, and who was so dishonourably treated on this cruel day, than
for Charles IX. who scandalously violated his promise.

Upon this doleful Subject Henry IV. thus explained himself very often, and my
Father was a Witness of it, that the most sensible displeasure he ever received
in his whole Life, was that on this fatal day of St. Bartholomew, eight hundred
Gentlemen, all of them men of considerable Estates and Quality, were basely
Murdered for their affection to him. These were his very words, and he spoke
them when he was King of France, at a certa^n time when some zealous Catholics
came to demand justice of him for certain Chronological Tables, which the
Huguenots had printed at Geneva before their Psalms, where was to be seen, In
the Year 1574 dyed Charles the Massacrer.

To Authorize this cruel Action, it must not be alleged that it was approved
of at Rome, where I have seen in the Pope's Chapel the Tragedy of St.
Bartholomew represented, and the Admiral thrown out at the Window, with these
words at the bottom, Pontifex Colinii necem probat. I have read these strange
words there some fifty years ago, not without a great regret, and a certain
pious Bishop told me he could never see them without astonishment.

To conclude, no one ought to be surpised, that writing the Life of William
Prince of Orange, I have set down the substance of his Apology against the
Prosecution of the K. of Spain. If it contains any severe passages on the
memory of that Prince, I am not the first person that divulged them. This piece
was printed in several Languages near a hundred years ago, and was sent by the
Prince of Orange to the Emperor Rodolphus, and to several other Princes of
Europe, amongst the rest to Henry III. accompanied with a long Letter which the
K. received kindly, although this Apology, which in truth is none of the gentlest,
was against his own Brother in Law.

This is all I have to say upon the subject of these Memoirs, which I hope will
be approved by all lovers of Truth, and Truth is the Mistress I have courted
all my life time. The strong aversion I have to flattery and calumny have
somewhat transported me against several Writers, that don't deserve the name of
Historians, but only of scurrilous Authors, and little low fulsome panegyrists,
who being led away by different passions, have endeavored to conceal the
Truth, which I have taken pains to discover, which will appear by several
Secrets of State, that I have laid open en passant, and which without question,
will not be unwelcome to good men.

I have nothing more to add, but that I composed these Memoirs to pass away
some hours of a dull, melancholy solitude, to which I find my self reduced,
having been never bred up to Hunting, or any other sports of the like nature,
which diversions, if they don't make a country life happy, yet they serve at
least to render it less tiresome and disagreable.

WILLIAM of NASSAU Prince of Orange. Founder of the Republique of the United
Provinces.
portrait

THE LIFE OF WILLIAM of NASSAW, Prince of ORANGE, Founder of the Commonwealth
of the United Provinces in the Netherlands.
NO Age of all Antiquity has produced a more extraordinary Man than William of
Nassau, Prince of Orange. Examine all the Heroes of Plutarch, and all those
great Men who lived since that admirable Historian; and 'twill be difficult to
find any upon Record, who possessed more eminently all those Virtues and good
Qualities that enter into the Composition of a brave Man.

The Victories and Conquests of Alexander and Caesar do not so much deserve our
admiration. The first was Master of all Greece, and at the Head of a Warlike
and Well-disciplin'd Army. The other absolutely Commanded half the Roman
Legions, who governed all the World. With these great forces and advantages
they entered upon the Stage, made their first Victories the forerunners to the
next, pursued their blow, and one overthrew the Empire of the Persians, and the
other the Roman Commonwealth. But Prince William has equaled the Glory of
these great Conquerors, by attaquing the formidable Power of King Philip of
Spain without any Army or Forces, and by maintaining himself many years against
him. His Courage was always greater than his Misfortunes; and when all the
World thought him ruined, and he was driven out of the Netherlands, he entered
'em again immediately at the Head of a new Army, and by his great Conduct laid
the foundations of a Commonwealth, that covers the Ocean with its Fleets, and
overmatches all Europe in the number and strength of its Naval Forces. His
Enemies had no other way to ruin him, but by a base Treachery, which he might
have avoided, if he had reposed less confidence in the love of the People, who
served him instead of Guards, and considered him as the Father and Tutelar God
of their Country.

After having reflected on all the Illustrious Persons that have lived before
him, I can meet with no one that equaled his profound Wisdom, heroic Courage
and Constancy under all his Adversities, but Gaspar de Coligny, Lord of
Chastillon, Admiral of France; so great a Man, that D'Avila his Enemy was
forced to own that he was more talked of in Europe than the King of France
himself. This Admiral, after the loss of four Battles, was so far from being
broken or ruined, and continued still so powerful, that his Enemies were
obliged to grant him a Peace; and had it not been for a Treachery, whose Memory
will be eternally abhorred by all good Men, he might have ended his days in
Peace, and done great service to his Country by the Conquest of the
Low Countries; which he proposed at so favorable a conjuncture, that we might
easily have made our selves masters of 'em. But the ill maxims of those
Divines, who would conform all Religion to the humors and passions of Princes,
and the Doctrine, That no Faith ought to be kept with Rebels and Heretics; and
that it is lawful to do a small evil to bring about a greater good, added to
the powerful Motive of Revenge; prevailed over all the Ties of Honor and
Faith, which ought always to be sacred and inviolable.

William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, was Born in the Year 1533, at the Castle
of Dillembourgh, in the County of Nassaw. He was Nine years Page of Honor to
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who continually admired his extraordinary good
sense and modesty.

This great Prince took delight to communicate his most important affairs to
him, and instruct him, and has often declared to those he was most familiar
with, That this young Prince furnished him with Expedients and Counsels that
surpised him, and which otherwise he had never thought of. When he gave
private Audience to Foreign Princes and Ministers, and Prince William was about
to retire with the rest of the Company, he usually bid him stay.

All the World was surpised to see this great and wife Monarch esteem him
above all those that were about him, and trust him at so tender an Age with all
the secrets of his Empire, the management of Affairs, and the weightiest
Negotiations. He was scarce Twenty years old when Charles the Fifth chose him
out among all the great Lords of his Court, to carry the Imperial Crown which
he resigned to his Brother Ferdinand. An Office which he discharged with much
unwillingness; assuring his good Master, That 'twas an unwelcome Task he had
imposed on him of carrying that Crown to another, which his Uncle Henry Count
of Nassaw had put upon his Head.

And for a proof that Charles the Fifth set on less a value on his Courage than
his Prudence; when Philibert Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, was obliged by his own
private affairs to be absent some time from the Netherlands, though the Prince
was but 22 years old, and was in Breda at that time; Charles the Fifth of his
own accord, against the advice of all his Counsel, made him Generalissimo, to
the prejudice of so many experienced Captains, and among the rest of Count
Egmont, who was Twelve years older, at a time when he had to deal with two
great Generals Mounsieur de Nevers, and the Admiral of France. But the Prince
was so far from receiving any blow that Campagn, that he built Charlemont and
Philipville in sight of the French Armies.

I do not pretend to relate all the Actions of the Prince of Orange, which
would require a Volume, and which so many Historians have done in several
Languages. 'Twould be a strange itch of writing, and a manifest robbery to
publish what may be met with in particular Books. My design is only to make
some Reflections and Observations on this great Prince, and acquaint the World
with some particulars of his Life, which I learned from my Father and other
eminent Men of that Age. But in order to make my History more intelligible and
agreeable to those who have not read his Life, I was engaged, contrary to my
former intentions, by an Illustrious Person (to whom I have too many
Obligations to refuse him any thing) to make a short Abridgment of his Life,
enough to give a general Idea of him, as Geographers present us at one view all
the Old and New World in a little Map; not doubting but a Narrow Portraicture
of so extraordinary a Man will cause these Particulars I know of his Life to be
read with greater pleasure, and besides will show to all the World upon what
foundations this Prince has erected the powerful Commonwealth of the United
Provinces.

Besides the esteem the Emperor had for his Virtue, there was no Man at his
Court whom he loved so tenderly as the Prince of Orange. Which he made appear
to the last moment of his Administration. For at the famous Assembly at
Brussels, A. D. 1555, when the Emperor resigned all his Kingdoms to his Son
Philip, 'twas remarkable that in so considerable an Action he was supported by
the Prince of Orange.

All these marks of Confidence, and professions of Friendship, which the
Emperor made him, were the cause of his Misfortunes. For though at his departure
into Spain the Emperor recommended him particularly to the King his Son, the
Spaniards who governed him (for he had been bred always in Spain) being jealous
of the growing Greatness and good Fortune of this young Prince, made the King
entertain such suspicions of him, that his most innocent words and actions had
an ill interpretation put upon 'em, and the refusel which the States made of
complying with the demands of the King was laid to his charge.

He easily perceived by the cold receptions of the King, that his Enemies had
ruined him in his good opinion: But he was confirmed in his belief when King
Philip was going aboard the Ship at Flushing, which was to carry him into
Spain. The King looking on him with a great deal of anger, reproached him with
hindering the execution of his designs by his private intrigues. The Prince
replying with much submission, that the States had done every thing voluntarily
and of their own accord; the King took him by the hand, and shaking it,
answered in Spanish, No los Estados mas vos, vos, vos, repeating the word vos
several times, which the Spaniards use by way of contempt, as we say in French
Toy, Joy, Thou, thou. This particular I had from my Father, who learned it from
a Confident of the Prince of Orange, who was present. The Prince, after this
public affront, had more wit than to conduct the King aboard his Vessel, but
contented himself with taking leave of him, and wishing him a good Voyage into
Spain: For he was secure enough in the City, where he was well beloved, and
where there was a great concourse of people from all parts to see the King's
Embarkment. As a further proof of his disgrace, instead of having the
Government of the Netherlands conferred on him, which his Ancestors had
enjoyed, and which he passionately desired, he saw Cardinal Granville, his
Enemy at the Helm, entrusted with all the secrets of the Court of Spain under
Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Parma, and Governess of the Netherlands, who
had particular Orders to have an eye on his Actions, and to communicate no
affair of importance to him; which made him resolve for the preservation of his
Honor and his Life too, which he saw openly threatened, to support himself with
the love of the People, and court Foreign Alliances.

From hence it is reasonable enough to conclude, that King Philip by his ill
usage of the Prince of Orange, who had done such great Services to the Emperor
his Father, was himself the cause of all the Disorders in the Low Countries.
For had he continued a favorable Treatment to the Prince of Orange, according
to the advice and example of his Father, he had without dispute been a good
Subject, and never had taken those desperate resolutions, which kindled a fire
that lasted above a Hundred years, and cost the Lives of so many Thousand Men,
and drained the Treasure of the Indies.

This ought to be a warning never to drive great Courages to despair. We meet
with a Thousand instances of this nature in History, but particularly of
Narses. This famous Eunuch, after all his great Services were slighted, (for
the Empress Sophia, Wife of Justin the Second, had sent him word that she would
make him Spin with her Women,) replied, That he would weave such a Web, that
she and the whole Empire should never be able to cover. And to make his
Threatenings good, he called the Lombards into Italy, who conquered the best
part of it, to which they left their Name. This done, without returning to
Constantinople, he stayed some time at Naples, where he died quietly in his
Bed, in spite of all the designs of this proud Empress, who had sent Longinus,
a wicked and cruel Man, to succeed him, with Orders to dispatch him.

But before I enter upon the General History of the Actions of this Prince,
'twill be proper to say something of his Family, leaving the Particulars, which
would be too tedious to the Genealogists.

The House of Nassaw is, without contradiction, one of the greatest and
ancientest in all Germany. For besides its high Alliances, the number of its
Branches, and the honor of giving an Emperor near Four hundred years since,
it has this particular advantage to have continued Ten entire Ages, and to
boast with the State of Venice, as a Learned Man says, That its Government is
founded upon a Basis of a Thousand years standing.

Count Oiho of Nassaw, who lived Six hundred years since, had two Wives: The
first brought him in Marriage the Country of Gueldres, and the other Zulphen,
which were preserved Three Ages in the House of Nassaw.

After him another Count Otho of Nassaw Married the Countess of Viandden, who
had great Estates in the Netherlands, above Three hundred years since.

His Grandson Engilbert, the first of that Name, Count of Nassaw, Married the
Heiress of Laeke and Breda, A. D. 1404, and was Grandfather to Engilbert of
Nassaw, the second of that Name.

This Prince was great in War and Peace. He won the Battle of Guinegaste,
punished the Rebellion of Bruges, and was Governour-General of the Netherlands
under Maximilian the First. He died without Children, and made his Brother John
Heir of all his Estates.

This Count John had two Sons, Henry and William. The Lands in the
Low Countries fell to Henry's share, the Eldest; William the Youngest had those
of Germany. This is that Henry Count of Nassaw, to whose strong Solicitations
against Francis the Fifth, Charles the Fifth owed his Empire. This was he, who
on the Day of his Coronation put the Imperial Crown upon his Head:
Nevertheless, after the conclusion of Peace between those great Princes, when
he was sent by the Emperor to do Homage for the Counties of Flanders and
Artois; King Francis by an incredible generosity forgetting all what was
passed, Married him to Claude de Chalon, only Sister to Philibert de Chalon,
Prince of Orange, who had been brought up by Ann of Bretan his Mother-in-law.
By this means Rene de Nassaw, and of Chalons his only Son, was Prince of
Orange, after the Death of his Uncle Philibert de Chalons, who died without
Issue.

William Count of Nassaw Brother to Count Henry, embraced the reformed
Religion, and banished the Catholic out of his Dominions. 'Twas he who was the
Father of the great William of Nassaw, whose Life I am writing, who became
Prince of Orange, and Lord of all the Estates of the House of Chalons by the
Will of Rene de Nassaw, and de Chalon his Cousin German, who was killed at the
Siege of St. Desire, A. D. 1544. and left no Children behind him.

The Emperor Charles the fifth, who was so much obliged to the House of
Nassaw, was extremely concerned to see this young Prince bred up a Heretic,
with much ado he removed him from his Father, and placed him near his Person,
in order to his Conversion to the Catholic Religion, which indeed the Prince
made a public profession of as long as the Emperor lived, and in the
beginning of the Reign of Philip the Third. But the prejudice of the Education
and the new Religion which he had sucked in with his Milk, and had a taste of
afterward at the Court of France, where the new Opinions were very much in
Vogue when he was a Hostage at Paris for the Peace of Cambray, made so strong
an Impression on him, that he could never wear it off.

His Father Count William of Nassaw had Five Sons and seven Daughters, by
Iulienne Countess of Stolbourg. The eldest was this William of Nassaw Prine of
Orange. The youngest was John Count of Nassaw, who left a numerous and renowned
Posterity behind him. The Three other Sons were Lodowick, Adolphus, and Henry
of Nassaw, who signalized themselves in the Civil Wars of France and the
Netherlands: They were never married, and all three died with their Swords in
their hands, Courageously seconding the Design of their elder Brother.

The Seven Daughters of William of Nassaw were all Married, one to the Count of
Bergues, who was Mother to that Count de Bergues, who in our days Commanded the
Spanish Armies against his Cousin Germans, Prince Maurice, and Henry Frederick,
and afterward quitted the Spanish Service upon some disgust. The other Six
were married to Sovereign Counts of Germany, one amongst the rest to Count
Schouarsbourg, who had the misfortune to be present at Antwerp, when John
Iauregny a Biscayner had like to have killed the Prince with a Pistol-shot, and
at Delft when he was Assassinated by Balthazar Guerard a Native of the Franche
Comte. For she never left her dear Brother, who loved her entirely.

William Prince of Orange was of a middle Stature; a brown Complexion, with
Chestnut hair, he talked little, thought much, but spoke always to the purpose,
and his words passed for Oracles. No private Man in the time of Charles the
Fifth lived with so much Splendor as the Prince of Orange, he entertained all
the Foreign Princes and Ministers at his House, and in short was the Glory of
the Emperors Court and his Sons, who in his Proscription which he thundered
out against the Prince of Orange, having upbraided him with the Favors he had
received from him, and how ill he had returned them, the Prince in his Apology
replied, that he was so far from having any Obligations to the King, or
enriching himself in his Service, that he had born the principal Expense of the
Court composed of many Nations, the King taking so little care of it, that he
was forced to desray it out of his own Pocket.

This splendid way of Living, and this engaging manner of insinuating himself
into all Peoples Affections, gained him the Esteem and Friendship of all the
World. Besides he had a great advantage over all the Princes and Lords of the
Emperors Court; the House of Nassau having had the Honor to produce the
Emperor Adolphus, who was killed, A. D. 1298. at the Battle of Spires, upon
whom these Verses were made.

Anno milleno trecent is his minus annis,
In Iulio mense Rex Adolphus cadit ense.
When King Philip who had been bred up in Spain, came into the Low Countries in
his Fathers Lifetime, there appeared such a vast difference between the Father
and Son, that all the People, and particularly the Nobility, conceived as much
Aversion and Contempt for one, as they had Love and Adoration for the other.
The Emperor was good Natured, easy of Access, treated all sorts of Nations
familiarly, and talked to 'em in their own Language, which won him an universal
Respect and Veneration. King Philip rarely appeared in public, wore his
Clothes always in the Spanish Fashion, talked little, and still Spanish, which
procured him the general hate of the Nobility, and the People of the
Netherlands, who hating and dreading the Pride of the Spaniards that governed
him, demanded of him in full Assembly of the States held at Gand, to withdraw
all foreign Troops out of the Netherlands, and use their own Forces for the
Security of the Towns, and make no Stranger Governor of the Low Countries;
these Demands surprised, and incensed the King, who believed all was done by
the Instigation and Contrivance of the Prince of Orange; but concealing his
Resentment, he gave the States hopes of complying with their Requests. In this
Assembly he made Margaret of Austria his natural Sister, Wife of Octavio
Farnese Duke of Parma absolute Governess of the Low Countries, created many
Knights of the Golden Fleece, and then Embarked for Spain. At his Departure he
left Orders with the Governess, to establish the Spanish Inquisition the in
Netherlands, and erect several new Bishoprics. These Innovations were the
Original cause of all the Civil Wars and Confusions, so strange an Aversion had
the People for the very name of the Inquisition and the new Bishops, whom they
considered as the Agents, and under Officers of the Inquisition.

Anthony Perrenot Cardinal de Granville, first Bishop of Arras, and then of
Malines, was Minister of State, and had all the Management of Affairs under the
Duchess of Parma; He was Son to Nicholas Perrenot of Besancon, Secretary of
State to Charles the Seventh, who for his personal Merit had advanced him from
the Quality of a private Citizen. This Cardinal naturally haughty and insolent,
treated the Nobility in a very imperious manner. For which they hated him to
that Degree, that at last Count Egmont, Count Horn, and the Prince of Orange,
no longer able to bear his insupportable Pride, writ plainly to King Philip,
that his Arrogance and violent Proceedings were abhorred by all the Nobility
and People, and would ruin the Netherlands if he was not recalled in time.

This Remonstrance was considered as a criminal Boldness in Spain, and from
that time they took a Resolution to destroy these three Lords, and all their
Adherents. But at that Conjuncture they were constrained to dissemble and
recall the Cardinal. Great disorders happening in the Netherlands, Count John de
Bergues Governor of Hainault, and John de Montmorency, Lord of Montigny,
Governor of Tornay, were dispatched into Spain, with Orders to acquaint the
King with what had passed, and persuade him to compose the Differences by
Mildness and Clemency, rather than by Severity and Roughness. But both losing
their Lives there, was a warning to the rest to stand upon their Guard.

As Soon as the Prince of Orange, who was a great Politician, knew of the
Resolution the King had formed, by the Advice of the Spanish Ministers, and at
the instance of Cardinal Granville, who resented his being driven out of the
Low Countries, of sending the Duke of Alva with an Army of Spaniards and
Italians into the Netherlands, he wisely judged, that the King designed to
revenge himself on the States, for the Demands they had made him, and the
forcible removal of the Cardinal, which was generally imputed to him. Knowing
besides, that the Alterations which were to be made, would infallibly occasion
great Convulsions and Commotions; he desired the Governess to request the King
to give him leave to resign his Governments of Holland, Zeland, Utrecht, and
Burgundy, which was denied him.

He was only persuaded to remove from him his Brother Count Lodowick, who was
thought to give him Counsels which were prejudicial to the Peace of the
Netherlands. Which he did not think fit to Consent too; no more than the new
Oath of Fidelity to the King, which many other great Men refused to take, for
this Oath obliging him to root out Heretics, he must consequently have sworn
the ruin of his own Wife who was a Lutheran. Besides he alleged, that having
already taken the Oath of Fidelity, 'twas needless to take a new one unless
they questioned his Fidelity. The same Course was followed by Anthony de Lalain
Count of Hochstrat Governor of Malines, Count Horn, Philip de Montmorency,
Admiral of the Low Countries, and Henry Brederode, Baron de Viane and Vicount
of Utrecht, descended from the Sovereign Counts of Holland, and by many other
Lords.

A. D. 1566, in April the Governess, pressing with great heat, the
Establishment of the Inquisition, and the New Bishops, Four hundred Gentlemen,
headed by Count Lodowick of Nassaw and Count Brederode (the next day arrived
the Count de Bergues and Culembourg,) met at Brussels in the Hotel de
Culembourg, and had the boldness to present a Petition which they had drawn up,
to the Governess in the Palace. The Heads of this Petition were to reject the
Inquisition, the New Bishops, and the Publication of the Council of Trent,
which they maintained to be contrary to the Interest of the Provinces. This
boldness let loose the reins to all the Seditions and Factions in the
Netherlands, and occasioned all the Sacrileges, all the Villainies, and
Impieties, the breaking down Images, demolishing Churches, and Altars, etc.
which are preserved in History, and are abhorred by the Protestants themselves.

This famous Petition presented by the Nobility marching two by two modestly
clad, and armed only with their Swords, was at first slighted; and Count
Barlaymont a great confident of Madam de Parma, because he saw a great many in
the Company not so rich as himself, told the Governess, by way of Contempt,
that they were a Troop of Beggars, and that she ought to take no notice, or
have any regard to 'em. Hence the name Gueux or Beggars, continued to that
party, as that of Hugeunots to the Protestants of France. The confederate
Nobility, far from taking offense at this Nickname, applied it to themselves,
and clothed themselves all in Gray cloths, and wore little wooden Porringers,
and Beggars Bottles in their Hats, and drank Healths publicly to the Gueux or
Beggars, at their Entertainments.

The Gentlemen who entered into this Association, wore at their Collar a Medal
of Gold, on one side of which was stamped the Kings Image, on the reverse two
hands joined, holding a Bag with this Inscription, Fideles au Roy jusque a la
besace: Faithful to the King even to the Bag. The greatest Lords on their
Footmens Liveries embroidered Dishes, Bottles, and Beggars Bags, glorying in
the Nickname, and publishing that they would Sacrifice their Fortunes to
support so just a Confederacy.

About the end of the Year 1566. the Prince of Orange had a Conference at
Dendermonde with Count Egmont, Horn, Hochstrat, and his Brother Lodowick, to
consult of means for their own Security, and the good of the Provinces; most of
them were of opinion to take up Arms, and oppose the entrance of the Spaniards
into the Low Countries, who had a design to ruin them, as the Prince of Orange
made appear by Letters of the Spanish Resident at Paris, which he had
intercepted: But Count Egmont Governor of Flanders, and Artois, who had a
great Interest with the Soldiers, would not hearken to it, but remonstrated to
the Assembly, that they ought to trust to the King's Clemency and Goodness.
Which he repeated again at Villebrook in another Meeting, and the Prince of
Orange replied, That this Clemency of the King would be his ruin; and that the
Spaniards would make him a Bridge over which they would pass into Flanders, and
which they would break down as soon as they had entered. After this the Prince
told him, that since he took so little Care of his safety, he would provide for
his own by retiring into Germany. To which the Count answered, Farewell, Prince
without Land; and the Prince replied, Farewell, Count without a Head, which
Prophecy proved too true.

A. D. 1568. the 10th. of February the Spanish Inquisition declared Guilty of
High Treason, all those who had not opposed the Heretics of the Netherlands.
Which was in effect condemning all the Nobility, which the Council of Spain had
a design to destroy, particularly the Great Men and Governors of Provinces,
and those who had presented the Address against the Inquisition: Which the King
confirmed by an Edict, which bore the same Date.

This done, he sent the Duke of Alva with an Army of Veterane Soldiers,
composed of Spaniards and Italians, to succeed Margaret Duchess of Parma, in
the Government of the Low Countries. The Duke passed from Spain into Italy,
where having made a rendezyous of his Troops, he entered into Luxemburg, through
Savoy, the County of Burgundy and Lorrain, and crossed all those Countries
without the least complaint of the Inhabitants in so long a March; so severe
was the Duke, and so strict an observer of Military Discipline.

The Prince of Orange, before the Arrival of the Duke of Alva, retired into
Germany to his County of Nassaw, giving out, that under pretense of settling
the Inquisition, and other Illegal things contrary to the Liberties and
Privileges of the Provinces, the Spaniards design was to force them to rebel,
that they might have a plausible pretense of enslaving them, and Erecting a
Despotick Government in the Netherlands, as a revolted, and conquered Nation,
in the same manner as they had done with the Indies, Naples, Sicily, Milan and
Sardinia. And indeed the severity, and cruelty of the Duke of Alva confirmed
what the Prince gave out; not only to the Provinces, but all the neighboring
Princes, who condemned his unjust and violent Proceedings, and particularly the
Emperor Maximilian, a good natured and a merciful Prince.

At his first coming the Duke established a Sovereign Council of twelve Judges,
of which he made himself the President. They were all men of the Long Robe, of
no Birth nor Merit, except le Sieurs Barlaymont, and Norcairme, who were
Gentlemen of Quality. The most eminent was John Vargas a Spaniard, so famous
for his Cruelty, that the Spaniards used to say, They had need of as keen a
Knife as that of Vargas to cut off the Gangreen of the Low Countries. There was
also one Hessels, a Flemming, of this new Council, who slept always at the
Trial of Criminals, and when they awaked him to deliver his opinion, he rubbed
his Eyes and cried between sleeping and waking; ad Patibulum, ad Patibulum, to
the Gallows, to the Gallows, as William Guerin Advocate General of the
Parliament of Provence; who said, when they brought before him, one of Herindol
suspected of Heresy, Toll, Toll, Crucifige, in Imitation of the Jews. This
Hessels was afterward hanged upon a Tree, without any form of Justice or
Process, by the Governors of Gand, Imbise and Rihove, whom he had often
threatened by his gray Beard to hang.

Sentences were often passed by only two or three Judges of this Council, as
the Judgment against Strales a Burgomaster of Antwerp, which was Signed only by
Vargas and two other Spaniards.

This Council was called by the Duke of Alva, The Council of Troubles, and by
his Enemies, The Council of Blood. By the Establishment of this Council, which
was a supreme Court of Judicature, the Duke of Alva deprived all the other
Councils of the Netherlands of their Power and Jurisdiction: For all men,
without Exception, were denied the Liberty of appealing, even the Knights of
the Golden Fleece, who by the Statutes of their Order were to be tried by their
Peers alone, in the Presence of the King: Which was contrary to all Privileges.
The Judges of the Country were forbid to take cognizance of the last Troubles;
and all the Councils of the Provinces were to Answer before this Tribunal. A
rich Burgher was condemned to Death, his hands being tied behind his Back,
being bound to the Tail of a Horse, and mercilesly dragged to the place of
Execution.

The First and second Days of June, Eighteen Lords and Gentlemen were
barbarously executed at Brussels; among the rest the two Barons of Battembourg
Brothers; John de Montigny Lord of Villiers, and the Lord de Huy a Bastard of
the Counts of Namur; Drums beating all the time of their Execution, that their
dying Speeches might not be heard; nor the People stirred up to Compassion by
hearing them complain of the Injustice which had been done to them.

The Fifth of June following were publicly executed at Brussels, Count Egmont
and Count Horn, several Regiments of Native Spaniards being drawn up in the
great Square to guard the Execution. I may say, that the Death of these two
Lords cost the Spanish King the Low Countries, so universally were they loved
and esteemed.

The First won the Battle of St. Quintins and Gravelins. The French Resident at
Brussels writ to Court, that he had seen that Head cut off, which had twice
made France tremble.

Cardinal Granville never feared any of the great Lords of the Netherlands, but
the Prince of Orange, for the rest were not capable of forming or maintaining a
Party; and when the News was brought to Rome in general, that the Duke of Alva
had seized on all the great Lords of the Low Countries; he asked whether
Silence was taken, meaning the Prince of Orange, and when they told him, No: he
replied, The Duke had done nothing.

The Prince of Orange who had put himself into a place of Security, was
Summoned to appear before the supreme Council, who condemned him for not
obeying: For he appealed to the States of Brabant, his natural Judges, and the
King himself, because he was Knight of the Golden Fleece; and consequently,
could not be tried by subdeligate and suspected Judges, and his professed
Enemies, but by the King himself, assisted by his Peers the Knights.

Which he represented at large in public Manifesto's to the Emperor
Maximilian and the German Princes, who approved his Reasons, and condemned the
violence of the Council of Spain, which went so far as to seize on his eldest
Son William Count de Buren, who was arrested in the College of Louvain at the
Age of thirteen, contrary to the privileges of the University, and the Country
of Brabant, and afterward carried Prisoner into Spain.

This hard usage made the Prince resolve to pass the Rubicon, and hazard all as
Caesar did, and endeavor to do himself Justice, and have satisfaction for his
Injuries by way of Arms. He raised an Army in Germany, and sent it into
Friezland under the Command of Count Lodowick his Brother, who made a happy
beginning of the Compaign by the entire defeat of John de Ligny, Count of
Aremberg, Governor of the Province, a famous Captain; who the year before was
sent General of a considerable Army into France, to the Assistance of Charles
the Ninth, against the Huguenots, who had the boldness to besiege him in Paris,
after having missed of surprising him at Meaux. This Count of Aremberg died
upon the place: But it is said, he revenged his Death by that of Count Adolphus
of Nassau, Brother to William Prince of Orange, and Count Lodowick, who
remained Master of the Field of Battle, of the Baggage, and Artillery of the
Spanish Army.

But Count Lodowick did not long enjoy the pleasure of this Victory; for the
Duke of Alva fell upon him in the same Country with old Disciplined Troops, at
a time when the Germans, instead of preparing for a vigorous defense against so
powerful an Enemy, mutinied and demanded their Pay, and routed his Army, the
most part of which were drowned in the River Ems which lay behind them. Count
Lodowick with great difficulty saved his Life which he had certainly lost, if
he had not met with a little Boat, and crossed the River which is very wide as
it falling into the Seas, leaving all his Baggage, and Artillery in the hands
of the Spaniards.

The Prince of Orange, a man of a steady and unshaken Courage in all his
misfortunes, without being startled at this Blow, raises another Army of Twenty
four thousand German Horse and Foot, which he joined with a Body of Four
thousand French, Commanded by Francis de Hangest Lord of Genlis. Before he
entered into the Netherlands, he published a Manifesto, in which he lays open
the Reasons he had to take up Arms, clears himself of the Crimes he was charged
with, excepts against the Bloody Council, and the Duke of Alva who pretended to
be his Judge. He owns that he had quitted the Church of Rome, for a Religion
which he thought more agreeable to the Holy Scripture; declares that he was
forced to make War for the preservation of his Country, and to free it from the
Slavery the Spaniards were preparing for it, as in Duty bound, being one of the
great Lords of the Netherlands. He hopes that King Philip whose good
Inclinations were obstructed by the ill Counsels of the Spaniards, will one day
better consider the Fidelity of the Provinces, and the Oath he publicly took
of preserving their Privileges: He says that the Laws of the Duchy of Brabant
dispense with the Subjects, from paying that obedience to the Errors and
Mistakes of their Princes, which they only owe to their lawful Commands, which
ought to be conformable to the Customs of the Province. He added that the
Brabantines never suffered any Prince to take Possession of the Government
before they had agreed with him; That if the Prince breaks the Laws, and the
Constitutions of the Duchy, the Subjects shall be absolved from their Oath of
Allegiance, till their Injuries are redressed.

After this the Prince having passed the Rhine, crossed the Meuse happily
between Ruremonde and Mastreicht, though the Duke of Alva was on the other side
of the River to dispute the passage with him. He passed his Foot over at a
Ford, whilst the Horse who stood above, broke the force of the River; in the
same manner as Caesar passed the River Segre near Lerida in Catalonia. The Duke
of Alva would not believe the Count of Barlaymont, who brought him the first
News of it, but asked him whether the Prince of Orange's Army were Birds.

Thus the Prince of Orange entered into Brabant. But the Duke who would not
stake the Netherlands upon the Success of a Battle against a fresh Army, and
stronger than his own, having fortifyed all the Towns, and covering himself
with Rivers, and posting himself very advantageously, laughed at the Prince of
Orange, who presented him Battle every day. For after the Prince had made
Twenty nine Incampments, without being able to draw the Duke to an Engagement,
being received into no City, contrary to his hopes, and pressed by Famine in a
little Country, incapable of supplying longer so numerous an Army, and his
Soldiers mutinying and demanding their Pay, (in one of which Mutinies some
Officers were killed in his sight, and he himself had been shot if the Pistol
bullet had not lighted on the Pommel of his Sword,) he was forced to disband
his Army, which refused to follow him into France, to the Assistance of the
Huguenots, the greatest part of the Officers telling him, That they promised to
serve only against Spain, not France. He paid the Army with the little ready
Money he had, with his Plate, and the Money which the Sale of his Artillery and
his Baggage yielded him, engaging to the principal Commanders, his Principality
of Orange, and his other Lordships for the Security of what he owed them.

The extraordinary prudence and firmness of the Duke of Alva can never be
enough admired, who found out an excellent way of beating his Enemies without
fighting, whereas other Victories are usually won by bloody and hazardous
Battles.

He swore to the Messenger who came from his eldest Son Frederick de Toledo,
and Chiapin Vitelli, Marquess of Celone, his Marshall de Camp, to press him to
give the Enemies Battle, That 'twas a strange thing they would not suffer him
to manage the War as he pleased, and that if any durst talk to him of fighting
again, he should never return alive.

This Marquess of Vitelli was a brave Captain, and had done such great Services
to the Duke of Tuscany in his Wars, that King Philip demanded him of the Duke,
to Command his Army under the Duke of Alva. He behaved himself extremely well
in Flanders, and died in the time of the Commendador de Requisons, who
succeeded the Duke of Alva in the Government of the Low Countries. He was so
prodigiously Fat, that he was forced to gird up his Belly to be able to walk.
As he was a great Eater, and reckoned an Atheist, after his Death the Gueux
made this Epitaph on him. O Deus omnipotens, crassi miserere Vitelli,
Quem Mors praeveniens non sinit esse bovem.
Corpus in Italia est, tenet intestina Brabantus;
Ast animam nemo, cur? quia non habuit.


The Prince of Orange disbanded his Army in Strasbourg, where he arrived from
the Netherlands through the Frontiers of Picardy, Champagne and Lorrain.

Between le Quesnoy and Cambray, the Prince cut off Eighteen Companies of Foot,
and three hundred Horse, and made almost all the Officers Prisoners. Don
Rufille Henriquus, Son to the Duke of Alva, with many others, were killed upon
the place, which was some satisfaction to him for the Blow he had received in
Brabant, where Count Hochstrate received a mortal Wound, and died not long
after very much regretted by the Prince of Orange, for his Valor and unmovable
Fidelity to his Party. Philip de Morbais Lord of Louverval, was taken Prisoner
in the same Action, and afterward beheaded at Brussels.

The Prince out of this great Army reserved to himself only a Body of Twelve
hundred Horse, and with his Brothers, Count Lodowick and Henry, joined the
Prince Palatine Wolfgang, Duke of Deuxponts, whom he found ready to enter
France, to the Succors of the Huguenots. He was present at the taking of la
Charity, which was very happy for that Party, for if the Germans had not made
themselves Masters of a passage over the River Loire, they could never have
joined the Admiral. He was afterward in the Battle of Roche la ville. D' Avila
observes, that the Prince of Orange on this occasion Commanded the main Battle
of the Huguenots Army, with the Count de Rochefoucaut, and that Count Lodowick
of Nassau his Brother, signalized himself in the Vanguard against Philip
Strozzi, Colonel of the French Infantry, who advancing too forward, was made
Prisoner by the Huguenots. The same Author assures us, that 'twas at Roche la
ville, where the King of Navarre, afterward Henry the Great, began to give
Proofs of the Courage, which he has since made appear on so many dangerous
occasions. He was afterward at the Siege of Poictiers which was fatal to the
Huguenots, for when they had ruined their Army before the place, they were
forced to raise the Siege to relieve Chatelleraut. At last he quitted the Camp
at Foy la Binese near Richelieu, disguised like a Peasant, with four Men in his
Company; and after having crossed Tourrain and Berry with great difficulty, he
arrived at la Charity, and then Montbeliard, from whence he retired into his
County of Nassau to raise new Forces. His Brother Count Lodowick was afterward
at the Battle of Moncountour, whence he saved himself in Company of the Admiral
de Chatillon, and a Body of the Huguenot Horse.

This year the Admiral advised the Prince of Orange to give out Commissions for
Commands at Sea, to several Persons of Quality, who had been driven out of the
Low Countries by the Duke of Alva, who after having put to Death a vast number
of Men, forced all People to pay the Tenth penny for the Sale of their
Movables, the Twentieth for immoveables, and the Hundredth penny for all they
possessed. The Admiral assured the Prince, that if he could once set Footing in
Holland or in Zealand, Countries very strongly situated, 'twould be difficult
to force him out, because he was so well beloved by the People, who would never
fail him at his need.

William Lord of Lumay, descended from the Count de la Mare, was the chief of
these Refugees. He and his Associates were called the Sea Gueux by way of
distinction from the Land Gueux. This advice of the Admiral was very useful to
the Prince of Orange, and was a sort of Prophecy of his Establishment in those
Provinces, for by this means he possessed himself of all Holland and Zealand,
and was as Successful and Victorious at Sea, as he had been unfortunate at
Land; for 'twas observed, that in Ten years continual War, the Spaniards were
always beaten by the Hollanders at Sea.

In the Year 1570. Peace being concluded with the Huguenots, the Court of
France, the better to amuse and overreach the Huguenots, made a show of
employing them against the Netherlands, under the conduct of the Duke of
Alenzon, Admiral Colligny, and Count Lodowick of Nassau. The Court pretended to
be dissatisfied with the King of Spain, for poisoning Isabella of France his
Wife, whose Death the French gave out they would revenge, and the Murders of
the French that had been Massacre'd in Florida by the Spaniards. They promised
to the Prince of Orange by Count Lodowick his Brother, whom they had loaded
with Honors and Caresses, a considerable supply of Men and Money, and the
Sovereignty of Zealand, Utrecht, and Friezland, and that they would join the
other Provinces to France.

The Prince of Orange, upon these great hopes and appearances which proved
false, refused a very advantageous and secure Treaty, which the Emperor,
offered him from the part of the King of Spain, and sent Forces under the
Command of his Brother-in-Law the Count de Bergues, to make an Attempt upon
Gueldres and Over-Yssel. The Count took Zutphen and several other places. His
Brother Count Lodowick was to make a considerable effort on the side of
Hainault, where he surprised Mons, the Capital of that Province, which
diversion hindered the Duke of Alva from retaking the Cities of Holland and
Zealand that had newly declared against him, and which he might easily have
done at a time when they were unprovided of forces and necessaries for their
defense. But nothing incensed the Duke of Alva so much as the surprising of
Mons which he resolved to recover at any rate, leaving every thing else to
apply himself wholly to this seige, which gave time to the revolted Cities to
draw breath, and furnish themselves at Leisure with Men and Ammunition.

The brave Defense of Count Lodowick, assisted by Mounsieur de la Nove bras de
fer, and many of the French Nobility, made the Siege of Mons very long and
difficult. The Spaniards fired above 20000 Canonshot against it.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange who had retired into Germany, had raised
a greater Army than his first, to enter into Brabant, where the Cruelty and
Exactions of the Duke of Alva made him hope for better Success than he had in
his first Invasion. This Army was to be paid with the money the French Court
had promised to supply him with. Thus the Prince believed with reason that the
Spanish Forces would not be able to defend the Low Countries, attacked on so
many sides by Land, whilst by Sea they were gauled by the Counts de la Mark,
Sonoy, Treton, the Brothers Boisols, and Bertel Entens his Lieutenants in
Holland and Zealand, where they had great Success, as I shall afterward
declare.

The Spaniards were never in so great danger of losing the Netherlands as at
that Conjuncture. The hopes of the Prince were not groundless, and in all
probability the Spaniards had been quite driven out of the Low Countries, if
France had made good its promises.

Thus this great Man, who had so many Strings to his Bow, parted from Germany
with a great Army to enter into the Low Countries, when he found all People
driven to despair by the Tyranny of the Duke of Alva, and ready to receive him
with open arms. First he was received into Ruremonde, where he passed his Army
over the Bridge into Brabant. Louvain gave him a sum of money, and Malines
opened its Gates to him, which cost that poor City very dear. The Duke of Alva
was absent at the Siege of Mons which he resolved to take, and the Prince
designed to relieve, as well to save so important a Place, as to deliver his
brother Lodowick from the danger he was in. But Mr. de Genlis who marched from
France to the relief of the place with 7000 Horse and Foot, having been
defeated and taken Prisoner by Frederick de Toledo, who had gone out to meet
him, upon the secret intelligence which he received from the Court of France of
his marching toward Mons, and the condition of his Forces. The Prince having
attempted in vain to raise the Siege, for the Duke of Alva had entrenched
himself so strongly that 'twas impossible to force his lines, and at the same
time understanding by the discharging of the great Guns and other signs of
rejoicing in the Camp, of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, where Admiral de
Chatillon and all his principal friends had been killed, and having no hopes
from the French who had deceived him, but on the contrary having all the reason
in the world to be apprehensive of so great a Kingdom which had declared
against his party and religion, he advised his brother Lodowick to make an
honorable Composition, which was granted him, and he himself retired by small
Marches toward the Rhine. In this retreat he was in great danger of being
killed by the Enemies and his own Soldiers. For the German officers talked of
arresting him to secure the payment of their arrears, which they were promised
should be paid at their arrival in Brabant, where he expected to receive the
money the French had promised him. But this eloquent and engaging Prince
appeased the mutiny, by assuring them 'twas not his fault, and satisfied them
with promises and the little ready money he had.

On the other side he was in great danger of his Life at Malines; 800 Spanish
Horse, who had chosen men mounted behind them, entered into his Camp by night,
and pierced as far as his tent, and would have killed him as he slept, if a
little dog who lay in his Bed, had not waked him by scratching his face with
his claws; the greatest part of the Spaniards being cut off, he marched strait
on to the Rhine, where he disbanded his Army at Orsay, and went through
Over-Yssell to Utrecht, and thence to Holland and Zealand, which had declared
for him, all except Middleburg and Amsterdam, in the following manner.

Whilst the Prince of Orange was a Refugee in France and Germany, and wandering
from Province to Province, William de la Mark Boissols. Siegneurs de Lumay,
Sonoy, Treton, the Boissols Entens, and others who acted under the Orders of
the Prince, turned Pirates and practiced the trade a long time with great
Success, till having no longer a retreat in the Ports of England, which Queen
Elizabeth denied them at the instance of the Duke of Alva, and for Fear of
making the Spaniards her Enemies, the Count de la Mark and the rest, designing
to seize a Port in North-Holland or Friezland, were obliged by the contrary
Winds to put in for shelter, with 30 great and Small Ships, into the Isle of
Vorn in Holland where the Brill is, which they took by surprise, having found
it without a Garrison, which was sent to punish Utrecht for refusing to pay the
tenth penny.

This Count de la Mark was a rash and a cruel man. He swore never to shave his
Beard nor Head till he had revenged the death of Count Egmont and Horn. When he
had surprised the Brill, which signifies Spectacles in the Flemish Tongue, he
had himself painted in a large piece, with the Duke of Alva behind, whom he
stood and put Spectacles on his Nose by way of Derision, it being a term of
Contempt in Holland, to say a man wants light.

He put ten pieces of Money in his colors in hatred of the Imposition which
the Duke of Alva had established, and to make him more odious.

The Count de Bossut Governor of Holland for the Spaniards, made a fruitless
attempt to drive them out of the Brill. Many other Cities of Holland, viz Horn,
Alkmar, Edam, Goude, Oudewater, Leyden, Gorcum, Harlem, and all Zealand, except
Middleburg, following the Example of the Brill, abandoned the Duke of Alva, and
declared for the Prince of Orange. Flushing, a considerable City and Port of
Zealand, was one of the first that revolted, by the persuasion of the Priest,
who on Easter Day, as he was saying Mass, exhorted the People to recover their
Liberty. This Air of sedition having blown the People into a flame, they
immediately went to their Arms, and forced the Spanish Garrison to leave the
place. But they arrested Alvarez Pacheco, a Spaniard and Relation of the Duke
of Alva, who was superintendant of the Fortifications of the Citadel which was
building at Flushing. He was immediately hanged by order of Treton, who
revenged on him the death of his brother, who had been beheaded by the Duke of
Alva at Brussels 4 years before. Pacheco in vain represented that he was a
Gentleman, and desired the favor to be beheaded, but he was hanged publicly
on a Gibbet.

I wonder at the variety of opinions I have met with in the most famous
Historians of the Netherlands concerning this Pacheco. Grotius says he was a
Savoyard, though Benlivoglio, Strada, Meursius and Emanuel de Metteren, do all
agree he was a Spaniard. Cardinal Bentivoglio says he was beheaded, and others
write that he was hanged: on the other side Meursius calls this Gentleman who
was executed, a Relation of the Duke of Alva, Pacioli, although the others call
him Pacheco, confounding this Pacheco with Francis Paciotti of Urbin, Count de
Montefabre, so famous for his skill in fortifications and other engines of War,
that when he had built the Citadel at Antwerp, his name was given to one of
the Bastions by order of the Duke of Alva, the four others were called the
Duke, Ferdinand, Toledo and Alva, not one by the name of the King his Master
But to return to this Pacheco, Emanuel de Metteren, though a very exact
Historian, names him Pierre Pacheco, though Famianus Strada, who was better
informed, names him Alvarez. Which shows that the greatest men are liable to
mistakes.

The Sea Gueux in requital of the Duke of Alva's cruelty, hanged all the
Prisoners they made without distinction, but the Spaniards they tied by couples
back to back and threw them into the Sea.

As soon as the Prince of Orange arrived in Holland and Zealand, he made the
Sieur Diederic or Theoderick de Sonoy, a Friezland Gentleman, his Lieutenant in
North-Holland, otherwise called Westfrise, and Charles B^issol Governor of
Flushing, and his Brother Lewis Boissol Admiral These two Gentlemen were of
Brussles, and being condemned by the Duke of Alva, followed the ^ortunes of the
Prince of Orange.

About that time the States of Holland and Zealand met at Dordrecht, where they
acknowledged the Prince of Orange for their Governor, though he was absent,
and obliged themselves by oath never to abandon him, and the Prince in like
manner swore by his proxy Philip de Marnix Sieur de St. Aldegonde, to continue
inviolably devoted to their interests. 'Twas observed in this Assembly that St.
Aldegonde gave his hand to all the Deputies of the States, and they to him, in
token of their mutual confidence and fidelity.

William Count de la Mark then present, was declared Lieutenant of the Prince
of Orange, but rebelling some time after against the Prince with his confidentt
Bertel Entens as rash as himself; they were both seized on, and they would have
proceeded to the Trial of the Count, if the consideration of his alliances and
great services had not pleaded for him, for he had been guilty of great
cruelties to some good Ecclesiastics which deserved a severe punishment. After
he was out of Prison he retired to Liege where he died of the bite of one of
his mad dogs.

The Prince did all things in the Name of the States, though he had all the
Power of the Government in his own hands, such an entire confidence had the
People in him. There were anciently but six Cities in Holland that had right to
vote in the States, viz, Dordrecht, Harlem, Leyden, Delft, Amsterdam and Goude,
the Prince added twelve others to these six, viz, Rotterdam, Gorcum, Schedam,
Sconen, la Brille, Alkmar, Horn, Enkhusen, Edam, Munikedam, Medimblet and
Purmerend, that he might engage these Cities in his interest by the honor he
had done them, and that they might be the better affected to him in the
assembly of the States, and ease the public miseries and grievances the more
effectually by being acquainted with them. He had the absolute disposal of all
Employments and charges, but refused the name of King and contented himself
with the Power.

At that time he banished all the Romish Ceremonies out of the Churches, that
this difference of Religion might out off all means of an accommodation with
the Spaniards who were sworn Enemies to the new opinions.

A. D. 1572 the Duke of Alva, after the recovery of Mons, being very much
indisposed, sent his Son Don Frederick de Toledo, to take the Cities of Holland
and Guelderland that had revolted from him. Don Frederick resolved to make
Malines an Example, for opening its Gates to the Prince of Orange: He did not
think it enough to pillage the Town for several days together, but permitted
his Soldiers to commit all sorts of Cruelties and Barbarities, even to ravish
the Women, without excepting the Nuns. After this he marched against the
Marquess of Bergues, routed him, and possessed himself of all the Towns he had
won, among the rest of Zutphen, which he mercilesly gave up to the Plunder of
his Army. He retook Narden and entirely destroyed it, cutting off the Innocent
and Guilty without distinction of Age or Sex, and contrary to the Promise which
Julian Romero a Spanish Colonel, had made to the Burghers of saving their
Lives, He burnt the Houses, razed the Walls, let the dead Bodies lie Three
whole Weeks in the Streets without Burial. An excess of Barbarity which was
considered by the most Cruel, rather as a detestable Villainy, than a just
Punishment for their revolts. This made Harlem take a Resolution to hold out to
the last Extremity, having to do with so Merciless a Conqueror.

The Dutch Historians write that the Art of Printing was begun at Harlem, A. D.
1440. by Laurence le Contre, and Thomas Pieterson his Son-in-Law; but that
their Factor John Faustus betraying them, carried away the Letters to
Amsterdam, then to Cologne, and from thence to Mayence, where he stopped, and
where John Guttemburg, a German Gentleman, who is commonly reckoned the
Inventor of Printing, improved it very much.

Wibald Riperda a Friezland Gentleman, Commanded in the City of Harlem, and Don
Frederick declared, that he would make use of no other Keys to enter the City
than his Canon. But this proved a long and a bloody Siege, having lasted from
December 1572. to July 1573. The Spaniards lost above Four thousand Men before
it, among others the Sieur Crossonier, Great Master of the Artillery, and
Bartholomew Campi de Besoro an excellent Engineer.

There was so great a Famine in the City, that a little Child Three years old
was dug up by its Parents some days after it was buried, to prolong their
miserable Life. During this Siege Don Frederick, tired with its length, and
despairing of good Success, talked of returning into Brabant; but the Duke of
Alva, blaming his impatience, sent him word that if he resolved to raise the
Siege he himself would come in Person, sick as he was to carry it on. But if
his Indisposition hindered him, he would send into Spain for his Mother to
supply the place of her Son. This reproach made Don Frederick resolve to
continue the Siege.

In the heat of the Siege, the Spaniards having thrown into the City the Head
of a Man with this Inscription; The Head of Philip Konigs, (id est, King,) who
came to relieve Harlem with an Army of Two thousand Men, and aftewards another
with this Inscription; The Head of Anthony le Peintre, who betrayed Mons to the
French. The Inhabitants of Harlem, put to Death eleven Spanish Prisoners, and
put their Heads into a Barrel which by Night they rolled into the Enemies Camp:
With this Inscription. The Citizens of Harlem pay the Duke of Alva ten Heads,
that he may no longer make Waer upon them for the Payment of the Tenth penny,
which they have not yet paid, and for Interest they give him the Eleventh Head.

As they had hopes that the Siege would be raised, they suffered themselves to
be transported to profane Mockeries, making the Images of Priests, Monks,
Cardinals, and Popes, and then tumbled them down from the top of the Walls,
after they had stabbed them in a hundred places

At last the City being reduced to the greatest extremity, by an unheard of
Famine, which swept away above Thirteen thousand Persons, and all hopes of
relief being vanished by the defeat of the Succors, which the Count de la
Mark, and the Baron de Balemberg were bringing to the City, they were obliged
to surrender at Discretion, by the Cries of the Women and Children, for the Men
had resolved to Sally out in a Body, and cut out an honorable passage with
their Swords through the Enemies Army.

The Spaniards forced the Citizens to pay a great Sum of Money, to hinder the
entire Destruction of the place; and hanged and drowned above Two thousand
Persons in some few days; among others all the Ministers, the principal Men of
the City, and the Officers of the Troops. Wibald Riperda Governor, and
Lancelot a Bastard Son to Brederode, were both beheaded.

The Cruelty of the Spaniards at Harlem, instead of doing their Cause Service,
ruined it, and made the People resolve rather to suffer the last Miseries, than
submit to so Cruel and Tyrannical a Government. Thus the little City of Alkmar
bravely repulsed all their Attacks, and the Prince of Orange surprised
Gertrudemberg which belonged to him in his own Right, and which covered
Dordrecht.

About the same time Maximilian de Henin, Count de Bossut, a famous Captain,
and very much valued by the Duke of Alva, who was made Governor of Holland,
was taken in the Zuider-Zee, which is the Sea of Amsterdam, and his Fleet
defeated by that of the Prince of Orange. His great Ship was also taken, which
he called the Inquisition to reproach the Dutch, with the principal Cause of
their revolt. This Count was carried to Horn, where he remained Prisoner Four
years, till the Pacification of Ghent. The Spaniards having taken Prisoner at
the Hague, Philip de Marnix Sieur de St. Aldegonde, Minister of State to the
Prince of Orange, he assured the Duke of Alva, that he would treat the Count de
Bossut, in the same manner as he did St. Aldegonde.

The Prince of Orange can never be enough commended for his good Nature, in
treating the Count with so much Kindness, and Civility, though not long before
he had corrupted a Burgomaster of Delft, and prevailed upon him to betray the
Prince, and deliver him into his hands, whilst he was walking out of the City.
But the Conspiracy was discovered by a Letter intercepted from the Count to the
Burgomaster.

About that time the Duke of Alva and his Son were recalled into Spain; King
Philip having found out too late, that their Cruelty confirmed the*
Low Countries in their Rebellion. Lewis de Requesens, great Commander of the
Order of St. James in Castile, and Governor of Milan, who had a great share in
the famous Victory of Lepanto, succeeded the Duke of Alva in the Government of
the Netherlands. The Duke at his Departure boasted, that he had put to Death by
the hands of the Hangman, above Eighteen thousand Men, yet cruel Vargas who
returned into Spain with him, cried at parting, that his Clemency and
Gentleness had lost the King the Netherlands.

A. D. 1574. Middleburg the Capital City of Zealand, having been a long time
defended by that renowned Captain Christopher de Mondragon, and endured a great
Famine, and after the defeat of the Spanish Fleets, who attempted in vain to
relie^e it, was reunited to the rest of the Province. This Siege lasted two
years, and the Spaniards spent above Seven Millions in the several Fleets they
set out to Succor it.

The Prince of Orange so successful at Sea, had always ill Luck at Land. For
the fourth Army which Count Lodowick of Nassau brought him out of Germany, to
assist him in driving out the Spaniards from the rest of Holland, was defeated
near Nimeguen by Sancho D'Avila, a General of great Experience, who from a
private Soldier, had advanced himself, through all the Degrees and Employments
of War, to that great Command. The Germans of Count Lodowicks Army, instead of
providing for their own, and their General's Defenses, fell to Mutiny according
to their usual Custom, and demand their Pay. In this Action, Count Lodowick and
his Brother Count Henry of Nassau, and Christopher Count Palatine, were all
three killed. D'Avila remained Master of the Field of Battle, of Sixteen pieces
of Canon, and all the Baggage. This Battle was fought in the beginning of the
Government of Requesens. The Prince of Orange who loved his Brothers tenderly,
was sensibly afflicted with this loss. But he abated nothing of his Constancy
and Courage.

A. D. 1575. the Spaniards, encouraged by the defeat and death of the two
Brothers of the Prince of Orange, laid Siege to the City of Leyden, which after
a long and unparalleled Famine, was miraculously saved by breaking down the
Banks, which drowned a great many Spaniards, and by the Succors which was
conveyed into the City, by an infinite number of Boats that swam on the Lands
that were overflown.

When the Prince represented to the States, the Damage which the breaking down
the Dikes would occasion, they replied, that a Country spoiled was worth more
than a Country lost.

But in regard this was a very memorable Siege I think fit to say in general,
that they had built two hundred flat bottomed Boats, with Twelve, thirteen,
fourteen, sixteen, and eighteen Oars. The greatest carried two pieces of Canon
before, and two on the sides; they sent for Eight hundred Seamen from Zealand,
who had all little pieces of Paper in their Hats with this Inscription; Rather
serve the Turk than the Pope and Spaniard, upbraiding them with the violence
they used to their Bodies and Consciences. This Fleet was Commanded by the
Admiral Louis Bossut. One of the Seamen having plucked out the Heart of a
Spaniard, eat it publicly all raw, and bloody, so violent is the Aversion and
Passion of these Countrymen. They had no Bread in the City for Seven weeks,
and their daily allowance to a Man was half a Pound of Horseflesh or Beef, but
by good Fortune to the City, that very day the Spaniards drew off, Twenty six
Fathoms of the Wall fell down, and a North wind dried up the greatest part of
the Water, and they must unavoidably have fallen into the power of the
Spaniards, if they had stayed only one day longer. Such an Accident happened at
Rochelle, for a little after the surrender, a tempest broke down a great part
of the Bank.

In this Siege they made Paper Money with this Inscription: Haec libertatis
imago. They Coined Tin Money at Alkmar, and had Five hundred Rix dollars for
Five thousand pieces of that Coin.

Before the Relief of Leyden, Ferdinand de la Hoy, the new Governor of
Holland, and the Sieur de Liques, Governor of Harlem, solicited the Citizens
of Leyden to surrender, flatterring them with a good and favorable Treatment.
They answered him only with this Latin Verse, Fistula dulce canit voluerem dum
decipit anceps.


Continuing to persuade them by Letter to a Surrender, they replied, That they
would defend themselves to the last Extremity, and that if they hadspent all
their Provisions, and had eaten their left hands, they should have still their
right hands remaining, to guard themselves from the Tyranny of the Spaniards,
and that they remembered the Cruelties which had been committed at Malines,
Zutphen, Harden, and Harlem.

The Prince of Orange after the relief of Leyden, was received into the City as
a God. He preserved and embalmed seven Pigeons in the Townhouse, in token of
his perpetual Acknowledgement of the Service they did him in carrying the
Letters of the besieged to him, and his Answers back again. At that time he
founded the University of Leyden, settled annual Revenues upon it, and endowed
it with great Privileges.

The Year before, the Prince, having lost his second Wife Anne of Saxe, married
Charlotte de Bourbon, Daughter to the Duke of Montpensier, who had retired to
the Court of Frederick the Third Elector Palatine. The Marriage was celebrated
at the Brill, where she was conducted from Heydelberg, by the Siegneur de St.
Aldegonde. She had been a Nun formerly, and Abbess of Iouarre. The Father, a
zealous Catholic, demanded his Daughter of the Elector, by Monsieur the
President de Thou, and after that by Monsieur D'Aumont.

The Elector offered to restore her to the King, provided she might be allowed
the free exercise of her Religion, but Mr. de Montpensier choosing rather to
have his Daughter live at a distance from him, than see her before his Eyes
make profession of a Religion, which was so much his Aversion, gave at last his
Consent to the Marriage, and gave her a Fortune.

After the Siege of Leyden, a Treaty of Peace was set a foot at Breda, but it
did not take effect. The States of Holland and Zealand demanded the departure
of the Spaniards out of the Netherlands, the meeting of the States General, and
the liberty and exercise of their Religion. Requesens, on the contrary, offered
to withdraw the Spaniards, and a general Act of Oblivion of all things passed,
and the Re establishment of their Privileges, but added that the King of Spain
would never tolerate any other Religion in his Dominions, than the Roman
Catholic.

The Treaty of Peace being broken of, the States Coined Money, on one Side of
which was stamped the Lion of Holland, holding a naked Sword with this Motto;
Securius bellum pace dubia, War is safer than a doubtful Peace.

About the same time the Commander Requesens made himself Master of Zirczee in
Zealand, by the incomparable Gallantry of Christopher de Mondragon, who waded
over several Leagues of the Sea to the Amazement of all the World, and the
great hazard of his Troops. But Requesens dying not long after, the Spanish and
German Soldiers mutinyed for want of Pay, and fell to ravage all the Country.
They sacked Maestritcht, and Antwerp it self, where the loss was computed at
Twenty four Millions in Money and other movables, and in the Destruction of
houses. The plundering of this great City lasted several days, and was called
the fury of the Spaniards, many of whom made their Guards of their Swords and
Corselets of pure Gold, but the Goldsmiths of Antwerp mixed Copper with it.

The Spaniards made Prisoners in Antwerp, Count Egmont, the Seigneur de
Goignie, and the Baron de Capres. This last making a low Bow to Hieronimo Rhode
chief of the Muniteers, who sat in an Elbow Chair at the entrance of the
Citadel, received a kick in the Belly from this insolent Spaniard, who told him
by way of Scorn, that he had nothing to do with his reverence.

The Spanish and German Troops after the taking of Antwerp, living with
insupportable Licentiousness, and committing great Barbarities, the Provinces
who continued firm to the obedience of the King of Spain, called in the Prince
of Orange to their assistance, for they lay exposed to all the Robberies and
Insolence of those Mutineers, and declared the Spaniards Enemies to the King
and Country.

At that time all the Provinces of the Low Countries, except Luxemburg which is
divided from the rest, united for their common defense, and made the famous
Treaty of Peace at Ghent, A. D. 1576. containing Twenty five Articles, the
principal of which were,

That there should be a general Amnesty of all that was past.

That all things should continue in the same posture they were in at that time.

They took a solemn Oath to mutually assist each other to free the Country from
the Yoke of the Spaniards and other Foreigners.

That all Placarts and Condemnations, which were made upon the Account of the
late Troubles, should be suspended till the meeting of the States General.

That all Prisoners particularly the Count de Boissut should be set at Liberty.

That the Pillars, Trophies and Statues with Inscriptions, which had been
Erected by the Duke of Alva should be plucked down, particularly that which was
set up in the Court of Antwerp, and the Pyramid he had raised, in the place
where the Hotel de Culembourg stood, which he had razed, because the Nobility
met there to draw up an Address against the Inquisition.

At that time all Men believed the King of Spain had entirely lost the
Netherlands, for he was forced to comply with the time, and ratify and approve
the Peace.

In pursuance of this Treaty the Castles of Ghent, Valenciennes, Cambray,
Utrceht and Groeningen were demolished; all Friezeland declared for the States,
and Gaspar de Robb who had married the Heiress of Billy and Malepert, Governor
of the Province was laid close Prisoner in the Townhouse of Groeningen with
Irons on his Legs. This Gaspar a Man of Sense and Courage, was Son to King
Philip's Nurse, and Native of Robb in Portugal. He was advanced and employed by
Margaret of Parma, and in her time was Governor of Philipville. He was
released out of Prison, by Virtue of the perpetual Edict, which was made under
the Government of Don John of Austria.

Christopher de Vasquez who had hid himself in the Monastery of the Cordeliers,
shaved and disguised like a Monk, was also taken; and carried in that Habit
into the great Square of Groeningen, the people crying out in Mockery. that
they had got a new Bishop favourer of the Inquisition.

Upon this Subject, I cannot forbear observing, how addicted the People of
these Countries are to turn their Enemies into Ridicule upon the least good
Success, as they did after the taking of Levarden in Friezland, for the States
having surprised it, they brought all the Monks, and Priests into the great
Square, where their Troops were drawn up in Battalia, and placed them by Ranks,
between the Ranks of the Soldiers, and then conducted them out of the City in
the same order, at the sound of Fises and Drums, with incredible Mockeries, and
there left them without doing them any other injury than laughing at them.

They had already given Proofs of this Inclination to Derision and Raillery,
after the surprising of the Brill, in that Picture which I mentioned before,
where Count de la Mark put Spectacles on the Duke of Alva's Nose, and at
Harlem; where the Citizens believing, That Don Frederick de Toledo would raise
the Siege, made Processions of Images clad like Monks, Priests, and Cardinals,
holding the Figures of the blessed Sacrament, which they flung down from the
tops of their Walls.

I my Self at Twelve years old, observed the particular bent of this Nation to
Mockery. My Father who was Ambassador into Holland, had put to Board in the
Year 1622. with Doctor John Gerard Vossius a German, and Native of Heidelburg,
who has published a vast number of Learned works: My elder Brother, my Self,
and my younger Brother called Daniel, who was killed in the Battle of
Harlingen, in the Year 1645, who had so great a Genius for the Mathematics,
that he would have equaled, the Reputation of Galileus, and Archimedes, if
Death had not snatched him away in the flower of his Age. That Year 1622.
Maurice Prince of Orange; having forced the Marquess Ambrose Spinola, to raise
the Siege of Bergen-op-zoom, assisted by Count Ernest of Mansfield, and Duke
Christian of Brunswick; the Cities of the Low Countries were transported, with
inexpressible Joy. Among others Leyden joined Derision to its public
rejoycings. This Doctor's House stood before the Square of the Church called
Hoguetanskirk, where was one of the greatest Bonfires. Upon the top of the Pile
was placed a great Spinning Wheel, which they call Spin in Dutch, and round it
little Tickets of Paper, on which was written the Name of Spinola General of
the Spanish Army. Upon the Cord of the Wheel there were other Tickets, with the
Names of Gonsolvo de Cordoua, one of the chief Commanders of the Spanish Army.
Upon the Wheel was a great Distaff loaded with Flax, which they call Ulasque in
Dutch, and upon it was writ the Name of Don Louis de Valasco, General of the
Horse; this done they put Fire to it, and the People overjoyed, fancied they
had burnt these Generals with their Names. This bears some Resemblance with the
Rebus's of Picardy, and acquainted me at that time, with the raillying Humor
of these People.

Pursuant to this Inclination of the People, 'twas reported with probability,
some years since, That the Sieur van Beuningen, which is the Sieur du Boudon in
French, had caused himself to be ingraved an a Medal, like another Joshua
making the Sun stand still, meaning that he had put a stop to, and been the
Jupiter Stator of the French King's Conquests, who had taken the Body of the
Sun for his device. But Persons very well informed, have assured me that 'twas
a scandal fastened on him, to cast an Odium upon him, and his Nation, at our
Court, and that the Medal was never seen, nor had ever any Being, unless in the
Imaginations of those Men, who contrived the Story.

It is true, That the united Provinces, after the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, all
the Honor of which they assumed to themselves, puffed up with the Glory of a
Treaty, which they imagined so advantageous to them, Coined Medals with a
pompous Motto, which their Enemies called proud, and which as I am assured was
this, Assertis Legibus and sacris, P.

Which I thus translate in favor of the Ladies. Having vindicated our Religion
and Laws, And defended Foreign Kings, our Allies, And established the security
of Navigation in the Seas of the Christian World, and made a glorious Peace by
the force of our Arms, the States General, etc.

The Consideration of which made Monsieur de Lamoignon, the greatest and most
famous Man in France for his Learning and Virtue, say to me, that the Romans,
after the Destruction of Numantia, and Carthage, the Rival of their Empire,
could not have talked of their Victories in more lofty and magnificent Terms.

At the end of the Year 1671. the States General seeing that those Medals drew
upon them the Envy and Hatred of the most powerful Monarchs, suppressed them as
well as they could, by breaking the Coins and Molds, insomuch as there remain
very few unless in the Hands of the Curious.

These proud Medals with the continual and insolent Reflections of the
Amsterdam Gazzette, which took a Liberty of openly rallying all things without
sparing Crowned Heads, which ought always to be respected. was not the least
Motive of the last War. It Is this gave credit to the imaginary Medal of the
Sieur Van Beuningen, whose Airy and Extravagant Discourses made any thing to be
believed of him.

Upon this Subject I may affirm with Reason, that those Men are the wisest who
are never arrogant in good Fortune, which many easily change into bad by the
ordinary Revolutions of the Affairs of this World, which suffer nothing to be
settled or lasting Besides Moderation make Men lamented when they are unhappy;
but we rejoice at the Misfortune of Insolent persons. When Duke Charles of
Burgundy had been defeated by the Suisses, he sent the Seigneur de Contay his
Favorite, to Louis the XI. at Lions, to court his Friendship in the most humble
and submissive Terms imaginable, contrary to his usual Custom; upon which
Philip de Comines says these very Words, If a Prince would take my Advice, he
should behave himself with so much Moderation in Prosperity, that he should
never be forced to change his Language in Adversity. He adds, that the Seigneur
de Contay, as he passed through Lions, had the Mortification to hear Songs sung
in honor of the victorious Suisses, and to the disgrace of his Master, whom
they had routed. But most Princes and Ministers display all their Sails to the
favorable Gales of good Fortune, without thinking of contrary Winds which
often shipwreck them.

Since we have been talking of the Sieur Beuningen or Boudin in French, I make
this Observation, that at the Beginning of the War, the principal Officers and
Ministers of Holland had very odd pleasant Names. Their great manager of
Business was the Sieur de Boudin, in English, Pudding; their Marshall de Camp
the Sieur Urst, dead lately at Hamburgh, (he was of Holstein, of mean Birth,
and raised his Reputation by defending Cracovia so long time for the Swedes
against the Imperialists.) Urst in Dutch signifies Hogs Guts seasoned; their
other General that defended Groeningen and retook Grave, was the Sieur de
Rabenhaupt, which is Ravens-Head; and one of their Colonels was Paen, Bread,
and Vin, Wine, who had his Head cut off.

'Twas observed also that the Swedish Ministers and Commanders had strange
Names, Oxenstiern signifies Ox-forehead. One of their most Famous Colonels was
called Douffell, which is Devil, who was killed at the Battle of Leipsick; and
another Sthtang, a Serpent; and Colonel Wolf, who defended Stetin so bravely.

I am of Opinion these Digressions will not be disagreeable to the Reader,
which serve to divert and refresh him after he has been tired with Narrations
all of the same Nature. This has been practiced by Herodotus and others with
general Approbation.

But to return to our principal Subject, the Affairs of the Low Countries. Don
John of Austria, natural Son to Charles the V. Famous for the Victory of
Lepanto, succeeded the Commander de Requesens in the Government of the
Netherlands, and arrived at Luxemburg the very day that Antwerp was sacked. He
went Incognito through France, and passed for an Attendant of Octavio de
Gonzague, and saw Henry the III. at Dinner; and at Paris he was informed of the
State of the Low Countries by Don Diego de Zunega the Spanish Ambassador.

Don John of Austria despised the Dutch, and thought them very easy to be
imposed upon, as did the Duke of Alva, who used to say, he would stifle the
Hollanders in their Butter. But these heavy stupid Men, as he thought them,
having more Solidity and good Sense than florid Wit, easily discovered that he
had a design to deceive them by fair Words and affected Civilities.

He was at that time thirty years old, a man of high and ambitious Thoughts: He
had formed a Project of making himself King of Tunis by the Assistance of the
Pope, but King Philip would never hearken to it. Afterward being made
Governor of the Low Countries, he had a design to depose Queen Elizabeth, and
rescue Mary Queen of Scots, whom he pretended to marry by the Favor of the
Guises her Relations, who encouraged him to this Attempt for their own private
Interests. These vast Designs gave great Jealousy to King Philip, who was
apprehensive with Reason, left a warlike Prince as he was and who had won so
much Reputation over all Europe, by gaining the Battle of Lepanto, by this new
Accession of Power, suffering himself to be hurried away with his Ambition and
the natural desire of Empire, should one day endeavor to make himself Master
of his Dominions to the prejudice of his Children. These Thoughts frightened him
extremely, with Reflection on the old Example of Iugurtha, who, though a
Bastard, possessed himself of the Kingdom of Masinissa by the Murder of the
lawful Heir; and the fresher Instance in his own Family, of Henry the Bastard,
his Predecessor, who dispossessed and put to death Pedro the Cruel the lawful
King of Castile. King Philip, who to rid himself of the like Fears had not
spared his own Son Don Carlos, had more Wit than to suffer any longer the just
Grounds of Suspicion which his bastard Brother gave him, he resolved to set
himself at ease of that side. John d' Estovedo Secretary to Don John, who was
accused of inspiring his Master with these ambitious Designs, being dispatched
into Spain about some Affairs of consequence, he was privately assassinated by
Antonio Perez, Secretary of State, and Favorite to King Philip, by his Orders;
whose death made all the World believe, that Don John's, which happened not
long after, had been hastened.

Upon Don John's arrival into the Netherlands, his favoring the Spaniards who
were declared public Enemies, made a Rupture between him and the States, who
took up Arms against him by the Advice of the Prince of Orange. He earnestly
exhorted them not to suffer themselves to be deceived by the false Hopes which
Don John gave them from the Part of the King of Spain, representing to them
that angry Princes dissemble for some time, but they never forget an Injury but
when it is out of their Power to revenge it, and that they are sparing of no
Words nor Promises to conceal their Resentments; quoting that Maxim of the
Roman Emperors, that They who had offended their Princes ought to be numbered
among the dead.

In fine, the perpetual Edict was concluded between the States on one side, and
Don John on the other in the Name of the King, by the Mediation of the Emperor
Rodolphus and the Duke of Cleves and Iuliers, on the 17th of Febr. An. Dom.
1577. By this the Treaty of Ghent was ratified, a general Amnesty granted, and
the holding of the States. The Departure of the Spaniards and Germans out of
the Low Countries was agreed to, and that they should leave behind them all the
Provisions, Ammunitions and Atillery which were in their Garrisons. The
Spaniards promised to punish the Soldiers who had been guilty of so many
Outrages, and to set at Liberty the Count de Burin Prisoner in Spain. But the
Prince of Orange, and the States of Holland and Zealand, entered their
Protestation against the Edict, maintaining, That a great many things,
particularly those which related to Religion had not been sufficiently
explained.

In pursuance of this perpetual Edict, the Spaniards went out of the Castle of
Antwerp, and Philip de Croy Duke of Arschoite was made Governor of it, who
took an Oath publicly bare-headed to John Escovedo, that he would keep the
Castle of Antwerp for King Philip his Master and deliver it up to no Man but
Himself or his Successors, but by his express Command; to which Escovedo
replied, If you perform what you promise, God will help you; if not, the Devil
take you, Body and Soul! and all the standers by cried, Amen.

By Virtue of this Edict all Prisoners were released on both sides, the Count
Egmont, the Sieur de S. Goignie, the Sieur de Capres, and others in the Custody
of the Spaniards, and Gaspar de Robb, and others by the States.

This done, Don John was received into Brussels in great State, as
Governour-general of the Low Countries: But beginning to oppress the Provinces,
pursuant to the private Orders he received from the Court of Spain, which were
discovered by several Letters intercepted, which Don John and his Secretary
Escovedo writ in Ciphers to the King and his Ministers, which Philip de Mornix,
Seignieur de St. Aldegonde decyphered: This made them resolve to oppose his
pernicious Designs by Force of Arms.

Don John, under a pretense that they had a Design upon his Person, retired
from Brussels, and having received the Queen of Navarre into Namur, surprised
the Castle of Namur, and then Charlemont, and made preparations for War; and
recalled the Spanish and German Troops. He called that day he seized the Gastle
of Namur, the first of his Government, as Henry the III. afterward called the
Day of the Murder of the Duke of Guise, the first of his Reign.

The States took up Arms on their side, demolished the Castle of Antwerp, and
joined themselves to the Prince of Orange. But the States General assembled at
Brussels demanding the free Exercise of the Catholic Religion in Holland and
Zealand; he made answer, that he could make no Alterations in that Affair
without consulting the States of these two Provinces, who had the sole and
absolute Power of doing it. This was a fundamental Maxim of that State; which
was afterward changed by the Factions and Force of Arms under the Government
of Prince Maurice, his Son, as I shall manifest in his Life.

Prince William of Orange being arrived at Breda with his third Wife Charlotte
de Bourbon, he was invited by the States to come and encourage them by his
Presence: For this Effect the Burghers of Antwerp went out to meet him, and
conducted him into their City, where the States General deputed to him the
Abbots of Villiers and Marotes, the Barons de Fresin, and Capres, to beseech
him to come in all haste to Brussels. The Prince went to Brussels through the
New-Canal, attended by the Burghers of Antwerp who marched in good Order on one
side of the Canal, and on the other side by the Burghers of Brussels, all in
gilt Armor, who came out of their City to meet him. He was received into
Brussels with great magnificence and Triumph, with incredible Acclamations of
Joy by all the World. Immediately he was declared Governor of Brabant, and
Superintendant of the Finances of the Provinces.

Upon this we may observe that though the Life of this Prince has been crossed by
strange Disappointments and Misfortunes capable of sinking a Man of less
Resolution than himself: Yet these Accidents were sweeted from time to time
with those secret pleasures and Delights which the most Stoical and insensible
Men are overjoyed at, as the Acclamations and Applauses of the People, whose
Hearts and Affections he entirely possessed. Other Princes command only the
Bodies of their Subjects, without having any Empire over their Minds, which
ought to make up the noblest part of their Dominions.

But as Envy is the inseparable Companion of Virtue; and a great Reputation is
often more dangerous than a bad one; this pompous Reception of the Prince of
Orange added to the Authority his great Birth, Experience, and Merit gained him
in the States and in the Hearts of the People, procured him the Jealousy of
many Lords and Gentlemen of Quality; the chief of whom were the Duke Arschot
newly made Governor of Flanders, the Marquess of Havret his Brother, the Count
de Lalain and his Brother, the Siegneur de Montigny, the Viscount of Ghent,
Count Egmont, the Sieurs de Compigny, de Rassinguem, and de Sueveguem, and many
others: This jealous Party dispatched privately the Sieur de Malstede to offer
the Government of the Low Countries to the Archduke Matthias Brother to the
Emperor Rodolphus. He made so much have, and pressed the Archduke so strongly
to depart, that he was arrived at Cologne from Vienna before 'twas known that
they had sent for him.

These Gentlemen imagined that they should have all the Management of the
Government under the Archduke, who would consider them as the Authors of his
Establishment; and at the same time should ruin the Authority of the Prince of
Orange by giving him a Superior of that Quality.

But the Prince of Orange, who had the Art of Complying with all Times, and
turning Poison into Antidotes, made a Modest Complement to the States General
for not acquainting him with so important a Resolution as they had taken of
sending for the Archduke; whereas nothing ought to be transacted without the
common Consent of all, especially Matters of such Consequence. But he made no
Opposition to the Reception or Establishment of the Archduke. Then having
brought over to his party the Count de Lalain who had the chief Command of the
Army, he managed Matters so well by his Address and Submissions that he gained
the Archduke who was made Governor of the Netherlands upon certain Conditions;
and he himself was declared Lieutenant General by majority of Voices in the
States; and the Archduke in consideration of his great Abilities trusted him
with the entire Management of Affairs. In this manner the Prince of Orange by
his good Conduct and Prudence, turned that Storm upon his Enemies, which they
raised with Design to ruin him. For the Duke of Arschot, the head of the
Faction, had the Mortification to be seized in the Capital City of his
Government (Ghent) by a Creature of the Prince of Orange (Rehove) who bore the
greatest Sway in that large City: And to make his Grief the more sensible, his
best Friends, the Bishops of Bruges and Ypres, and the Sieurs de Ressinguem and
de Sueveguein, and many others of his Dependants, were seized on at the same
time.

Don John of Austria, having been declared Enemy of the Low Countries by the
States General the 7th of September, 1577. recalled all the Spanish and Italian
Troops who had retired out of the Netherlands, in pursuance to the perpetual
Edict. with a great Body of Germans under the Command of Alexander Farneze Duke
of Parma, Son to Margaret of Austria, formerly Governess of the Netherlands.
With this Reinforcement the last day of January, An. Dom. 1578. he defeated the
Army of the States, at Gemblours, commanded by the Sieur de Goiguin in the
Absence of the Count de Lalain and the principal Officers who were at a Wedding
in Brussels; for which they were extremely censured. All the Cannon was taken,
with 30 Colors and 4 Cornets. But the Reduction of the Famous City of
Amsterdam, which surrendered to the States, and was united to the Body of
Holland, the 8th of February following, eight days after the Defeat, made
sufficient amends for this Loss.

Don John, encouraged by this great Success, and hoping that this Victory would
be the Instrument of another, advanced with great Forces to attack the Army of
the States at Rimenant near Malines commanded by the Count de Bossut. But the
Count had entrenched himself so strongly, that Don John was obliged to retire
in great Confusion, and considerable Loss: And 'twas agreed on by all Hands,
that if the Count de Bossut had marched out of his Camp he would have entirely
defeated Don John, who had a Crucifix in his Colors with this Motto; With this
Sign I have beaten the Turks, and with This I will beat the Heretics.

In July the States General consented to a Toleration of both Religions in the
Provinces, which was called the Peace of Religion, which all Men were not
satisfied with; by this means a Third Party sprung up, called the Malcontents;
the principal of which were Emanuel de Lalain, Baron de Montigny, the Viscount
of Ghent, Governor of Artois, Valentine de Pardieu, Sieur de la Motte
Governor of Gavelines, the Baron de Capres, and others. Thus the Provinces of
Artois and Hainault returned to the Obedience of the King, notwithstanding all
the Remonstrances which the States made to them by Letters and Deputies.

About this time the States coined Money with the Bodies of Count Horn and
Count Egmont, and their Heads upon Stakes on one side, and on the reverse two
Horsemen and two Footmen fighting, with this Inscription, praestat pugnare pro
patria quam simulata pace decipi; It is better to fight for our Country, than
be deceived by a feigned peace.

The Malcontents, to secure themselves against the States, desired that the
Foreign Troops might be recalled into the Netherlands, contrary to the
Pacification of Ghent, and the perpetual Edict. On the other side the States,
in order to their Defense, treated with the Duke of Alencon, whom they called
the Defender of the Belgic Liberty, upon condition that he should supply them
with 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, paid at his own Charge. This Treaty was
concluded by the Means of the Queen of Navarre his Sister, who in her Journey
to the Spaw-Waters, had drawn over a great number of Men to the party of her
Brother, whom she loved so tenderly; among others the Count de Lalain, and the
Sieur D' Enchy Governor of Cambray.

A. D. 1578. in September died Don John of Austria, in the Camp at Namur, of
Grief for being suspected in Spain, where his Secretary had been Assassinated,
or of Poison as many are of Opinion.

Immediately after died the Count de Bossut General of the States; who after
his Death, desired Mr. de la Nove Bras de fer, in Consideration of his
Reputation, Valor, Conduct and Experience in War, to take upon him the Charge
of Marshall de Camp of their Army.

Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, succeeded Don John in the Government of the
Low Countries, and by his Civility, and obliging Carriage to all Men, added to
the great Promises he made, strengthened the Party of the Malcontents, and
weakened the power of the States.

About this time, the 22d. of January, A. D. 1579. the Prince of Orange laid
the first Foundation of the Commonwealth of the united Provinces, by the strict
Union which he made at Utrecht, between the Provinces of Gueldres, Zutphen,
Holland, Zealand, Friezland, and the Ommelands, consisting of Twenty six
Articles, the chief of which were these,

The Provinces made an Alliance against the common Enemy, and promised mutually
to assist each other, and never to treat of Peace, or War but by common
Consent. And all this without prejudice to the Statutes, Privileges, and
Customs of every particular Province: Which Article was broken under the
Government of Prince Maurice, when the States General assumed a Jurisdiction
over all the Subjects of the Provinces, who till that time had no other Lords
than the particular States of the Province. This Treaty was called the Union of
Utrecht, because 'twas made in that City. It was r^tified by all the Governors
of the Provinces, and the States to show how necessary a perfect Union was to
their Preservation, took those words of Micipsa in Salust for their device.
Concordia res parvae crescunt, little Things become great by Concord.

That Year Maestricht was taken by Storm by the Duke of Parma, after a Siege of
four Months, and a Treaty of Peace was set afoot at Cologne by the Mediation of
the Emperor Rodolphus, but the King of Spain, refusing to grant a Toleration of
Religion in the Netherlands, though it had been allowed in France and Germany,
the design did not take effect.

Under the Government of the Duke of Parma, many Actions passed between the
Malcontents, and the Troops of the States commanded by Mr. de la Nove, who
surprised Ninove in Flanders and took in their Beds Count Egmont, his Wife, and
Mother with Count Charles his Brother, and carried them Prisoners to Ghent,
where the People, as they passed through the Streets, threw Dirt upon them, and
treated them with a thousand Indignities and abuses, upbraiding them with
abandoning their Country, to join with the Executioners of their Fathers.

But Monsieur de la Nove after great Success, was surprised himself with the
few Men he had with him, by the Viscount of Ghent and Marquess of Risbourg. The
Cause of this Accident was the Sieur de Marquette's not obeying Monsieur de la
Nove's Orders in breaking down the Bridge which led to him. By order of the
Duke of Parma he was carried Prisoner to the Castle of Limburg, where he was
barbarously treated by the Spaniards, who offered to set him at Liberty,
provided they might put out his Eyes. From whence it is visible how apprehensive
they were of this great Captain. At last, after a long Imprisonment, he was
exchanged upon Count Egmont's Swearing never more to bear Arms against Spain,
of which the Duke of Lorrain and many other Lords and Princes were Guarrantees.

Besides his great Skill in the Art of War, which is celebrated by all
Historians, never was a Man of so clear and dis-interested a Virtue, which he
gave continual proofs of during the whole Course of his Life; but among the
rest one very remarkable Instance: Monsieur de la Nove Bras de fer was a
Gentleman of Bretaigne, and had a Sister married to Monsieur de Vezins, a Man
of Quality and Fortune in Anjou, who had by her a Son and two Daughters; this
Sister had 20000 Crowns for her Fortune; but dying young, Monsieur de Vezins
married a Woman who was one of her Attendants, by whom he had several Children:
This Megere, after the Death of her Husband, desiring to secure to her Children
the great Estate of the House of Vezins, could think of no more effectual way
than by delivering the Children of the first Wife, her Mistress, to an English
Merchant for a Sum of Money, upon Condition that she should never see them
more. The Merchant carried them immediately to Iersey and Guernsey. No one knew
what became of the Daughters; but the Foreign Merchant, having more good Nature
than the Mother in Law, took pity of the Boy, and brought him with him to
London, where he bred him up, and taught him the Trade of a Shoemaker. This
Boy, when he was grown up, traveling up and down the Country, happened to be
in Flanders at the time that Monsieur de la Nove commanded the Army of the
States, and bringing him some Shoes, Monsieur de la Hove, having narrowly
viewed him, told those that were about him, that this young Lad had much of the
Air, Stature and Mien of his Brother in Law de Vezins. Though he was exposed at
the Age of 4 or 5 years, he still retained some memory of his Name, his
Country, and what he was; and told him that his Name was Vezins, and that he
was a French Man by Birth. But the great Business of Monsieur de la Nove
hindered him from making further Enquiry into the Matter at that time. Some
years after, being released from his Imprisonment at Limburg, and retiring to
Geneva, this same young Man who traveled over the World, as Apprentices do,
once more meeting him when he had no Affairs, after having very well examined
him, and, besides the general Resemblance, discovered some particular Marks
which those of the Family de Vezins bore, he resolved to make him be
acknowledged Heir of that House; and in order to it, contrary to his own
Interest, made all the necessary Proceedings in Anjou, at the Council and
Parliament for the recovery of the Estate; but being killed at Lambette in
Bretaigne with a Musket Ball, before the Affair was completed, his Son Odel
de la Nove, (whom I have seen in my youth) Ambassador extraordinary into
Holland, a Man that pursued the generous Example of his Father, put an end to
the Process; and by a famous Decree made him be declared Heir of the House of
Vezins, which the Children of his cruel Mother in Law had so long usurped.
These Heroic Actions of the Father and Son can never be sufficiently praised,
which the curious Reader will be glad to learn; and the Example of so rare a
Virtue may Sp^r on a generous Mind to an Emulation of such noble Performances.

In this time the Prince of Orange who had been made Governor of Flanders, was
at Ghent, where he altered the Magistrates of the City; erected contrary to
their Privileges by the Violence of John Imbese a turbulent daring Fellow, who
had at that time the chief Authority of the City. Imbese retired into Germany
to Prince Casimir Palatine, who had formerly brought such a great Body of Horse
to the Assistance of the States, that they had much more been harassed and
inconvenienc'd by them than relieved or defended. But he returned again to
Ghent and domineered there for some time with a Guard of 30 Halberdiers who
still accompanied him; but in the end a contrary Faction setting up against
him, as nothing is more changeable than the Affections of the People, he was
arrested, tried and beheaded.

An. Dom. 1580. the Prince of Orange represented to the States General, that
Considering the Desertion of some Provinces, and the Falling off of a great
many Men who quitted their Party to reconcile themselves to Spain, by the means
of the Duke of Parma; they could no longer defend themselves against so
powerful an Enemy; and that they were obliged either to make an Accommodation
with Spain, which he would never advise them to do, when they could have no
Security for their Lives or Religion; or else to choose some neighboring Prince
for their Lord, and that he could think of none more proper than the Duke of
Anjou and Alencon only Brother to Henry the III. King of France. Which
Resolution the States approving of they sent Deputies into France; the most
considerable of whom was Philip de Mornix, Seigneur de S. Aldegonde, who made a
Treaty with him in September An. Dom. 1580. at the Castle of Plessis les tours.
The Heads of which were, That the States of Holland, Brabant, Flanders,
Zealand, Utrecht and Friezland, would acknowledge him for their Sovereign
Prince, and his Posterity after him, upon Condition that he should leave
Matters of Religion in the same Posture they were in at that time; and preserve
the Privileges of the Provinces That he should hold an Assembly of the
States General every year, who nevertheless should have power to meet when they
pleased. That he should put no Man into any Employment, Place, or Government of
the Provinces without their Consent. And that if he invaded their Privileges
and broke the Treaty, he should forfeit his Right, and that they should be
absolved from their Oath of Fidelity, and have power to elect a new Prince.

The Archduke seeing that there was no further Occasion for his Presence in the
Netherlands, and that they were looking out for a more powerful Protection,
withdrew, after having received Thanks and many Presents, according to their
Abilities and the Times, leaving behind him the Reputation of a good and
moderate Prince: But his Enemies in the End made him suspected of holding
Intelligence with the Spaniards.

The Prince of Orange with all his Power solicited the coming of the Duke of
Alencon, to support himself and his Country with so considerable a Prince; but
more particularly because in June 1580. the King had published a terrible
Proscription against him, in which he upbraids him with the Favors he had
received from the Emperor; among others, for having secured to him the
Succession of Rene de Nassaw and de Chalon Prince of Orange: That he had made
him Governor of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, and Burgundy, Knight of the
Golden-Fleece, and Councellor of State: That though he was a Stranger, he had
loaded him with Honors and Riches, for which he made him very ungrateful
Returns. That by his Instigation the Nobility had presented the Address against
the Inquisition: That he had introduced the New Religion into the
Low Countries, and disturbed the Catholic Religion, by the breaking of Images,
and demolishing Altars: That he had made War upon his Lord: That he had opposed
all the Pacifications, even that of Ghent, and broken the perpetual Edict;
that, in short, he declared him an ungrateful Man, a Rebel, a Disturber of the
public Peace, a Heretic, a Hypocrite, a Cain, a Judas, one that had a hardened
Conscience, a profane Wretch, who had taken a Nun out of the Cloister to marry
her, and had Children by her, a wicked and perjured man, the Head of the
Troubles of the Netherlands, the Plague of Christendom, the common Enemy of
Mankind: That he out-lawed him, and gave his Life, his Body and Estate to him
that could seize on it; and to free the World from his Tyranny, he promised,
upon the Word of a King, and as a Servant of God Almighty, to give 25000 Crowns
to any man that should bring him alive or dead to him, and besides a free
Pardon and Indemnity of all his Crimes; and to make him a Gentleman, in case he
was not so before. He declared all his Adherents to have forfeited their
Nobility, Estate and Honor, if within a Month after the Publication of this
Out-law'ry they did not leave him and return to their Duty.

In December following the Prince of Orange published his Apology, which is a
very long, eloquent and handsome Piece, and read it publicly in the Assembly
of the States General. The Prince made a Discovery of a great many Secrets
which 'twas the King's Interest never to have had known. Kings have not so much
Advantage in Defending themselves against their Subjects with their Pens as
their Swords, and for that Reason the King made no Answer to it; but because
this Apology is very considerable, it is proper to put down the Substance of it.

After having submitted his Life and Conduct to the Consideration of the
States, he says, He was forced, contrary to his Nature and Custom, to discover
some Indecencies which he would very willingly have concealed; and, if they had
not loaded him with Injuries and Abuses, he would have only answered the
Proscription, which he would have made appear unjust and without any
Foundation. That his Enemy who made it, and the Duke of Parma who published it,
not being able to kill him by Poison or Sword, endeavor to blot his Reputation
by the Venom of their Tongues.

As for the Obligations they reproached him with, he owns to have received a
great deal of Honor from the Emperor, Charles the V. who bred him up 9 years
in his Chamber; and that his Memory (these are his own Words) will be for ever
honored by him; but at the same time he is obliged to justify his own
Innocence, to declare that he never received any Advantages from the Emperor,
but, on the contrary, suffered great Losses in his Service.

That he could not deprive him of the Succession to Rene de Nassaw and de
Chalons Prince of Orange his Cousin-german, whose sole Heir he was without a
manifest Injury, unless they reckon the not seizing upon another Man's Right to
be a Liberality.

That he was so far from having received any Advantages from him, that on the
contrary, the Emperor, for the good of his own Affairs, being pressed on one
hand by the Protestant Princes, and on the other by the King of France, had by
the Treaty of Nassaw disposed at his Expense of the County of Catzenellebogen
in favor of the Landgrave of Hesse, though it had been adjudged to him by the
Imperial Chamber at Spires, with above two millions of Arrears, and the Emperor
had taken no care to restore Prince Rene of Nassaw, his Cousin-german, to the
Possession of the third Part of the Duchy of Iuliers which belonged to him by
their Grandmother Margaret Countess de la Mark, though he had gained the
Victory by the Valor of that Prince.

That the King had deprived him of the Possession of the Seigniory de Chartel
velin, (for which there was due to him above 350000 Livres) by bringing the
Cause to be tried in his Council, when it was to be judged by the Parliament at
Molines; and it has ever since continued undecided. Which he mentions to show
the World who ought to be taxed with Ingratitude, he or the King.

That h^ had spent above 500000 Crowns in the Embassy he made, against his
Will, to the Emperor Ferdinand; and when he was Hostage in France for the Peace
of Cambray; and that year when he commanded the Imperial Army, and built
Charlemont and Philipville in sight of the French Generals; in all which time
he only received 300 Florins a Month, which would not pay for the pitching his
Tents.

That, quite contrary, those of his Family had spent great Estates, and exposed
their Lives freely in the Service of the Princes of the House of Austria; that
Engilbert the second Count of Nassaw, his Great Grandfather, being Governor of
the Netherlands for the Emperor Maximilian the I. had secured him these
Provinces by the gaining of a Victory.

That Count Henry of Nassaw, his paternal Uncle, prevailed upon the Electors to
prefer Charles of Austria, Grandson of Maximilian, to Francis the I. King of
France, and put the Imperial Crown upon his Head.

That Philibert de Chalon Prince of Orange, had conquered Lombardy, and the
Kingdom of Naples, for the Emperor; and that by the taking of Rome and Clement
the VII. his Enemy, he had gained him vast Honor and Renown.

That the Nephew of this Philibert, Rene de Nassaw and de Chalon, his
Cousin-german, was killed at the Emperor's Feet before St. Dizier after having
repaired the Loss of a Battle and conquered the Duchy of Gueldres.

That if the House of Nassaw had had noBeing in the World, and had not done
such great Exploits before the King was born, he could never have been able to
put so many Titles, Countries and Seigneuries, in the Front of that infamous
Proscription, which declares him a Traitor and a Villain, Crimes which none of
his Family had ever been guilty of.

That for so many Expenses, and signal Services of his Family, they could not
show the least Mark of Acknowledgment from the House of Austria.

That the Kings of Hungary had given to his Predecessor as a perpetual Proof of
their Valor in defending them from the Invasion of the Infidels, several
Pieces of Artillery, which were carried away by Force, out of his Castle of
Breda when the Duke of Alva tyrannized in the Low Countries.

When the King reproaches him with having made him Governor of Holland,
Zealand, Utrecht and Burgundy, Knight of his Order, and Councellor of State, he
answers, That if he ought to thank any one for that, it is the Emperor Charles
V. who at his Departure for Spain, had so appointed it in consideration of his
great Services.

That the King himself had forfeited his Pretensions to that Order, by breaking
the Statutes (which expressly enjoin, that no Knight can be tried but by his
Peers) in Condemning the Counts Egmont, Horn, de Bergues, and Montigny, by
Rascals, and Men of no Birth or Merit.

That the Government of Burgundy belonged to him hereditarily, the House of
Chalon having all along enjoyed it without Contradiction. And as for the
Employment of a Councellor of State, he obtained that by the Policy of Cardinal
Granville who screen'd himself from the People by the Authority of the Prince,
in whom they reposed an entire Credit and Confidence.

When the King, to render him odious, charges him with Marrying a Nun, he
answers, That Slanderers ought to be free from all Blame, and that it is an
unaccountable Impudence in the King to reproach him with a lawful Marriage, and
agreeable to the Word of God; whereas the King is all covered over with Crimes.
He maintains that he was actually married to Donna Isabella Osorio, and had
three Children by her, when he married the Infanta of Portugal, Mother to Don
Carlos.

That he murdered his own Son for speakiing in Favor of the Low Countries;
and poisoned his third Wife Isabella of France, Daughter to Henry the II. King
of France, in whose Lifetime he publicly kept Donna Eufratia, whom he forced
the Prince of Ascoti to marry when she was big with Child by him, that his
Bastard might inherit the great Estate of this Prince, who died of Grief, if
not (says the Prince) of a Morsel more easy to swallow than digest.

That afterward he was not ashamed to commit public Incest in marrying his
own Niece, Daughter to Maximilian the Emperor and his Sister. But, says the
King, I had a Dispensation. Ay, says the Prince, only from the God on Earth;
for the God of Heaven would never have granted it: These are the very Words of
the Prince.

That it was as strange as insupportable, that a Man blackened with Adultery,
Poisoning, Incest, and Parricide, should make a Crime of a Marriage approved of
by Monsieur de Montpensier his Father-in-law, a more zealous Catholic than the
Spaniards are with all their Grimaces and Preterisions.

That if his Wife had made Vows in her tender Age, which is contrary to the
Canons and Decrees, according to the Opinion of the ablest Men; And though she
had never made any Protestations against it, He was not so little versed in the
Holy Scriptures, but He knew that all Bonds and Engagements entered into merely
upon the Score of Interest, had no Force before God.

To that Article, where the King calls him a Stranger, he answers, That his
Ancestors had possessed for many Ages Counties and Baronies in Luxemburg,
Brabant, Holland and Flanders; and that those who have Estates in the Provinces
have still been reckoned Natives.

That the King is a Stranger as well as himself, being born in Spain, a Country
which bears a natural Aversion to the Low Countries; and he in Germany, a
neighboring Country and Friend of the Provinces. But (says the Prince) they will
say he is King; to which he answers, Then let him be King in Castile, Arragon,
Naples, the Indies, and Jerusalem, and in Africa and Asia, if he please; that
for his part he will acknowledge but a Duke and a Count, whose Power is limited
by the Privileges of the Provinces, which the King has sworn to ob serve.

That he must let the Spaniards know, if they are not acquainted with it
already, that the Barons of Brabant, when their Princes go beyond Bounds, have
often shown them what their Power was. He ended this Discourse by saying, That
'twas strange that they had the Impudence to charge him with being a Stranger,
in regard his Predecessors were Dukes of Gueldres, and Owners of great
Possessions in the Provinces, when the King's Ancestors were only Counts of
Hapsburg, living in Switzerland, and their Family was not known in the World.

The Prince maintains that the Design of the Spaniards was always to enslave
the Netherlands and erect a tyrannical Government, as they have done in the
Indies, Naples, Sicily and Milan. That the Emperor Charles the V. being
acquainted with it, represented to King Philip, in his Presence, and the old
Count of Bossut and many others; That if he did not curb the Pride of the
Spaniards he would be the Ruin of the Netherlands. But that neither the
paternal Authority, nor the Interest of his Affairs, nor Justice, nor his Oath,
which is sacred among the Barbarians, could bridle his unbounded Passion of
Tyrannizing.

That the Country granted a considerable Supply of Money, with which and the
Courage of the Nobility of these Provinces, having won two famous Battles, and
taken a great number of Prisoners of the highest Quality in France, he
concluded a Peace at Cambray, as Profitable to himself as Disadvantageous to
his Enemies. That if the King had any Gratitude remaining he could not deny but
that he was one of the principal Instruments in bringing it about; having
managed it in particular, with the Constable de Montmorency, and the Marshall
de St. Andre, by the King's Orders, who assured him that he could not do a more
grateful piece of Service to him, than by effecting a Peace, at a time when he
was resolved to go into Spain upon any Terms.

But these Supplies of Money, and this great Success obtained by the Blood of
their Nobility, were reckoned Crimes of High Treason, because nothing would be
granted, but on Condition the States General should meet, and the promised
Subsidies pass through the Hands of Commissaries of the Provinces, to clip the
Wings of these Harpies, Barlaymont and others like him. And these as he
assures, are the two great Crimes, which created that implacable Hatred in the
King and Council to the Low Countries.

The first of these Crimes was the Demand of an Assembly of the States General;
who are as much hated by bad Princes for bridling their Tyranny, as they are
loved and reverenced by good Kings the true Fathers of their Country, who
consider them as the most sure Foundation of a State, and the true support of
Sovereigns.

The second is the Demand they made of having Commissioners of the Provinces
for managing the Subsidies; the Prince affirming that these Devourers of the
People reckon their Robberies and Cheatings a better Revenue than that of their
Lands. That seeing themselves out of Condition any longer to enrich themselves
at the Expense of the public with Indemnity; they look out for all Pretenses,
by flattering their Princes, to incense them and set them at odds with their
Subjects. He concluded this Article by assuring the States General to whom he
addresses himself all along) that he has seen their Actions, heard their
Discourses, and been Witness of those Counsels, whereby they designed to make a
general Massacre of them, as they had practiced in the Indies, where they had
destroyed thirty times more People than are in the Low Countries

To that part of the Charge where the King accuses him of gaining the Hearts of
all those who desired Innovation, particularly those who were suspected of the
Reformed Religion, by his private Intrigues; and of being the Author of the
Request against the Inquisition. He owns that he was always of the Reformed
Religion in his Heart, which had been established by his Father William Count
of Nassaw in his Dominions. That he heard the King of France, Henry the II.
say, when he was Hostage in France, that the Duke of Alva was then treating
with him to root out all the Protestants of France, the Low Countries, and all
Christendom besides. That they had resolved to establish the merciless
Inquisition; the Severity of which was such, that the looking a squint upon an
Image was Crime enough to deserve burning. That he could not suffer that so
many good Men and Lords of his Acquaintance should be designed for the
Slaughter; which made him firmly resolve utterly to extirpate this cursed Race
of Men, and that if he had been well seconded in so just and generous a Design
there would have been nothing left to preserve the Memory of the Spaniards but
their Bones and their Graves.

As for the Address which they make a Crime of, he thinks it as advantageous to
his own Credit and Honor, as to the King's Service, and the Interest of the
Provinces, to have advised the presenting it, as a certain method to divert the
Deluge of these infinite Disorders which afterward happened. And as for the
Protestant Sermons, he advised Madam de Parma to permit them, things being in
such a posture that they could not be hindered without a manifest danger of the
entire Subversion of the Government.

When the King says that the Care and Providence of Madam de Parma was so
great, that he was obliged to quit the Netherlands; he owns that the Charge
would be true, if his Treachery and Disloyalty had been the Cause of it; but
that, a year before, he would willingly have retired and surrendered all his
Employments. When he saw that Monsieur de Bergues and Montigny had lost their
Lives in Spain, and Gibbets were erected, and Fires kindled all over the
Country, he thought it high time to put himself in a place of Security, without
trusting to the King's Lerters, full of fair Promises and Offers, the better to
deceive him.

That they had fallen upon his Person and Estate. That neither the
Consideration of the Privileges of the University of Louvain, nor the Province
of Brabant, could hinder them from carrying his Son Prisoner into Spain: And
that by so rigorous and unjust a Treatment he was absolved from all his Oaths,
and had good Ground to make War upon his Enemy; which was objected to him as a
Crime.

That the King laid nothing to his Charge, but what his Predecessor Henry of
Castile had been guilty of: who though a Bastard rebelled against his lawful
Prince Don Pedro King of Castile and Leon, and killed him with his ownhand. If
the King answers, that Don Pedro was a Tyrant, and that he possessed Castile
only by that Title; wherefore, says the Prince, should not the King of Spain be
used in the same manner; for there never was a Tyrant who subverted the Laws
and Constitutions of the Country with more Arrogance, or broke his Oath with
more Impudence than King Philip. And that at least Don Pedro was neither guilty
of Incest, nor a Parricide, nor a Murderer of his Wife: And though he was born
the King's Subject, and should take up Arms against him, 'twas no more than
Albert the first Duke of Austria, formerly Count of Hapsburg, his Predecessor,
had done against the Emperor Adolphus of Nassaw, his Lord, one of the Prince's
Ancestors.

The Prince affirms, that there is an origiginal, mutual Contract between the
Dukes of Brabant and their Vassals; that they owe Obedience to their Prince,
who, on his side, is bound to preserve their Privileges; the chief of which
are, That the Dukes cannot change the Constitution of the Province by any
Decree; That they are to be satisfied with their ordinary Revenue; That they
can lay no new Impositions, nor bring any Troops into the Province without the
Consent of the States; nor alter the Price of Money; nor imprison any man
without the Information of the Magistrate of the place, nor send him out of the
Country. The Lords of the Provinces are obliged by their Oath to maintain and
assert these Privileges; because by their Prerogative they have the Charge of
the Militia, and the Arms of the Province; and not doing it they are to be
accounted Perjured, and Enemies of their Country. That the King has not
violated only one of these Privileges, but all, and many times over. He has
seized upon his Estates, his Dignities, and his Son, contrary to his
Immunities. That for this Reason he was absolved from his Oath of Allegiance,
and by Consequence had a right to defend himself by Force of Arms; and above
all, because the King would never redress and make Amends for his Faults,
having rejected the Intercessions of the Emperor Maximilian, and the Petitions
of his Subjects who deputed to him the principal Lords of the Netherlands,
which he put to Death by the Hands of the Hangman against the Law of Nations,
as he had served all others whom he could seize on by his Artifices, and who
were too credulous, in believing his false Promises.

This abundantly justifies the Prince for taking up Arms for his own and his
Country's Preservation; and if he could not take footing in the Netherlands at
his first Entry, as the King reproaches to him, 'twas no more than what had
happened to the greatest Generals, and to the King himself, who has often
invaded Holland and Zealand, and been driven shamefully out without being able
to make himself Master of one Inch of Ground. And in regard, by his Oath, he
dispenses with his Subjects from obeying him if he acts contrary to the Laws,
why is he so impudent to say that the Prince has taken up Arms against him
unjustly.

To that Article in which the King says he returned into Holland and Zealand by
Bribery and Corrupting the Inhabitants; he makes answer, that he went there at
the Instance and Solicitation of the principal Men of the Province, which he
is able to make appear by their Letters.

When the King accuses him of having persecuted the Churchmen, driven out the
Catholics, and banished that Religion; he replies, That all this had been done
by a common Consent, to preserve their Lives and Privileges against Men who had
taken an Oath to the Pope, and were setting all Engines a work to subvert their
Liberties, and the newly established Religion: Which was represented at the
Treaty of Peace at Breda, where this Article of Religion was confirmed by the
Decree and Seal of all the Cities, and that 'twas not fair to impute that to
him, which was done by an unanimous consent of the whole Country.

When he reproaches him for granting Liberty of Conscience; he answers, that he
had always been as averse to the Burning so many Men as the Duke had taken
pleasure in it; and that he was of Opinion to put a Stop to all Persecutions.

He ingenuously owns, that the King before the holding of the States at Ghent,
and his Departure into Spain, had commanded him to put to Death many good Men
suspected to favor the new Religion; but he never put these cruel Orders in
Execution, but gave them notice of it, not being able to do it with a safe
Conscience, and choosing rather to obey God than Man.

He says that they do him Wrong in laying the Murder of some Ecclesiastics to
his Charge; for he punished the Criminals with Death; and those who were of an
illustrious Family, as the Count de la Mark, convicted of those Outrages, were
condemned only to Imprisonment and loss of their Employments, in Consideration
of their great Alliances.

To that Head wherein the King declares that he did not command the Duke of
Alva to establish the Imposition of the 10th and 20th penny; he answers, That
his not being punished for it, is sufficient Proof that he had Orders to do it.
And that he cannot escape the Imputation of a Tyrant for Imposing this Tribute,
or suffering so great a Boldness committed against his Will to go unpunished.
He adds, that the Duke of Alva had too much Sense to dare settle so severe an
Imposition without the express and reiterated Orders of the King; and that
otherwise he would never have fined the Burgo-master of Amsterdam 25000 Florins
for opposing the raising of this new Tax.

That the King would have done much better to preserve the Kingdom of Tunis and
Guletta, which the Emperor had conquered from the Turks, and which he preferred
to all his other Victories, than to make an unjust War upon his own Subjects.
But that his Passion and Fury had transported him so far, that his Eyes and
Understanding were blinded, and hindered him from seeing the ill Measures he had
taken: And that he chose rather to expose his Weakness to his Subjects than
employ his Forces against the common Enemy of Christendom. He adds, that as
Hannibal had sworn the Ruin of the Romans upon the Altars of his Gods, so the
Duke of Alva had vowed the Destruction of the Netherlands; which is visible
from the Cruelties he committed there. That if a Master is known by his
Servant, they might easily guess at the good Affection the King bare to the
Low Countries by the Tyranny of this unrelenting Minister.

When the King says, That the Pope dispenses with him from keeping his Oath;
the Prince answers, That he does not consider, that by breaking his Oath, at
the same time his Subjects were absolved from their Oath of Fidelity. He adds,
That the Duke of Alva was preparing to hang the principal Men of Brussels for
refusing to submit to the raising of the tenth Penny; and that the Hangman was
ordered to get ready seventeen Ropes; that the Dictum of the Sentence was
already writ, and the Spanish Soldiers going to their Arms to guard the
Execution, when the happy News of the Taking of the Brille arrived, and saved
them from the Gallows.

Speaking of the perpetual Edict, he says it was concluded by the Artifice of
the Spaniards contrary to his Advice, and that of the States of Holland and
Zealand. That there was no other Difference between the Duke of Alva and the
Commander de Requesens and Don John; but that the last could not dissemble as
well as they, nor conceal his Venom so long. For it is undisputable from the
Letters which were intercepted, that he had the same Orders as the other
Governors had to oppress the Low Countries.

When they charge him with Breaking the Pacification of Ghent and the perpetual
Edict; he answers, That 'twas the Spaniards that broke it, by restoring no man
to the possession of his Estate, or Charges, and by detaining the Prisoners.
That the King had given Orders to Don John not to observe the Peace, as appears
from the intercepted Letters, and that when he swore to it, 'twas on Condition
that he would keep it till he repented of it, as he explained himself to some
Deputies of the States. Thus the Peace of Ghent and the perpetual Edict being
once violated, 'twas in the Power of the States to provide for their own
Defense, by explaining, enlarging and altering the Treaty.

That he is extremely concerned at the Insolences which the Soldiers committed
in his Governments, though they were not to be compared with the intolerable
Outrages of the Spaniards.

He Complains of the Treachery of many Lords and Gentlemen of the Netherlands
who preferred their own private Interests, and the Spanish Tyranny, to the Good
of their Country, which they have torn by their Division, and might have
rendered flourishing by their Union Inveighing against the Infidelity of his
false Brothers called Malcontents, he says, He cannot enough admire the
Inconstancy and the unsettledness of their Resolutions. They serve the Duke of
Alva, says he, and the Commander Requesens, like Servants, and make a vigorous
War upon me. Immediately after, They treat with me, are reconciled, and declare
themselves Enemies to the Spaniards; Don John arrives, they follow him and
contrive my Ruin; when Don John miscarries in his Attempt upon Antwerp, they
quit him and recall me; I am no sooner come, but, contrary to their Oath,
without acquainting me with it, they call in the Archduke Matthias: And him too
they immediately forsake; and without giving me notice, send for the Duke of
Anjou, and promise him Wonders, and then abandon him and join with the Duke of
Parma; upon which the Prince cries out, Are the Waves of the Sea or the Euripus
more inconstant than these Men, who consented to this Proscription, when 'twas
my Courage and Firmness that restored them to the Enjoyment of their Estates
and Places!

When they say that he got the Government of Brabant and Flanders by Intriguing
and making Parties; he answers in a Word, That these Governments were conferred
on him at the Desire of the States, and by a general Approbation.

When they endeavor to make him odious, by saying that he loads the People
with Impositions; he replies, That they are laid on by the Consent of the
People, and if the King raises such excessive Taxes upon his Subjects to
oppress Holland and Zealand and the other United Provinces, why should not they
have the same Liberty allowed them, in order to defend themselves from the
Spanish Tyranny.

When they blame him for turning out those Officers in the Cities who were well
affected to the King; he says, That they were Enemies to the Country, and he
did well to drive them out.

When the King taxes him with the Credit and Authority he had over the People,
as a great Crime; he answers, that it is a great Honor to him that they have
chosen him for their Defender against so cruel a Tyranny, which has kindled so
just an Hatred and Aversion in all their Hearts.

When they reproach him with hating the Nobility; Yes, says the Prince, those
who degenerating from their Ancestors, and not treading in their generous
Steps, betray their Country, and join with those who endeavor its Ruin.

When the King says that the Peace treated at Cologne by the Mediation of the
Emperor Rodolphus, was judged reasonable by all men of Sense; the Prince says,
That it follows thence necessarily, that all those who think it unreasonable
and deceitful, have neither Reason nor Judgment. For what Appearance is there,
(continues he,) that a People harrassed and impoverished by so long a War,
would refuse an equitable Peace with their Prince, unless it appeared to be a
Bait or a Blind only to surprise them? That this Peace projected at Cologne was
worse than War, and that the Honey of a treacherous Tongue is more dangerous
than the Point of a Sword. That if the Emperor thought this a reasonable Peace,
he was persuaded so by the Betrayers of their Country.

When they object to him the Union of Utrecht, which they reckon the worst and
greatest of his Crimes; he answers, That the Spaniards like nothing that
contributes to the Interests of the States; and what is wholesome to the
Oppressed, is mortal to the Favorers of Tyranny. That their Enemies had
grounded all their Hopes upon their Division; against which there is no such
Specific as a Good Union, nor a more certain Antidote against Discord than
Concord, which has prevented and made useless all their Intrigues and
Intelligences. He owns that he was the Author of this Union; and speaks it so
loud, that he wishes that not only Spain, but all Europe may hear him. Upon
which he exhorts the States to preserve it, and to practice the Moral of the
Bundle of Arrows tied together by one Band, which they bear in their Arms.
Instead of blushing at it, he glories in an Action so conducive to the
Preservation of their Liberties.

When they upbraid him with driving out the Churchmen; he denies that he ever
did so, till George de Lalain, Count de Renneberg Governor of Freizland,
surprised Groningen by Treachery, and the Massacre of the principal Burghers,
among others the Burgo-Master Hillebrand, a Man of the greatest Authority in
the City, having supped with him and caressed him, the better to overreach him,
the day before this infamous Surprizal. And that they could not reproach him,
that in all the Troubles and Confusions stirred up by the Spaniards he ever
stained his Hands in the Blood of the Confederates, who relied on his Faith.

When he is accused of driving out some of the Nobility; he denies it, and
declares that they retired voluntarily through the Terror of their
Consciences, having openly contrived the Ruin of their Country; and, Would to
God, added the Prince, all they who are like them would follow them, to rid the
Country of all Fear.

He says it is ridiculous to call him Hypocrite, who never dissembled with the
Spaniards. When he was their Friend he talked freely to them, and foretold them
by Word of Mouth, and Writing, that those rigorous Persecutions would ruin
them. That being forced to become their Enemy, to support the Liberty of his
Country, what Hypocrisy can they charge him with, unless they call Hypocrisy
the making open War upon them, taking their Cities, driving them out of the
Country and acting against them with all the Vigor the Right of a just War
entitles him to. That if they will take the Pains to read over his Defense,
which he published 13 years since, to justify his Taking up Arms, they will see
the Letters of a King, who is a Hypocrite and Dissembler, who thought to
surprise him with fair Words, as now he thinks to daunt him with Threats.

When King Philip calls the Prince of Orange Desperate as Cain and Judas; he
says it is a quite different thing, to distrust the Grace of God who cannot Lie,
and to suspect the Words of a treacherous and deceitful Man: Witness the poor
Moors of Granada; Count Egmont, Horn and many others. That the fall of Cain and
Judas was Despair caused by the dreadful Sins they had been guilty of; to which
State he was not yet reduced, his Conscience upbraiding him with nothing. But
the Style of a Man in Despair is visible in this Heathenish and Turkish
Proscription.

When he accuses him of Distrust, and says it is an ordinary thing with wicked
Men, he makes an Apostrophe to Cardinal Granville (whom he believed the Author
of this Proscription) in these Terms: And thou Cardinal, who have lost so much
time at the College, unless thou call that Learning, to be trained up in thy
Youth in the Arts of Lying and Deceiving, what answer can thou make to that
sententious Orator and Lover of his Country, when he says that Distrust and
Jealousy is the strongest Bulwark of Liberty against Tyranny? Which was said
against another Philip, a puny Tyrant in comparison of this Dom Philip, who has
out done the greatest, and whose Tyranny the divine Philippick it self is not
able to express. Consider of it; and I for my part, says the Prince, will
speak, write and ingrave every where this fine and useful Sentence. And would
to God, I may be better believed by my People than Demosthenes was by his, who
suffering themselves to be imposed on by such Villains and Dissemblers as thou
art, were in the end utterly ruined.

When the King reproaches him with refusing very advantageous Offers which were
made him upon condition he would retire into Germany, and abandon the States;
he says the Spanish Folly and Impertinence cannot be sufficiently admired, who
endeavoring to blacken and defame him, raise his Reputation, by owning that he
preferrs the Safety of the States, and their Liberty, to his own Repose and
Native Country. That he would willingly be freed from all his Troubles and
Disappointments, and enjoy his Estate and the Presence of his Son in Peace. But
since this could not be effected without perjuring himself, and betraying the
States, violating his Faith, and abandoning them to the Cruelty of their mortal
Enemies: No Consideration of his Estate, his Life, Children or Wife should
prevail upon him to deliver them over a Prey to the Spaniards, to be worried
and massacred by them. He concludes, 'twas a very great Crime which they
reproached him with, to be a Man of Honor and of unshaken Firmness and
Constancy, not to be wrought on by Threatenings nor Promises. And that on those
false Accusations the King and Spaniards have grounded this barbarous
Proscription full of Calumnies, Abuses, and inconceivable Imprecations, which
he is no more frighted with than Philibert of Orange was with the Bull which
Pope Clement the VII. thundered out against him; who for all that made him his
Prisoner.

He declares to the States and all Europe, that whatever Spaniard, or whatever
Man in the Spanish Interests says or shall say, as this Proscription does, that
he is a wicked Man and a Traitor, lies, speaks falsely and against the Truth.
That though the Spaniards forbid him the use of Fire and Water, in spite of all
their Rage he will live by the Assistance of his Friends as long as it pleases
God, who alone has the Disposal of Life and Death, and who has numbered all the
Hairs of his Head. As for his Estates he hopes (God willing) that the Purchase
of them will cost the Spaniards so dear that they will be obliged to seek out
others elsewhere at an easier rate. As for those they wrongfully detain from
him, he hopes to dispossess them, and that they never usurped the Possessions
of a poor Prince who proved a greater Burden to them.

When the King promises 25000 Crowns to any Man that shall bring him alive or
dead, to make him a Gentleman if not so before, with a full Pardon of all his
Crimes how heinous soever; he answers, that if a Gentleman had been guilty of
so villainous an Action, no man of Honor would eat or drink with the Wretch or
endure his Presence. That if the Spaniards reckon such Men Noble, and if this
is the ready way to Honor in Castile, no wonder all the World believes that
the most part of the Spanish Nobility are descended from the Moors, and Jews
who sold our Savior's Life for ready Money; and that they inherit the Virtue
of their Ancestors. Upon this Subject, the Prince writes that the Just God has
taken away the King's Understanding, who by the ennobling of Villains and
pardoning of the greatest Crimes, would destroy the Defender of a People
tyrannized over. That he has the Impudence to mix the Name of God with so many
abominable Promises, though he calls himself the Minister of God, and assumes
the power of not only permitting what God forbids, but of rewarding it with
Money, Nobility, and indemnity of all their Offenses.

The Prince concludes by a Persuasive of Union to the States, and not to suffer
themselves to be dazzled with the false Praises the King gives those who forsook
them contrary to their Oath, to scatter Division among them. His Enemy gives
out that his Quarrel is only to the Prince of Orange as Author of all these
Troubles and the War, which will last eternally so long as he lives, imitating
the Wolves in the Fable, who published that their Design was only on the Dogs,
(the Keepers and Guardians of the Flock) to devour afterward the Sheep at
their Leisure. But for a Proof of the King's Dissembling and his Cruelty, when
he was absent in Germany the Country was as much persecuted as ever. As many
were drowned hanged and burned as before; and the Liberty of the Country was
extremely well maintained by their mild Governor the Duke of Alva. That the
King's principal Design was to root out the Religion, the only bulwark of the
State, without which it could not support it self three days: For they of the
Reformed Religion could repose no Confidence in Spaniards or Papists.

He repeats once more, that Union and Religion may defend and protect them from
all their Enemies, and concludes in these Words, That he would willingly
purchase their Ease and Repose at the Expense of his own Banishment or Death.
That Exile and Death upon these Conditions would be grateful and agreeable. But
if they thought his Life might contribute to the Defense of their Liberties, he
offered them his Assistance, Industry, and Blood it self, which he would spill
to the last Drop in their Preservation.

The Prince of Orange would willingly have had the States General publish this
Apology in their Name. But some Provinces finding the Reflections on the King
to be too severe and bitter, and not being acquainted with the Crimes he
imputed to the King, thought it not proper. They contented themselves with
declaring by a Decree, That the Prince of Orange was wrongfully accused, that
he had accepted the Government at their earnest Desires; and offered to
maintain a Troop of Horse for the greater Security of his Person: Desiring him
to continue to defend their Liberties, and promising all Obedience and
Deference to his Commands and Counsels, which they acknowledged to have no
other aim but their Safety.

Not long after, An. Dom. 1581. the City and Castle of Breda were surprised by
Claude de Barlaymont Count de Hautepenne, by the Means of the Baron de Fresin
kept prisoner in the place by Order of the States upon Suspicion of holding
Intelligence with the Spaniards, the Truth of which he confirmed, as much a
Prisoner as he was, by causing the City to be surprised by the Means of one
Soldier, whom he had gained over to his Party. This was a great Loss to the
States and a sensible Affliction to the Prince, whose hereditary Estate this
City and its Territories were. This is an Instance that a Prisoner ought never
to be kept in a Frontier-Town, but in the Heart of the Country; for as they
think of nothing but setting themselves at Liberty, and all their Thoughts are
bent that way, they are always contriving Methods and inventing Ways to bring
it about; it is in effect Nourishing a Serpent in our Bosom, and there needs
nothing more to take an Impregnable Fortress than the corrupting of a Sentinel
when the Enemy is in the Neighborhood, who may come at the time appointed to
Petard or Scale the place.

We should have seen in our time a remarkable instance of a Surprise of this
Nature, to the great Advantage of the Arms of France, if Hatred and Revenge had
not born a greater Influence over the great Minister, than the Glory of his
Master or the Good of his Kingdom: But this Mystery has lain concealed
hitherto, for fear of his Resentment who governed all things with an absolute
Authority in the last years of the Life of Monsieur the Cardinal de Richelieu.

The Story is this; After the Defeat of Honne Court, in May 1642. Don
Francisque de Mello Governor of the Low Countries, put several Prisoners of
Quality, in the Castle of Ghent, to the Number of Seventy. The principal of
whom were the Count de Rantzau, since Marshall of France, the Marquess de
Roquelaure now Duke and Governor of Guyenne, the Marquess de St. Maigrim
killed at the Battle of St. Anthony, and the Sieur de Lalen Captain in the
Regiment of Piedmont, who died afterward at Cremona, commanding the French
Infantry of the Army of Italy. This Monsieur de Lalen was originally of Lions,
of mean Birth, but of extraordinary Valor and Fidelity, which might give him
just Grounds to hope for the highest Employments of War. Monsieur de Rantzau,
impatient in his Prison, obtained Leave of the Spaniards to send Monsieur de
Lalen into France to propose some Exchange of Prisoners. But during his stay at
Court, where the variety and multitude of Business hinders their speedy
Dispatch, and where Monsieur de Noyers, who hated him, did not take much pains
to get him his Liberty. Monsieur de Rantzau, tired with the long Stay of
Monsieur de Lalen, and holding a secret Correspondence with me by Letters, who
did him all the good Offices at Court of which I was capable, upon the Account
of the Esteem and Friendship I had for him; he complained extremely in all his
Letters of Monsieur de Lalen's being detained so long, at a time when his
Presence was necessary for a great Design, which he had projected. At length
overcome by his Impatience he writ me a long Letter in Ciphers, part French,
part Latin, by which he advised me that nothing was easier than to surprise the
Citadel of Ghent, by the Means of the Hollanders who were Neighbors to it;
and the Prince of Orange might advance near with a Body of Foot, without giving
the least Jealousy; and in short desired me to go to Court and make this
Proposal.

But, in Order to make appear how easy this Enterprise might have been put in
Execution, 'twill be convenient to insert the proper Terms of the Letter which
was writ in Ciphers, a Copy of which I transcribed before I presented an
Original to Monsieur de Noyers.

SIR,
I Am extremely concerned that my Endeavors have had no better Success; and
that Monsieur de Lalen is detained for such slight Reasons. If he had made a
quick return, 'twould not have been difficult to surprise this place. There are
now but 300 Men in Garrison, many of whom are old and can scarce go, and as
many disabled and can make no Defense; besides the 28 or 30 Portugese and
Catalonians, who have promised us their Assistance, and above 70 Officers who
are Prisoners. Philippine, where there is a Garrison of Dutch, is but four
hours March from us. All the Country between this Place and that is under
Contribution. Their Parties come up to the very Gates of the City, and many of
them enter upon several Pretenses. For they carried off lately a Horse from the
middle of the Marketplace, by a cunning Stratagem, in the Presence of all the
World. The Covetousness of the Governor, the Count de Salazar, gives all People
a free Entrance into the Castle, that he may sell off his Wine at the greater
Gain, which by a particular Privilege pays no Excise to the King. And a Measure
which costs fifteen pence in the City is worth but six pence in the Castle.
Here are still five or six thousand Burghers and Strangers, Men and Women who
drink without being searched or examined. If you will consider all these
Circumstances, and reflect upon what happened at the Surprise of Amiens and
Breda, you will find a fairer Occasion and a greater Probability of Effecting
this.


To hasten so important an Affair I waited on Monsieur de Noyers, who was at
that time at Chaume en Brie with the King to ta^e care of the Preservation of
Monsieur le Cardinal de Richelieu, who stayed behind at the Bourbon Waters, in
great Suspicion of his Master and many of those who were about him. But this
Minister having assured me that he would give the necessary Orders about this
Affair, and commanded me to speak to no Man of it, I retired, easily perceiving
by his Looks and Discourse, that he did not relish this Proposal, however
advantageous it was, when it came from a Man to whom he had such an Aversion.

He never acquainted the King with it, for fear he should reward and consider
Monsieur de Rantzau for so important a Service. The Campaigne being at an End,
the Spaniards, according to their usual Custom, reinforced their Garrisons,
among others, that of the Castle of Ghent, with the Troops of their Army, which
changed the Face of Affairs, and made the Execution of this Enterprise
impossible.

The same Year that Breda was surprised by the Spaniards, the Duke of Anjou,
pursuant to his Engagement with the States of the Provinces, came from Chateau
Thierry with 10000 Foot, and 4000 Horse to the Relief of Cambray besieged by
the Duke of Parma, who raised the Siege. Not long before the Viscount de
Turenne, who was afterward the famous Duke de Bouillon, Henry de la Tour, the
Counts of Ventadour, and de la Fenillade, and four other Lords, having run the
Risque to pass through the Army of the Duke, and throw themselves into the
Place, were made Prisoners, and forced to pay a great Ransom.

At that time the States General, assembled at the Hague, declared the King of
Spain to have forfeited the Sovereignty of the Netherlands, broke his Seal and
Arms, and commanded all People to acknowledge him no longer for their Prince,
and take the Oath of Fidelity to them.

The Beginning of this Decree runs thus, That a Prince is appointed by God
Almighty, the Head of his People, to defend them from Oppression, as a Shepherd
to keep his Flock; and that when a Prince oppresses them, they may choose
another Lord to govern them in Justice according to their Privileges. The rest
is nothing but a long Narration of the Cruelties and Infractions of their
Privileges by the King and his Ministers, which obliged them to have Recourse
to another Prince.

At the same time the Duke of Parma took Tournay from the States
notwithstanding the vigorous Defense of Mary de Lalain Princess D'Epinoy,
Sister to Emanuel de Lalain Seigneur de Montigny, one of the chief
Malcontents. She gave great Proofs of her Courage in this Siege, encouraging
the Soldiers and Burghers to a gallant Resistance, and exposing herself so much
in the most dangerous Places, that she received a Harquebuss Shot in her Arm.
This Lady, who deserves a Place among the Heroines, died the Year after at
Antwerp extremely regretted by the States General, for her Courage and Firmness
to maintain their Party.

Immediately after, the Duke of Anjou passed into England, to have the Advice
of Queen Elizabeth, and to endeavor to accomplish his Marriage with that
Princess, a Contract being made, and Rings having been presented on both sides.
But the Queen having found out some Excuses to hinder it contented her self
with supplying him with Money for his Voyage into the Netherlands, and sending
with him my Lord Leicester, Admiral Howard, both Knights of the Garter, and 100
other Lords and Gentlemen of Quality, who carried with them a Train of 500 Men.

An Dom. 1582. He repassed from England into Zealand, aboard the Ships of this
Princess, arrived at Flushing, and because of the great Cold went a foot to
Middlebourg the Capital of Zealand, which is a League from thence, where he was
received and treated very magnificently. The Prince of Orange and Epinoy went
to meet him, and going aboard the 50 Ships provided for them, arrived at
Antwerp, where this great City received him with surprising Pomp and Splendor.
All the Keys were lined with the Burghers in Arms, most part very richly
dressed, and with gilt Arms: Triumphal Arches were erected in all parts very
richly adorned with fine Inscriptions. This Prince marched under a Canopy of
Cloth of Gold, from the Port to the great Piazza, where a Theater was built
with a Throne upon it. There the Prince having clothed him with the Ducal Cap
and Mantle of Red Crimson Velvet lined with Ermins, he swear publicly in the
presence of the States and the Officers of the City, and an infinite Concourse
of People from all parts to see so extraordinary a Sight, That he would
religiously observe the Treaty concluded with them, and the Privileges of the
Provinces, and govern, not by his Will, but by Justice and Equity. Afterward
the States, and the Magistrates of Antwerp swore Fidelity and Obedience to him
as their Sovereign Prince. But this public Rejoicing was interrupted by an
Attempt made on the Prince of Orange. One Iauregny a Spaniard of Biscay, Factor
to a Merchant called Anastre, spurred on by the Reward promised in the
Proscription, fired a Pistol at him, loaded with one Ball, which struck him
under the Right Ear and went out through the Left Cheek, breaking several of
his Teeth. At first they believed the French to be the Authors of this Attempt,
but the Murderer being killed by the Halberdiers of the Prince, and Papers
found in his pocket, which proved him to be a Spamard, they were undeceived,
and the People who had run to their Arms to revenge his Murder on the French
at the Cloister of S. Michael, where the Duke of Anjou lodged, retired to their
Houses. The Prince of Orange, to appease the Tumult, with much Difficulty, writ
a Letter with his own Hand to the Magistrate, to assure him that the Spaniards
were the Authors of this Attempt.

The Grief and Concern of this great City, for the Wounding of the Prince,
cannot be expressed. Immediately public Prayers were appointed, and as long as
he continued in Danger the People stayed in the Churches praying to God for his
Recovery. When he was well, they kept a general Fast, and the whole Day was
employed in thanking God for restoring to them the Father of their Country.

When he was in a Condition to travel, the Duke of Anjou carried him to Ghent
and Bruges, where another great Conspiracy against those Princes was
discovered. The chief Man concerned in it was Nicholas Salvedo a Spaniard, who
confessed that he had received 4000 Crowns from the Duke of Parma, to make away
the Duke of Anjou, and the Prince of Orange, by Poison or any other way; and
that he followed them in order to put his villainous Design in Execution;
Francis Baza an Italian and Native of Bresse, one of his Accomplices, was
arrested likewise, and confessed the same thing, but before Execution stabbed
himself with his Knife, to prevent the Severity of the Punishment which was
preparing for them. Salvedo was carried to Paris, where by a Decree of the
Parliament he was drawn in pieces by four Horses in the Greve.

The wretched Salvedo seeing himself a Prisoner in the Conciergerie, accused
Monsieur de Villeroy, in hopes to save himself, by making so great a Man a
Partner in his Guilt, or at least suspend the Punishment he deserved. But no
Credit was given to so Hellish an Accusation of a Minister of the greatest
Abilities, and the most devoted to the Good and Interest of the State, of all
those who ever had the Administration of France. And it must be acknowledged,
to his Honor, that in all the Fury of the League, he was the Man that prevented
its falling into the Hands of Foreigners, and after a Ministry of fifty years,
died poorer at the End than the Beginning of his Greatness. His Father had been
likewise Secretary of State, and his Grandfather, of the same Name, De Neville,
was so under Francis the First, and Superintendant of the Finances.

The Duke of Anjou, imitating the Conduct of Rehoboam who ruined himself by
following the Counsel of the young Men, by the Advice of the Sieurs de
Fervaques, S. Agnan, de la Rochepot, and other hotheaded young Fellows that
governed him, without acquainting the Prince of Orange, the Duke of
Montpensier, Count de Lavall, nor any other Lords who were capable of giving
him good Counsel; resolved, contrary to his Oath and against all Justice, to
seize, the same day, on all the most considerable Cities of the Netherlands, as
Dunkirk, Dendermonde, Bruges, and Antwerp it self, not being able to bear any
longer the great Authority of the Prince of Orange, and so limited a Power,
complaining to be only a Sovereign in Name. And for a Proof of his just
Resentment, and in his own Justification, he alleged that the People of
Antwerp had taken up Arms to destroy him in his Lodgings, and having rebelled
against him by so rash an Act, he was consequently absolved from his Oath. Thus
he surprised Dunkirk, Dendermonde, and some other places, but missed of Bruges
and Antwerp, when he thought himself Master of it; for though he had poured
into the City 17 Companies of Foot supported by all his Army, which he had
advanced near the Walls, under pretense of making a review of it; nevertheless,
the Burghers ran in all have to their Arms, and made so brave a Resistance,
that the French were obliged to retire in Disorder to the Gate by which they
entered, where there was made such a terrible Slaughter of them, that 'twas
impossible for those without to succor their Friends within; for there were
Mountains of dead Bodies pil'd in Heaps one upon the other, which blocked up
the Entry and cut off the Retreat of the French, of whom there were more
stifled than killed. In this bloody Dispute, called the Enterprise upon
Antwerp, there were killed only 83 Burghers, and 1500 French, among whom were
300 Gentlemen, who were all buried without Distinction in a great Ditch. And as
the people of these Counties who are much of the same Humor with the Germans,
in all extraordinary Events make Computations upon the Numbers, they observed
that this Deliverance fell out in the Year 1583, which Number made up that of
the 83 Burghers and 1500 French who were killed that day.

The Duke of Anjou, having miscarried in his Attempt, surrendered by a Treaty
made with the States all the Places he had possessed himself of, and returning
into France, died of Grief in his Appenage of Chateau-Thierry, in the beginning
of the next year, with the Reputation of a violent and unsettled Temper.

The Flemmings believed that the Prince of Orange was concerned in the Attempt
the French made to surprise Antwerp, and his Enemies and Enviers (which great
Men never fail to have) made use of this false pretense, to lessen his great
Credit, and of his fourth Marriage with Louise de Coligny, Daughter to the
Admiral de Chastillon, whom he married after he had lost his third Wise
Charlotte de Bourbon, who died at Antwerp not long after he was cured of his
Wound, which was a visible proof, as they said, of his Inclination to the
French, who at that time were had in Execration by all the Netherlands. Seeing
himself thus suspected, and that the Party of the States declined in the
Walloon Provinces, he retired into Holland, where he thought his Life in
greater Security and less exposed to those Attempts which Superstition on one
side, and the Reward promised in the Proscription on the other, made every one
ready to undertake against his Person. He chose the City of Delft for his
ordinary Residence, where at the Beginning of the year 1584. he had a Son born
called Henry Frederick, Grandfather to the present Prince of Orange, who did
not degenerate from the Virtue of his Ancestors.

Prince William employed Philip de Mornix, Seigneur de S. Aldegonde, in the
Management of his greatest Affairs, and made him Burgomaster of Antwerp when he
left it. He was a Man of Quality, Integrity and Learning. About the End of his
Life he made use of John Barneveld, whom he valued very much upon the account
of his Honesty and great Capacity.

Having been almost overset with the Tempests which had been raised up against
him and having a Heart above the Storms, he took for his Devise, a Sea-Gull or
Didapper, in Latin Mergus, with this Motto, Saevis tranquillus in Undis,
Undisturbed in the midst of the stormy Waves.

He behaved himself with so much Sweetness and Civility to the common People,
that he never wore his Hat as he walked through the Streets, where People of
all Ages and Sexes crowded to see him. His most intimate Friends assured my
Father, that in his Passage through the Streets, if he heard a Noise in any
House, and saw a Husband and Wife quarrelling, he entered, heard the Difference
patiently, persuaded them to a Reconciliation with incredible Sweetness. The
Breach made up, the Master of the House asked him if he would not taste his
Beer; the Prince said yes; the Beer brought, the Burgher, according to the
Fashion of the Country, begins the Prince's Health, in a Gup which they call a
Cann, and which is usually of blew Earth, then wiping off the Froth with the
palm of his Hand, presented the Can to the Prince who pledged him. And when his
Confidents told him, that he condescended too much to Men of such mean Quality,
and treated them with too much Civility, the Prince used to answer, that what
was gained by pulling off a Hat or a little Complaisance, was bought at a very
easy Rate.

No wonder, after this, that he was so universally lamented by the People when
he was unhappily assassinated in the 51st. year of his Age. 'Twas done by one
Baltazar de Guerard a Gentleman of the Franche Comte and Native of Villefons in
the County of Burgundy, who in Hopes of a Reward, or pretending to merit
Heaven, by taking out of the World an Enemy to the King and the Catholic
Religion, killed him at Delft, as he rose from Table, with a Pistol Shot loaded
with three Bullets, of which he died without saying any thing more than Lord
have Mercy on my Soul, and this poor People! This dismal Accident happened in
the presence of Louise de Coligny his fourth Wife, and the Countess of
Schouarzebourg his Sister, whom he loved very tenderly, and who never forsook
him and was present at Antwerp when Iouregny wounded him.

This Villain had insinuated himself into the Acquaintance of the Prince, under
the name of Francis Guyon Son to Peter Guyon of Besancon, who suffered for
Religion. He had always the Huguenot Psalms in his Hands, and was a constant
Frequenter of Sermons, the better to conceal his Design: Insomuch as the Prince
trusted him, and sent him upon several Dispatches, and at the very Moment he
assassinated him, he demanded of the Prince a Passport to go somewhere where
the Prince was sending him. He was but 22 years old, and made appear as much
Constancy and Resolution in suffering the Punishment of his Crime, as Boldness
in undertaking it. He repeated a hundred times, that if he had not done it, he
would do it again; and when his Flesh was plucked off his Limbs with burning
Pincers he did not utter the least Cry or Groan, which made the Hollanders
believe he was possessed by the Devil; and the Spaniards, that he was assisted
by God Almighty; so different are the Opinions and Passions of Mankind.

The Marks of the Balls which entered into a Stone of the Gate, after they had
gone through the Body of the Prince, are shown to Strangers at this day in
Delft in Holland, and I my self saw them when I was young.

Thus died William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, and these are his principal
Actions, which are like so many solid Pillars upon which he has erected the
great Fabric of the Commonwealth of the United Provinces. There was need of as
vast a Genius and Capacity as his was to undertake so great and difficult a
Work, an unparallelled Courage to carry it on to the End, and an unheard of
Constancy in arriving to it, in spite of the formidable Power of Spain, and the
domestic Treasons, which crossed his generous Designs. After this I believe no
Man will accuse me of an Hyperbole for ranking this great Man among the Heroes
of Antiquity; and asserting that the Life and Virtue of the Admiral de Coligny
bore a great Resemblance with that of the Prince of Orange.

They had both a very great share of Conduct, Wisdom and Moderation. They both
had the Address to clear up and unravel the most perplexed and embroiled
Affairs. Both heard more than they talked. They had both the Art of persuading,
and were full of good Counsels. Both possessed the Hearts, the Esteem and the
Veneration of all those of their Party. Their Courage was above their
Misfortunes, and their Constancy in supporting them was admirable. Both were
often routed, and still found some glorious Resources in all their Adversities.
Both had to do with the most powerful Kings of Christendom. Both made use of
the Assistance of England and Germany to maintain themselves. Both lived in the
same Time, and outlived 50 years. Both supported the same Religion, and
established it one in France, the other in the Low Countries. Both were
proscribed, and Prices set on their Heads. The Prince was seconded in his Wars,
by the Courage of Count Lodowick, Adolphus, and Henry of Nassaw, his Brothers.
And the Admiral was supported in his, by the Counsels of Odel de Coligny,
Cardinal de Chatillon, and by the Valor of Francis de Coligny, Seigneur d'
Andelot Colonel-General of the French Infantry, his two Brothers. In fine, both
died a violent Death and by Treason, and both equally dreaded. The powerful
Princes whom they had attacked not thinking themselves secure till they had cut
off these two great Men; and not being able to compass it by open Force and
War, made use of Treachery and Fraud to bring it about.

The Prince would never have perished as the Admiral did; for he would never
have committed himself to the Power of his Enemies being of the same Opinion
with the Man who said, that when a Subject draws his Sword against his King, he
ought to throw away the Scabbard. The Prince died by giving all sorts of
Persons too free Access to his Person, at a time when Superstition was the
Motive to such horrible Attempts, and perhaps by being of Caesar's Opinion, who
told his Friends when they advised him to guard himself, and make himself
feared, That 'twas better to die once, than live in continual Apprehensions of
Death.

As soon as the News of his Murder was spread about, nothing was to be seen
over all Parts in the Cities but Tears, nothing to be heard over all the
Villages of the Country but Lamentations, as if all had lost what was most dear
to them. The People of the United Provinces, in the Celebration of his Funeral,
showed the greatest Mourning which was ever heard of, and their Affliction went
even to Despair. The Funeral Pomp was very Magnificent; all the Nobility
assisted at it, and the chief Men of the Provinces, in deep Mourning followed
by an incredible Number of People of all Conditions. Prince Maurice his Son
followed the Corpse, having on his Right Hand Gerard Trucses Archbishop and
Elector of Cologne, and on his Left Count de Hohenlo or Helac. This was that
Elector, who falling desperately in love with Agnes de Mansfield a Nun, chose
rather to lose his Sovereignty and Electorate than his Mistress. He was of the
same Opinion with that Greek Poet who writ, that a beloved Nymph stood in
instead of all things, and that we can want nothing with her; but not enjoying
her, we are poor amidst the plenty of all other Goods.

This Archbishop delivered into the Hands of the United Provinces the City of
Reneberg in the Diocese of Cologne. It was so often taken by the Spaniards and
Dutch, that the Marquess Spinola called it the Whore of War, and it was seven
years since in the Hands of the States, the Consideration of which made the
present Elector of Cologne join with France, to recover again this Place of his
Electorate, which this Trucses had alienated, and this Alliance gave us an
Opportunity of falling upon Holland behind, which some years since was almost
overrun.

The Gravers of Holland have represented this Magnificent Funeral Pomp of the
Prince of Orange, upon several Sheets of Paper glu'd together, which take up
the whole side of a great Hall, in order to perpetuate the Memory of so
remarkable a Mourning.

Count Maurice his Son built him a very stately Monument of Marble, where his
Images stands made to the Life; the Basis of this fine Monument is adorned with
several Statues representing all the Virtues, and the upper part is surrounded
with weeping Loves. It stands in one of the principal Churches of Delft, and is
not inferior to the most sumptuous and stately Tombs in Italy.

Reflecting on this Tragical Death of the Prince of Orange, I have often
wondered that so wife a Man, and who had so powerful Enemies, had not better
guarded himself. For when he passed through the Cities he was commonly attended
by only three or four Domestics; and I wondered at it the more because, not
long before, Iouregny had like to have killed him at Antwerp, where he escaped
miraculously. And there were many Salcedes in the Country who wanted only an
Opportunity to assassinate him. For after his Death the Spaniards gave out,
that when he was murdered by this Burgundian, there was the same time at
Delft, a Lorrainer, an English Man, and two more of different Nations, who had
the same Design, and could not have failed to put it in Execution.

It seems to me that his own Dangers ought to have made him provide better for
his Security; but he feared only two Nations, the Italians and Spaniards,
employing all others but these two; and in the City of Delft which he had made
the Seat of his Residence there was neither Spaniard nor Italian. He observed
that though a Price had been set on Admiral Coligny's Head, nevertheless no Man
durst run the Hazard of Assassinating him in hopes of a Reward which could
prove of no Service to them when they had lost their Lives; for there was no
Appearance of making an Escape after they had killed a Prince in his own
Country and in the midst of his Attendants. Had he lived till the year 1589.
and seen a little Monk, spurred on by a false Zeal of Religion, have the
Boldness to assassinate Henry the III. at St. Cloud in the midst of his Army,
he would have taken more Care of his Safety.

These dismal Accidents, and the deplorable Death of Henry the IV. massacred in
the middle of Paris, were a Warning to Richelieu who had always in his Mind,
this Proverb, that Suspicion is the Mother of Security. For when he saw all
Europe had conspired his Ruin, he stood upon his Guard, and died peaceably in
his Bed, in spite of all the Disgusts of his Master, and the Contrivances of
his Enemies.

The Superstitious Catholics and Spaniards celebrate this Belthazar de
Guerard, and have ranked him in the Number of their Martyrs. Upon which Subject
I cannot but admire that Famianus Strada in his excellent History of the Low
Countries has insinuated that Iouregny who narrowly missed of killing the
Prince at Antwerp, had a good Design, because he had fortified and prepared
himself before he executed it, with the Sacraments of the Communion and
Penance, as if God Almighty who has expressly forbid Murder in the Decalogue,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, who has said and taught that he who should strike
with the Sword, should perish by the Sword, would guide and strengthen a
Murderer in his Attempt. Some Examples of the Old Testament will not serve to
justify him, where God Almighty for the Preservation and establishment of the
people of Israel, and for other Reasons best known to himself allowed of such
Actions, otherwise there could be no Security for the Life of any Prince. The
Huguenots on the other side made a Martyr of that execrable Poltrot, who killed
the Great Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise, who had given him a treat in his
House and made him eat at his Table, insomuch as Adrianus Turnebus one of the
learned men of his Age, made a Latin Poem in Honor of this Poltrot, who was
called John de Mere, where he says, Conspicuus fulvo stabit Mereus in auro.
And toward the End, Plurimus ut maneat Mereus in ore nepotum.
Another learned Heretic said this in his Poem, Praemia multa Meret, alluding
to his Name de Mere. Another Heretic goes so far as to say among other things
in French Verse,

Ce valeureux Poltrot qui tant s'ever tua
Que le tyran, tueur de Chretiens il tua.
I knew in my youth the Lady of the Sieur Alard a Captain in the French Troops
in Holland, so prepossessed with false Zeal and Bigotry for Calvinism, that she
showed publicly to all the World the Picture of Poltrot, like Judith having
killed Holofernes, which she kept in the Reuelle of her Bed, as a great Martyr,
and whom she considered as the Deliverer of the little Flock.

The Doctors of the League honored with many Elogies James Clement a Iacobin,
the Murderer of Henry the III. comparing him to Ebud who freed the people of
Israel from their Servitude, by killing Eglon Prince of the Moabites in his
Chamber. For Men's Passions are so violent, and their Animosities prejudice
them in such a manner, that they celebrate Actions which deserve not only the
Blame of all good Men, but an exemplary Punishment.

William Prince of Orange made more noise in Europe than all the Kings of his
time put together, and has left behind him a renowned Posterity, who pursuing
his glorious Example, have amazed all the Christian World by Actions which are
immortalized in History. He may boast to have been the Father of two very great
Captains, to have produced Kings, Electors, Landtgraves, and Sovereign Princes
in Germany, to have peopled France with Princes, Princesses, Dukes, Cardinals,
Mareschals, and many great Lords. But for a clearer Understanding of the
Matter, we must first declare that he had four Wives.

His first Wife was Anne D' Egmont Daughter to Maximilian D' Egmont Count of
Burem and Leerdam, a great Heiress, whom he married by the Favor of Charles V.
and had by her a Son and Daughter. The Son was Philip William Prince of Orange,
of whom more hereafter, and the Daughter Mary de Nassaw who was married to
Philip Count de Hohenlo, commonly called de Holac, a great General, who after
the unexpected Death of the Prince of Orange which put the United Provinces
into a strange Consternation, generously resisted all the Efforts of the
Spaniards, and taught the first Rudiments of War to Prince Maurice his Brother
in Law who was at the College at the time of this unhappy Accident.

His second Wife was Anne of Saxony, Daughter to the Great Maurice Elector of
Saxony who made head against the Emperor Charles the V. by whom he had the
Famous Maurice, of whom we shall give a very large Relation, and a Daughter
named Emilia de Nassau who married Emanuel King of Portugal, Son to King
Anthony of Portugal, who was dispossessed by King Philip the II. This Prince
Emmanuel won so much on the Princess by his Civility, Courtship and Addresses,
that she chose him for her Husband as poor as he was, and of a contrary
Religion, and though Prince Maurice opposed the Match as advantageous to neither.
They had two Sons, whom I knew in my youth, one of whom left a Son, among other
Children, who went lately into Holland to demand of the Prince of Orange the
Remainder of his Grandmother's Fortune; and many Daughters, some of whom were
married to Persons of a very unsuitable Quality. She was a very good Princess,
but about the end of her Life, having fallen out with the Prince of Orange her
Brother, she retired to Geneva. An. Dom. 1623. and died shortly after of
Melancholy, leaving six Daughters whom I saw at Geneva, An. Dom. 1624. She was
Godmother to one of my Sisters and gave her Her Name Emilia, who is still alive
and is married to the Seigneur de Montrevil near Menetoon in Champagne: Her
Godfather was the Count de Culembourg, Son to Florent de Pallant Count de
Culembourg, whose House at Brussels was pulled down by Order of the Duke of
Alva, and who having done nothing after the Address of the Nobility, retired
into Holland and lived so privately that he died unknown to those of his own
Party.

The third Wife of William Prince of Orange was Charlotte de Bourbon of the
House of Montpensier, whom I have declared before to have been a Religieuse or
Abbess of Iouarre. But the Love of Liberty which is an invaluable Blessing,
prevailed over all the Vows she had made in her youth, which she pleaded she
had been forced to, and had made several Protestations against. She died of a
Pleurisy at Antwerp, A. D. 1582. leaving six Daughters behind her.

The eldest Lovise Iulienne de Nassau was married to Frederick the IV. Elector
Palatine, Father to Frederick the V. Elected King of Bohemia, who by the
Princess Elizabeth of England, Sister to Charles the I. King of Great Britain,
had many Princes and Princesses.

The eldest, Henry Frederick Designed King of Bohemia with his Father, A. D.
1620. was a very handsome and hopeful Prince. He studied at Leyden, and Our
Tutor Benjamin Prioleau Author of the Latin History of the last Regency,
carried us duly every Sunday after Dinner to play with this young Prince, who
loved us extremely, which made us the more regret his Death when we afterward
heard of it. He perished unhappily in the Sea of Haerlem, going in Company with
the King his Father to see the Spanish Galleons laden with an inestimable
Booty, which had been taken by Peter Hain the Dutch Admiral near the Island of
Cuba. A Vessel by Night, sailing full Speed, having fallen soul on his, split
it in two; thus the Prince and all that were in it were drowned, except the
King his Father, who by great Fortune, having caught hold of a Rope that was
thrown out to him from the Ship, was miraculously drawn aboard.

The Second is the present Elector Palatine, who has several Children by the
Princess of Hesse, among others, Madam the Duchess of Orleans, a Princess of
great Wit and Judgment, who has already Children who are the first Princes of
the Blood in France.

The third is the Famous Prince Robert who has won so much Reputation by Sea
and Land, having not deceived the hopes which he had given in his Infancy, by
the Martial and Manly Look which was then taken notice of.

The fourth was called Edward, who lived a long time in France, where turning
Catholic he married the Princess Anne de Gonzague Daughter to the late Duke of
Mantua, Montferrat and Lions, and Sister to Maria Louise Q. of Poland, and Wife
to two Brothers Uladislaus and Casimir Kings of Poland. She was celebrated for
her Beauty under the Name of the Princess Maria. Concerning whom, I add this by
the way, that having been designed Queen of Poland, and understanding that I
was very well acquainted with the State of that Kingdom where I had been twice;
she desired me by the Duke de Noailles to give her some Instructions of it,
which I did several Afternoons; and in Token of her Acknowledgment she would be
Godmother to my eldest Daughter, with Monsieur the Coadjutor of Paris, then
Archbishop of Corinth, who is the famous Cardinal de Retz, the learned
Prelate in the Kingdom.

But to return to the Prince Palatine, Edward: He left three Daughters by the
Princess Anne of Mantua, the eldest of whom is Madam the Duchess of Enguien,
already the Mother of several Princes and Princesses of the Blood. The other
married the Duke of Brunswick Hanouer, who had only Daughters, and the third
the Prince of Solme who was made prisoner at the Battle of Seneff.

If I well remember (for I write all this by my memory which is very good
without the Assistance of any Book) there was another Son of the King of
Bohemia, a very handsome Man, Godson to Prince Maurice of Nassau, called Maurice.

I saw another Son of his, called Philip, who retired to Venice, for an Action
which it is better to pass over in Silence than mention.

Another Son was called Louis, who died young, whom my Father named so for the
late King who was his Godfather, by an Order of his Majesty which follows.

Monsieur de Maurier,
BEing acquainted with the Desire my Cousin the Count Palatine of the Rhine has
to invite me to be Godfather to the last Son which God has given him, I shall
be extremely glad to pay him this Testimony of my Friendship and good
Affection, and that you should perform this Office in my Name when the time is,
first informing him of the Charge I have given you, and renewing the Assurances
of my Affection to him: Referring this to your Care I desire God (Monsieur
Maurier) to keep and preserve you.

Written at Paris the 15th day of November. 1623. Signed LOWIS; and below,
Brulart.



In pursuance of this Order the Ceremony of the Baptism was performed. Prince
Maurice represented the King of Sweden, who was likewise Godfather, and the
Countess of Nassau, the Queen of Sweden. My Father Walked as Ambassador of
France, with the King of Bohemia on his Right Hand, and the Prince of Orange on
his Left. The Ceremony was celebrated with great Pomp in a Church at the Hague
called the Cloistre, where I was present, with my three Brothers. For which
great Honor the King and Queen of Bohemia thanked the King of France by
Monsieur D'Ausson de Villeroul, of the House of Iaucourt, Brother-in-Law to my
Father, who was in their Service, and afterward unhappily perished with Prince
Henry Frederick by the splitting of the Vessel which I mentioned before. The
Pope's Nuncio Resident at Paris hearing of this Baptism, made great Complaints
of it at Court, and said 'twas a great Shame for the most Christian King and
eldest Son of the Church to have his Person represented by a Huguenot in an
Ecclesiastical Ceremony.

The King and Queen of Bohemia left behind them several Princesses eminent for
their Beauty and Merit, one of whom turned Catholic, and is now Abbess de
Maubuisson.

The Princess Louise Iuliane de Nassau, eldest Daughter of Charlotte de
Bourbon, and William Prince of Orange, had also a Daughter by Frederick the IV.
Elector Palatine, who was married to the late Elector of Brandenburg, Father to
the present Elector. I saw (A. D. 1635.) the old Electoress Palatine a
Konigsberg, the Capital of the Ducal Prussia, where she had retired to her
Daughter the Electoress of Brandenbourg after the Disorders of the Palatinate.
These two Princesses were extremely civil to me.

The second Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon and William Prince of Orange, was
Elizabeth de Nassau, Wife to Henry de la Tour, Duke of Bouillon, a Famous
General in the the Wars of Henry the IV She was living in the year 1641. and I
saw her in the Castle of Sedan, after the Battle wherein the Count de Soissons
was killed. She left two Sons and four Daughters who had Children

The eldest was Frederick Maurice de la Tour, Duke of Bouillon, as great a
Captain as his Father, who by the Countess de Bergue had the present Duke of
Bouillon, Great Chamberlain of France, and the Cardinal de Bouillon, a Prince
of great Learning and Merit, and the Count D'Auvergne who has distinguished
himself in our Armies, and other Children, among the rest the Duchess D'Elbeuf.

The second Son of Elizabeth de Nassau and Henry de la Tour Duke of Bouillon,
was the Famous Henry de la Tour, Viscount de Turenne, a General of as great
Wisdom and Valor, who during the whole Course of his Life was held for one of
the firmest Pillars of the State, and in consideration of his extraordinary
Valor and great Services, was interred at St. Denis with our Kings, by a just
Order of his Majesty. He married the Heireress of the House de la Force, whose
Virtue equalled her Birth; she was Daughter to the deceased Duke de la Force,
and Granddaughter to a Marshall of that Name, two Famous Captains, and died
without Issue, but if she had left any Children behind her they could not have
failed of being great Men, being descended on both sides from an illustrious
Number of generous Ancestors.

Besides these two great Sons, Elizabeth de Nassau had several Daughters by
Henry de la Tour, Duke de Bouillon.

The eldest, Anna Maria de la Tour, married Henry Duke de la Trimouille and de
Thouars her Cousin German.

Iuliane de la Tour was married to Francis de Roye de la Rochefoucault, Count
de Roussy, Father to the Count de Roye, very Famous in our Armies.

Elizabeth Wife of Guy Alfonse de Darfort, Marquess of Duras, Father to
Monsieur de Duras, Captain of the Guards du Corpse to the King, Marshall of
France, Governor of the Franche Comte, and of the Count de Lorge likewise
Marshall of France.

I believe that the youngest was called Henrietta de la Tour, Wife to the late
Marquess de la Moissy of the House of Matignon. She is Mother to the Marquese
Du Bordage, and the Count de Quintine, who married a Lady of the Illustrious
Name of Montgomery, as considerable for her Beauty and Merit, as the Greatness
of her Extraction.

The third Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon and William Prince of Orange, was
named Catharine Belgique, who married Philip Louis Count of Hanau a Sovereign
Lord near Francfort on the Main, from whom, besides the Counts of Hanau, is
descended Amelia Elizabeth, Wife to that generous William Landtgrave of Hesse,
who died in the year 1637. after whose Death this Princess, a Woman of a
masculine Courage, continued on the War against the Imperialists, and pursued
the Steps of her Husband who after the Peace of Prague (where most of the
Protestant Princes forsook their Allies and joined with the House of Austria)
had the Courage and Resolution to make head almost alone against so formidable
a Power. Among other Children she left the present Landtgrave of Hesse, called
William as his Father was, the Electoress Palatine Mother to the Duchess of
Orleans, and the Princess of Tarente, Mother to the present Duke de la
Trimouille who is married to the Heiress of the House of Crequi.

The fourth Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon and the Prince of Orange, was
Charlotte Brabantine, Wife to Claude Duke de la Trimouille, and de Thouars,
Count de la Val who had Henry Duke de la Trimouille, dead lately, and Frederick
de la Trimouille, Count de Laval killed in a Duel in Italy by the late Monsieur
Du Coudray Montpensier. I saw him, and knew him in my youth, and because his
upper Lip was slit, they called him Bec de lievere or Hare-Lip. Henry Duke de
la Trimouille had by Mary de la Tour, his Cousin German, formerly mentioned,
the Prince de Tarent and de Talmont who is dead, and who had the Duke of
Trimouille already mentioned by the Princess of Hesse.

The fifth Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon and the Prince of Orange, was
Charlotte Flandrine de Nassau, who returning to the Religion of her Ancestors
died Abbess of S. Croix in Poictiers. She was a very good Princess, I knew her,
but was little, and so deaf that she could not hear without a little Silver
Trumpet.

The sixth Daughter of Charlotte de Bourbon Princess of Orange was Aemilia of
Nassau, Wife to Frederick Casimir Count Palatine, of the Branch of Duponts,
called the Duke of Lansberg.

This is the illustrious and great Posterity of this Fruitful Abbess.

The fourth and last Wife of William of Nassau Prince of Orange, was Louise de
Coligny, Widow to Monsieur de Teligny, and Daughter to the great Admiral de
Chatillon; by whom he had only one Son, the renowned Henry Frederick Prince of
Orange, of whom we shall speak hereafter.

Besides his celebrated Posterity of legitimate Children, the Prince of Orange
left a Natural Son called Justin de Nassau, who led a considerable Body of Men
to the Assistance of King Henry the IV. before the Peace of Vervins. He was a
Brave, Virtuous Man, and died Governor of Breda. I have heard my Father say,
that in the year 1616. having dispatched to Court upon some important Affair, a
Garson Captain, named Lanchere, famous in the Netherlands, where he served.
This Courier in his Return passing through Breda, Monsieur Justin de Nassau
asked him, what News? He answered, nothing considerable but the Imprisonment of
the Count D' Auvergne, since Duke of Angoulesme. Justin de Nassau asking him
the Reason, he replied, bluntly striking him on the Back, (for he was
acquainted with his true Extraction) Don't you know, Sir, that a Son of a Whore
was never good for any thing. A Fault which the poor Lanchere confessed to my
Father when he knew that he was a Bastard. Which is a proof that it is good to
be informed of Pedigrees and Alliances, otherwise we are liable to Mistakes,
and to offend innocently Persons of Quality.

The End of the Life of William of Nassau Prince of Orange.
THE LIFE OF LOVISE de COLIGNY, THE Fourth and Last Wife of WILLIAM of NASSAU
Prince of ORANGE.
THIS Lady had very excellent Virtues, without having the least Mixture of any
Weakness incident to her Sex, through the Course of her whole Life, though it
was very long. She had been married to Monsieur de Teligny before the Famous
Day of St. Bartholomew, which was in 1572. and she died in 1620. The Admiral
her Father esteemed her very much both for her Modesty and Prudence She gained
every Body's Heart and Affection, by her Way of Conversation, which was easy
and graceful; and had an universal Respect, as well for her true Sense, as her
extraordinary good Nature. She was very well shaped, though her Stature was but
low; her Eyes were very beautiful, and her Complexion lively.

The Admiral, who loved her tenderly and passionately, desired to have her well
disposed of, after having cast his Eyes upon all the Persons of Quality that
were of his own Religion and Party, he found none so deserving to marry this
excellent Lady as Monsieur de Teligny, (Son of Monsieur de Teligny a Famous
Captain in the Wars of Italy) in whom he had observed more Valor and Conduct
than in any other Gentleman of his time; besides, his Virtues were so
considerable, that those who writ in Favor of Queen Catharine Queen of
Medices, (who mortally hated the Admiral have confessed, that she and the King
her Son had very great Difficulty to consent to the Death of Monsieur de
Teligny, who had rendered himself agreeable to both of them, by his handsome
Deportment, and by his sincere and noble Way of Acting; which shows that Virtue
is always attractive, from whencesoever it proceeds, and that it has uncommon
Charms to make it self admired and favored, though in the Person of an Enemy.

The Admiral then advised this beautiful Lady to accept of Monsieur de Teligny,
and to prefer a Man endued with so many good Qualities, though of moderate
Fortune, to others, who though they had greater Riches and Titles, were still
less worthy to possess her. But she soon lost so good a Husband, together with
the Admiral her Father, in the cruel Day of St. Bartholomew. Having heard of
this Misfortune in Burgundy, her Mother-in-Law and she, with the young Lord of
Chatillon her Brother, had much ado to get into Switzerland to secure their
Lives, the Massacre of the Protestants being universal throughout all France.

This great Admiral was Son of another Gaspar de Coligny, Lord of Chatillon
upon Loyr, Marshall of France under Louis the XII a Famous General, who died
at Aix, as he was commanding the French Army against the Spaniards, and of
Louise de Montmorency, Sister to Anne de Montmorency, Constable of France. He
left behind him three Sons that were very considerable; Odet Cardinal of
Chatillon the eldest, who was Patron to all the Wits and Learned Persons of his
Age; Jasper Admiral of France, who, before that, had been Governor of Paris
and Picardy; and lastly, Francis de Coligny Lord of Andelot, Colonel General of
the French Infantry. A Son of the Admiral, named Francis was likewise Colonel
of the French Infantry, he signalized himself, as well upon the Bridge of
Tours, by saving the Persons of Henry the III. and the King of Navarre, from
the Forces of the League, and afterward in the Battle of Arques, by which he
gained the Reputation of surpassing the Admiral. He left two Sons by a Daughter
of the House of Chaune de Pequigny; the eldest, who promised much, was taken
off by a Cannon Bullet at the Siege of Ostend; the other was the Marshall de
Chatillon, Father to the Count de Coligny that died young, and the Duke de
Chatillon who was killed at Charenton. The Marshall Chatillon had likewise two
Daughters, one married to the Prince of Montbeliard, and the other named
Henrietta, Countess of Adinton and Suze, had so great a Genius for Poetry, that
she has out done Sappho her self, by her exquisite Works, which are the Delight
of all such as are Lovers of Gallantry.

Madam de Teligny having lived during her Widowhood with a Conduct that made
her admired by the whole World, she was sought to by Prince William of Orange
after the Death of Charlotte de Bourbon, and he married her in the year 1583.
upon the Reputation of her Virtue. But soon after, by a Fatality that usually
snatches from us That which is most dear, she saw him assassinated before her
own Eyes, having had but one Son by him, born a little before his Father's
Death who was the Famous Henry Frederick Prince of Orange.

She had this Advantage, to be Sprung from the greatest Man in Europe, and to
have had two Husbands of very eminent Virtues, the last of which left behind
him an immortal Reputation; but she had likewise the Misfortune to lose them
all three by hasty and violent Deaths; her Life having been nothing but a
continued Series of Afflictions able to make any one sink under them, but a
Soul that, like hers, had resigned her self up so totally to the will of Heaven.

She has told my Father freely, that at her coming into Holland, she was very
much surprised at their Rude Way of Living; so different from that in France,
and whereas she had been used to a Coach, she was there put into a Dutch
Wagon, open at Top, guided by a Vourman; where she sat upon a Board, and that
in going from Roterdam to Delft, which is but two Leagues, she was crippled,
and almost Frozen to death.

There never was one of a more noble Soul, or a truer Lover of Justice than
this Princess.

But it was observable, during the great Differences between Maurice Prince of
Orange her Son-in-Law, and Monsieur Barneveldt, she took part with the latter,
and used all her Endeavors to save his Life, having founded her good Opinion
of him, upon his having been one of the chiefest Confidents of the Prince her
Husband.

This Princess was my Father's greatest Support in his Long Embassy; and
rendered him always agreeable to the House of Orange. This was a Favor which at
that time he stood mightily in need of; for the Court would suffer no person
there, but one that stood fair in the Opinion of that Family. This Protection
was so much the more advantageous and necessary to him, because there were
several Persons of Quality in France that were Brothers-in-Law or Cousins to
Prince Maurice, who used all their Endeavors to render him suspected, and to
have him recalled from that Employment, which was the most considerable that
could be hoped for from France in that Conjuncture.

All Europe was then in a profound Peace, so all Embassies at other Courts lay
dead, and had no Action stirring that was considerable. That of Holland only
was of Importance, by reason of the War, which on their part was managed under
the Conduct of that Famous Captain Count Maurice; and in Flanders by the great
General Ambrose Spinola a Genoese. The English, Scotch, Danes, Swedes, the
Germans those that were Protestants, and the French went thither to learn the
Rudiments of War under the Count; and the Germans, the Italians, the Sicilians,
the Polanders, and the Spaniards, that were Catholics, did the same under the
Marquess; so it seemed as if all the whole Christian World was met in this
little Corner of the Earth to learn how to fight against one another.

France then maintaining diverse Companies of Foot, and some Troops of Horse in
that Country, being very much interested in what concerned the Good of the
United Provinces, who then Employed the Arms of the Spaniards their ancient
Enemies; and having likewise very often an Occasion for the Assistance of the
Dutch Men of War, the Ambassador had continually some matter of Importance to
write to Court, and to dispatch his Couriers thither. Besides the King every
year gave large Sums to the Hollanders for the Payment of the French Troops;
and the Ambassador, besides the Allowance for his Employment, and his Pensions
from Court, had moreover fourscore thousand Livres a year as Treasurer in
Holland; and all the Money went through his Hand. Besides the great Profit of
this Employment, there was likewise much Honor and Pleasure in the Service;
for all the French Nobility, when they came from the University, went to learn
the Art of War under Prince Maurice, as heretofore they had done in Piedmont
under the great Marshall Brisac. In Winter the Hague was full of French Lords
and Gentlemen, who to honor their King, and the Person of his Minister used to
accompany him to his Audience of the States General; and it not being possible
to provide Coaches for two or three hundred Gentlemen and Officers, that
sometimes came together, the Ambassador himself used to march on Foot at the
Head of so splendid a Company; and his Coach to follow after empty.

I shall spend no more time upon the Concerns of my Fathers Embassy, or his
Obligations to the Princess Louise of Orange; but return to my principal
Matter, and relate what I know concerning Philip Prince of Orange, eldest Son
to William of Nassau, by his first Wife Anne of Egmont.

PHILLIP WILLIAM Prince of Orange.
portrait

Philip William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, and Eleanor of Bourbon his Wife.
THis Prince was Godson to King Philip the Second; and when Prince William his
Father was forced to take Arms in his own Defense, he studied in the College
of Lovaine: where, amongst other privileges, it is not permitted to arrest any
person upon what account soever. Notwithstanding this, John Vargas, a Spaniard,
accompanied with several Soldiers of the same Nation, took him thence by
force, pursuant to an Order from the Duke of Alva; in spite of all the clamours
of the Rector of the University, who complaining vehemently and in good Latin,
that their Privileges were violated, was answered by Vargas very incong^uously
in this Barbarous expression, Non curamus Privilegios vestros.

The Prince of Orange his Father complained of it by Public Manifesto's, which
set forth the Cruelty of the Spaniards; and proved that there were neither Laws
nor Privileges, nor Innocence of Age, that could exempt any person from their
Tyranny.

This poor Child was carried Prisoner into Spain at 13 years old, and shut up
in a Castle in the Country, where he could have no Education, and where he
passed the greatest part of his time in playing at Chess, which the Governor
of the Castle had taught him. Toward the end of his Imprisonment, which was
about 30 years, they allowed him a little more Liberty.

This Prince was naturally Complaisant; his Body sat, and wore a very large
Beard. Being carried young into Spain, he continued a Catholic; so the
Spaniards, to justify this unjust detention, said they had brought him thither
only to preserve him from the poison of Heresy, and to keep him in security
from it. During his stay in Spain, the Captain who guarded him having spoke
much to the disadvantage of Prince William his Father, this generous Son,
pushed on by affection for his Father, which animated him to resentment, took
him about the middle, threw him out of the Window, and broke his Neck. He
thought that so bold an action would bring him into trouble: and indeed upon
this occasion there were different advices given in King Philips Council, but
at last it was resolved to use mildness, and indulgence in this encounter;
Gabriel Osorio, a young Gentleman, who was present at the action, having
reported it in favor of the Prince, said the Governor had been wanting in his
respect toward him; so this death was allowed to his just resentment. The
Prince thought himself so obliged to Osorio, for this favorable representation
which he had made of him, that he ever after kept him near his Person, and
bestowed on him a great many favors.

At last, King Philip II. either moved by so long a Captivity, or weary of
punishing the pretended Iniquity of the Father upon the Son that was Innocent,
or rather hoping that his deliverance would raise jealousies and divisions
amongst the Brothers of the House of Orange, (as the escape of Monsieur de
Guise, from the Castle of Tours, had caused amongst the heads of the League)
resolved to release him, after so long an Imprisonment.

Then Count Maurice showed upon this occasion, that he had a Soul that was
wholly disinterested, and let him enjoy all the Estates which were then in his
Possession, as Breda and other places; and Madam the Countess of Holoc, his
Sister by Father and Mother, used him very generously, making him a Thousand
fair Offers, and rich Presents, upon his arrival in the Low Countries, where
they two met at Cleves; but Count Maurice for fear of being suspected,
satisfied himself with visiting him by an Envoy.

Prince Philip came into Flanders with Albert the Archduke, who a little while
after sent him back to Spain, to bring the Infanta Isabella (afterward his
^se) into the Low Countries, to whom her Father Philip gave in Marriage, the
Sovereignty of the Seventeen Provinces; all Europe was very much astonished,
that the Son of a man so odious to Spain, should be chose to execute so
important a Commission, which could not be given him without a large Testimony
both of Esteem and Confidence. He lived afterward in the Court of Brussels
with the Archdukes of Flanders: for the States of the United Provinces
conceived such a distrust of him by reason of this employment, and because King
Philip had reestablished him in his Lands, situated in the Spanish Low
Countries, and in the Franche Comte, which had been confiscated; that they
would never let him come to visit their Provinces, much less to continue there,
though he had often testified his desire of it.

He never appeared there before the Year 1608, when the Truce with the
Spaniards was almost concluded; and in this Journey he did nothing else but
reconcile the Princess Emilia his Sister, with his Brother Count Maurice, who
would never see her since her Marriage with Prince Emanuel of Portugal, because
it had been concluded without his consent.

He married Eleanor of Bourbon, the Sister of the deceased Prince of Conde, a
very virtuous Princess, by whom he had no Children. This Marriage with the
first Princess of the Blood of France, put him in possession of his
Principality and Town of Orange, where the Sieur de Blacons who was Governor of
it, as being a Kinsman of Monsieur the Marshal des Lesdiguierres, who commanded
absolutely in Dauphiny, would not let him enter; but the Sieur de Blacons, had
so many express orders from the King to leave the place; and Monsieur des
Lesdiguierres had an order to make them be precisely obeyed, that at last the
Prince saw himself possessed both of the Place and his Sovereignty; for before
he had been looked upon as an Enemy, having followed the Archduke Albert when
he was at Calais, and would make King Henry IV. raise the Seige of Amiens.

Prince Philip farther confessed to his most intimate Friends, That in his
whole Life he was never in so great pain and such strange uneasiness, as at the
time when the battle of Newport was fought; for the Archduke, who presumed
very far upon his own Forces, thinking them as much superior in Valor, as they
were in Number, to those of the Hollanders, had boasted, that if he had gained
the day, he would send the two Brothers, Maurice and Henry Frederick, bound
hand and foot as his Prisoners into Spain. So he sent out his Scouts on every
side, kept all his Horses ready sadled and bridled in his Stable, and his
People all in a condition to retire suddenly into some place of safety,
thinking that his Brothers being lost, he likewise must perish by the
Spaniards: so that during the whole fight he was at his Prayers, and made
ardent and continual Vows that his Brothers might obtain the Victory.

During the Truce, which was concluded for 12 years, he made a Voyage into
Holland, in the Year 1615, with Madam the Princess his Wife, and they lived
generally at Breda. My Father had the honor to see them, and converse with them
often, and he was so far in both their good graces, that they helped him to
overthrow a great many calumnies which had been invented to draw upon him the
indignation of Monsieur the Prince of Conde, and several other Lords and great
Persons of the Kingdom, who during the Minority of the late King, had been
several times in Arms upon diverse pretenses; it having been told them by my
Fathers Enemies that during these commotions, he had acted with too much heat
and violence against them, having caused several Vessels full of Arms to be
seized, and stopped diverse Officers from Holland, who would have come over to
their Service; to all these disobliging actions were added some discourses to
the disparagement of these great Persons, which my Fathers Enemies had likewise
imputed to him.

These Princes had so far given credit to such Impostors, that not being able
to seize upon my Fathers Person, they testified their resentment by sacking his
Castle of Fountain Dange, near Chateleraut, which they pillaged by their
Troops; but Mary de Medices, the Queen Mother, who had knowledge of this
disorder, being then at Poitiers, made him ample satisfaction; so that he had
no further loss, than of several original Papers, and ancient Titles which were
not in her Majesty's Power to repair.

The King himself upon this occasion wrote to my Father as follows,

Monsieur de Maurier,

Then after this are two pages in Cipher.

AS for what remains, I am very sorry that your House has suffered for the
Services you have rendered me. I will takecare of my Servants, and encourage
them to do well by the Protection which I give both to their Persons and
Estates. The Sieur de Puysieux may acquaint you with what I have ordered upon
this account; continue only to serve me with care and fidelity as you do at
present, and you shall receive both the Honor and the Profit of it. I pray God
keep you Monsieur de Maurier, under his holy and safe Protection. Written at
Poitiers, Jan. 20, 1616. Signed Lewis, and a little lower. Brulard.


The Queen likewise wrote him the following Letter.

Monsieur de Maurier,
THE King, my Son, answers your dispatch by this Bearer, whose intentions I am
assured you can so well execute, as they may produce the effect which we
desire, pursuant to your good Counsels; we confide therefore in your affection
and care in this encounter; nor shall I add any further Command. You know
likewise what considerations he has made you, for the House which you have lost
in his Service; to which, if you continue firm with the same fidelity and
diligence, you shall receive all possible Content and Advantage. I pray God
keep you Monsieur de Maurier in his holy and safe Protection. Written at
Poitiers the 20th of January, 1616. Signed Mary, and a little lower Brulard.


Monsieur de Puysieux writ to him likewise, toward the end of a long dispatch.

AS to what concerns your Interests, and the loss and damage you have sustained
in your House of Fontayne, I have not been wanting to represent it to their
Majesty's, in all those circumstances which were requisite; at which they are
much concerned, and do not intend that any of their Servants shall suffer upon
account of the good services they have rendered them. They have ordered you 2000
Crowns for a Recompense of your loss, and would have you know, they do it upon
that consideration; and have thought fit to increase your Pension to 1000
Crowns a Year. I wish I could still testify more to your content, the extreme
desire I have of serving you, that you may know that I am truly your very
humble, and very affectionate Servant,

From Poitiers, Jan. 20th 1616. Puysieux.


Prince Philip, and Madame his Princess, had so much goodness as to disabuse
the Princes and Grandees, who had raised a war, which they called the War of
the Henrys, because the greater part of the Heads of that Party were so called;
Mounseir the Prince was called, Henry of Bourbon; Monsieur du Main, Henry of
Lorrain; Monsieur du Longeville, Henry of Orleans; and the Duke of Bovillon,
Henry de la Tour. They told them all, that these injurious Speeches were pure
inventions to animate them against my Father. They acquainted them likewise
that whilst he acquitted himself of his duty, he all along continued to
preserve that respect which was due to them; That for what remained there was
no reason to object it to him as a crime, to have served his Master faithfully.
And that he could not without betraying his trust, and endangering his own
ruin, but execute such orders as came to him from Court.

I remember that I saw them at our House in my infancy, and particularly the
Princess, who had the goodness to make very much of us, and did my Father the
favor to think fit, that one of my Sisters, who was born at that time, should
have the honor of bearing her Name of Eleanor: She was presented in Baptism by
Prince Henry Frederick of Orange, who was her Godfather. This Daughter was
married to the Baron de Mauze, near Rochelle, Brother to the Marquess de la
Villedieu, and died without Children, in 1660. She was a Woman who painted the
best in France, and writ the most correctly, whose Letters were all of a
vigorous and masculine Style, without one word that was unnecessary.

Prince Philip died at Brussels, in the beginning of the Year 1618. He had the
Hemorrhoids very much in^amed; and Gregory a German Chyrurgeon having hurt him
with the Syringe whilst he gave him a Clyster, a Gangreen insued, and it was
impossible to save him. The Princess his Wife died likewise in the same Year.

After his Death, Count Maurice his Brother took upon him the Quality of Prince
of Orange, and inherited his whole Estate; whereas before he was contented with
the bare Title of Count.

Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange.
THis great Captain has falsified the Proverb, which says, The Children of
Heroes are generally good for nothing; for though he was the Son of a most
excellent Father, who left behind him an immortal Glory, yet he has not only
equaled him in his prudence and greatness of Soul, but has likewise surpassed
him in the Art Military, and great Performances; As the Father for 20 years
together made the discourse of all Europe, so the Son for 40 years
successively, did it much more than all the crowned Heads in Europe: for from
the Year 1584, when he came first into action, to 1625, when he died, Prince
Maurice was never mentioned without admiration and astonishment, as being held
for one of the greatest Captains that has ever yet appeared: In truth, though
Nature does not always make extraordinary efforts to produce great men in the
same family and succession, yet the great Actions of the Father are powerful
Incentives to stir up their Children to imitate them: The Glory of their
Ancestors being a Light, which directs their posterity to march in those
generous paths which they have trod before them If the virtue of strangers has
often stirred up some courageous Souls to do great things, (as that Greek whose
rest was discomposed by the Triumphs of Miltiades;) sure domestic examples
must be much more moving, that they may not incur the shame of having
degenerated.

Upon this occasion I shall here relate what I have often heard my Father say
in his latter years, That he had undoubtedly past his life in the Country like
some of his predecessors, had not it been for the example of James Aubrey, his
great Uncle; who by his Virtue, his Knowledge and his Eloquence, discharged the
office of Advocate General to the Parliament of Paris, was Lieutenant Civil of
the Council to Henry the Second, and his Ambassador Extraordinary to England;
where he concluded a Peace between Henry the Second, and Edward the Sixth; and
left behind him the reputation of being the French Demosthenes and Cicero, by
that famous Plea which he made, pursuant to an order of the King, for the
people of Cabrieres and Merindol; and which Monsieur the Chancellor de Hopital
admired so much, that he has translated great part of it into Latin verse. My
Father therefore thought, that by his labor he might arrive to honorable
employments; and so well ordered the Talents which God had given him, that he
likewise was employed in Embassies, and admitted to the Council of his Princes.

Prince Maurice of Orange from his very childhood discovered the passionate
desire he had to follow the glorious steps of his Father; and took for the body
of his Device the Trunk of a Tree, cut off so as to seem about two foot high,
from whence there grew a vigorous Sprout, which apparently would renew the
noble Tree which had produced it, with these words, Tandem fit circulus arbor,
At last the Sprout becomes a Tree: To show that he would revive the glories of
his Father.

I do not pretend to represent the great Actions of this Prince in all the
particulars; I shall not say any thing that may be found in common Annals, nor add
to the number of those who transcribe other People; my design is only to draw
the Portraicture of his Person and his Manners, to inform the World of some
transactions of his Life which are not known, and to set forth the causes of
those great differences which happened between him and Mr. Barneveld; which, as
it was thought, would have overturned the Commonwealth, by an intestine
division that has remained almost to this day, and threatened its ruin if it
had not been prevented.

But before we come to these things, it is necessary briefly to represent his
principal Actions, and to tell you, That Prince Maurice had a great stock of
Constancy and Courage from the 17th year of his age, when he was called to the
government of Affairs upon the decease of his Father; for he was not cast down
by that torrent of Success which attended Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma,
Governor and Captain General for the King of Spain, who had then taken Bruges,
Ghent, Dendermond, Deventer, Nimeghen, the Grave, with a great many other
places, and even Antwerp it self, (which was held for impregnable) by a Siege,
which was looked upon as a Miracle of the Age; having stopped the River
Schelde, and repelled the force of the Sea by a Dyke, which was then held as a
thing impossible, and which afterward set an Example for undertaking the same
thing at Rochel. Prince Maurice was not more disturbed by the confusion and
disorder that had reigned for a long time in the Commonwealth, occasioned by
the haughty conduct of Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, Captain General for the
Queen of England in the United Provinces, whose insupportable Pride, and
unmeasurable Ambition, did them more prejudice than the Sums of Money which he
brought, and the Troops which he commanded, ever contributed to their Service;
for four entire years the States were reduced to strange Extremities, so that
it was thought impossible for this young Prince to rid himself of so great
Difficulties; and to cure those Evils which were occasioned by the Intrigues of
Spain, and the Treachery of some of the Earl of Leicester's Dependants; who,
after their return into England, sold the most important places to the
Spaniards. To be short, as the Affairs of this World do not always continue in
the same posture, and are subject to a perpetual change, so that good Fortune,
which till then had favored the Duke of Parma in all his Enterprises, of a
sudden came over to the Party of Prince Maurice; for the Spanish Navy, which
they had entitled The Invincible, and was designed to swallow up England, and
the United Provinces, was destroyed in the year 1588. by the Fleet, and good
fortune of Queen Elizabeth; the third part of so great a Navy scarce returning
into the Spanish Havens, after having undergone incredible dangers upon the
Coasts of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and this inestimable loss was
accompanied with the mortification which the Duke of Parma received before
Berghen ap-zoom, which he had besieged; Prince Maurice having forced him to
quit his Enterprise, with the entire ruin of his Reputation.

After this Success the Prince, for the course of 20 years, to the time of the
Truce, had fortune still so favorable to him, that he conquered 38 or 40
Towns, and more Fortresses, and defied the Spaniards in open Field at three
signal Battles: besides, he obtained several great Victories at Sea, as well
upon the Coast of Flanders, as upon that of Spain and the Indies, by the Valor
of his Lieutenants and Vice-admirals.

But nothing gained him so much Reputation, as the happy Surprizal of the Town
and Castle of Breda, which belonged to his own Propriety. He made himself
Master of it in 1590, by the stratagem of a Boat of Turfs, without any effusion
of Blood, or losing so much as one Soldier upon so important an occasion; and
since this remarkable Action has made so great a noise in the World, it may not
be unnecessary to give some account of it, in as brief terms as possible.

A Boatman, called Adrian Bergues, who furnished the Garrison of Breda with
Turfs, being discontented with the Spaniards, proposed a way to Prince Maurice,
how to surprise the place, by placing some Soldiers in the bottom of his Boat.
The Prince seeing the probability of the matter, gave the management of this
great design to Charles de Heraugiere, a Walloon Gentleman, Native of Cambray,
Captain of Foot in his Guards, reputed a Man of Bravery and Conduct. As soon as
he received this Order, he made choice of 70 Soldiers out of several Companies,
and some Commanders, whose Courage had been tried. These he put at the bottom
of the Boat, where they were placed very uneasily, as being forced either to
lie down or stoop, the rest of the Boat being filled up with Turfs to a very
great height. It was extreme cold weather; besides, they were up to the knees
in water, which came in by a leak, which at last they fortunately stopped. The
excessive cold made them cough very much, but above all, Matthew Helt, a
Lieutenant, (whose name ought to be remembered here in testimony of the Courage
he showed upon this occasion) not being able to hinder himself from coughing as
they came near to the Castle, drew his Sword, and desired his Comrades to kill
him, that the Enterprise might not fail, and he become the cause of their
ruin; but the Boatman hindered him from being heard, by often pumping, as if
his Boat had took water.

The Garrison, consisting of Italians, wanted Firing, the Soldiers, because of
the Ice, helped to draw the Boat by a Sluice within the walls of the Castle, as
the Trojans brought the wooden Horse into their City; which gave occasion to
the Poets of the time, to compare the taking of Breda to that of Troy; but
withal remarking this difference, that the Horse made the Enemies Masters of
Troy, from whence proceeded its ruin, whereas this Boat put the right Lord
into possession of Breda, who thereupon caused it immediately to flourish.

Prince Maurice having spread the report that he had a design upon
Gertrudemberg, made the Surprizal of Breda become more easy; for Edward Lanza
vechia, who was Governor of both places, ran to that which he thought was most
in danger. So the Castle being without a Commander was easily carried. As soon
as Heraugiere had made himself Master of it by the death of 40 of the Enemy,
Prince Maurice, attended by the Counts de Hohenlo and Solmes, Francis Vere the
General of the English, Justin of Nassau the Admiral, and the Sieur de Famars
General of the Artillery, being entered into the Castle with several of his
Troops, was afterward received into the Town, whence the Italian Garrison,
which, for the most part, consisted of Horse, ran, with full speed, by the way
of Antwerp.

Heraugiere, with a great deal of Justice, was made Governor of Breda, and
Lambert Charles a French Man, a brave Soldier of Fortune, was made Sergeant
Major: I saw him afterward when he was Governor of Nimeguen. There were Medals
stamped upon so considerable an occasion, which had these words upon one side,

Breda a Servitute Hispanica vindicata ductu Principis Mauricii a NASSAU. 4
Martii 1590.

Breda delivered from the Spanish Yoke, by the conduct of Prince Maurice of
NASSAU. March 4. 1590.

And upon the Reverse was represented a Boat, with these words,

Parati vincere aut mori, prepared to overcome or dye.

One of these Medals was given to each of the Soldiers in the Boat, as likewise
a Sum of Money, with the promise of future advancement; Adrian de Bergues the
Boatman had likewise a Medal, and was rewarded with a very large Pension.

This Surprizal may occasion this necessary Reflection, That ye ought never to
trust the guard of two Frontier places at the same time to one only Governor,
who has but too much trouble to preserve his own Government from the
neighboring Enemy, whose mind is always intent, and his eyes open, for some
opportunity to be able to surprise him.

The taking of Hulst in Flanders, was a very considerable Action, and that of
Gertrudemberg much more so, by reason of a long and difficult siege, in sight
of the Spanish Army, consisting of 30000 Men, commanded by the old Count Peter
Ernest of Mansfeldt, in the absence of the Duke of Parma, who was then in
France, with Succors for the League: This old General could never force the
young Prince in his own Lines, nor oblige him to come out of them, though he
presented him battle each day continually; so that when Count Mansfeldt said
one day to a Trumpeter whom P. Maurice had sent him, That he admired his
Master, who was a young Prince, full of heat and courage, would always contain
himself within the covert of his own retrenchments; the Trumpeter answered him,
That his Excellency of Nassau, was a young Prince, who desired to become one
day such an old and experienced General, as his Excellency of Mansfeldt was at
present.

The year following he took the great and famous Town of Groninghen, Capital of
the Province; he likewise took, and retook Rimbergues, and seized upon Maeurs,
and the Grave, Towns belonging to his own Patrimony; having by the death of
several Spaniards revenged the public injuries and those of his Private Family.

The Reputation of Prince Maurice was very much increased, by the long and
memorable defense of Ostend, where the Spaniards having lost more than
Threescore Thousand Men, in a Siege that continued above 3 Years, and exhausted
their Treasures by the expense of above two Millions, at last became Masters of
a bit of ground which might seem to be a burying place rather than a City.

At the time of this loss Prince Maurice was so happy and diligent, that to
return it with Usury, in a few days he seized upon the Town of Sluise in
Flanders, which was of more consequence than Ostend, that had cost so many Men,
so much Time, and so vast a Treasure; upon which Theophilus says very well in
the Ode he made for the Prince of Orange. Much time, and many years the
Spaniards spend
Before their Forces gain Ostend.
But, Sir, when you resolve to seize a Town,
Few Days suffice to beat its Bulwarks down.
Each Day of yours much more importance bears.
Than all that space of time, which mortal Men call Years.


This Ode did not displease Prince Maurice, and tho he was naturally an Enemy
to Flattery, and Vain glory, yet he recompensed this Poet with a Chain of Gold,
and his Medal, to a very great value.

But this Prince showed at the battle of Newport, where he overcame the
Archduke Albert, that he knew as well how to defeat a numerous and well
appointed Army in open field, as to defend places, or else to force and
surprise them. The Archduke, and the Duke d'Aumale were wounded in the fight,
Francis Mendoza Admiral of Arragon, Master de Camp, was taken Prisoner, with
a great many other Commanders, and even the Archdukes Pages, whom Prince
Maurice sent him back very civ^illy, without any Ransom. All the Cannon, the
Baggage, and above 100 Cornets and Colors, remained in the hands of the
Conqueror, who saw above 6000 Enemies dead upon the place, and had all other
marks of a full and entire Victory; which made several People say, because this
great Success happened upon the 2d day of July, that the Fortune of the House
of Nassau was changed, seeing that 300 years before, upon the same day of July,
the Emperor Adolphus of Nassau, had lost his Life and Empire near Spire, in a
Battle against Albert of Austria; and that the same day Maurice had revenged
the disgrace of his Ancestors, by the defeat of the Archduke Albert, who was a
Descendant from the former Albert of Austria.

A little before the fight, there was a dispute of Honor, between Prince
Maurice, and Prince Henry Frederick his younger Brother, who was then but 17
Years old; for when the Elder desired him to retire into some place of Safety,
that in case of any misfortune, he might defend his Family, and his Country;
Prince Henry being offended, said, he would run the same fortune with himself,
and live or dye by him.

Prince Maurice showed that no ill success could daunt his courage, for the
Resolution he had taken to give Battle, was not altered notwithstanding that
the night before the Archduke had defeated the Count Ernest, whom the Prince
had sent to seize a pass, with 2 Regiments of Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse, that
were all cut off, and several Colors, with 2 pieces of Cannon taken.

It is remarkable that the Prince, to take away from his Army all hopes of a
retreat, and to show his Men that they had nothing to trust to, but their Arms,
made all those Vessels that brought them into Flanders to be sent away, for
which he was much commended by the Admiral of Arragon, as the thing which had
gained him the Victory by, the necessity that was laid upon his Soldiers to
fight boldly, as having no prospect of Life but in the defeat of the Spaniards;
so he told his Men before the fight, that they must either overcome the Enemy,
or drink up all the water in the Sea. There came out at that time a magnificent
Inscription upon this Battle, in honor of Prince Maurice, which is this.

Anno 1600 secunda die Iulij, Mauricius Aransionensium Princeps in Flandriam
terram hospitem traducto exercitu cum Alberto Archiduce Austriae conflixit,
copias ejus cecidit, Duces multos primumque Mendosam coepit, reversus ad suos
victor signa hostium centum quinque in Hagiensi Capitolio suspendit Deo
Bellatori.

In the year 1600, the 2d day of July, Maurice Prince of Orange, having brought
his Army into Flanders, then possessed by his Enemy, fought with Albert
Archduke of Austria, slew his Forces, took several Commanders, and especially
Mendoza, then returning Conqueror to his Country, he hung up 105 of the Enemies
Colors, in the Council House at the Hague, to the Honor of God the Disposer of
Victory.

This was not his first Essay of a Field Battle, for otherwise he might have
passed for one, that was good only at the taking of Towns, but he had long
before forced the Duke of Parma to raise the Seige of Knotsemburg, over against
Nimiguen, having defeated 7 Troops of his best Cavalry; a disgrace which the
Duke lessened, by the necessity laid upon him, by Orders from Spain, to go and
succor Roan.

In the year 1594, he had likewise at the Battle of Tournhout, defeated and
slain the Lord de Balancon, Count de Varax, General of the Artillery of Spain,
who commanded a body of 6000 Foot, and 600 Horse, of which, besides the
General, above 2000 were left upon the place, with several Prisoners of Note,
amongst whom, a Count of Mansfeldt was one; there were 38 Ensigns taken, with
the Cornet of Alonzo de Mondragon, which were all hung up in the great Hall of
the Castle at the Hague, for a perpetual Memorial.

And upon this occasion, I shall here relate, how an Ambassador of Poland,
being come from King Sigismond, to exhort the States General to reconcile
themselves to the King of Spain, whose Power he magnified so far, as that
sooner or later it would entirely subdue them, and speaking as if he would
frighten them with lofty words, full of Vanity, and according to the Eloquence
of his Nation: Count Maurice, who was then present at this Harrangue, upon his
going out of the Assembly, led the Ambassador into this Hall, where he showed
him all the Colors and Cornets, taken from the Spaniards at Knotsemburg, and
Turnholt, and without using many words, let him understand, that in reality the
King of Spain was not altogether so invincible.

But as Prince Maurice was victorious at Land, so he was not less successful at
Sea, having always got great Advantages over the Spaniards, by the Conduct of
his Vice-Admirals.

They were assisting to the ruin of the Spanish Flota, styled the Invincible,
and brought several of the Galeons into Zealand.

In the year 1596, John de Duvenvorde, Lord of Varmont, contributed his help to
the Earl of Essex, in taking the Town of Cales, and burning the Spanish Fleet,
for which Queen Elizabeth returned thanks to the said Sieur de Varmont, by a
very obliging Letter, which extremely commends his Bravery.

In the year 1599, the Vice Admiral Peter Vanderdoes, seized upon Allagona,
Capital of the Canary Islands, where he forced the Spaniards to fly into the
Mountains, and followed them even thither, and then having sacked and burnt the
place, returned victorious to his own Country.

In the year 1603, Don Frederick Spinola, not being able to endure that these
Vessels of Zealand should always lie before the Haven of Sluise, went out, with
8 Galleys, and some other Vessels of War to chase 'em thence; He was slain in
the fight, and his Fleet so ill handled, that it was constrained to retreat
into Sluise with a considerable loss: not to mention here a great many other
considerable advantages obtained in the Indies, and diverse other parts of the
World, over the Vessels of the Castilians, and the Portugueses.

This is what I shall say in general of this great Prince, only adding, that in
the year 1622, the Truce of 12 years being expired, and the Marquess Ambrose
Spinola, having besieged Berghen ap Zoom, with all the Forces of Spain, the
Prince of Orange made him raise the Siege, being assisted by Count Ernest of
Mansfeldt, and Christian Duke of Brunswick, that he had expressly sent for out
of Germany. These Generals had taken Arms in favor of the King of Bohemia, and
passing through Brabant, had defeated at Fleuru, (if my memory does not fail
me) Don Gonsalvo of Corduba, who was sent to oppose their passage: In the fight
the Duke of Brunswick had an Arm cut off as he was forcing a Barricade, which
obliged him to wear one of Silver, which I myself have seen.

There was great rejoicing through all the United Provinces for this happy
Victory, public Thanksgivings were ordered to be made in every Town, where
there were such prodigious Bonfires, that they seemed to be all on fire. So
this Count of Mansfeldt, and the Duke of Brunswick contributed to the Prince of
Orange's Glory, which seemed to have been decayed and worn out of Men's minds by
so long a Truce, but was renewed and revived throughout the whole World, by so
illustrious an Action.

And because that here there has been occasion to speak of these two Men, who
in their time were the scourges of Mankind, it may not be amiss to let the
Prince of Orange rest a little, and to relate what I know of their manner of
Proceedings, and their Principal Encounters.

This Count Ernest was a Bastard of the famous House of Mansfeldt, which has
produced great Generals; he was a Man so subtle and cunning, that some have
rightly styled him Ulysses Germanicus, or the German Ulysses. He was so bold,
as to maintain the Quarrels of the Elector Palatine, elected King of Bohemia,
with a great deal of Constancy and Resolution, against the Family of Austria;
He had several successes both unfortunate and happy; at last being called into
Holland to the succor of Berghen ap Zoom, I remember that I saw him there; he
was then about 50 years old, fair, much wrinkled, of a good stature, but a
little stooping; He always wore a gray Hat, without a Hatband, and said that he
would never put it off till he had made his Fortune, which I myself have heard
him speak. France, that too late understood its true Interest, (for it had
unadvisedly sacrificed the Elector Palatine to the fury of the House of
Austria, as I shall more fully relate hereafter) assisted him with a Sum of
Money, which my Father paid him, and with the succor of 4000 Foot, under the
conduct of Monsieur de Mantereau, who had his Winter Quarters in East
Frizeland, beyond the River Ems, with the Troops of Count Mansfeldt.

This New Attila afterward ravaged the lower Saxony, from whence being chaced
by the Count de Tilly the Emperors General, he marched through the Country of
Brandendurg into Silesia, where he had some fortunate Successes, and from
thence at last retired to Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania. A little after,
as this unquiet Spirit, fruitful in new Expeditions, was going to Venice, to
propose some League, passing through Bosnia in November 1626, he was taken with
a violent pain in his Bowels, of which he died, not without suspicion of
Poison, and was buried at Spalatro. He was a man of great Courage, who run
through and ravaged the greatest part of Germany, having spread the terror of
himself both within and without the Empire, and so frightened Champaigne and
Paris itself, when Montpelier was besieged, where the late King was then in
Person, that the most part of the Inhabitants of that great City, seeing their
King and his principal Forces upon the Confines of his Realm, conveyed
themselves, with what they most esteemed to the City of Orleans, to avoid a
Fire which consumed all things that were found in its way: Some Blockheads of
Paris being frightened with his approach, commonly called him Bloody Bones, and
used his Name to frighten Children that were troublesome.

As to Duke Christian of Brunswick, he was of the illustrious and ancient House
of Brunswick, one of the richest and most powerful in all Germany, which at
present maintains Armies both within and without the Empire, and which having
conquered the Duchy of Bremen, assists the Kings of Spain and Denmark, the
Hollanders and Elector of Brandenburg with its Forces. This Duke Christian was
commonly called Halberstat, because he was Bishop of that place, and sometimes
Dol Hartzoch, which is as much as to say, one that acts like a Madman. He was a
Prince of good Mein, and well made; he was very brave, but his Courage had
something more of Brutishness than true Valor: for when he saw a Workman on the
top of a Steeple, he took no greater pleasure than to fetch him down with a
Stone, which in my time he did in Holland: He had a great Passion for the Queen
of Bohemia, from whom he had taken an English Glove, which I saw him wear, tied
to a String in his Hat, and hanging below the brims of it.

Having raised an Army in Lower Saxony, and not having wherewithal to pay it,
he turned a Statue of St. Liberius into Money, which was much bigger than the
Life, and at that time in the Cathedral Church of Paderburn. This Saint
Liberius had been Bishop of Man's. Such a beginning enticed him farther, and
knowing that at Munster there were 12 Apostles, all of Silver, of a prodigious
bigness; he went thither, and seizing upon the place, marched directly to the
great Church called the Dome, accompanied with all his Colonels and Captains,
made a Speech to these Apostles, reproaching them with their Idleness and
Disobedience, in not observing the commands of their Master, to go instantly
through all the World, in these words, Go throughout all Nations; swearing that
he would make them Travelers, and become obedient: So he immediately commanded
to coin them into Rix Dollars, with which he paid his Army, and so spread them
throughout all Germany. He had taken this for his Device, Gottes freindt, und
der Psaffen feint, which is to say, Friend of God, and Enemy of Priests, whom
he slew, or at least guelt them, without any remission; at last this outrageous
Spirit departed in 1626, at Wolfenbottle, of a burning Fever in the prime of
his Youth.

After having raised the Seige of Berghen op Zoom; Maurice Prince of Orange did
nothing considerable besides the Project he laid for the surprise of Antwerp,
but Heaven and the Winds were opposite to his design; he had given so good
order for every thing, the Undertaking was so well laid, and he promised to
himself such a happy Issue, that he said that it was God alone that could
hinder the Success.

Prince Maurice before he had resolved to ruin Mr. de Barneveld, honored my
Father with his esteem and confidence, insomuch that he undertook his defense
against those that had aspersed him, as his elder Brother Prince Philip, and
his Princess had done before; which was very well known to all those who were
then in Holland, and which appears evidently by a Letter which Prince Maurice
writ to Monsieur de Villeroy, after the Peace of Landau, wherein he not only
justifies my Fathers conduct, but moreover tells him, that the Court had no
Person thereabouts, who could serve France so much as my Father, and that was
so agreeable to him and the States General. The Letter is this.

SIR,
AT my return from Zeland, upon the instances that were made me by Monsieur de
Maurier the Kings Ambassador, for the Re-establishment of the French Officers
in their Employments, I used my endeavors for the satisfaction of their
Majesty's, the States having taken the same Resolution, their Act shall be
executed; I am very much pleased that the Troubles in your Kingdom have been so
happily composed, and particularly that your Labors have so well succeeded in
it, wishing that this repose may be of long continuance to the prosperity of
their Majesty's, which is the thing that I desire: besides, although the Care
and Diligence which Monsieur Maurier has showed in his faithful Execution of
the Kings Commands, may speak sufficiently for themselves, yet I must render
this Testimony to his Behavior, that it has been such as has served their
Majesty's heartily, and to the purpose, without giving any one reason to
complain, having managed all his Actions, which are very well known to us, with
Modesty, Respect and Honor, and thus much I can give you certain assurance of;
whereas if any other reports may be spread to his Prejudice, they must do great
injustice to his Conduct and Integrity: The States General and all of us, are
fully satisfied with his whole proceedings, and think their Majesty's cannot
hereafter make use of any other Minister, that will be more faithful and
serviceable to themselves, or more agreeable to this Commonwealth, which, as I
have reason, I must declare to be my own opinion; and with that I shall
conclude, together with assurance of my desire to serve you, and prayers to God
to give you health and long life.

Sir, your very affectionate Servant Maurice of Nassau.


This Letter, and several others of the same Strain, which Madam the Princess
Dowager of Orange, and the principal Persons in the Country had writ to Court,
contradicted the Aspersions of several Persons of Quality, who had assured the
Queen Mother and her Ministers, that my Father was disagreeable to the Prince
and States General.

In short, Prince Maurice, upon all occasions, gave my Father very signal marks
of his Esteem and Friendship; so that in the Year 1615, having a Son born, the
Prince would be his Godfather, and gave him his own name of Maurice, with a
little Picture of a great value, this is he who has been known by the name of
Villaumaine, and who having past all his Life in Holland, where he was born,
arrived by 40 years Service and his own Merit, without any favor, to the
command of Colonel; He had a mortal aversion for this last war, for he drew
his extraction from France, where his Family was established; on the other side
he saw himself obliged to defend the place of his Birth, where he had all his
effects, and where he was at last arrived to an honorable Post, by an
extraordinary Patience: never Man had more true Friends than he, and they of
all Nations, so that he gained the Esteem of all the considerable Frenchmen
that had known him in Holland, amongst others of Monsieur de Beringhen, chief
Querry to the King, of Mr. de St. Romain, who was Ambassador in Portugal and
Switzerland; and toward his latter days, of the Princess of Tarentum: He lived
in great Esteem for his Valor and Fidelity, and died at the Head of his
Regiment in the Battle of Senef, very much lamented by all that knew him, and
by the Prince of Orange himself, who placed a great Confidence in him. I hope I
shall be pardoned for the tenderness I had for this only Brother that was left
me, which occasioned this digression.

But let us now come to the description of Prince Maurice's Person and Manners,
even to the secrets of his Life, which have not hitherto been divulged, as I
have learnt them from my Father, and several Noble Persons of that Country.

This Prince was very strong, and indefatigable in Labor; he appeared lesser
than he was, by being full and fat; his Face was plump and ruddy, his Beard
fair, which he wore very large and broad; he always made use of little pleated
Ruffs about his Neck: He never clothed himself but after the same fashion, with
the same Stuff, and that always of a sort of brown or musk color; his Doublet
was of Silk with Gold stripes, the rest of his Clothes were Woollen, but his
Cloaks, or long Coats, were faced with Velvet; I speak of his common Habit, and
not of those that were designed for great Feasts and public Assemblies. He
often wore in his Hat a Band of Diamonds, he was never without a Girdle, to
which was fastened a sort of Belt for his Sword, that was gilt: I never saw him
in any other Habit, and yet I have minded him a thousand times, at the French
Church, in the Castle at the Hague, which heretofore was a Chapel for the
Counts of Holland, and often at my Fathers, whither he used to come, either to
eat, or play at Chess, which was his chief diversion; for during the Truce,
when he was not busy in war, he often played at it, and for that reason looked
upon such as did so. Hehad a great affection for Mr. de la Caze, a brave
Captain of Bearn, whose Son served in the Troops of Holland, and played very
well at it. This Mr. de la Caze had no Revenue more certain, than what he won
of the Prince at this Play, scarce ever parting from him without 9 or 10 Crowns
of Gold, which was worth more to him than his Company. They never played for
above one at a time, without ever doubling, but la Caze that he might not
dishearten the Prince, would let him win one Game in three or four.

This Monsieur de la Caze has told my Father, that the Prince would be very
much vexed when he lost, which happens even to the greatest Men; and the reason
is evident, because it is their own fault if they lose, for this Game does not
depend at all upon chance, but good conduct; and it is very provoking to see
ones self surpassed by others in Knowledge or Judgment. Monsieur de la Caze
said, that when the Prince had lost, and it was late before they gave over
Play, the wax Lights being almost burnt out, he would pull his Hat down over
his Eyes without rising from his Seat, or bidding him good Night; but at such
times as la Caze had let him win, the Prince would be very pleasant, conduct
him on his way, and command his Pages to light and wait upon him to his
Lodgings; Such particulars as these show the temper of People, and that the
greatest Men are not without their weaknesses. In relation to Chess, Prince
Philip of Orange told my Father, that he had heard for certain in Spain, when
he was there a Prisoner, that an old Spanish Lord having been winner all the
Evening at this Play, and continuing so good part of the Night with King Philip
the 2d, without being so complaisant as to let him carry one Game, and having
remarked much disturbance in the Kings Countenance, he told his Children upon
his return home, that he must depart the day following, and never think of
coming back to Court, where there was nothing to be done or hoped for, either
for himself or them, because he had beat the King at Chess all that Night, and
should never be forgiven for it.

Prince Maurice used to make himself very merry with us Frenchmen, who to
cloth themselves after the Fashion of those times, wore slasht Doublets, with
one single Shirt, which made those freeze that looked upon them, being so thin
clothed, and shivering, in the midst of Winter, which is very long and sharp
in Holland; and as he was jesting one day upon them in a great Company, one of
these Gentlemen told him, he had a way to deceive People, for he had two Shirts
on, and that nothing was so warm as two Shirts; the Prince was pleasant, cried,
Lay a wager upon it; to which the other replying, That he knew nothing warmer
than two Shirts, Prince Maurice answered, That undoubtedly three were warmer
than two; and that the weather was cold enough for him to make use of them.

Prince Maurice related to my Father, that one Winter at the Hague, when there
was a great many German Princes of his Kindred there, they met one day at one
of the chief Inns to divert themselves, where after having drank till scarce
any of them could see, one of the Company proposed the putting out the Lights,
and throwing Stools at one another all night long, which being done, one of
these sovereign Princes found his Arm broke, another his Knee out of joint,
another his Skull cracked, and those that came off best had horrible Bruises and
black Eyes; after this they were all forced to go to Bed, and consider what to
do with themselves. This Story the Prince learnt from Monsieur Luc his Surgeon,
a Frenchman, very expert in his Profession, who was called to their help upon
this occasion: Prince Maurice smilingly asked my Father, if this was not a very
fine and agreeable diversion for the Princes his Relations, and whether they
had not extraordinary reason to boast of their Pastime.

Prince Maurice loved Mathematicians and Engineers very well, and amongst
others of that age, he very much esteemed Monsieur Alcome, one excellent in the
profession, to whom he gave a large Pension, though he had a very good one from
the King; but there was no body could teach the Prince in that Science, he
having contrived several fine Inventions for the passage of Rivers, and fiege
of places, so that in his Age, he served for a Pattern to Engineers, as well as
Captains.

He would not suffer his Troopers to wear straight Boots, saying great
inconveniences might arise from thence, being often in haste to get on
Horseback; ridiculing us Frenchmen, for affecting to have fine Legs, so that
they would be whole hours in getting their Boots off, or on; and to set them an
example, he had his own Boots so large, that he could almost leap into them. He
did not approve those Italian Grooms who taught their Horses to prance, which
he said was very dangerous, and had been the death of several People; he had no
People to manage his Horses, and was content if they would only turn to the
right and left.

During the Truce, the King of France sent him a magnificent Present of Spanish
Horses by Monsieur de Pluvenelle, Querry to his Majesty, who had the honor to
teach the King to ride, being a person of great Reputation, and the most famous
Man of his time in that Art.

The Prince, though he was very vigilant and laborious, yet had so great a
Quietness of Mind, that so soon as ever he was in Bed, and his Head laid upon
the Pillow, he fell into so sound a Sleep, that it was a difficult matter to
wake him; but knowing his own infirmity, that he might not be surprised in time
of War, as his Father, who was of the same Complexion, was like to have been in
his Tent, near Malines, after having given necessary orders, he made two Men
watch by turns every hour, with command to wake him, if any accident should
happen. Marquess Spinola was of a humor quite contrary to the Prince, and could
never sleep if he had the least business upon his Spirits; the Marquess was
very lean, the Prince very fat, and their Tempers very different; the one being
dry and choleric, the other plump and sanguine.

Prince Maurice, being one day in a good humor, told my Father, That Elizabeth
Queen of England, by a weakness common to her Sex, had so extraordinary a
desire to be thought handsome, that when the States General had sent her a
magnificent Embassy, which consisted of the principal persons of their Country,
accompanied by a great many young Gentlemen of the United Provinces, a
Hollander who was in the Ambassadors Train at their first Audience, having
looked earnestly upon the Queen, told an English Gentleman, with whom he had
been acquainted in Holland, that he saw no reason why the Queens Beauty should
be generally spoke of to so much disadvantage; that he thought People much to
blame for doing it, that to him she seemed very agreeable, and that if he
durst, he would let her see what passions she was able to raise in a young
Gentleman; with several other such like discourses, often looking upon the
Queen, and then applying himself to the Englishman. The Queen who took more
exact notice of the private persons than the Ambassadors, as soon as the
Audience was ended, sent for the Englishman, and commanded him on pain of her
displeasure to tell her, what his discourse was with the Hollander, being
certain that it was concerning her, as was evident by their mein and behavior.
The Gentleman made a great many excuses, saying it was not worth her Majesty's
knowledge, at last the Queen being very urgent, he was forced to declare the
whole matter, and confess the extreme passion which the Hollander had testified
for her Royal person. The event of the affair was this, that the Ambassadors
were each of them presented with a Chain of Gold worth 800 Crowns, and every
one of their Retinue with one of 100 Crowns; but the Hollander who thought the
Queen so handsome, had a Chain of 1600 Crowns, which he wore about his Neck as
long as he lived.

This Queen, who had a Thousand great qualities, had still the vanity of being
thought handsome by all the world, and I have heard my Father say upon this
occasion, that being sent to her, in every Audience that he had, she would pull
her Glove off a hundred times to show her hands, which were very white and
handsome.

But to return to the character of Prince Maurice, he was naturally good and
just, and died with the reputation of an exemplary Honesty; to show that he
deserved this character, I need only relate the following Story. Two of his
Domestics who were Frenchmen, one called John de Paris, who waited upon him in
his Chamber, the other one of his Halberdeers, named John de la Vigne, having
assassinated a Jeweller of Amsterdam, who had Stones of a great Value, which he
would have sold the Prince; he was so far from protecting them, (as several
Persons of Quality would have thought it concerned their Honor to do) that on
the contrary, he himself prosecuted the Actors of so inhumane a Butchery, and
made them both be broke alive upon the Wheel.

If this great and just character of Prince Maurice, might be any way in the
least sullied in the opinion of some persons, it was occasioned by his contests
with Monsieur Barnevelt, who had been one of the principal Ministers, and
Confidents of Prince William his Father, and who after his Death got the
sovereign Command both by Sea and Land, to be put into the hands of Prince
Maurice; for People being in a terrible confusion after that disaster, and
several seeing themselves deprived of their principal support, being desirous
to have recourse to the Amnesty which King Philip offered them, he said
publicly that matters were not in so desperate a condition; that they ought to
take courage, they had indeed lost a real support by the Death of the Father,
but that he had left a Son, then studying at Leyden, who was capable to fill
his place, and gave very great Testimonies of his inclination to Virtue; so by
the Persuasion and Authority of this great Man, Prince Maurice was no sooner
come out of the College, but he was placed, as Commander, at the Head of
Armies; upon this account the Prince looked upon him as his Benefactor, till
time made him think, he had reason to alter his opinion, and use other measures
toward him:

Whilst Monsieur de Barnevelt was for the continuance of the War, which the
Prince desired to uphold his Authority, they kept a very fair Correspondence;
as likewise in the year 1598, when he met King Henry IV. in Britain to diswade
him from making the Peace of Vervins. But when Barnevelt showed himself
inclinable to a Truce, after a War of 40 years, which had so exhausted the
State, that it was impossible, by reason of the prodigious number of Debts, to
have the War continue any longer; it was then that this Prince, who thought the
Truce would give a mortal blow to his Glory and his Interests, could no longer
conceal his resentment, but fell openly at variance with Monsieur de Barnevelt,
even in public Conferences, so far as to give him the Lie, and one time to
lift up his hand against him. Prince Maurice used all imaginable endeavors to
persuade King Henry IV. to break the design of the Truce, as inconsistent with
the welfare of France, since the Spaniards, being no longer engaged against the
United Provinces, would without all doubt turn their whole Forces against his
Kingdom: He spread several Papers which accused those who were for the Truce,
of being Traitors, and holding aCorrespondence with the Spaniards, but Monsieur
de Barnevelt, made it be represented to the King by such Ambassadors as had
their dependence upon himself, what he had several times before told to Mr.
Buzanval his Ambassador, and Monsieur the President Iavin, who had been
dispatched Extraordinary Envoy into Holland; That it was necessary for the
United Provinces, to use the King in the same method that sick and wounded
persons do their Physicians, or their Chyrurgions; That is, to discover plainly
their Wounds and Infirmities, whereby his Majesty may see, if it lay in his
power to afford them such remedies, as would heal them; That their State was
charged with excessive Debts, whose Interest was to be paid to private persons,
that had lent their Money to the Public, and had scarce any thing else
remaining for their own subsistence; and that except that Interest was exactly
paid, the greatest part of them must be left to starve. That the several
Imposts which were established to maintain the charges of the War, were not
sufficient for its continuance, and that 13 or 14 Hundred Thousand Crowns were
over and above necessary, to pay the Interest of their Debts, and the Troops
which were then in their Service; but that if his Majesty would supply them
with what was necessary for their continuance of the War with Spain, they would
pursue it more vigorously now than ever.

The King, whose Treasure was exhausted, seeing that he would be obliged to
furnish them every year with at least 4 Millions of Livres, consented to the
proposal of the Truce, which was concluded by his Authority, notwithstanding
the perpetual opposition which Prince Maurice made to it by his Creatures. So
the Truce being concluded, in the year 1609, by Monsieur Barnevelt's
persuasions, it is not to be admired, if the Prince of Orange bore no good will
to him; seeing France had followed the sentiments of that great Man, and had so
little consideration for hisInterests and Council: After this time, the Prince
sought occasions to revenge himself of Barnevelt, but before he came to his
final resolution, he endeavored to gain him over, by the means of the Princess
Dowager of Orange, his Mother-in-law; but this did not succeed, for Monsieur
Barnevelt intimated to the Princess, as if Prince Maurice had a design of
possessing himself of the Sovereignty of the Country, and that it was upon this
account he so manifestly pursued his Ruin.

The Prince finding that Barnevelt was not to be brought over, began to
encourage such persons as were jealous of that Power and Authority which
Barnevelt had gained upon the States; but the Prince managed this affair with
such discretion, that those, whose ruin perhaps he might design, should have
least reason to distrust him, or provide for their own Safety; pursuant to
this, he bestowed upon them all imaginable Favors; he gave to Monsieur de
Grouneveld, Monsieur Barnevelt's eldest Son, the Office of Master of the Dykes,
and Forests in Holland; to Stautembourg his youngest Son, he gave the
Government of Berghen ap Zoom, which is one of the principal Keys of the
Country.

Among others, he brought over Francis Aersens, Son of Cornelius Aersens,
Secretary to the States, originally of Brabant, who had been a long time
Resident, afterward Ambassador in France: This Man was Author of all the
violent Councels, and principal Executor of the passion of the Prince; he was a
Man of Ability, and very bold, who aspired to new things, that so he might
become great; eloquent to the public damage, and desirous to heap up Riches by
any means whatsoever. The Prince likewise made use of several other persons,
who were of an unquiet and ambitious temper, willing to fish in troubled
waters, and to make their advantage of the disgrace such people were fallen
into, as they before had reason to envy.

But as it was not safe, so neither did it seem just, to fall upon Monsieur
Barnevelt, and his Dependants, till they had rendered themselves suspected, and
odious to the people; the difference which happened at this time upon the
matters of Religion, between the Followers of Gomarus, and Arminius, gave an
occasion for the Peoples disgust against him: for this diversity of opinions
had so divided the State, that there were great quarrels in the Schools, and
even fights and murders, upon their coming out of the Churches; what one
Minister had preached in the Morning, after Dinner was confuted in the same
Pulpit, by another Minister of a contrary opinion; so all the Doctors and
Ministers having banished Charity, which is the chief Foundation of the
Christian Religion; instead of instructing People in true Piety, and explaining
the Word of God, that breathes nothing but peace, and which is sufficiently
intelligible to minds that are meek and well disposed, amused themselves only
with handling such questions, as the vulgar never could comprehend; and all
full of Animosity and Revenge on either Party: employed their whole Wit and
Knowledge to make their Adversary appear ridiculous, employing Scurrility more
than Arguments against one another. These different Sermons, in which the
Ministers mutually accused one another of Ignorance and Heresy, sowed
divisions amongst the People, each following the opinion of his own Minister,
as being incapable to judge for himself in questions so difficult, as those of
Free Will, Grace, or Predestination; like as it happens at this time, when
Ladies of the greatest Quality, follow some the opinion of the Jesuits, and
others that of the Doctors of Port Royal; besides this division increased
daily, and not only took deep root throughout the whole State, but an infinite
number of printed Books, swarmed in every place, and entertained men's minds
with Schism and Bitterness. The Gomarists, wedded to the opinion of Calvin,
maintained that God had sentenced by an eternal Decree, what men were to be
saved, and what were to be damned; that this Sentence drew the one into the
path of Piety and Salvation, whilst it left the other buried in all that Vice
which is common to humane Nature.

The Arminians said, on the contrary, That God who was a most righteous Judge,
and a most merciful Father, made this distinction between Sinners, that those
who repented of their faults should obtain Grace and Life, whereas such as were
disobedient and obstistinate in their crimes, should be punished for them; That
God desired all would come into the right way, and had given them good precepts
for to follow, but that there was no necessity that might force either the one,
or the other, it depending upon each Man's will, either to damn himself, or to
be saved.

In the heat of the disputes, and in several writings, the Arminians accused
the Gomarists of making God the cause of men's sins, and maintained that by a
sort of destiny, they made Souls immovable, being submitted to the irrevocable
fatality of Eternal Life or Damnation.

The Gomarists on the other side, blamed the Arminians for blowing up men's
minds with so great an arrogance, as to think they could possess the greatest
of Treasures, which is a Soul well constituted, without being beholding to God
alone for it, but to the Merits of their own Good Works. These Opinions were
defended with so much heat and positiveness, that I have heard Daniel Tilenus
(a Famous Arminian, Native of Gaulsberg in Silesia, who had been driven from
Sedan, by the Ministers of a contrary Opinion, and who died at Paris in an
extreme old Age) often say, he had much rather embrace the Opinion of Mahomet
than that of Calvin; alleging that the Turks believed in God, whereas the
Calvinists did not, forasmuch as the principal Attribute of God was to be
infinitely Good and Merciful; that the Turks acknowledged a God of such a
Nature, but that the Calvinists framed one that was Cruel, Pittiless, and that
damned his own Creatures with a set deliberation. Upon the mention of Tilenus I
shall add, that he disputed against Cardinal Perron, and that the Conference
which they had together was Printed; and that tho he was a German, and upon the
Frontiers of Poland, yet there was no Person in France, who writ in our
Language with more Elegancy and Neatness, which I am certified of from my
Father, who received a thousand Letters from him, and who was a competent Judge
in this matter, as being himself esteemed to have had one of the best Pens of
the Age; He lived in the same Country of Silesia, which has likewise produced
Monsieur de Borstell, who had the same Talent at writing, and was so much
esteemed by Madam des Loges, and immortalized in the Letters of Monsieur Balza^.

The States General being often assembled to remedy these disorders which daily
happened in all their Cities, by reason of these divisions upon the account of
Religion, it was the advice of Monsieur Barnevelt, that all Ministers, and
Professors of Divinity, should be prohibited to speak concerning Grace, and
Predestination, either in the Pulpit or the Universities; that all Printers
likewise should be forbid to publish any books upon this Subject; that both
Parties should live together in Brotherly Union, without scandalously dividing
the Church; that this Doctrine was so subtle, and so incomprehensible to the
Common People, that the whole Country would be at rest and easy, as soon as
nothing more should be spoke concerning it: that there remained a field large
enough for the Ministers to comfort and instruct their Flocks, by exhorting
them to the practice of Gods Commandments and Christian Virtues, by explaining
to them the Old and New Testament, which leads Men's Minds to nothing more than
Peace and Charity: In short, he added that the book of Predestination was a
book so difficult and obscure, that the greatest Doctors could not see a Letter
in it, and that the very Angels had much ado to comprehend it.

This Council was so wise and prudent that at the same time it was followed by
the French King, who seeing his Kingdom disturbed with the same Questions, and
threatened with a dangerous Schism, by the disputes and frequent writings of the
Jesuits, and such as were called Iansenists; imposed a perpetual silence to all
these Writers.

But Prince Maurice and his dependants opposed themselves to the sentiments of
Monsieur Barnevelt and his Party, as esteeming them to lie under a suspicion of
holding correspondence with the Roman Catholics and the Spaniards, and that by
this means they would bring back Popery into the United Provinces, which was
the only thing that could ruin that Republic, and Francis Aersens being a
bold Man that could write and speak fluently, he was ordered to make use of his
Pen upon this Occasion.

There were several papers published at this time, among which, one was called
Praevia Detectio, another Dissertatio Necessaria, a third Hispanici Concilii
Arts: and whereas Monsieur Barnevelts Party had commended his wisdom and the
pains he had taken for the good of his Country, and the Counsels he had given
so much for its advantage; so Monsieur Aersens by these writings accused him
openly of being in League with the Papists, and corrupted by the Spaniards to
ruin the true Religion, and bring his Country back again into Slavery.

Monsieur Barnevelt answered Aersens, with a very large Apology, wherein all
his long services for the good of the State were represented to the sull; but
this gained no ground upon those who were affected to Prince Maurice, who had
the Power in his hands, and the Soldiers all depending upon him, and then the
common People could not but follow him, as having no reason to think he could
have any design to their prejudice, who had so long exposed himself to a great
many dangers in the defense of their Liberties.

Monsieur de Barnevelt seeing himself thus attacqued, complained to the States
of Holland, as his Judges and Natural Lords, who took him into their protection
by an authentic Act; but he having counseled those of Utrecht to preserve
their new Garrison which they had levied for their particular safety, upon
their own charges, affirming they might do it by the privilege of their
Province; the States of each Country having reserved their Rights by the Union
of Utrecht: The Prince of Orange and his Party imputed this action to him as a
crime, and made it pass for an attempt against the good of the confederated
Commonwealth. The Prince soon after went to Utrecht, assisted by some Deputies
of the States General, disarmed the new Levies, and changed the Magistrates, as
at Leyden, Haerlem, Amsterdam, and other places; afterward he displaced
several of the States of Holland, and substituted others in their room; a
little while after by an extraordinary Order of Eight Persons under the Title
of States General, Prince Maurice caused Monsieur Barnevelt to be arrested, he
was put into the Castle of the Hague, in the same Chamber where Admiral Mendoza
of Arragon had heretofore been Prisoner; at the same time Monsieur Hoguerbeis,
a Person of merit and known capacity was arrested likewise, with Monsieur Hugo
Grotius, Pentionary of Rotterdam, a Man of great Learning, and the Sieur de
Leydenberg Secretary to the States of Utrecht.

They were accused of several crimes against the State, amongst others, that
they would have laid the whole Country in blood, and betrayed it to the
Spaniards.

The Prince to secure himself from any hatred that might be drawn upon him in
this conjuncture, declared that whatever he acted, was in the Name of the
States General, as principal Conservators of the safety of the Republic.

The Prisoners on the other side remonstrated, That though this was done under
the Name of the States General, yet that in effect it proceeded only from the
power of the Prince, who was armed, and followed by the greatest part of the
common People; that the change at present made in the Commonwealth was so
considerable, that it ought to astonish all those who were true Lovers of the
Laws and Liberties of their Country.

That as for the States General, they had no Jurisdiction over the Subjects of
particular Provinces, much less to arrest Persons of their Quality, who were
deprived of their Employments without any process, against all Justice, and in
opposition to the States of Holland, who were their only Lords and Superiors;
that their true crimes were their opposition to the ambitious desires of Prince
Maurice, their obedience to the States of Holland, who were their Masters,
their Counsel to some Towns to preserve their Privileges, and to arm
themselves for their own safeties; and finally their refusal to give consent to
the calling of a General Synod, which they thought would cause more mischief
than advantage to their Country: that they were oppressed by their Enemies under
the Title of States General, who are the Deputies of Provinces, only for the
affairs of Peace and War, for the receiving proposals from foreign Ambassadors,
and reporting them to the particular States of each Province; the States
General having no other lawful Right of intermedling with the affairs of the
Provinces, each of which are sovereign States, and have time out of mind been
Masters of the Life and Fortune of their Subjects; that this was only a
specious Pretext, by which the Neighboring Princes, who did not know the true
constitution of the Provinces, might be hindered from defending them, and to
put some sort of color upon so great an Injustice; they alleged farther for
themselves the ancient Customs sworn to by the Earls of Holland, the Dukes of
Burgundy, and Charles the 5th, which for several ages had been inviolably
observed, and for whose preservation their Ancestors had taken Arms; That as
for a General or National Synod, they could not agree to it, because it would
seem, as if the Seven Provinces were but one Nation, contrary to the privilege
of particular Provinces, which had always provided for matters of Religion in
their own bounds, which was so true, that when the States of the 17 Provinces,
assembled at Brussels, having instantly demanded of Prince William of Orange,
that the Roman Catholic Religion might be exercised in his Governments,
returned answer, That this depended only upon the States of Holland and
Zealand. That they appealed from these Judges as incompetent, and visibly
suspected of being their Enemies, to such Judges as were natural and proper to
their cause.

At the same time Prince Maurice with the States General, called a National
Synod in the Town of Dort, and several Divines of Foreign Countries were
invited thither; in this Assembly the Opinion of Arminius was declared to be
Heretical, scandalous, and tending to the Re establishment of Popery in the
United Provinces, and in pursuance of this decree, Utembaugarts, and all the
other Ministers and Doctors suspected to be of that Opinion, were dismissed
from their Cures, and banished the Country, and forbid to return under pain of
severe punishment.

After this, Monsieur Barnevelt and the other Prisoners, were tried before
Judges nominated by the States General; these Judges Condemned Monsieur
Barnevelt to death, upon the 12th of May 1619. My Father had several times
interceeded for him in the Name of the French King, and Monsieur de Boissise
had been twice sent Envoy Extraordinary into Holland, to exhort the States to
consult their proper welfare, and treat their Prisoners with moderation.

Pursuant to the Sentence, he was executed in the Court of the Castle at the
Hague, being 66 years old, where the Scaffold was raised against his Chamber
Window, opposite to the Prince's Apartment, who was said to have beheld this
Execution from his window by the help of a prospective; upon which some people
made their Reflections.

Prince Maurice and the States had less regard to the Intercession of France,
because the King of England was in their Interest, as being persuaded that
Monsieur Barnevelt was none of his Friends, and that he had done him a sensible
displeasure, by causing the English Garrisons to retire from the Town of
Flushing, the Brill, and the Castle of Ramekius; which the English held for a
security of those Sums which Queen Elizabeth had lent to the States General.
Monsieur Barnevelt (being the chief of a very splendid Embassy) made great
Instances to the King to recall his Forces from their Towns; King James
promised him publicly and solemnly that he would do it, provided they paid the
Money due to him, thinking he had imposed an impossible condition upon them,
considering how the Provinces had been exhausted by their Taxes; but Monsieur
Barnevelt having got the Kings word, applied himself with so much diligence to
the collecting of the Money, and by his Credit the people bled so freely, that
in a little time these vast Sums were carried into England, which King James,
though very much surprised at, was obliged to receive, and consequently to recall
his Garrisons; and the remembrance of it stuck so close, that he had always a
great aversion for Monsieur Barnevelt.

Prince Maurice had another reason to make him have less regard to the
intercession of France, which was because he was not in the least afraid of
their resentments; Lewis the 13th was then come out of his Minority, and a new
Favorite was absolute Master of Affairs, who had more regard to the raising of
himself and two Brothers, than to meddle with the Affairs of other Countries,
which appeared in the business of the Elector Palatine, King of Bohemia; for
though by reasons of State he should have been maintained, to weaken the House
of Austria, which at that time was become formidable, and because this Elector
was one of our principal Allies, who might always have so divided Germany, as
that one of the Parties should have assisted us when we had occasion; yet
Monsieur de Luynes promised the Marquess de Mirabel, the Spanish Ambassador,
then at Paris, to ruin the Affairs of the Palatinate, upon condition that
Monsieur de Cadenet his Brother, should marry Mademoiselle de Pecquigny and
Chauln^s; one of the most noble, most beautiful, and richest Heiresses of her
time, who was educated at Bruxels, in the Family of the Infanta Isabella.

Upon these hopes, which were not ill grounded (for the Spaniards had given him
their word) Monsieur de Luynes sent a splendid Embassy into Germany, consisting
of Monsieurs d' Angouleme, de Bethune, and de Chateau-neuf; who deceived the
Protestant Princes, that were armed for the defense of the Palatinate; for it
was concluded by the Treaty of Ulme, where all the Princes of both Parties were
assembled, to hearken to the propositions of France; That both Catholics and
Protestants should lay down their Arms, and the Quarrel be decided by the King
of Bohemia, and the Emperor only. The Protestant Princes suffered themselves to
be abused, and did perform the Treaty honestly, so that the Marquess of
Ansbatch, the General of their Forces, had orders to disband them; but the Duke
of Bavaria, and the other Catholic Princes of the same Parties, sent their
Troops by the Danube to the Emperor, who overthrew the Prince Palatine at the
battle of Prague. After this, Monsieur de Luynes, having thus sufficiently
raised his Family, began to consider what might be for the Interest of the
Kingdom, and thereupon councelled the King to weaken the Hugonots, who as he
told his Majesty, had the Insolence to make a distinct State within themselves,
and had hitherto been held invincible; hereupon Monsieur de Luynes seized upon
all their important places, except Montauban, from Saumur to the Pyreneans, and
after his death, in the year 1622, pursuant to his Maxims Montpelier was taken,
and at last (some time after) Cardinal Richelieu counseled the King to attack
Rochel, which he gained, and razed immediately; and having in that destroyed
the principal strength of the Hugonot Party, their entire ruin soon followed,
upon the Duke of Rohans retreat to Venice, who had a long time upheld them by
his Valor and Industry.

Prince Maurice was sufficiently informed of this condition of France, by the
Dukes of Bovillon, and dela Trimoille, who had married his Sisters; besides
these, he had a great many Friends in Germany, where several of the Sovereign
Princes were related to him, either by his own side, or his Mothers, who was
Daughter to Maurice Duke of Saxony. The Elector Palatine was his Nephew
likewise, and he afterward was chose King of Bohemia, which he accepted, as
it is said, upon the advice of Prince Maurice, and the persuasions of the
Princess his Lady, though contrary to the Counsels of King James, his Father
in-law, who thought a young Prince was not capable to manage an Affair of such
Importance, and resist the power of the House of Austria; protesting that he
would neither succor him with men nor money, except he quitted this design,
which would infallibly become his ruin: but the Duke of Bovillon persuaded the
Elector Palatine to the contrary, as having some power over the young Prince,
who was his Nephew, and had been bred up with him at Sedan; and the Duke
discovered some Ambition to have his Nephew a King, when he wrote to some
Friends at Paris, that whilst Lewis was making Knights at Fountainbleau, he was
making Kings in Germany. But this Royalty did not continue above 6 months, so
that his Enemies called him a King of Snow, because the single battle of
Prague, in the beginning of the year 1621, lost him all Bohemia, Silesia,
Lusatia, Moravia, with the adjoining Provinces; and the year following, the
Spanish Forces marching from the Low Countries, deprived him of the Palatinate
itself, in which he was not re-established, but by Gustavus Adolphus's Descent
into Germany; Charles Duke of Lorrain, who died many years after, one of the
oldest Captains of the age, signalized himself very much at the Battle of
Pragne, where Count Harcourt was likewise, tho very young.

But to return to Prince Maurice; France being so apparently inclined to the
Interests of Barnevelt's Party, its Ministers, which were then in Holland, used
to say, that Prince Maurice would have pretended to the Sovereignty of the
United Provinces, but that such People, who in the beginning had been hottest
against Mr. Barnevelt, and most devoted to the Prince; yet when they fathomed
his designs became averse to them, notwithstanding their former obligations;
besides the Exile, Death and Imprisonment of persons who had been so
considerable in the State, and had likewise a great many Friends and
Dependants, wrought a mighty change in the Peoples affections to the Prince,
which appeared very visibly; for whereas before when he went through the Towns
of Holland, every body came out of their houses praying for him with
extraordinary Acclamations; now, as he was one day going through the
Marketplace at Gorcum, which was full of people, there was scarce a single man
that pulled his Hat off to him: For the common people were so variable, that
the very Writings which heretofore had made Mr. Barnevelt become suspected by
them, were now produced as so many motives for their pity and compassion
toward him. To this they added, that the assistance which probably he might
have hoped for, from the Elector Palatine, was since the loss of the battle of
Prague, no longer to be expected; and the Emperor Ferdinand the 2d, having by
the happy success of his Generals, Count Tilly, and Wallestein, made himself
absolute Master of all Germany, even to the Baltic Sea, where he established
an Admiralty at Wismar, reduced all the Princes, and Imperial Towns under his
Obedience; Prince Maurice could no longer expect Succors from Germany, whatever
Friends he might heretofore have had there.

But those who adhered to the Interests of Prince Maurice, and the House of
Orange, acquitted him of a Design so prejudicial to the good of the United
Provinces, by maintaining that it was a perfect Artifice of his Enemies, to
make him become odious to the People of the Low Countries; for said they, what
probability was there, that Prince Maurice ever had it in his thoughts to
become Sovereign of his Country, since after the extirpation of Barnevelt and
his party, he never made one step toward it, which he might have done, having
then no farther obstacles.

Prince Maurice did not long survive a great Conspiracy, which the Sieur de
Stautemburg, youngest Son of Mr. Barnevelt, had laid against his Life, which
being happily discovered some hours before its execution, obliged him to punish
a great number of the Conspirators, throughout the pincipal Towns of Holland.

The Prince was never married, but had several Natural Children, the most
considerable of them all was Mousieur de Beververt, a man very well made, and
very brave, he was Governor of Bolduc, after whose death the Prince of Tarentum
had that Government, and was succeeded by Colonel Fitz Patrick, a Scotchman.

Prince Maurice died in the Spring of the Year 1625, when the Marquess Spinola
besieged the Town of Breda. And as some pretended it was for grief that he did
not succeed in the Sovereignty; so others said that it was, because he could
not relieve that place, which was his own propriety, and had been surprised by
him 34 years before.

FREDERICK HENRY. Prince of Orange.
portrait

Henry Frederick of Nassau Prince of Orange, and his Posterity.
THis Prince was born the 28th of February 1584. He was of a good mein, and of
a strong make, and his parts were as eminent, as his person was agreeable. He
was a very great Captain, and equaled the Glory of his Brother Maurice, who
taught him the Art of War, and lead him into the most dangerous Adventures; and
amongst others, at the battle of Newport, where though he was very young, he
contributed much by his Valor to the gaining that great Victory in a
conjuncture, where the Army of the States General had before them a powerful
body of men commanded by Albert the Archduke in person, and the Sea behind
them, so that it was absolutely necessary, either to make themselves Conquerors
or to perish.

When Prince Maurice died, in the year 1625, he advised his Brother Henry
Frederick his chief Heir, to marry Madam de Solmes (who was come into Holland
with the Queen of Bohemia) whose Beauty and good Carriage were accompanied with
a great deal of Modesty and Prudence; she died a little while ago, being very
ancient, and her Name was Amelia, Daughter to John Albert Count de Solmes.

This Prince had one Son, and four Daughters, the eldest of these Ladies
married Frederick William the Elector of Brandenburg, by whom she had several
Children. This Prince has the greatest Territories in all Germany, they
reaching from the Low Countries to Poland and Curland.

The 2d Daughter Henrietta Emilia, married the Count de Nassau. The 3d
Henrietta Catherina, married John George Prince of Anhalt; and the 4th married
the Duke of Simeren, the youngest Son of the House Palatine, who died a little
while ago.

The Son was called William, was born in 1626, and died the 6th of November
1650, after the business of Amsterdam. He was a Prince naturally ambitious, and
of great Courage, so that his Enemies reported of him, that though he was so
young, yet he aimed at the execution of that design, which had been laid to
Prince Maurice's charge, by Barnevelt and his Adherents. His sudden death
changed the whole face of affairs in the Low Countries. He had great prospects
from his alliance of England, having married Princess Mary, Daughter of Charles
the first King of Great Britain, by whom he left Prince William Henry of Nassau
(now King of England, etc.) who was born the 14th of November 1650, some days
after the death of his Father.

This young Prince William was very remarkable in his Infancy, for his
reservedness and moderation; his Prudence increased as he grew up, and such
people as were nice observers of merit, and took great notice of him, have
affirmed, that never Prince gave greater hopes than he, even in the most tender
years. He suffered with an admirable temper the injuries of Barnevelt's Party,
which revived itself in the persons of the two Dewits, who were Brothers;
expecting with a silent patience, which was greater much than that of his
Ancestor, the great Prince William, what time would produce, and what favorable
occasions might occur, at last for his Re-establishment; for having by a solemn
sentence been deprived of all the Employments of his Family, after the sudden
death of the Prince his Father; he was restored to them again, at the beginning
of the last war, by an Ordinance that was made on purpose for it.

His Rise and Re-establishment were owing to France, which having made great
Conquests for almost 8 years together; the greatest part of the Frontier Towns,
and several capital places of the Provinces Utrecht and Zutphen among others,
were rendered up at the very sight of their Armies, though these places were
provided with large Garrisons, yet being composed of Officers and Men without
any experience, the King of France became Master of more than 40 places, in
less than two months. These misfortunes, which seemed to be the presages of
greater, and had put the United Provinces into the utmost consternation, gave
occasion to the People to complain of the ill conduct of the two De Wits, who
governed till that time; and furnished those who adhered to the House of Nassau
with a reasonable pretext to affirm, that the Princes of Orange were only able
to uphold their tottering State, and defend them against their most potent
Enemies; and that, as heretofore, they had protected them against the Tyranny
of Spain, so it was they alone who could preserve them from the Fury and
Violence of the French Armies.

The Grandmother of this young Prince, who was a Woman of a Masculine courage,
and suffered the indignities that had been offered to the House of Orange with
great impatience, having beheld it, in its greatest splendor, was not a little
serviceable in stirring up all the creatures and dependants on the House of
Nassau, who were very numerous; these people being angry to see themselves
fallen from their credit, the principal employments being given to the Sons of
Burgomasters; and seconded by the fury of the people, that were grown out of
all patience at so many disasters, and the sight of a victorious Army, through
the very bowels of the Country, massacred the Enemies of the Young Prince, who
was afterward restored to the possession of all the dignities that had
belonged to his Ancestors, which is to say, that of General of their Forces,
Stadt-holder and Admiral, which were moreover by a solemn decree made
hereditary to his Family.

Upon this occasion it cannot but be admired, how so powerful a State, that had
made head for Fourscore years against the Crown of Spain, had taken such large
Towns, and gained so many Battles, and had become formidable at Sea to all the
Princes of the world, having carried its Arms and Victory to the farthest part
of the Earth; that this State, I say, which had rendered itself so famous by the
long defense of Ostend, which has equaled the reputation of the famous Sieges
of Tire, and the ancient Troy, should be reduced in less than two months to the
very brink of its ruin; and it had assuredly been destroyed in the year 1672,
if by a desperate resolution it had not resolved to save itself by drowning
part of the Country; as a Pilot who throws all his Cargo overboard, during a
furious Storm, that so he may preserve his Men and Vessel.

But those who knew the constitution of these Provinces, and were not ignorant
that discord is the plague and certain destruction of the most flourishing
States, were not so much amazed, considering it was more than Threescore years
since that Country had been torn in pieces by two contrary Factions, which
threatened its subversion without any Foreign Forces: This Gangreen likewise had
so seized upon the most noble parts of the United Provinces, that in the year
1672, by a strange fatality and an unaccountable passion, the greatest part of
the chief Persons in that Country, desired the loss of their Land Army, and the
defeat of the Prince of Orange, whose Rise and Power they so much envied: For
this reason they had not sufficiently provided his Army with necessary
provisions, whilst they applied their principal cares to increase the Fleet, to
resist the Kings of England and France, who attacked them jointly with a Navy
of above Fourscore Men of War.

But it is not less surprising to consider the expedition the French made in
this Campaign, when as these people for fear of becoming subject to the House
of Orange, allied to these great Monarchs, had committed a considerable fault
in their Politics: for after the Peace of Munster, imagining themselves to be
in perfect security, and that they had nothing more to be afraid of, and being
acknowledged Sovereigns by Spain, they might rather give Laws than receive them
from any body. They disbanded the greatest part of their old Forces, that were
Strangers, and those experienced Officers who had gained so great Glory to
their Country, imagining that the surest means of freeing themselves from the
Slavery which they thought themselves threatened with, was to take from the
Prince of Orange the support of his Government, by reforming those Troops which
looked upon him as their Master, having taken an Oath to him, and were devoted
perfectly to his service.

Besides the principal men in the Country had, as they thought, some interest
in this change, for they gave all the Commands in the Army, and the Government
of places to their own Relations, thinking by the assistance of this Soldiery
to sortifie themselves, and at the same time to weaken the House of Orange; but
they found by sad experience, that endeavoring to avoid one inconvenience, they
fell quickly into a greater. For having given the great Employments in the
Army, and Government of places to Sons of Burgomasters, and Deputies of Towns;
People without any experience, and who wanted Tutors for themselves, rather
than to be Commanders; when a strong and powerful Enemy made War against them,
these young men showed none of their Northern courage in this storm and danger,
for there were places that were garrisoned with 5000 Foot and 800 Horse, that
rendered themselves all Prisoners of War, at the very sight of the French Army,
without making any resistance.

My Brother de la Villaumaine, who came into France a little before this last
War, giving me an account of the state of the Army in Holland, told me that if
a powerful Enemy should attack them, the Officers must resolve to perish and
bear the brunt in their own persons; having no confidence in the Soldiers they
commanded, who did not know how to manage their Arms; a Prophecy which was
since accomplished at the expense of his Life; A little before he told me
likewise, that the Dutch Horse were so ill equipped, that 50 Reyters of Munster
would put to flight two or three Hundred Dutch Troopers, who would fly before
these Germans as Sheep before a Wolf.

There happened the like inconvenience to the Swedes, for having committed the
same fault as the Hollanders, because after the Peace of Munster, they likewise
disbanded the old Troops which had done such great actions, and revived the
ancient Glory of the Goths, who had conquered a great part of Europe, being so
bold as to attack the Elector of Brandenburg and his old Soldiers, with their
new Levies, that never durst maintain their ground against him, and were always
beaten when he could join them; so that if by an extraordinary good fortune
they had not had so faithful, and so mighty a Protector as the French King,
they had quite lost Pomerania, and been sent back to their own cold Countries
beyond the Baltic Sea:

All which shows us that a Prince ought always to keep a large body of old
Troops to defend his State, which without such a support runs the hazard of
becoming a prey to the first Enemy that shall be bold, and strong enough to
attack it.

To these two causes of the extremities to which Holland was reduced in 1672,
that is to say, to the intestine divisions, and to the disbanding of the old
foreign Soldiers; there may a third be likewise added, which was the
extraordinary and unheard of drowth that happened that year; for it was so
great, that the Rhine, one of the greatest Rivers in Europe, that carries Men
of War, was so low, that the French Troops were able to ford it; so the Country
being frightened to see itself attacked both by Sea and Land, by the powers of
France and England united to its ruin, was reduced to the utmost despair,
seeing Heaven conspire to their destruction, by taking away those Ramparts
which Nature had designed for its preservation.

The French Army for the reasons before mentioned, had penetrated into the very
Heart of the Country, and 40 places were taken in a small space of time,
whereas the State thought they might have found work for 20 years, these people
that were a little too haughty in their prosperity, lay then under a terrible
consternation; almost in the same condition as the Venetians were heretofore,
when King Lewis the 12th made himself Master of the greatest part of the
Territories which they had upon the Continent. Being in this despair, they were
constrained to the last Remedy, which was to overflow their Country, and
breaking down their Dykes to oppose a Sea to the French forces, so hindering
them from passing further, they averted the ruin of the Commonwealth, which
else had assuredly run its period.

Heretofore seeing themselves reduced to a like extremity, they made use of the
same Remedy against the Spanish Army at the Siege of Leyden, having succored
the place then at the very point of being lost, with an innumerable company of
Boats, which swum upon the Land, which they had overflowed; and then the United
Provinces were reduced to so strange circumstances, and to such a height of
despair, that the principal persons amongst them proposed, in imitation of the
ancient Switzers, to burn all their Towns, Villages and Castles, and to spoil
the Country as much as they could, and go on board their Ships to settle
themselves in the Indies, so to be delivered from the Spanish Tyranny; but they
had not Vessels enough to transport a fourth part of the people, and were
unwilling to leave the greater number to the mercy of so pityless an Enemy: and
for a Motto of the lamentable condition which this Country was then reduced to,
they engraved upon the Money which they coined at that time, a Vessel without
Masts and Sayls, tossed by the waves and storm, with these words, Incertum quo
fata ferant: words which represented the extremity of their condition.

But to return to the Prince of Orange; He appeared at the head of an Army at
22 years old; as his Great Grandfather Prince William, who was Generalissimo to
the Emperor Charles the V. at the same Age; and throughout the course of this
great War, he showed so much Courage and Conduct, both in Sieges and Battles,
that he had assuredly passed the Actions of his Illustrious Ancestors, who for
200 years served for a model to the greatest Generals, if he had not had the
misfortune to be born in the age of a King, whose Genius and Power no common
forces could stand against. I do not design to make an exact Journal of the
Actions of his Illustrious Father Prince Henry Frederick, since they may be
learnt from other. Histories, but speak of them in general, and relate some
certain passages not commonly known.

In the year 1626 he took Oldensell, Capital of the Country of Tui^z, in the
Neighborhood of Friezeland and Groninghen: and the same year Peter Hein, one
of his Vice-Admirals, in the Bay of Todos los* Santos, in the Road of St.
Salvador, took a Spanish Fleet laden with Sugar.

In the year 1627 he took Grolle, before the face of Count Henry de Bergues,
General of a powerful Spanish Army, that could put no succors into it, nor
make the Prince raise his Siege, he being so well entrenched against the
Enemies Army. At the end of the year 1627 the same Peter Hein mentioned before,
took the Spanish Silver Fleet near the Isle of Cuba. This prize, without
reckoning the Galeons and Vessels, was esteemed at more than twenty Millions;
there were, besides other Riches, 356000 Marks of Silver, and 300000 Marks of
Gold, abundance of Pearls, Cochinele, Jewels, Bezoar, Musk, Ambergreese, 250
Chests of Sugar, and an infinite number of Stuffs, and other merchandises of
great value. This Vice Admiral Peter Hein arrived gloriously in Holland in the
beginning of the year 1629, which was remarkable by the Conquest of the strong
Town of Bolduc, where by a Siege that was very long and difficult, Prince Henry
Frederick showed by his conduct and valor that he could overcome that which
had resisted his Brother Maurice, who had heretofore attacqued that important
place without success. But what was more mavelous was, that whilst Prince
Henry Frederick lay before the place, Count Henry de Bergues having passed the
River Isell with a great Army, ravaged all the Country of Utrecht, where he
seized upon Amersfort, and put Holland into such a consternation that several
people counseled the Prince to quit his enterprise upon Bolduc, and succor the
heart of his Country which was made desolate by the Enemy; but he had the
constancy to persevere, till he had made himself Master of so considerable a
Town, without being moved by the Councels of his chief Officers, or the
Lamentations of the People that had been plundered.

At the same time the Prince by the vigilance and resolution of Otho de Guent
Lord of Dieden, Governor of Emeric, having happily surprised the Town of
Wesel, where was the Magazine and Artillery of the Spanish Army (which obliged
Count Henry de Bergues to repass the Issel in all the haste imaginable) he
gained by this double conquest the reputation not only of a very brave, but
likewise of a very fortunate Captain; a quality so desirable to a General, that
Scilla the Dictator preferred the surname of Happy to that of Great.

In the year 1630 he seized upon the Town of Olind in Brazil, by the conduct of
his Vice-Admirals; and the same year Count John de Nassau, his Cousin, who for
some discontent had gone out of the Dutch service to that of Spain, was
defeated near the Rhine, and taken by Colonel Illestein, who was not half so
strong; he was carried Prisoner to Wesel, from whence he was ransomed for 18000
Rix Dollers.

The year following the same Count John de Nassau, who had gathered together a
very strong Fleet in hopes to surprise Willemstat, he was totally defeated by
the Hollanders, above 4000 of his men taken Prisoners, and the rest either
slain or wounded, and the Count had much ado to save himself with the Prince of
Brabanzoon.

In the same year 1631, the States General, to gratify the Prince of Orange,
and to testify their acknowledgment for the services which he had continually
done his Country, gave the reversion of all his Offices to his Son Prince
William, and the writings for it were presented to the young Prince in a Box of
Gold.

In the year 1632, Prince Henry after having taken Ruremond, Venlo and Strale,
he set about the conquest of Maestricht, a place somewhat distant from Holland,
situated upon the River Meuse, in the confines of Brabant, where he provided
his Ammunition and Victuals for the Siege with so much Prudence, that he had
enough to make himself Master of the place; he had surrounded it with a great
circumvallation, which the Spanish Army could not force, no more than another
German Army, under Henry Godfry, Count of Papenheim, a famous Captain; both
which were constrained to retire with disgrace, after several efforts that were
unsuccessful, and many considerable losses.

In the year 1633 the Prince besieged and took Rhineberg, and the year
following the Spaniards having besieged the Fort of Phillipin, which incommoded
the Town of Ghent, the Prince of Orange made them raise the Siege. A little
before Count Henry de Bergue, complaining that he was ill used by the
Spaniards, had quitted their service and retired into Holland, upon which he
published a Manifesto; and two years after, in the year 1634, he was condemned
as contumacious, to have his Head cut off, by the sentence of the Court of
Mechlin. In this place I must tell you how in the year 1628, after the taking
of Rochel, the Cardinal Richelieu, who was absolute Governor in France, was
mighty desirous to gain the reputation of having destroyed all the retreats of
Heresy, having an unmeasurable desire of making himself be canonized; and to
arrive at it the more easily he made his Confessors say, that he had never
committed so much as a Venial Sin, as I have often heard from Mr. Lescot de S.
Quintin, his Confessor, whom he made Bishop of Chartes: as crafty a man as ever
came out of Picardy, who under the pretense of freedom and apparent simplicity,
concealed a great deal of subtilty and artifice. The Cardinal to gain a
reputation among the Zealots for the Catholic Religion, had treated underhand
with John Osmael Lord of Walkembourg, Governor of Orange, who seemed
discontented with his Master, to deliver up the place to him. This man bred up
by the Family of Orange, and entrusted by Prince Henry with the charge of his
Sovereignty, was gained by the promise of four hundred thousand Livres in ready
Money, and an Estate of twenty thousand Livres a Year in Provence, whither he
designed to retire and renounce Calvinism, having no other Religion besides his
interest. But this affair being long in hand, and Walkembourg resolving not to
render the place till the Money was paid down, the Prince was so happy as to
get some intimation of this Treason: He dispatched the Sieur Knuth, a
Zealander, a man of Resolution, in whom he had an entire confidence, with an
express order to dispatch this Traitor; but that he might not cause the least
suspicion, he sent him to Orange alone, as pretending other business. This
Knuth with whom I was acquainted, and who was a very bold and dexterous person,
having made sure of the principal Inhabitants of the Town, and of several
Gentlemen in the Principality of Orange, watched his opportunity to surprise
the Governor; who being one day come down from the Castle into the Town, with
very little company, contrary to his usual custom, he attacked and killed him
in the house of one Pyse a Scrivener, whether he was retired. Afterward Knuth
went directly to the Castle, where the Lieutenant after having levelled the
Cannon against the Town, and being doubtful for some time what he should do, at
last received him upon sight of the Prince's order, and took a new Oath of
Fidelity to Prince. Henry Frederick of Nassau, together with all the Garrison;
the Prince afterward sent the Baron de Dona his Brother-in-law to command in
the place.

This Walkembourg had married the Daughter of the Sieur de Bic, Treasurer to
the States, a Lady of great probity and merit, who had used all possible
endeavors to alter his pernicious designs. She had the trouble as well as his
Daughters to see him expire, for he was forced to render himself to Knuth,
after having been wounded through a Chamber Door, where he had for a long time
defended himself. I have heard my Father relate this story with great
indignation, he being a professed Enemy to all Ingratitude and Unfaithfulness:
and to show me and my Brothers the horrors of those crimes, he related to us
upon this occasion, the Treason of Bernardine de Corte, who delivered up the
Castle of Millan to King Lewis the 12th, for a Hundred thousand Crowns, that
had been entrusted to him by Duke Lodowick Sforza his Master, by whom he had
been bred in the quality of a Page, and was at present preferred before all his
other Subjects to the command of that place, where he had put all that he
thought most precious, whilst he was going to seek for succor in Germany. He
recounted likewise to us such another Treason of Donat Rafagnine, who sold
Valencia to the same King for fifty thousand Crowns; and remarked to us from
Guicciardine that these Traitors were so looked on, and detested in the French
Army, and that shame made them die with discontent.

This Mr. Knuth rendered an important piece of service to his Master, who
rewarded him with a Present, and a Pension of two thousand Livers a year for
his Life.

No body can imagine but that the Prince of Orange must bear some ill will to
Cardinal Richelieu, for having endeavored to take away this Sovereignty, which
was as dear to him as his Eyes; but he concealed his resentment, as expecting
some favorable opportunity of showing it, which it was not long before it was
offered him: for some time after the Cardinal having some difference with Mary
de Medicis, the Queen Mother, who being of the house of Austria by the mothers
side, was upheld by all the power of Spain and Germany, he was forced to have
recourse to foreign Alliances, and to caress those whom he had before despised
and offended.

This storm which was raising against the Cardinal for his destruction as well
within as without the Kingdom, obliged him to seek the friendship of the Prince
of Orange, who tho he had not the title of Sovereign, disposed of all things
belonging to the United Provinces. There was a Treaty concluded between France
and the States General, by which they were to attack the Spaniards, and to
divide the Conquest of the Low Countries, which they had already devoured in
their imaginations; the Prince of Orange was to enter Holland with the Dutch
Army, and France was to join him with thirty thousand Men, and the French
Generals had orders from the King to obey the Prince of Orange; so much it
seems at that time they thought him necessary to their affairs. In short, the
Spring following the year 1635, the French Army under the Command of the
Marshals Chatillon and Breze entered the Low Countries, and defeated the
Spanish Forces at Avein commanded by Prince Thomas of Savoy, who afterward
took the name of Prince of Carignon; all the Baggage and Cannon remained in the
possession of the French, with abundance of Prisoners, several of which that
were of the best quality were carried to Maestricht: These Generals after this
Victory joined the Prince of Orange, and sacked part of Brabant, but the Prince
who did not love the Neighborhood of the French better than that of the
Spaniard, and had still the remembrance of the affair at Orange very fresh in
his mind, for want of victuals and subsistence ruined the French Army that had
been so victorious: which being retired into Holland after raising the Siege of
Lovain, under pretense of the approach of Picolomini with a German Army, the
greater part of it perished there with Hunger and Sickness; the sixth part of
it never returning back again into their own Kingdom.

The Prince of Orange looked upon Cardinal Richelieu as an Enemy, that was
reconciled to him only out of the necessity that he had for him in his present
circumstances, and for this reason he underhand did him all the displeasure,
and gave him all the mortification that he could possibly; granting a
favorable reception to such as had been disgraced by him in France; honoring
them with his confidence and considerable employments; as amongst others it
appeared by Mr. Hauterive and Mr. Beringhen, whom he respected not only in
spite of the Cardinal, but because they deserved it; and Cardinal Richelieu as
powerful as he was, was forced to swallow those Pills, having necessary
occasion for Holland to make some diversions, which conduced to the good of his
other affairs; this made the Cardinal know, that it was not good to offend
people of courage, and being a very great Politician, he could dissemble so far
as not to be angry at this ill treatment; so he continued to seek the Prince of
Orange's Friendship, and it was agreed that each should attack the common Enemy
from his own side; he maintained a faithful and perfect correspondence with the
French; and the Prince who was sufficiently revenged, and drew great advantages
from his alliance with France, executed the Treaties he had made with great
sincerity.

The same year in which happened the battle of Avein, and the Siege of Louvain,
the Spaniards surprised the Fort of Skink, by means of Lieutenant Colonel
Enhold, who made himself Master of it by a party of the Garrison of Guelders,
whom he made use of to execute so bold an Enterprise. The Sieur Veld the
Governor being waked with the noise of the attack, and rising in his Shirt,
had his Arm immediately broken, and being in despair to see himself surprised,
would not render himself Prisoner, whatever offers of quarter they could make
him, still defending himself till he was overwhelmed with blows.

The Father of this Enhold had been beheaded at the Hague for some Crime, and
the Son to revenge the death of his Father, quitted the Dutch service, and put
himself under the Spaniard; which happened very luckily for him, for by the
surprise of so important a place, beside the inward satisfaction which he had,
to cause so great a loss to the States, the Cardinal Infant Ferdinand of
Austria being newly arrived in the Low Countries, where he had the Sovereign
Command presented him, for so bold and happy an action, with a Chain of Gold of
great value, and gave him the sum of fifty thousand Livres. But Prince Henry
was so set upon the regaining of this place, that he gave the Spaniards free
entrance into the Countries of Guelders and Utrecht; having besieged it in the
month of August 1635, he re-took it in April 1636, by a Siege of six months.

In the year 1637, Cardinal Richelieu, to oblige the Prince of Orange, gave him
the Title of Highness, in a discourse made on purpose by Monsieur de Charnasse,
Ambassador of France to Holland, in the Name of his Majesty; and at an
Assembly of the States General, which was soon after printed: In which he was
followed by the Ambassadors of all other Princes, who before had used no other
Title but that of Excellence.

In the same year 1637, Prince Henry, by a Siege of four months, re-took the
Town and Castle of Breda, which the Marquis Ambrose Spinola had conquered in
the year 1625, by a long Blockade of a whole year, with incredible Expenses;
although this place was defended by France, England and Denmark; so the Marquis
put over one of the Gates of the Town, that he had carried it, tribus Regibus
frustra renitentibus, notwithstanding the Resistance of three Kings.

It was at this last Siege of Breda that Monsieur de Charnasse was killed; for
though he was Ambassador of France, yet he would serve at the Head of his
Regiment, which he had in the Low Countries; hoping to become a Marshall of
France, by the favor of the Marshall de Breze, whose Aunt he had married, and
who had gained him his Employments.

In the year 1639 the Hollanders gained a considerable Victory at Sea over the
Spaniards, the Fleet of Don Antonio Doquendo, consisting of 67 Men of War, that
had been equipping so long in Spain; joined to some Vessels from Dunkirk, who
were considerable in that time, came for some great design, (which none yet
have ever penetrated) were stopped in St. George's Channel by the Renowned
Admiral Martin Erpez Tromp, with only-twelve Ships; but being afterward
reinforced with ninety Men of War, and several Fireships; that came from
diverse places, he encompassed the Spanish Fleet, (that had put itself into the
Downs, near the Fleet of the King of Great Britain, as thinking itself to be
there in safety); and then attacqued it with so great resolution, that after a
long Combat, where abundance of persons of France, England, and the Low
Countries, ran from all parts to see from the shore so extraordinary a
spectacle: The greatest part of so powerful a Fleet was burnt, destroyed, or
separated; and those which escaped put themselves under the covert of some
English Vessels; and so retreated into the River of Thames, or some Port in
Flanders. The Spaniards lost above 7000 men, that were burnt, or drowned,
besides 2000 who were made Prisoners by the Hollanders. This Victory was very
great and memorable, for there were 40 large Vessels sunk, burnt, or taken; and
amongst others the great Galeon of Portugal, called Matter Tereza was burnt,
which was 62 foot broad, and had 800 men on board, who all perished. This Tromp
was the Father of Count Tromp, who was engaged in the King of Denmark's
service, and gained great advantages over the Swedes.

In the year 1641, Prince Henry Frederick married his only Son Prince William,
to the Princess Mary of England, eldest Daughter to Charles I. King of Great
Britain, and Madam Henrietta of France; and this Marriage was celebrated with a
great deal of Pomp and Magnificence.

The year 1645 was remarkable for the taking of the important Town of Hulsh in
Flanders, which was carried in spite of the Spaniards, who could neither put
succors into it, nor make Prince Henry raise the Siege.

This Prince during the space of two and twenty years that he had the
Government in his hands, was remarkable for his wife and moderate conduct.
Because the Princess Louise de Coligny his Mother, had maintained Barnevelt's
Party, some people thought that the Prince following his Mothers inclinations,
would re-establish that Party, and recall such of them as had been banished,
and among others Mr Grotius: But this Prince, like a good Politician, thought
it better to let things continue in the posture he found them in, than to
embroil'em afresh, by bringing a prevailing party upon his back: I have seen
Mr. Grotius in a great passion upon this occasion, and he has spoke very ill of
the Prince, accusing him of Ingratitude, and of having no respect for those who
had been Friends to his Mother.

Prince Henry was very rich; but instead of finding any support from England,
he was forced to help King Charles in his necessity, with all his ready Money:
The greatest part of which has been repaid by the King of England, since his
Restoration, to his Nephew the Prince of Orange.

Henry Frederick died the 14th of March 1647, and was buried with a great deal
of State. Besides his Children that we have mentioned before, he left a Natural
Son, remarkable for his Valor, his name was Mr. Zulestein, Colonel of the
Dutch Infantry, who died at the attack of Vorden.

Prince William of Orange, laid the Foundation of the Commonwealth of the
United Provinces, and was their first Founder; his eldest Son Maurice secured
and established this Commonwealth by his Victories, which forced the Spaniards
in the Treaty of Truce for 12 years to acknowledge the United Provinces for a
free State; and Henry Frederick Brother to Maurice, and Grandfather to the
present King of England, by the continuation of his Conquests, at last forced
the Spaniards to renounce entirely the right which they had pretended to that
Country; so that we may say with reason and justice, that this illustrious
Father, and his two generous Sons, who have imitated his Virtues, are the
Founders of this Commonwealth, which sends Ambassadors that are covered before
the most powerful Kings in Christendom, even before the King of Spain himself,
whose Vassals they were about 100 years ago.

Henry Frederick had for his devise this word, Patriaeque Patrique intimating
thereby, that he thought of nothing but serving his Country, and revenging the
Death of his Father.

WILLIAM II; Prince of Orange.
portrait

THE LIFE OF WILLIAM II.
Prince of Orange.
THis Prince was born in the year 1626, the States General were his Godfathers,
and by the appointment of his Father was called William, after the name of his
Illustrious Grandfather.

In the year 1630 this young Prince was declared General of the Cavalry of the
Low Countries, and the year following the States granted him the Survivorship
of the Government of their Province.

He was no sooner of Age to bear Arms, but he followed his Father to the Army,
and was present at the Siege of Breda, giving great proofs of his Courage,
though but 13 years old.

Immediately upon the death of his Father Frederick Henry, he took the Oath of
Fidelity to the States, for the Government, of which they had granted him the
Reversion.

All Europe was in a profound Peace upon conclusion of the Treaty at Munster,
which was done the next year after Prince Frederick Henry's death. The States
considering the vast Debts they had contracted by the extraordinary Expenses
they had been obliged to make, resolved to retrench all unnecessary ones;
having a great number of Troops in their pay that were of no use now the War
was at an end, they proposed to disband a considerable part of them.

William the Second, who had succeeded in all the Places of the Prince his
Father, and knowing very well that nothing but the Army could support the
credit of the Places he was possessed of, made a strong opposition to this
design of the States General: He represented that it was against all the Rules
of Policy to disband Troops who had been so faithful to the Provinces, and that
France or Spain might make use of this opportunity to fall upon their
Commonwealth, in a time when they could not be in a condition to defend
themselves. The States, who were already resolved to break 120 Companies; to
make some sort of satisfaction to the Prince, offered to continue the ordinary
Pay to the disbanded Officers: The Prince agreed to this proposal; but the
Province of Guelders and the City of Amsterdam opposed and protested against it
for several reasons. They who were in the Prince's Interests, advised him to
visit the principal Cities of the Netherlands, to persuade the Magistrates to
take a Resolution of leaving not only the Officers, but the Troops in the same
condition they were in before the War, that they might be in a readiness to
serve wherever there was occasion.

Pursuant to this advice, the Prince having sent for the principal Colonels of
the Army, went in person to four or fiveCities of Holland; The Burghers of
Amsterdam, who were well assured that the Prince would visit them too, and
apprehending his presence would cross the Resolutions they had taken; desired
him by their Deputies to put off his intended Journey to this City, for several
Reasons which they gave him: Haerlem, Medemblic, and several other places
followed the Example of Amsterdam.

The Proceedings of these Cities was so considerable an Affliction to the
Prince, and incensed him so much, that in a meeting of the States General, he
resented it with inexpressible concern: He endeavored to insinuate to them by
a great number of Reasons, that the Affront they had put upon him, in refusing
to give him Audience, was designed only to lessen his Authority; that nothing
but a public satisfaction would make him amends for this Affront; which he
demanded earnestly of the States. The Deputies of Amsterdam, and other Cities,
answered this Remonstrance by a long Manifesto, wherein they alleged the
Reasons that induced them to make the Prince that Request; this touched him to
the quick, and made him continue more obstinate against disbanding the
Soldiers; and transported him so much, that he Arrested six of the principal
Magistrates, and sent them Prisoners immediately after into the Castle of
Lovestein.

This violent proceeding of the Prince alarmed all Holland. The people were
generally apprehensive that he aspired to the Sovereignty of the United
Provinces, and that he opposed the disbanding the Troops for no other reason.
All Europe said something, and tho probably the Prince had no such design, the
attempt that he made upon Amsterdam, confirmed the suspicions all men had
entertained of him, that he was too arrogant to obey the orders of a popular
Government: But those who judge impartially of this action, are of opinion,
that he never aimed at making himself King, and that he had no other prospect
in besieging Amsterdam, but to revenge some private affronts, and support his
authority and credit by humbling such a powerful City. Whatever his reasons
were, he resolved to besiege it, and actually performed it on the 30th of July,
1650; he narrowly missed of surprising it, for the Citizens had not the least
apprehension of such a design. The Troops appointed for this enterprise put
their orders so punctually in execution, and met so exactly at their
rendezvous, that the City must unavoidably have fallen into the Prince's hands,
but for the Hamburgh Courier who passed through the Prince's Army without being
perceived, and gave timely notice of it to the Magistrates. The City
immediately took the alarm, the Council of Thirty six met, the Burghers run to
their Arms, the Bridges were drawn up, the Cannon mounted upon the Ramparts,
and the City put in a posture of defense; Deputies were dispatched to the
Prince with proposals which took up all the next day, which was done to gain
time for the opening of their Sluices. The Prince seeing all the Country under
water, and the impossibility of continuing a long Siege, and the firm
resolution of the Burghers, hearkened to a Treaty of accommodation, which was
concluded three days after; very much to his advantage.

The Prince was sensible the States would resent this attempt, and the better
to make his peace with them, he released the Prisoners out of the Castle of
Lovestein, upon condition that they should be for ever unqualified for any
public employments or places, and at the same time presented a Memorial to the
States with a particular account of the motives he had to form this Siege. The
States sent it back without opening it, assuring him that there needed no
justification, since the difference had been so soon adjusted. About a month
after the Prince assisted at a particular Assembly in the Duchy of Guelders,
where by his prudence and good conduct he entirely quieted all the jealousies
they had entertained of him. He returned to the Hague about the beginning of
November, and went to bed very weary with his Journey. He had been observed to
be melancholy ever since the miscarriage of his design upon Amsterdam, for
which reason the Court was not alarmed with this little indisposition. He was
let blood the next day, and the day after the Small Pox appeared, and proved so
violent, that the Physicians believed him in danger; he died the 6th day, in
the Twenty fourth year of his age, on the 6th of November, 1650.

There wanted but three things to make his memory immortal, viz. The
Continuation of the War, which he passionately desired, a longer Life, and a
little more Deference to the State, whom he treated with too much authority;
for he was Master of a great many good qualities, and eminently possessed the
advantages of body and mind. He was a great General, and would have been as
renowned for all civil and military virtues, as the Heroes of his Family. He
had a vast comprehensive Genius, and learned in his Youth the Mathematics, and
spoke English, French, Italian, Spanish, and High Dutch, as readily and
fluently as his Mother Tongue. He was buried at Delf in the magnificent Tomb of
the Princes of Orange in great state.

He married Mary Stuart, eldest Daughter to Charles I. King of Great Britain.
An Illustrious Birth, Interest of State, and Glory, are the three ordinary
motives which sway Princes in the choice of their alliances, and all three
concur in the making this match; for the Glory of the immortal actions of his
Father Frederick were spread over all Europe. William his Son had given a
Thousand proofs that he did not degenerate from the Valor and Virtue of his
Ancestors? and the Family of Nassau, had given five Electors to Cologne and
Ments, and an Emperor to Germany.

The proposals were no sooner made, but they were accepted, and the Marriage
was celebrated at London with great magnificence. From this Marriage was born
William III. whose History we are now entering upon.

WILLIAM III. KING of ENGLAND. Prince of Orange etc.
portrait

THE HISTORY OF WILLIAM III.
Prince of Orange, AND King of GREAT BRITAIN.
Out of the French by Mr. Brown.
THe sudden and unexpected death of William II. (who died in the 24th year of
his age) threw the Court and Friends of the House of Nassau into such a
consternation as is not easy to be expressed. But to moderate their grief, the
Princess Royal within eight days after was delivered of William Henry, a Prince
in whom the valor and all the other qualities of his glorious ancestors
revived; and who may justly be styled the Restorer of that flourishing
Republic, whereof his Fathers were the Architects and Founders. According to
the new Style, which I have all along followed with my Author.
He was born on the fourteenth of November, 1650, and had for his Godfathers,
the States of Holland and of Zealand, the Cities of Delf, Leiden, and Amsterdam.

As it was his misfortune to be born at a calamitous conjuncture, when his
enemies were furnished with a plausible pretense to deprive him of those
Dignities which his Ancestors had enjoyed; the States General finding
themselves now at liberty, by the death of William II. and concluding from the
enterprise of Amsterdam what they might expect from a single Governor,
resolved to remedy all inconveniences that might for the future happen upon
this occasion, and so appointed a General Assembly to meet at the Hague. This
Assembly began on the eighteenth of January 1651, and did not end till the
month of August the same year. In the first Session it was resolved, That since
the Country was now without a Governor, by the death of the Prince, the choice
of all Officers and Magistrates for the time to come should be in the disposal
of the Cities; and that not only the ordinary Soldiers, but even the Guards of
the deceased Prince should take an Oath of Fidelity to the States of Holland.
This was unanimously carried, notwithstanding all the representations made by
the Princess his Mother, who ineffectually labored to preserve him in those
Offices which her Husband possessed, and before him the other Princes of
Orange: the Royal Family of Great Britain, from whom principally she could
expect any assistance, being at that time under an Eclipse through the wicked
Machinations of those execrable Parricides, who after they had barbarously
Murdered their lawful Soveraing King Charles I. of Blessed Memory, by a train
of Hypocrisy and other Villainies peculiar to their Party. shared the
Sovereignty between themselves.

Our Prince, who like Hercules was to encounter Snakes in his Cradle, suffered
a great deal from the intreagues and contrivances of Barnevelt's Party, now
re-established in the Persons of the Messieurs De Wit. But he bore all with
incredible moderation, still waiting for a favorable opportunity to be restored
to those dignities and great Employments he had been deprived of by a public
decree, obtained by a predominant Faction, immediately after the death of his
Father. It must be confessed that France in some measure contributed to his
re-establishment, although without the least design to favor the Prince. Heaven
so ordering it that that mighty Monarch should ravage and almost destroy this
flourishing Republic, to convince the world at the same time that only the
Family of the Founders of this Republic was capable to repair its Ruins, and
restore it to its former Grandeur.

The Reader can scarce imagine with what a prodigions torrent the King of
France overran and surprised all the United Provinces, obliging the greatest
part of the Frontier Towns and other Capital Cities to surrender themselves.
Amongst the rest, Utrecht and Zutphen opened their Gates at the first approach
of the Enemy; for although there were large Garrisons in both those places, yet
being composed of Burghers, and commanded by Officers of little or no
experience, they were frighted at the sight of a well disciplined, courageous
army, that knew how to make the best advantage of the victory, and the fright
they had put their enemies in.

These calamities, which had been foreseen long before by some of the most
prudent persons of these Provinces, as they occasioned a general consternation,
so they gave the people subject to complain of the ill conduct of the Mrs de
Wit, who at that time had all the authority of the Government in their hands;
and by this means furnished the friends of the House of Nassau with a
favorable opportunity to speak their thoughts upon what passed at that time:
Which they did by way of advice to the People, giving them to understand that
the Princes of Orange were probably the only Persons that were able to support
their tottering State, and to defend them against their most puissant Enemies:
Adding that as these illustrious Princes had formerly delivered them from the
tyranny of the Spaniards, so they alone could stop the fury and career of the
French.

The Princess Dowager, Grand mother to his Highness, a Lady of incomparable
prudence and of a courage above her Sex, did not contribute a little by her
address to awaken those Persons that were in her interests, and who were not
inconsiderable for their number: These at last not being able to see themselves
any longer despised, or that all the great Offices of State should be thrown
away upon Persons that were not worthy of them; and at the same time making use
of the fury of the people, who justly alarmed to see a victorious Army in the
bowels of their Country, spoke of nothing but Sacrificing the De Wits, managed
their affairs so dexterousl^ that they attained their designs: for after the
Prince had made a Journey toward the beginning of the Year 1672 to visit the
fortifications of some Places, the States of Holland and West-Frizeland being
assembled, it was unanimously agreed, that he should be chose General of their
Army, which was notified next day to the States General; and on the 24th of
February the Prince having accepted their offer, took the Oaths before them
with the accustomed Ceremonies. It is very remarkable that the Peasants of
West-Frizeland, who make excellent Soldiers, would not take up Arms but with
this condition, that they should swear to be true to the Republic, and to obey
the States and his Highness the Prince of Orange.

The immoderate ambition of some Persons had formerly occasioned two fatal
Factions, who to fortify their own particular interests weakened the Nerves of
the public security: which made those who had the greatest Credit with the
People commit the greatest Solecism's in matter of Policy that any Party can be
guilty of. For these shortsighted Statesmen imagining that after the Peace of
Munster, there was nothing left them to fear, and that no body could hurt them
in their Pretensions, but the too great power of the House of Nassau, by reason
of its Alliances with France, and particularly with England, they casheer'd
their Troops composed of old Soldiers, and experienced Captains, who had
preserved the Country, but were looked upon to be entirely devoted to the
Prince of Orange; and at the same time gave the greatest Posts in their Army
and in their Garrisons to the Sons of Burgher Masters and Deputies of Cities,
People who however brave they might be in their own Persons, were for the most
part of little or no experience, as having never seen a Battle, and this was
the reason that when they came to be surprised by a vigorous Enemy, whole
Cities, although they had in Garrison five thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse,
surrendered at discretion, without discharging one Gun, at the first sight and
appearance of the Enemy. Thus Faction and Interest, that are commonly the
destruction of the most flourishing Kingdoms, having reduced the States General
to the brink of despair, they were constrained to have recourse to their last
Asylum, the Prince of Orange, in order to avoid their approaching ruin; and to
place the little hope that was remaining, in the hands of one person. whom the
prevailing party had formerly rejected with a great deal of ingratitude, and
who indeed did not deserve such a hard destiny: for, in fine, Children ought
not to be responsible for the actions of their Fathers, when they have by no
means justified them.

The Prince had no sooner accepted the high Charge of General of the Armies,
which was presented to him from the part of the States by Monsieur de
Beverning, John de Wit, and Gaspar Fagel, but he immediately repaired to the
Army, which was then posted near Nieu Rop; where all he could do against the
united forces of the French, commanded by the King in person, was to keep his
post. And this he performed with so much conduct, that the Enemy, as powerful
as he was, could have no advantage over him on that side. On the other hand,
thinking to force the Prince out of his retrenchments, they were forced to
retire with loss, and to abandon their works.

All this while the frontier Towns and Garrisons in the Province of Holland
sell every day into the hands of the Enemy, which made the people complain
openly, and distrust the fidelity of those that governed. The Inhabitants of
Dort were the first that rose; and sent one of their Captains to the
Magistrates, to know whether they were resolved to defend the City, or to sit
still. The Magistrates answered that they were ready to resist the efforts of
those that should attaque them, and to do all that could be expected from them;
the people demanded at the same time to see the Magazines. But the Keys being
missing, this put the Mobb into so great a serment, that there were a thousand
voices crying out at the same time, That there was Treachery in the case; That
they would have the Prince of Orange to be their Head and Governor; threatening
to murder the Magistrates upon the spot, if they did not immediately comply
with their demands. These menaces so terribly alarmed the Magistrates, that
they dispatched Commissioners that very moment to his Highness, desiring him to
come to their City with all possible haste, to prevent by his presence the
insurrection of the people. The Prince alleged several reasons to them, to
convince them how dangerous it was for him to leave the Army; but all was to no
purpose: they persisted still in their demand, till at last the Prince resolved
to grant what they desired. Being therefore with great solemnity conducted to
the Town Hall, they entreated him to signify his pleasure to them. To which his
Highness answered, that it belonged to them to make proposals to him, since
they were the occasion of his coming. After some demur they requested him, that
for the satisfaction of the People, he would be pleased to visit the
Fortifications and Magazines of the City, without taking the least notice of
making him Stadt-holder; to which the Prince freely consented, and to that
effect made the tour of the Town immediately. But at his return, the people
suspecting that the Magistrates had deceived them, as well as they had done the
Prince, flocked in great multitudes about his Coach, and boldly asked him, but
with a great deal of respect for his person, whether the Magistrates had made
him their Governor or no? His Highness having modestly answered, That he was
content with the honor they had already done him, and that he had as much as
he could desire; they unanimously declared, That they would not lay down their
Arms till they had chose him Stadt-holder. So that at last, the Magistrates,
terrified with the menaces of the people, and not knowing what other measures
to take in so critical a juncture, were not without some repugnance,
constrained to accomplish what they had before only done by halves: So
difficult a matter it is for men to lay aside a settled hatred and aversion,
that has once taken root in their hearts.

Upon this they passed an Ordinance to abolish the perpetual Edict; which the
Prince refused to own, unless they would absolve him of the Oath he had taken,
when he accepted the Charge only of Captain General, which they gave him
likewise by this Ordinance. So they immediately made another Act, which was
read in the great Hall by the Secretary, by which the Magistrates declared his
Highness the Prince of Orange to be Stadt-holder, Captain, and Admiral General
of all their forces, as well by Sea as by Land; and gave him all the power,
dignity, and authority which his Ancestors, of glorious memory, had enjoyed.

After this the whole City rang with acclamations of an universal joy, and the
arms of the House of Orange were immediately placed upon the Towers, and
Ramparts.

Only Cornelius de Wit, an ancient Burghermaster, coming from the Fleet sick
and indisposed, said he would never sign the Act, whatever instances were made
him to do it. He was pressed after an extraordinary manner not to refuse the
signing of it, but neither the persuasions of the chief men of the City, nor
the threatenings of the people, who were ready to plunder his house, nor the
tears of his Wife, who was sensible of the great danger he was in, could
prevail with him to alter his resolutions. Nay, it went so far, that his Wife
threatened to show her self at the Window, and declare her own innocence and
that of her Children, and to abandon him to the fury of the populace; but all
this made no impression upon him.

Dort was not the only place that rose up after this manner: All the Cities of
Holland and Zealand, where the Burghers took notice of the ill conduct of their
Magistrates, did almost the same thing. So that upon a report made by the
Deputies of the respective Cities, the States of Holland, Zealand and
Friesland, did not only confirm what had been done by the City of Dort, but in
a full Assembly of the States, they presented his Highness with some public
Acts, by which the Prince was absolved from his first Oath of Captain General,
and at the same time was invested with the Dignity of Stadt-holder, together
with all the rights, jurisdictions and privileges heretofore granted to his
Predecessors. In conse^ence of which his Highness the very same day, in the
Hall of Audience, took the place of Stadt-holder, Captain, and Admiral General
of the United Provinces, with the usual Ceremonies; and afterward returned to
the Army, that was encamped at Bodegrave.

From this very moment, as if the re-establishment of the Prince had inspired
the people with new Courage, a body of five thousand French were twice repulsed
before Ardemburgh; and without counting those that were killed upon the place,
were forced to leave five hundred Prisoners behind them, amongst which were
several Officers, and persons of Quality; and all this effected by the
extraordinary bravery of no more than two hundred Burghers. It Is true, that the
Women and Boys assisted them, no body being spared upon this occasion; which
will be an everlasting disgrace to France, that looked upon the City as good as
in their own possession.

The Burghers of Groningen did not defend themselves with less Courage and good
fortune against the Bishop of Munster, than those of Ardemburgh had done
against the King of France. For that Bishop having besieged this City with an
Army of twenty five or thirty thousand men, he was obliged to raise the Siege,
with the loss of almost half his Soldiers, after he had been at a prodigious
expense in buying all sorts of Ammunition and Inst^ments of War, necessary to
make himself master of that important place.

In the midst of this extraordinary zeal the people showed for the Prince, an
accident happened that served to confirm him more effectually in their
affection, and occasioned the death of two of his greatest enemies.

For a Chyrurgion having accused Cornelius de Wit, Bailiff of Putten, with
having secretly proposed to him to poison or kill the Prince of Orange; after
examination of the matter the Baoliff was apprehended and put in Prison, and
although he denied what was laid to his charge by throwing back the same crime
upon his Accuser, in order to justify himself to the Prince and People,
nevertheless being confronted with the Chyrurgeon, who still persisted in his
Accusation, which he confirmed by a promise that he said the Bailiff had made
him of 300000 Franks for a recompense, and of six Ducatoons which he had given
him in hand, and by several other circumstances, usual in affairs of this
nature: the Court of Holland, after they had maturely considered the report
made by the Advocate General, condemned Cornelius to be divested of all his
dignities and employments, and to be perpetually banished out of the
Territories of Holland and Friezeland. But the people seeing the States had
pushed on the matter so far, and imagining that a Criminal who was treated with
so much severity, would have received a greater punishment if the Judges had
not favored him, began to murmur at the Sentence, as too mild and gentle; and
immediately ran toward the Prison with weapons in their hands. It happened at
this moment that John de Wit came in his Coach to take his Brother out of
Prison, when one of the Burghers dropping these words amongst the people; Now
the two Traitors are together, and it is our fault if they escape us. This was
enough to animate the Mobb who were heated enough before: but another thing
happened, that helped to exasperate them more; which was, that whilst the
people were waiting for the coming out of the two Brothers, some body or other
had maliciously spread a report, that above a thousand Peasants and Fishermen
were marching toward the Hague to plunder it. Upon which another Burgher
saying, Come along Gentlemen, let us make these Traitors come out; follow me
and I will show you the way. These words inflamed them to the highest degree,
so they immediately burnt the Prison-gates, drew out the two Brothers by main
violence, dragged them about the streets, murdered them, and cut them to
pieces, crying aloud, Behold the Traitors that have betrayed their Country.

Thus fell Cornelius and John de Wit, two sworn Enemies of the House of
Orange. It Is commonly pretended that John was Author of these politic
resolutions, viz. the exclusion of his Royal Highness from all his Offices, of
the perpetual Edict, and of the Qualities requisite for a Stadt-holder. Min
Here Fagel succeeded the Pensioner in his place, the Prince of Orange having
approved his election. The Elector of Brandenburgh writ a Letter to the States
in favor of the Prince, telling them that since he heard his R. Highness was
re-established in the dignities of his Ancestors, he did not doubt but Heaven
would prosper a resolution so advantageous to the public, especially since he
knew the Prince inherited all the Virtues of his Glorious Predecessors;
protesting besides that he found himself obliged since his Elevation, to
contribute all that lay in his power to assist the Prince, to recover and
preserve what his Ancestors had acquired at the expense of their own blood,
with so much reputation to themselves.

About this time the Prince being resolved to dislodge the advanced Guards of
the French, made a Detachment of Horse and Foot, and with them gives an Alarm
to the Enemy, whom he chased as far as their trenches before Utrecht,
disheartened with the loss of their own men before Cronemburgh. While both
Parties were thus busied in the Field there was great changing of the
Magistrates in most of the Cities, to the great satisfaction of the
Inhabitants, who now hoped to see their Country enjoy its ancient Tranquillity.
His Highness not being any longer able to suffer the corruption of Military
Discipline, which had been so fatal to the Republic in general, ordered several
Officers to be punished for their Cowardice and Treachery. But nothing touched
him so sensibly as to see the Season almost past without any considerable
action, which made him resolve to attack Narden. For this purpose he commands
Coll. Zulestein and Count Horn to advance; the first to take his quarters
between Utrecht and Narden, and the other to entrench himself at Polanen, on
the Mill side. His Highness entrenched on that part near Bodegrave with four
Regiments, The Duke of Luxemburgh made all imaginable haste to relieve the
besieged, and with about eight or nine thousand men fell upon the quarter of
Coll. Zulestein, but was repulsed with loss, and forced to retire. The Town was
afterward battered in a very furious manner, and reduced to such extremities
that they sent Deputies to capitulate. But in this interval the Duke of
Luxemburgh having received a new reinforcement, marched by a way full of water,
by the help of some Peasants, who served him as Guides; he once more attacqued,
when they least expected him, the very same quarters of Coll. Zulestein, from
whence he had been beaten the night before; and after a bloody resolute
dispute, wherein the Colonel was slain, (having refused quarter,) the Duke at
last threw three thousand men, by way of relief, into the Town: Nevertheless he
was repulsed the second time by Count Horn, and forced to leave his Prisoners
behind him. Of the French there were 2000 killed, and fifty Officers who dyed
of their wounds within 5 days after the engagement, without reckoning those
that lost their Arms and Legs upon this occasion: Which caused so great a
consternation amongst the French that were at Utrecht, that after this time the
Officers drew lots, when they were go out in any Parties against the Prince of
Orange. Of the Hollanders were slain Six or Seven Hundred Men, besides Coll.
Zulestein, and a Lieutenant Colonel.

His Highness seeing the City had received so considerable a relief, retired to
his own Quarters, with the honor of a complete Victory, and raised the Seige
without the least loss, having defeated almost five entire Regiments, the
greatest part of their Officers being either slain or mortally wounded, and
having twice repulsed an old General, who had never succeeded in his design had
it not been for the perfidiousness of the Peasants.

After the unsuccessful attempt upon Narden, his Highness assembled a Council
of War, at which the principal Officers of the Army assisted, and having
commanded the Horse that were quartered at Helden to hinder the English
Merchandise from being transported from Rotterdam to Brabant, he marched
himself to Rosendael, which was the place of the general Randezvous, from
whence with an Army composed of Twenty four Thousand Horse and Foot, he took
his march directly to the Country of Liege. At his approach the Count de Duras,
who was at Moseyk, retired with his Army to Vassemburgh, and higher toward the
River Roer. 'Twas believed that his Highness's principal design was to chase
the French from their quarters near the Meuse, and give battle to the Count de
Duras, who commanded the Enemy's Troops, in case he found a favorable
opportunity to do it. To effect this, having passed his Army upon a bridge of
boats near Navagne, and joined the Auxiliaries which came to him from Spain, he
marched directly to Tongres, and invested it on all sides with the Spanish
Cavalry and his own. He had no sooner done this, but news was brought him that
the Count de Duras had decamped, upon which repassing the Meuse between Sittart
and Maseik, he encamped near Ainsberg, where he continued two days, to see if
he could engage the Count to give him battle, but the River which was swelled
with the late rains not favoring his design, he returned the same way to
Mastricht; from whence he detached a party of Horse and Foot to possess
themselves of the Castle of Valcheron. This Castle was strongly fortified, but
after some resistance surrendered at discretion. They found in it great quantity
of Hay and Corn, and other Provisions. After this his Highness marched to
Lewick, hoping to engage the Enemy, but the Count had retired in mighty speed,
and was got at such a distance from the Princ's Army, that it was impossible to
overtake him.

At last perceiving that the Count de Duras had no mind to hazard a battle, he
ordered the Count de Marcin to invest Charleroy with the Vanguard, while he
himself followed with the main body of the Army; but the weather was so
violently cold that it was impossible to open the Trenches, or to make the
least circumvallation, so that after he had made himself Master of Bins, taking
three Captains with Three Hundred Soldiers Prisoners, pillaged and demollished
the Town, he marched back the same way, and put his Army into Winter Quarters.
The Count de Montal, who sometimes shut himself up in Tongres, and sometimes in
Charleroy, because he was afraid for both these places, and yet could not tell
which of them the Prince would besiege, was much mistaken to imagine, that the
Prince would undertake a long siege in the most rigorous season of the Year.
However it was very remarkable, That a young General, who commanded an Army
composed of so many different Nations, should be able to march in the midst of
so violent a Winter into the Enemies Country, to beat an old General from his
post, to offer him battle, and for this purpose to follow him from place to
place, to alarm two strong Garrisons, and return home with abundance of
Prisoners, and the booty of two fortified places, and all this in the compass
of nine days, without the loss of any of his men, or at least very few. Not to
mention the terror he put the Archbishop of Colen in, who neither thought
himself safe at Bonn, or any other place within his own Territories, while the
Prince was so near him.

During the Prince's Expedition, the Duke of Luxemburg got together an Army of
Forty Thousand Horse and Foot, with a resolution to conquer the Province of
Holland, and hoping to enrich himself and his men with the pillage of Leyden
and the Hague, designed to march upon the Ice, with the Flower of the French
Army, toward the end of December; but being arrived at Slinwetering he found
the Waters so high that only Three Thousand five Hundred Foot could pass, the
rest being obliged to return to Naerden. This party first attacked Nieucrop,
but was repulsed by the Peasants, so that he marched toward Swammerdam, where
the Soldiers were the first that fled, leaving the Inhabitants to the Mercy of
the Enemy. Nevertheless Count Koningsmark, who commanded at Bodegrave, having
advice of the coming of the French, made all imaginable haste to march by
Leiden, and posted a Regiment at Goursluys to hinder their incursions on that
side.

This desperate and unexpected march of the French at first put the people into
a great consternation, particularly those of the Hague; but nothing discouraged
them so much, as to hear that while the States took all imaginable care to
prevent the Enemies returning, Colonel Painvin had abandoned his Post at
Niewerbourg, and retired to Tergou. By this means the Enemy had an open free
passage to go home when they pleased, whereas otherwise they must either have
perished in the Water, or else surrendered themselves at discretion, by reason
of the great Thaw which followed soon after: But all their fears and
apprehensions vanished at the Prince of Orange's return, who having at Breda
received advice of this enterprise of the French, arrived with incredible
diligence at Alfen, and in a short time his presence reestablished every thing
as before. All this while the Duke of Luxemburg ravaged the heart of the
Country, where he had like to have lost his life by a fall from his Horse into
the water which was thawed, his people saving him not without a great deal of
difficulty. But tho he made a shift to escape, it did not fare so well with Six
Hundred of his best Soldiers, who there perished. Thus ended this bold and
hazardous Expedition.

It is certain the French committed unheard of cruelties at Swammerdam, and all
other places that fell into their hands, ravishing the women, stripping and
wounding young and old, and throwing Children into the Fire. But these losses
nevertheless were in some manner recompensed by the taking of Coeverden, which
is one of the strongest Cities in the Low Countries, the Key of Friezland and
Groningen, encompassed on all sides with a Morass, fortified with large deep
double Ditches, the Ramparts extremely high and strong, and defended by seven
Bastions that carry the names of the seven United Provinces, and a very regular
Castle, looked upon by ancient Writers to be impregnable. This City fell into
the hands of the Bishop of Munster, in the fatal Year 1672, not without
suspicion of Treachery. But Fortune now declining to espouse the French
Interest any longer, since his Highness was restored to all his paternal
dignities; it was retaken with as much gallantry and courage, as it had been
lost with dishonor and cowardice. For this very same place, which Verdugo had
in vain besieged, for the space of one and thirty weeks together; and which the
Bishop of Munster, after he had rendered himself Master of it, had plentifully
stored with provisions, out of a prospect of making it the Magazine for those
parts, was by a party of Nine Hundred and Sixty men only, commanded by M. de
Rabenhaut, retaken in less than an hour, without the loss of more than Sixty
men, whereas the Enemy lost above an Hundred and fifty, besides the Officers
that were slain at the assault, and four Hundred and thirty Prisoners taken, of
which number were six Captains, eleven Lieutenants, and fourteen Ensigns. The
rest of the Garrison, for in all it consisted of Nine Hundred men, saved
themselves by a precipitate flight as soon as they saw the City was lost. But
what was most considerable, there was found in this important Fortress such a
prodigious quantity of all warlike Ammunitions, and other Provisions, that
without question the Enemy might have maintained the Siege much longer. Besides
as the retaking of this strong place by the Hollanders, gave infinite
encouragement to the people, so the loss of it extremely mortified the Enemy,
and put them into such a terrible consternation, that upon the news of this
loss they abandoned several other places. All this served to increase the
reputation of his Royal Highness, for the people observing how much all affairs
went for the better, ever since the management of them was lodged in his hands,
they were easily persuaded, and that not without good reason, that all this
unexpected series of successes was the sole effect of his bravery and conduct.

At this time the disputes between the new and old Magistrates of Friezland
were carried on with that warmth and vigor that they held their Assemblies
apart, and formed resolutions entirely opposite to each other. This disorder,
which might in time have proved pernicious to the public tranquillity, could
neither be determined by the Governor of that Province, nor by the Princess
Dowager of Orange, whatever instances and precautions both one and the other
used to extinguish the differences; but no sooner had the Commissioners sent by
the Prince arrived there, but all these breaches were repaired, and the Country
once more settled in order and union.

After this, his Highness went in person to Zealand, where the same divisions
reigned as in Friezland; and at the moment he appeared in the Assembly of the
States at Middleburg, all the differences vanished, and the Province was in a
condition to defend it self, to the great satisfaction of the people in
general, the Magistrates in particular, and the eternal praise of this
illustrious Prince. He took occasion from hence to go and visit the frontiers
and fortifications of Flushing, Sluyis, and Ardenburgh, where they delivered
him the Keys in a Silver Basin by the hands of the young Maids of the City, all
dressed up with Flowers. He did the same thing at Assendyck, Bergen ap zoom,
Breda, Boisleduc, and other places; and after making an exact review returned
to the Hague.

The Spring was by this time well advanced, and the Hollanders had business
enough on their hands; for on one side they were attaqued by the King of France
in person with a powerful Army, and the Prince of Conde and the Duke of
Luxemburg were at Utrecht with great forces, watching an opportunity to throw
themselves into the heart of the Country; and on the other side the King of
Great Britain, with his Fleet and that of France conjoined, vigorously
attacqued them. For these reasons the Prince of Orange could not stir abroad,
being constrained to keep his post, as well to have an eye upon the Prince of
Conde and the Duke of Luxemburg, as to prevent the descent of the English.

In the beginning of May 1673, the King of France parted from Paris at the head
of a great Army, which several other Bodies in the French Acquisitions were to
join; and after a slow march sat down before Maestricht on the 10th of June
with all his forces, consisting in all of forty two thousand Horse and Foot;
having given Orders before to the Count d' Orge to invest the place with three
thousand Horse. The Garrison of Maestricht consisted of about four thousand
Foot, and eight or nine hundred Horse, under the command of Monsieur de Farjaux
Governor of the Town, a brave experienced Captain, as he abundantly convinced
all the World by the generous resistance he made, and by that vast inundation
of blood it cost the French King to take it; who lost on this occasion more
than 9000 of his best Soldiers, all his Musketeers except seven, and an
infinite number of gallant Officers: and perhaps it had not been purchased so
easily, if the Besieged had been in time relieved with a recruit only of a
thousand men, or if they had been better provided with ammunition, which now
began to fail them. It would be too tedious to give an exact relation here of
all the rencounters, and bloody combats that happened night and day, and of the
firing which was made on both sides, this being rather the business of a
Journalist than an Historian. I shall therefore content my self to say in a few
words, that after the Garrison, by a vigorous defense, which lasted near three
weeks, had lost one half of her men, by continual Batteries and Assaults one
after another, and those that remained were not in a condition to defend
themselves any longer, by reason of the perpetual fatigues they had endured,
the Governor was sorced at last, at the repeated instances of the Magistrates,
or rather by the treachery of some Ecclesiastics of the Romish persuasion, to
capitulate and surrender himself. In effect, upon a faithful relation which the
Governor gave his Highness of all that had happened, the Prince was so well
satisfied with his conduct, that he made him Major General of his Army.

And to say the truth his opposition had been so vigorous, and withal so fatal
to the French, that the King of France thought he had done enough for this
Campaign in only taking Mastricht. So that after he had demolished the
Fortifications of Tongres, he divided his Army at the same time, part of which
he sent to the Marshall de Turenne, another body was appointed to ravage the
Country of Triers, because the Elector of that name had taken the Emperor's
side. And three Brigades marched immediately to reinforce the Army which was in
Holland.

The French Army being thus dispersed, and the English Fleet after the last
Engagement leaving the Coasts of Holland, the Prince of Orange found himself
more at liberty, and not enduring to spend any more time without action, he
recalled all the Troops that were in Zealand, to come and join the rest of his
Army, and marched all on the sudden to besiege Naerden with twenty five
thousand Men. He gave the Command of the Cavalry to Major General Farjaux, and
took his Quarter on one side, and Count Waldeck on the other. While things were
in this posture, the Duke of Luxemburg having made up a body of ten thousand
Men besides four Regiments of Munsterian Horse, advanced within sight of the
Dutch, as far as the Prince's intrenchments, which by that time were finished;
but not daring to relieve the Town, the Prince pursued his design, took the
Counterscarp by assault, and the Ravelin before the Huyserport after three
hours resistance, forced the besieged to retire into the Town in great
disorder, and obliged them the day following after the loss of their Forts to
demand leave to Capitulate. In short the Town was surrendered, on condition the
Garrison should march out with Colors flying, Drums beating, and two pieces of
Cannon.

The Governor, as he passed by, saluted his Highness with a profound
Reverence, and as it is reported, told the Prince that he had very good reasons,
for delivering up the Town in so short a time, which he would acquaint the King
his master with at a proper time and place: but in all appearance his reasons
upon examination were not thought valid, for he was condemned to perpetual
imprisonment, after he had been degraded at Utrecht in a very ignominious
manner. It Is true, all the world was surprised, that the French so easily
abandoned a place of that importance and strength, and which was in so good a
condition to defend it self; for there were Two thousand Nine hundred and
thirty Soldiers in the Garrison, who wanted no provisions; besides that the
French, ever since they had rendered themselves Masters of it had fortified it
extremely. But whatever was the cause of it, whether some divisions arising
between them and the Swissers, as some people imagine, or something else which
we don't know, his Highness, who to encourage the Soldiers by his own example,
exposed his person to all dangers, both in the Trenches and upon the Batteries,
carried the Town in four days, having only 100 men slain outright, and about
200 wounded, whereas the Enemy lost abundance more, which is quite contrary to
what happens in all other Sieges. Nor was he less careful to preservehis
conquest, than he was to acquire it: to this purpose having given all necessary
orders to repair the Fortifications, and placed a sufficient Garrison in in it,
he made Count Coningsmark, a brave experienced Captain, Governor of the Town,
and then returned to the Hague to prepare himself for some greater designs.

For after the States of the United Provinces had made a stricter alliance with
the King of Spain and the Emperor, to defend themselves mutually against France
their common Enemy, by which they were obliged to assist one another conjointly
with all their forces; after this triple alliance, I say, in consequence of
which, the Imperial Army consisting of about Twenty Thousand Foot and Ten
Thousand Horse was already on their March; the Prince of Orange to perform
something remarkable before the season was over, caused his Army to advance to
Rosendael in Brabant, and following it soon after himself, he joined with the
Count de Monterey, who without the least difficulty yielded to him the
pre-eminence and command of the whole Army. But finding that the Prince of
Conde had changed his post upon the news of the two Armies being joined, and
that he had so well entrenched himself that it was impossible to attack him, he
advanced higher, and joined the Imperial Army commanded by Montecuculi, between
Andernach and Bon. In his march he summoned Rhinbeck to surrender, which through
the persuasion of a Burgher, who encouraged the rest to make resistance, being
refused, he commanded the Sieur de Walkenburg to take two Regiments of
Dragoons, and two of Infantry, and to make an assault, which they did with that
vigor, that the Soldiers entering the Town put all to the Sword, and hanged up
the Burgher who had so ill advised them as to make an opposition.

The Confederates being now joined, it was resolved to attack Bonn. The better
to effect this the Marquis d' Arsentar was dispatched to Kessenning to take his
quarters there, and on the next day Montecuculi lodged the Imperialists at
Goedesbourg. His Highness went to post himself with all his forces at Rynford,
and General Spork, who commanded the Imperial Cavalry, planted himself on the
other side of the City, near Westerwaldt.

Bonn is a considerable City, called by the Romans, Iulia Bonna, situate upon
the Rhine, within four Leagues of Colen. As it was then in the hands of the
Elector and the French, they had placed in it a Garrison of two Thousand men,
under the command of Lantsberghen, and had provided it with all ammunitions of
war, with Twenty four piece of Cannon planted upon the Walls and Ramparts. The
Confederates not thinking themselves sufficiently paid for the loss of
Mastricht by the retaking of Naerden, resolved to render themselves Masters of
Bonn. The Pr. of Conde durst not hinder them in person, but sent the Marshall
d' Humieres with a body of five Thousand Horse to oppose them, and to endeavor
to throw some relief into the Town in the beginning of the Siege. To put this
in execution he advanced as far as Birchem, from whence he sent a party of an
Hundred Horse, who pretending that they belonged to the Duke of Lorrain, passed
through the midst of the Imperialists, without being stopped by any of the
Sentinels, and so got safe into the City. But another Hundred hoping to meet
the same success, as they passed by his Highness's Quarters, found the
Sentinels not so credulous as their Brethren were, so they were all cut in
pieces, or made Prisoners; which news coming to the ears of five Hundred more,
who had hid themselves in a neighboring Wood upon the same design, they fled
with the greatest precipitation imaginable. At this time General Spork detached
a body of five Thousand Horse to go and meet the French, which the Marshall
being informed of, he sounded a retreat, and went back to Utrecht.

On the other side, the Bsiegers having finished their Batteries, and made
their approaches, gave but little, or no rest at all to the besieged, and after
they had made three Mines ready to spring, they prepared to give a general
assault. Nevertheless the Generals of the Confederates being willing to spare
their own People, and hoping to make themselves Masters of the place by gentler
methods, sent to summon the Governor afresh, remonstrating to him that he had
no hopes of being relieved, that they were ready to spring three Mines; that to
be farther satisfied of the truth of this matter he might if he so pleased,
send one of his own men to behold them; and that in case of longer resistance
they were resolved to put all to the Sword, without giving quarter to any whom
they found in arms. This message so effectually frighted the besieged, that
after a few days siege they demanded Articles, and surrendered the same day upon
the ordinary conditions, viz. to go out with Drums beating, Colors flying,
without carrying any provisions, or ammunition with them, except two pieces of
Cannon. There went out of the Garrison a Thousand five Hundred men, the rest
being either slain or wounded, All the Germans who were in this number
immediately deserted, and listed themselves in the Emperor's service.

The City being taken, his Highness retired to Vesseling, and from thence
marching lower with his Army, and that of the Imperialists (for he commanded
both ever since the departure of Montecuculi for Vienna, till the arrival of
the Duke de Bournonville) he took the two Castles of Brevel and Sechuich, the
latter of which had a Garrison of two Hundred French commanded by a German, who
perceiving that the Soldiers, after they were summoned to surrender, resolved
to hold it out to the last, bethought himself of a stratagem to make them alter
their opinions, for having commanded the French to go down into the lower
Court, under a pretense to defend it, when he saw them all there, he drew the
Drawbridge upon them, who finding themselves by this means exposed to a much
greater number, were forced to yield up the place.

This same Castle in the year 1642, had been besieged by the entire army of the
Duke de Weimar, and the Landgrave of Hesse, under the command of the Counts de
Guebriant and d' Eberstein, and for six weeks together was battered with
extraordinary fury. But after all their efforts they were constrained to raise
the Siege.

All this while the Marshall de Turenne kept himself at a distance, for although
he received the news that Bonne was besieged by the Confederates, and had a
mighty desire to attempt the raising of the Siege, yet knowing that the Duke of
Lorrain lay upon the banks of the Moselle to observe him, he moved up and down
in the Electorate of Ments, mightily complaining that he was no sooner informed
of the joining of the Confederates.

The mighty multitudes of the French were by this time reduced to so
inconsiderable a number, and all through their prodigal illmanaged effusion of
blood, that they were not in a condition to keep the field without draining
their Garrisons. This necessity obliged them to abandon the greatest part of
their conquests in the Low Countries, and draw out their men from thence,
rather than suffer so powerful an Army as that of the Confederates was, to
retake without any manner of resistance the Cities upon the Rhine, the Meuse
and the Moselle.

Woerden was the first place they quitted, as it was the first that suffered
under their Tyranny, the Governor having received orders from the Duke of
Luxemburg to demolish the Ramparts, and to carry away with him all the
Ammunition and heavy Canonn: But as in the bodies of persons possessed, the
Devil before he departs, leaves terrible marks of his rage behind him; so after
the same manner the Governor of this Town, before he left it, sent for the
Magistrates and demanded twenty Thousand Livres of them to save themselves from
plunder and fire; alleging that he had orders from the King and Duke of
Luxemburg to pillage and reduce the place to ashes, unless they gave him the
above mentioned Sum. The Magistrates repaired to Utrecht, but notwithstanding
all the Remonstrances and Submissions they made to the Duke of Luxemburg, were
obliged to comply with what he demanded of them, nay and more than that, to
save their Castle, their Gates, and their Fortifications, which ohterwise they
threatened to lay level with the ground, and were forced to leave Hostages till
the sum was paid. The malice and perfidy of the French was such, that they had
min'd the Castle and one of the Bastions, and had insallibly destroyed them, if
the Swissers that werein the place had not discovered their treacherous
intention.

Harderwick was entirely dismantled, yet for all that they had the good manners
to demand twelve Thousand Livres of the Inhabitants, but the richest Burghers
having long before quitted the Town, they were forced to go without it.

The Fort of Crevec^ur was utterly demolished: nevertheless the French made an
offer to save the Church and the Governor's House for the sum of three
Thousand Pistols, to be paid by the Inhabitants of Boisleduc, but this proposal
being rejected, they neither spared the House, nor the Church.

Bommel, a Fortress of great importance, upon the Fortifications of which place
the King of France had expended the sum of Sixscore Thousand Livres, was
deserted at the same time; the Inhabitants giving a dozen Hostages for the
payment of two Thousand Crowns, to preserve their Houses from being pillaged.

Utrecht, where the French had always in Garrison between six and seven
Thousand men at least, and which place consequently was a mighty expense to
them, was likewise abandoned. Nevertheless this City was obliged to give
Hostages for the payment of 100 Thousand Crowns. The French leaving it all on
the same day, the Burgher-masters were absolved from the Oath they had taken
against the re-establishment of the Pr. of Orange, and sent their Deputies to
him to acknowledge him for their Stadt-holder, in the name of all the Province,
which change was very agreeable to the People.

Elburgh upon the South Sea, Campen on the Overyssel, and Hattem were likewise
quitted by the French, and Steenwick and Weppel by the Munsterians.

In consideration of so unexpected a change, which was entirely owing to the
prudent conduct and great courage of the Prince of Orange, the States confirmed
him in the Office of Stadt-holder, to testify how sensible they were of the
services he had done the Republic; and not content with this, entailed this
Dignity upon the Heirs of his body, born in lawful Wedlock in an instrument
dated Febr. 2d. 1674. The same day the States of Zealand conferred the same
administration upon his Royal Highness, and declared him chief Nobleman of
their Province.

It was high time now to deliver these States from those consusions and
disorders, which the French had occasioned in the Government. And the Prince
very wellknowing that it was no less glorious for a good Governor to reform
and correct what was amiss at home, than to make Conquests abroad, went to
Utrecht to settle the Government of that Province upon the ancient Foot. To
effect this, he convened immediately after his arrival an Assembly of the
States, where it was resolved that new members should be chose to compose the
body of the Nobility and Magistracy; which was put in execution in the very
same manner he had projected. For having given them to understand, that at the
request of several of the Burghers, he had drawn up a Scheme of certain Orders
for the better government of the Province for the time to come; but yet would
by no means impose any thing upon them without the advice and consent of those
that were present; at last, after a mature deliberation, they all unanimously
submitted to the Ordinances proposed by his Highness, which were, That the
Government of the Province should be in the hands of three distinct Societies,
as it anciently had been, viz. the Counselors elect, the body of the Nobility,
and the Deputies of Towns: that the Counselors elect should be continued three
years and no longer; that after that time was expired, which they were to
acquaint the Governor General with three months before, he should have power
to continue them, or else to make new alterations, as he should see convenient;
provided he nominated none but those that were of the Reformed Religion, and
that amongst these Counselors Elect there were four Burghers and four
Gentlemen; moreover, that the Governor General should have the disposal of the
vacant places of the Provosts, as also of the Revenues of the Vicaridges
belonging to the Provosts, Deans and Chapters of Monks, as soon as they fell,
and employ this for the maintenance of poor Ministers, and other pious uses in
the Province; that to avoid all disputes relating to the Nobility, the
Governor alone should have the power, after the death of one or more of that
body, to put in his or their place, such Person or Persons as he should think
fit, provided they made profession of the Reformed Religion, having a due
regard to their Age, Birth, Estates, and such other circumstances; that after
the first nomination and election of a Governor General, all vacancies of
Bailiffs of Towns, Presidents, Advocates, and in short of all civil and
military Offices, should be at his disposal. After this a form of an Oath was
agreed upon, which all that were present were to take without further scruple,
and all others should be obliged to do the same, according to their several
functions. And when the following proposition was made, whether it were
advisable to confer the Charge of Governor General, Captain, and Admiral
General of the Province upon his Highness and his heirs male lawfully begotten;
they all nemine contradicente approved the motion, and so conserr'd that
Dignity upon his Highness.

At the same time General Rabenhaupt, with the Militia of Frizeland and
Groningen, reinforced with the Regiment of Bumarnia, took the field, and made
himself master of Northom, which he fortified with sixteen Companies of Horse,
and six of Foot; and from thence advancing to Tuvent, took several other places
of less importance, designing to chase all the Munsterians out of that part of
the Country, and to that end marched as far as Nienbuys.

The Enemy was no sooner informed of the General's march, but they invested
Northom with five Regiments of Horse, three Companies of Dragoons, and three
hundred Foot, commanded by General Nagel, and beat the advanced Guards back
into the Town. General Rabenhaupt had no sooner received intelligence of this,
but he came back the same way to relieve the place; which he performed so
happily, that the Enemy was obliged to betake themselves to flight, after they
had lost a hundred and seventy of their men; of which number sixscore were
slain upon the place, and the rest made prisoners. The next day he returned to
Nienbuys, and being resolved to make short work on it, gave orders to five
Regiments to make an Assault in five several places all at the same time; which
they executed with that bravery, that after a quarter of an hours resistance,
the enemy was forced to retire into the Castle, which was encompassed but with
one single Rampart, and defended with no more than two pieces of Cannon. The
Besiegers, who pushed the point home, were now just ready to enter the Castle,
when the enemy begged quarter, which was granted them. The Garrison consisted
of three hundred Foot, thirteen Officers, and two hundred and seventy Horse and
Dragoons, with fifteen Officers. General Rabenhaupt after so happy a success
put his small body of an Army into Winter quarters, which news being brought to
Nagel, he came back again to Nyenbuys, and retook it for the Bishop of Munster.

But the Bishop, either dreading these uncertain chances of War, or rather
fearing the approach of the Imperialists, made his peace with the Emperor.
Which so mightily alarmed the French, who were still in possession of their
Frontier Towns in the Low Countries, that the Marquess de Bellefonds, who
succeeded the Marshall d' Humieres in the Government of the Conquered
Provinces, resolved to abandon the rest, pretending he had occasion for the men
to preserve those Conquests they had made upon the Rhine. Besides, being
informed that the Prince of Orange designed to march into Brabant with thirty
Thousand men, there to join the Spanish Army that was composed of twenty
Thousand, instead of fortifying the places of his Government, he began to
demolish them. Thiel compounded for Twenty two Thousand Florins, to preserve
themselves from fire and plunder, which they threatened them with, and to save
their Fortifications. The Town of Zutphen promised Seventy Thousand, and gave
Hostages for the security of payment. Arnheim paid Twenty six Thousand Florins,
and four Thousand Sacks of Corn and Meal, which the Magistrates of the Town
engaged to see carried to Grave. Deventer paid six Thousand Rixdollars to the
Bishop of Munster. Thus the whole Province of Overyssel regained its ancient
liberty, and returned to its natural and lawful Sovereigns. After which his
Highness sent Commissioners thither to make some necessary alterations, and
regulate affairs, till he had an opportunity to come himself in person and put
a full conclusion to them.

The King of France seemed to be exceedingly displeased with the conduct of the
Marquis de Bellefonds so that he banished him to Bourges, with a prohibition to
come near the Court, although all the world knew this was only a mere pretense to
conceal his present necessities, and that he was forced to exhaust his
Garrisons in the Low Countries to reinforce his Army which he had designed for
the Conquest of the Franche-Comte. But the honor of all these desertions was
justly attributed to the Prince of Orange; for he, like another Scipio,
carrying the war into the Enemy's Territories, in less than two years, forced
all these French Hannibals to quit his own Country, and seek their fortune
elsewhere.

In the mean time the King of France, endeavoring, like the Sea, to gain in
one place what he had lost in another, entered the Franche Comte with a
prodigious Army, which joining with another that was commanded by the Prince of
Conde, became so formidable, that in a short time he made himself Master of
Besancon, Dole, Salins, and in short of the whole Province. While these two
Armies were thus joined, the Prince of Orange repaired to his Army at Berghen
op Zoom, from whence he marched to Malines, and kept himself on his guard in
Brabant, during all the time the French King was in the Neighborhood: but this
Monarch being returned to Paris after his new Couquest, where he lost both
abundance of brave Officers, and of his best Soldiers, the Imperialists threw
themselves into Namur, took the Castle, and Dinant, and the passage of the
Meuse being by this means opened. they went to join the Army of the
Confederates toward the end of July. The three Generals after some conference,
ordered that the Count de Souches should lead the Van, his Highness command the
Main Body, and the Count de Montery the Rear. In this order the Confederates
prepared to attack the Prince of Conde, who with an Army of Fifty Thousand men
was encamped on the other side the River Pieton, to prevent the designs of the
Enemy. The Confederates, who had an Army of Sixty Thousand men, resolved to set
upon the Prince and give him battle. With this prospect they marched strait
upon him, having abundance of all sorts of provisions, which came daily out of
Brabant.

With this resolution the Confederate Army arrived at Nivelle by the beginning
of August, where they encamped for some days. But because they saw the Prince
of Conde was by no means disposed to quit his post, but on the other hand was
still fortifying himself more and more within his Trenches, the Confederates
judged it expedient to approach nearer to him, to see if he would not be
willing to hazard a battle in open field. Being therefore advanced within five
or six mile of the French Camp, they did all that in them lay to make him leave
his strong situation, but 'twas to no purpose; for the Prince (whether he had
received orders from the King, or this was his own proper sense of the affair)
would by no means quit it. And now the Confederate Army finding that all their
efforts were in vain, resolved to attack some important place, not doubting but
the Prince would leave his post to come and relieve it, and so they should
bring their designs about.

This resolution being taken, the Prince of Orange decamped from Senef and
marched strait on the side of Bins. The Imperialists had the Vanguard, the
Hollanders the Main Body, and the Spaniards the Rear; and because the passage
was narrow, the Cavalry marched on the left, the Infantry in the midst, and the
Artillery with all the baggage on the left also; and to secure their march the
Prince de Vaudemont still kept behind, with four Thousand Horse and some
Dragoons.

The Prince of Conde being informed of their March, and knowing perfectly well
the difficulty of the ways through which the Confederates were to pass, took
care to range his Army in order. However not thinking it safe for him to engage
the whole Army of the Confederates, he suffered the Vanguard with a
considerable part of their Main Body to pass some leagues before, and when he
saw they were too far advanced to return soon enough, he believed he might now
fall upon the Rear. Thus the Prince came out of his Trenches, and attacked
Vaudemont's Horse, who seeing himself in a Country where the Horse could do no
great service by reason of the Hedges and Ditches, sent presently to the Prince
of Orange for two Battalions of his best Foot, while he with his Horse kept the
Enemy in play. His Highness sent him three under the command of young Prince
Maurice of Nassau, who as soon as they came up, were placed on the other side
of Senef, all before the Horse in a four square body. And now the whole Army of
the Prince of Conde being come out of their Trenches, 'twas judged convenient
to send for the Troops that were on the other side of the River, that runs by
Senef, and then they placed the three Battalions that before were posted in the
Wood, directly against the Bridge of Senef, over which the French were to pass.
They were no sooner got thither, but the French attacked 'em all at once,
Horse, Foot, and Dragoons. Tho they began this attack with wonderful vigor, yet
they were not able to force the Enemy from his Post, so that they were forced
to draw off, and make a Bridge over the River somewhat higher. Having by this
means joined all their forces together, the Confederate Horse ranged themselves
behind the Infantry, but so that they might come upon occasion to their relief.
In the mean time the Foot fired so warmly upon the French that passed the
River, that abundance of them were killed; but the Confederates being unhappily
straightened for want of ground, and the French setting upon them as they came out
of the Wood, on all sides, their Foot was obliged to retreat, being overwhelmed
by the excessive number of their Enemies, which was the reason that they lost
several of their principal Officers. Young Prince Maurice who commanded the
Brigade was made a Prisoner, with several Officers more, and Coll. Macovits was
killed.

As soon as the Infantry of the Confederates was retired, the French fell with
great vigor upon the Horse commanded by the Prince de Vaudemont; and the
Prince of Conde began to range his Army in form of battle, commanding his Foot
to march secretly under the covert of the Hedges and Bushes. The Confederate
Horse had orders to charge them, and as they were going to do it, found the way
was so hollow between the Enemy and them, that they were obliged to turn about
to the right, and join the rest of the Army, lest the Enemy perceiving their
retreat, should charge them in the Flank. The French observing this, turned to
the left, and made so much have to charge this body of Horse, that Prince
Vaudemont had only time enough to range his three Battalions, to endeavor to
make head against the Enemy. This first onset proved unlucky to the
Confederates, for the three Commanders in chief of this Brigade were taken
Prisoners, with several other Persons of Quality, as the Duke of Holstein, the
Prince de Solmes, and Monsieur de Langerac, and many more were there slain.
Whatever care was taken to make these four Battalions rally again it could
never be effected, for away they ran, without making the least discharge upon
the Enemy. Prince Vaudemont gave convincing proofs of an extraordinary valor,
but all his efforts were to no purpose. The Prince of Orange likewise
discovered an undaunted bravery, behaving himself in all respects like an Old
experienced General, for he got before these affrighted Troops with his Sword
in his hand, and endeavored by all sorts of persuasions, and by his own
example, to encourage them to renew the fight, exposing himself frequently to
the danger of being killed; or made a Prisoner, but he was not able to stop
them, till they met a body of Spanish Horse posted at the bottom of a little
Hill, between them, and the Village of Fay. Another Party of these Runaways,
joined themselves to sixteen Battalions commanded by the Duke de Villa Hermosa,
who marched at the head of his Troops to oppose the French who pursued them,
and did every thing that could be expected from a person of his valor and
conduct, in the miserable condition that things were then in. The rest of the
Confederates rallied togather with a body of Foot, posted likewise at the Foot
of the same Hill.

On the other side the Prince of Conde, who had advanced so far in pursuing the
fugitives, fell with that fury upon the Spanish Horse, and the Foot whom he
chased, that the Marquis d' Assentar was forced to send for four other
Regiments from the Foot of the Hill, to reinforce his Cavalry. Which the Prince
of Conde observing, he ordered five or six Battalions to advance immediately,
with a Brigade of Horse, and dividing his Troops on the right and the left, he
charged the Cavalry of the Confederates in the Front, and put them in disorder.
The Marquess did all he could, by his own example, to rally his men, and begin
the Battle afresh, till at last, being wounded in seven places, he was killed
at the head of his own Troops. The Cavalry being thus in disorder, he attempted
to break his way through four Battalions of Foot that were come to their
relief, and put them in great confusion, notwithstanding the conduct of the
Duke de Villa Hermosa and Prince Vaudemont, who used all the means imaginable
to make them rally. They likewise disordered the rest of the Infantry that were
posted at the bottom of the Hill, although Count Waldeck did his best to stop
their flight; but seeing it was time thrown away, he charged the victorious
Enemy in the Flank with a fresh body of Horse, that had joined him a little
before. And certainly there was all the reason in the world to expect a good
effect of this onset, under the conduct of so courageous and experienced a
Commander, if he had been but seconded: but as he was overpowered by great
numbers of the Enemy, he withdrew from the heat of the Action, after he had
slain two of the Enemy, who had particularly set upon him, and after he had
rallied the rest of his Troops, although he was all over bloody with three wounds
he had received.

In the heat of this Combat, some Battalions of the Enemy had made themselves
Masters of the Baggage belonging to the Dutch, and had already pillaged part of
it. For the Leaders, instead of fortifying and barricadoing themselves with
their Wagons, cut the harness of the Horses, and fled away without ever
looking behind them, some toward Brussels, and some to other places, where
they gave out that all was lost. It must be confessed, that the Prince of Conde
had carried away all the advantages of victory in this Fight, had he given over
here, but his natural impetuosity and ambition spurred him on to gain all or
nothing, which in the end proved fatal to him.

For after he had ranged his Guards du Corpse, Cuirassiers, and the rest of the
Army that stayed behind in battle array, he advanced toward the main body of
the Confederates, commanded by the Prince of Orange, Prince Maurice, the
Rhingrave, and Major General Vane. At the same time General Souches who led the
Vanguard, and who was advanced some hours before the rest of the Army, having
received advice of what had passed, made all the haste he could to join the
main Body: which he did at one a Clock in the Afternoon: By which time his
Highness had advantageously bestowed the Imperialists, and the Spaniards on the
left wing, and his own on the right. And now the Fight was renewed more
furiously than ever.

The Duke of Luxemburgh commanded the right wing of the French, and the Duke of
Nouailles the left: for the Marquess de Rochefort, the Chevalier de Tourilles,
and the Count de Montal, were all three wounded. The first onset of the French
was by far the most vehement that had been seen during the course of this war.
Honor, Hatred, Revenge, Hope, and Despair, animated the courag of the two
Parties. Hope of Victory, which as yet had declared her self in favor of
neither side, made them resolve to vanquish or dye. The Prince of Orange showed
himself every where, sparing nothing upon this occasion that might facilitate
the victory: sometimes he threw himself into the midst of his Enemies to the
apparent hazard of his life, and the Soldiers who being encouraged by his
example strove to outdo one another, sustained the fury of the Enemy with a
bravery greater than could be expected from them. Having thus frustrated the
hopes of the Prince of Conde, he endeavored to wheel about to the left. But
Monsieur de Farjaux Major General of the Dutch Army, being sent with some
Battalions, and seconded by the Count de Chavagnac, (who commanded a Squadron
of Imperial Horse) to prevent this design, opposed the French with so much
gallantry, that they were forced to retire: After this the Count sent for four
pieces of Cannon, with which he gauled the Enemy so advantageously, that Count
Souches with his Forlorn Hope broke into the strongest quarter of the Enemy,
and gave proofs of an extraordinary courage, according to his custom upon such
occasions. Nor did the Prince of Lorrain sit idle, but was seen to fight
several times at the head of the first ranks, although he lost so much blood, that
at last he was obliged to withdraw from the battle. Prince Pio who lay with his
Brigade near Senef, accompanied by the Marquess de Grana, and Count Staremberg,
after he had signalized himself by a Thousand noble actions, was wounded in the
thigh by a Musquetshot. The Marquess de Grana, and the Sons of Count Souches
behaved themselves so valiantly at the head of their Squadrons, that the French
Swissers were not able to gain one inch of ground upon them, which did not a
little contribute to the gaining of the battle for the Confederates.

In the mean time the Prince of Conde charged the right wing of the
Confederates, with his Cuirassiers, and the King's Household, but without
effect: only about seven in the afternoon he broke two Battalions that were
posted in a meadow at a small distance from thence. But Prince Maurice here
performed a signal piece of service to the States, in stopping the Career of
the Enemy, and preventing the great disorder on that side with no less conduct
than courage. The Rhingrave behaved himself with great bravery, and we may
truly say, that his valor and prudence did not inconsiderably promote the good
success of this battle. He was nevertheless constrained to leave the field by
reason of a wound he had received. Major General Vane, and the Sieur de
Villaumdire after having given remarkable testimonies of their valor, were
mortally wounded, and died of their wounds.

The two Armies fought in this manner till night with unexpressible fury on
both sides, tho the ground was covered with the dead and wounded; while the
Combatants covered with blood and sweat encouraged one another by so terrible a
spectacle. One might have seen whole Battalions of one and the other side
sometimes give ground, and then immediately rally by the good conduct of their
respective Commanders, amongst whom the Prince of Orange was chief, who was all
along to be seen in the heat of the battle, encouraging his men by his own
example. He had near him the young Prince of Frizeland, who was not above
twenty years old, and always engaged where the Enemies stood thickest, and
doing all that could be expected from so valiant and generous a Prince.

Thus the first heat and fire of the French, which threatened to devour every
thing that stood in its way, began to slacken about ten at night. The Infantry,
great part of which they lost, kept off at some distance, in spite of all the
Prince of Conde could do to bring them back, so that the Prince fearing a
greater misfortune, ordered his Horse to retreat, leaving but a few Squadrons
behind to favor their retreat, and these he commanded to move off as soon as
the rest of his Army was safe; leaving the Victory and the Field of battle to
the Prince of Orange, who two hours after the retreat of the French made his
Army draw off, and put them into Winter Quarters. Nevertheless he left Monsieur
de Farjaux all night in the Field to observe the motion of the Enemy, who tho
they could not well digest the rude treatment they received the day before,
durst attempt nothing: the Prince of Conde having only left some Dragoons in
his old Quarters, and got above three hours march before, lest the Confederates
should pursue him.

This was the issue of this bloody battle, wherein the Confederates were beat
at first, although they got the victory at last. For on the Enemies side there
were seven thousand men killed upon the spot, without reckoning the wounded,
whom the Prince of Conde left in the neighboring villages, to the number of
more than fifteen hundred On the side of the Confederates, the whole list of
those that were slain, wounded, made Prisoners and deserted, did not amount in
all to above six Thousand five Hundred, besides that abundance of their men
after they had been dispersed on one side and the other in the hurry of the
Engagement returned to their Colors. It Is commonly reported that a Letter of
the Prince of Conde to the King of France was intercepted, wherein he acquaints
him, that after he had made a general review of his Army, he found it in a very
deplorable condition, that he had lost the flower of his Infantry, and the
better part of his Horse, and in fine did not look upon himself to be strong
enough to hazard a second battle. In effect, besides three Regiments, Seven
Hundred Swissers of the Guards, and the Swiss Regiment of Molandin were
entirely defeated. An infinite number of Officers of note were slain, amongst
whom were the Marquess de Chanvalon, de Clemerant, de Bourbon, and d' Iliers;
three Counts, two Cornets of the King's Guards, more than Forty Officers of the
Guards du Corpse, Forty three Officers of the King's Regiment, Fourscore
Officers of the Queen's Guards, Nine Colonels, Eight Lieutenant Colonels and
Majors, and a Hundred and Sixty five Captains, without reckoning the subaltern
Officers. So that the Prince of Conde did not without reason complain that he
had lost abundance of brave Officers in this bloody dispute; and a certain
truth it is, that if he had not had the advantage in the beginning of the Fight
his Army had been entirely defeated. Amongst several other Standards a white
one was carried to Brussels, and hung up with a great deal of solemnity in the
Church belonging to the Carmelites. This Standard was embroidered with Gold and
Silver, bearing a Sun in the Zodiac with these proud words: Nihil obstabit
eunti, Nothing shall stop my Course.

The day after the battle his Highness marched with the whole Army by the way
of Mons, and put them in quarters at S. Guillain, where he received five
Regiments of new Recruits: and the Imperialists retired to Queverain, where
they stayed without doing any considerable action, till the eleventh or twelfth
of September.

In the mean time General Rabenhaupt undertook the Siege of Grave, which was
one of the most memorable Sieges that had happened for a long time, as well for
the situation of the place, the strength of the Garrison, the great abundance
of Ammunition and Provisions, as for the furious attacks and assaults of the
Besiegers, and the vigorous resistance of the Besieged. And that which renders
it still more famous, is, that it could never be ended till the arrival of the
Prince of Orange, who soon determined it.

The Garrison consisted of Fourscore and eleven Companies of Foot, who made in
all four Thousand men, and of Nine Troops of Horse. The Sieur de S. Louis, an
old experienced Captain commanded the Cavalry, and the Marquess de Chamilly, a
valiant and expert Commander was Governor of the Town; where were four Hundred
and fifty pieces of Cannon, a Hundred of which were mounted upon the Ramparts,
besides an infinite quantity of Powder, Corn, Grenades, and all sorts of
Provisions; for here the French had laid up all that they carried away from
those places they first conquered, and afterward abandoned

General Rabenhaupt laid Siege to this place, which extremely incommoded all
the Neighborhood, with Twenty Regiments of Foot, and some Horse, which were
soon after reinforced with two Regiments of Foot, and two Hundred Horse,
commanded by Don John de Pimentel, and a Regiment of Foot of the Prince of
Courland, and two Regiments of Horse of the Elector of Brandenburg, under the
command of General Spaen. Coll. Hundebeck posted himself behind the great Dike
on that side which lay nighest the Velp; Coll. Golstein on the side toward
Overyssel. The Brandenburg Cavalry posted themselves higher toward the Est, to
hinder any relief from coming into the Town. And the General himself approached
near the Castle de Vegesak. The place being thus environed on all sides, the
Siege was pushed forward with as much violence on the side of the Besiegers, as
it was vigorously defended by the Besieged.

In the mean time his Highness and the Imperialists that were quartered upon
the Frontiers of Henault, having recovered the disorder of the last battle,
were thinking how to perform some remarkable action. Upon this consideration,
as soon as the Grand Convoy was arrived from Brussels with the Spanish Army,
consisting of eight Thousand Foot, without reckoning the Horse and Dragoons,
the Prince of Orange decamped with the whole Army on the 12th of September, and
passed the River Hayne near Tournay and Aeth, and marched from thence to
Oudenarde. In the interim two Regiments of Foot, and two Thousand five Hundred
Horse near Ghent, were sent to break the Bridges of Deinse and Harlebike upon
the River Ley, with orders after that to rejoyn the Army. That Evening the same
Regiments brought abundance of Barges laden with all sorts of Ammunition and
Provisions, and five Hundred Pioneers, who were ordered to advance by the way
of Oudenarde, and were followed by a body of two Thousand five Hundred Horse,
that posted themselves that evening before the Town, and shut up all the
passages leading to the Garrison on that side. The Prince of Orange, and the
Count de Souches arrived at the same time, and took each of them their
quarters, the Prince in the Abbey of Ename, and the Count on the other side the
River at Leupegem and Elare: and the Spaniards c^mmanded by the Duke de Villa
Hermosa, posted themselves at Beverem and Moregem. There were in the Town four
Hundred Germans, six Thousand Swissers, a Thousand French, and four Hundred
Horse commanded by the Sieur de Rosquaire. The Confederates having finished all
their Works, made themselves Masters of the Counterscarp, when the Prince of
Conde, having decamped from before Beaumont, began to approach with his whole
Army, which consisted of forty Thousand men, and resolved to give battle to the
Confederates, in case he could not otherwise relieve the place. It was
therefore his Highness's advice to get all things in readiness, and meet the
Enemy that was fatigued and spent with so tedious a March. But this resolution
had no effect, because Count Souches was not to be found all that day, and thus
the Army was constrained to keep within their Trenches. In the mean time the
French still advanced on that side where the Imperialists lay posted, but Count
Souches, instead of ranging his men in Battle, quitted his post, and passed the
River in so much haste that he left some pieces of Cannon behind him, which his
Highness had sent him, and could not be recovered without extreme danger. By
this means the Prince of Conde having an open passage, entered the Town with
part of his Army, and he had certainly gained that Advantage as to cut off all
mann^ of Communication between the Confederates, had it not been for a great
Fog that arose on the sudden, and prevented his design.

The Prince of Orange considering the present state of his affairs, was of
opinion that it was the best way to draw off; and so followed after the
Imperialists and the Spaniards, whom he joined within a league of Oudenard, but
finding that by reason of the great opiniatrete of the former, he should be
able to effect nothing here, he was resolved to return the same way to Grave,
where his presence was so necessary to carry on the Siege, leaving Count
Waldeck to command the Army in his absence. The Prince arrived before this place
on the ninth of October with sixty Troops of Horse, and tho the Besieged, who
were now reduced to great extremities, defended themselves with great vigor
and resolution till the 25th of the same month, yet the Marquess de Chamilly
seeing it was impossible to hold out against a general assault, because of the
great breaches in the works, demanded a cessation of Arms for three or four
hours, and after Hostages on both sides, the City surrendered on very honorable
conditions; and thus ended this Campaign.

The year 1675 began with the Addresses of the Burghers, wherein they thanked
his Highness for the mighty services he had done them, in delivering them from
the calamities and miseries they had suffered under the tyranny of a foreign
Enemy. In consideration of which they offered him the Sovereignty of the Duchy
of Gueldres, and Earldom of Zutphen, with the Titles of Duke of Gueldres, and
Count of Zutphen. But the Prince reflecting with himself, that the accepting of
this offer would give matter of jealousy to some persons, and give others
occasion to infer that he only aimed at his own Grandeur in this war: to
convince the world of the sincerity of his intentions, he judged it the best
way to refuse these Honors, but at the same time did not refuse the offer they
made him of being hereditary Governor of that Province. This he readily
accepted, and after he had taken the Oaths, reformed several abuses that had
got footing during the Enemy's usurpation there. And now by reason of the
continual alarms the People were in, upon the occasion of the French King's
resolutions, who was to open the Campaign himself in Person, in the beginning^
of the Spring, he continually applied his thoughts upon the war, and for that
end always assisted at those Conferences, where they debated upon their
military affairs. He was at Cleve to confer with the Elector of Brandenburgh,
who entertained him with great magnificence; and soon after his arrival at the
Hague, fell ill of the Smallpox, which news caused so much the greater
consternain the United Provinces, because that disease had been fatal to his
Family, in the Person of his Father, his Mother, and the Duke of Gloucester; but
by the care and prudence of an able Physician, and by the assistance of some
remedies which the Elector of Brandenburgh sent him, he recovered his health,
to the universal joy not only of Holland, but all the Confederates.

No sooner was he perfectly recovered, but he repaired to the general
rendezvous at Rosendael; for the King of France being now upon his march in
Brabant, it was necessary for the Prince to observe his motions; and so much
the more, because Limburg, which was besieged by the Marquis de Rochefort,
demanded a speedy relief. For this reason, his Highness parting with his Army
from Duffel, joined the Dukes of Lunenburg and Lorrain at Gangelt, with a
resolution to raise the Siege. And in all probability it had come to a Battle
between the French King and the Prince, since the King, who was then at
Maestricht, having received advice of the Prince's march, had repassed the
Meuse at Viset, to oppose his design, but the City not being any longer able to
sustain the great numbers of their Enemies, surrendered sooner than was expected.

After the taking of Limbug, the King of France encamped near Tillemont,
ravaging all the Country round about Louvain, Brussels, and Malines. He had a
mighty desire to make himself master of Louvain, but his Highness and the Duke
de Villa Hermosa watched him all along so narrowly, that he durst not undertake
it; so that finding he was able to do no more, content with having gained
Limburg, he returned to Paris, leaving the Prince of Conde to observe the
Prince of Orange.

And to say the truth, both these wary Generals watched one another so
carefully, that they could not gain the least advantage one over the other. But
the Prince of Conde was soon commanded to go into Alsatia, after the death of
the Marshall de Turenne. Our Prince therefore had now to do with a new
General, the Duke of Luxemburgh, but who in prudence and conduct was by no
means inferior to his great Predecessor. His Highness had nevertheless this
advantage over him, that he hindered him from ravaging the territory of Triers;
so that after the fatal and entire routing of Monsieur de Crequi, that City
fell into the hands of the Imperialists. France having thus sustained two
mighty losses, in the death of Turenne, and the Defeat of Crequi, the D. of
Luxemburg, rather than run the hazard of receiving a third, which perhaps might
have proved mortal, suffered the Prince of Orange to take Bins before his face,
when there were 350 men in Garrison, and great store of Provisions. His
Highness ordered all its Fortifications to be demolished, to render it
unserviceable to the Enemy, and finding the season now well advanced, dispersed
his Army and came back to the Hague.

The calamities of war, which had for some years afflicted and depopulated the
greatest part of Europe, were so extremely great and deplorable, that several
Princes moved with compassion, did deliberate of the most proper means to stop
the progress of those miseries, under which the people languished. Tho this
design was so highly advantageous to Christendom in general, yet it did but
slowly advance, till at last the K. of Great Britain, having concluded a peace
with Holland, resolved to offer his Mediatorship to procure an universal peace
amongst all the Christian Princes, which having at last been submitted to, the
City of Nimeguen was chosen for the place of Treaty, where all the
Plenipotentiaries met toward the beginning of the year 1676.

This hindered neither party from making as mighty preparations to renew the War
in the Spring, as if there were not the least thoughts of a Peace: So that
during the winter his Highness was sufficiently employed to get his Army ready
against the opening of the Campaign, for it was an easy matter to foresee that
there would be occasion for very considerable forces to oppose the common Enemy
as soon as the season was approached. The French on their part began before the
midst of April to make a review of several of their Troops under Marshall de
Crequi, near Charleville: and Marshall d' Humieres was in the Field with a
body of fifteen Thousand men, near Courtray, putting all the Country to
contribution, because the Spaniards were not strong enough to resist them.

Before the Prince of Orange could come and join the Duke de Villa Hermosa,
which he did at Cambron, on the 26th of April, the Marshall de Crequi had
blocked up Conde with an Army of sixteen Thousand men. Upon the receipt of this
news the King of France parted immediately from Paris, and was soon after
followed by the Duke of Orleance, who brought with him a reinforcement of ten
Thousand men. The place was so furiously attacked and battered on all sides,
that unable to hold out any longer, they were constrained to surrender at
discretion, although the Prince of Orange was advanced as far as Granville to
relieve it. The King of France having given orders to repair the Fortifications
of Conde, and to place a Garrison of 3000 men in the Town, commanded the Duke
of Orleance to besiege Buchain. This was a small Town, but exceeding strong,
situate between Cambray and Valenciennes, and defended the communication
between those two places; for this reason it had a good Garrison, under the
command of a Governor, who had the reputation of a brave and prudent Captain.
But the Duke with such an Army did not find the Siege to be a work of great
difficulty, and so much the less, because the King of France, who commanded the
Army in person, was not far from him; and all this while kept the Dutch and
Spanish Army in breath. The Prince who was now encamped in view of the Enemy,
near Valenciennes, and was resolved to attack him the day following in case
Bouchain had not been taken, would not quit his Post till the French King had
decamped first, and having sent a considerable number of Horse and Foot to
seize all the passes and bridges upon the River Dender; hindered him from
ravaging the Country of Alost. About the beginning of June the King returned to
Paris, and gave the command of his Army in the Spanish Netherlands to Marshall
de Schomberg; and the Prince of Orange encamped before Maestricht. On the other
side the Marshall to make a powerful diversion, sent Humieres with 15000 men
to besiege Air, a place of prodigious strength, for it is encompassed with a
deep Morass, and excellent Fortifications on three sides, so that it can be
entered only at one way, which was defended by a Fort called St. Francis, having
five Bastions, two Half-Moons and a very deep Ditch. Nevertheless all this did
not hi^der him from making himself soon Master of the Fort, the Governor not
having men enough to oppose the great numbers of the French: who threw such a
prodigious quantity of Bombs and Grenades into the place, that most of the
houses were afire. So that the Burghers having without the Governors privity
demanded to capitulate, he was obliged to surrender the Town, which
nevertheless he did on very honorable conditions, that were easily agreed to
by the French, because they were informed that the Duke de Villa Hermosa was on
his way to attempt to raise the Siege.

All this while the Prince of Orange never stirred from before Maestricht,
which he had invested with his own Army, and the Troops of the Confederates, to
each of whom he assigned their proper quarter. Amongst the rest of these
Troops, the English, under Col. F^wick Col. Widdrington, and Col. Ashley, to
the number of two thousand six hundred then, without reckoning the Volunteers
and Reformades, presented a Request to his Highness, wherein they petitioned
him to assign them a particular quarter, and that they might be commanded
separately, that so if they behaved themselves like valiant men, they might
have all the honor, and if otherwise, all the shame to themselves, it not
being reasonable that they should suffer for the faults of other men. This the
Prince readily granted, and gave them a separate post, over against his own
Regiment of Guards, under the Command of Col. Fenwick, the eldest Colonel of
the three; and they were as good as their word, as they really made it appear
by their desperate attacques, where they signalized themselves by their
extraordinary valor, as long as the Siege lasted.

And in truth never was Siege carried on with greater vigor and resolution
than this was; the Prince continually encouraging the Soldiers with his
presence, till he received a slight hurt in his arm by a Musket Shot; but two
things hindered them from taking the Town which might otherwise have fallen
into their hands. First, the River was so low that the Prince was forced to
stay some days till his Cannon came from Ruremond, for want of water. In the
second place, the forces he expected from the Bishop of Munster and the Dukes
of Lunenburg came not to his relief. On the other side, Schomberg having
received express orders to succor the Town, and for that purpose having
marched as far as Tongres, his Highness summoned a Council of War to consider
what was to be done in this conjuncture; where, after they had reflected upon
the present condition of the Army, which was extremely lessened and fatigued,
and found it was impossible to shut up the passes and avenues to the City on
the side of Wick, and that the French would infallibly throw some relief into
it, notwithstanding all their endeavors to the contrary: In short, after they
saw their Horse could not subsist any longer in the Trenches for want of
forage, it was unanimously resolved to raise the Siege. So the Prince
commanded the Horse to join Count Waldeck, and sent the Artillery, Ammunition
and Provisions, with the sick and wounded to Ruremond by water, keeping his
Foot in a posture of fighting till the Vessels were out of all danger. Soon
after this, judging the Campaign was ended for this year, he left his Army
under the Command of Count Waldeck, and returned to Holland to assist at the
General Assembly of the States. He gave them an account of the last expedition,
which so highly satisfied them that the President congratulated him upon the
score of his happy return, and in the name of the whole Assembly thanked him
for the extraordinary pains and fatigues he had undergone for the safety of the
Republic.

The Campaign being thus finished, all the world was in great hopes that a
Peace would be soon concluded; but as it is a much easier matter to kindle a
fire than to extinguish it, a Peace like this, where so many different
interests and parties demanded to be satisfied, was not to be so speedily
concluded, as those persons who impatiently wished for it, did imagine. The
very preliminaries of this numerous Assembly at Nimeguen could not be regulated
in the compass of one winter; and notwithstanding all the instances and
application of the King of Great Britain, those that reasoned solidly, saw well
enough that the Peace was in no great readiness. Nor were their conjectures
vain, for no sooner was the year 1677 begun, but tho it was the depth of
winter, the French marched directly into the Spanish Netherlands; so that in a
short time all the places about Valenciennes, Cambray, and St. Omers, were
covered with the Enemies Troops; and these three Cities were in a manner
blocked up at a distance: The French openly boasting, that they would make
themselves Masters of two important places before the Spaniards were in a
condition to take the Field. A great and stately City upon the Scheld, built,
as it is commonly pretended, by the Emperor Valentinian.
Valenciennes was the first place that was invested, with a Army of 50 or 60
thousand men, under the command of the Duke of Luxemburg and the Count de
Montal: and four days after the King himself arrived in person in the Camp.
There was in the City a Garrison of 2000 Spanish, Walloon and Italian Foot,
with about 1000 Horse and Dragoons, commanded by the Marquis de Risburg,
Brother to Prince d'Epinoy

TheKing after his arrival viewed the posts, gave orders for the Trenches to be
opened, and set up Batteries. In fine the siege was so vigorously pushed on in
a few days, that the French were advanced as far as the Glacis of the
Counterscrap, and a Horn work, that was one of the best defenses the City had.
But the King, not being willing to lose time in taking all the Outworks
regularly, ordered an Assault to be made on the Hornwork, in four different
places, all at once, by eight in the morning; and to facilitate this
enterprise, alarmed the Besieged all the night with throwing of Bombs,
Grenades, and Carcasses, which had the desired effect: For after a short
dispute the French entered the Town, losing no more in this expedition than
only Count de Barlemont, a Colonel of the Regiment of Picardy, three
Musketeers, six Granadiers, and some Soldiers.

The King having thus carried Valenciennes, sat down before Cambray, with part
of his Army, commanded by the Duke of Luxemburg; and ordered the Marshall
d'Humieres to invest St. Omers with another part. Cambray is one of the oldest
Cities in the Low Countries, built ever since the time of Servius Hostilius,
but the Castle was built by Charles the Fifth, upon which account the Spaniards
took great care to preserve it. There were in Garrison fourteen hundred Horse,
four Regiments of Foot, besides two Companies of old Spanish Soldiers, under
the command of Don Pedro de Laval the Governor. The Cathedral was in so great
veneration for the beauty of the structure, that the Canons came out of the
Town, and presented a Petition to the King, wherein they requested him not to
fire at the Church, which he freely granted. The lines of Circumvallation were
no sooner finished, but the King commanded an Assault to be made on the two
Half-moons on the Castle side, which the French having soon made themselves
Masters of, they immediately began to undermine the Ramparts; this put the
Besieged into such a consternation that they desired to Capitulate, and
surrendered the Town on very honorable Conditions.

But tho the Town was lost, the Castle held ^ut still; for the Governor taking
advantage of the Cessation of Arms, gave orders in the mean time to have some
Cannon and other necessary provisions got ready, commanded all the Horses to be
slain, only reserving ten for each Company, and thus retired into the Castle
with all his Soldiers, before the French had the least suspicion of it; being
resolved to sell the Castle dearer than he had done the City. The King was
obliged to cease for some time, not only because the French Pioneers were
repulsed by the Besieged in a Sally they had made to prevent their approach;
but also because he was informed that the Prince of Orange was marching to the
relief of St. Omers: he sent the Duke of Luxemburg with a great part of his
Army, to reinforce his Brother the Duke of Orleance, who had set Siege to that
City, and had already finished his Batteries.

For the news of the great success which the French King had at Valenciennes
and Cambray, and the Siege of St. Omers had so mightily alarmed the United
Provinces, that the Prince of Orange was forced to take the Field, before the
rest of the Confederates were ready to join him. He assigned Ipres for the
general Rendezvous of his Army, which was composed of Dutch, and some other
Troops drawn out of the Spanish Garrisons, and began his March on the 7th of
April, and on the 9th arrived at St. Mary Capel, where he was informed that the
D. of Orleans lay encamped on the great road to St. Omers, and had only left a
few Regiments in the Trenches to keep the City blocked up. The straitness of
the ways, which he was to pass, made his March very tedious, so that after he
had marched all the next day, he advanced no farther than a small River called
Pene, on the other side of which he perceived the Enemy drawn up in battle. The
Prince having consulted his Guides, and those that knew the Country, they all
assured him that there was no other passage than this to go to Bacque which
they looked upon to be the only place by which St. Omers might be relieved:
Upon this consideration he resolved to pass the River, and set upon the Enemy;
and having ordered some new Bridges to be made, and repaired those that the
French had broke down, he accordingly passed it on the 11th of April by break
of day, so that all were got over before the Enemy was aware of them. But when
he had passed it with his Troops he was very much surprised to find that there
was another River still between the French and him, encumbred with Trees and
Hedges, although those that were acquainted with the Country had assured him of
the contrary, so that he found himself strangely embarass'd, as not having in
the least expcteed this second Obstacle. But this did not hinder him from
making himself Master of the Abbey de Pienes; but in the mean time the Enemy
having received a reinforcement of fifteen Thousand men came to attack the
Abbey, where the Prince's Dragoons were posted, who being supported by some
Regiments of Foot. received them so warmly that they were forced to retire.
After this the Prince set fire to the Abbey least the Enemy should post
themselves there. At the same time the French advanced slowly with the right
Wing of their Army, to charge the Prince's left Wing in the Flank, which was
covered with abundance of Hedges, where were likewise posted two Battalions.
The Prince perceiving that the Enemy had received some new recruits on that
side, sent three fresh Battalions to support his own, as likewise to guard the
plain that was behind the Hedges. But the two first Regiments basely quitted
their Post upon the first approach of the Enemy, so that the other three
Regiments that were sent to their assistance, having not sufficient time to
adjust themselves, and seeing the two first Battalions run away, betook
themselves to their Heels, and breaking into their own Squadrons that stood
there to cover them, occasioned an extraordinary confusion. Upon this the
French Cavalry coming to advance, and being supported by the Infantry that made
perpetual firing, the Prince's Squadrons were beaten back, but they did not go
far, and soon rallied again, and poured so vigorously upon the French that they
made them fly, in their their turn. In the mean time the Enemy's Foot being
advanced above, and having possessed the Hedges, where the Prince's men were
posted before, they could not possibly make a long resistance, nor hinder the
rest of the Foot from being attacked in the Flank as well as the Front. So that
the Foot, after they had done their duty extremely well, saw themselves obliged
to quit their post; and the Prince repassing the Rivet, retired in very good
order to Steenword, and from thence to Poperdingue; the Enemy having been so
rudely handled by Count Waldeck, who commanded the Prince's Right Wing, that
they had no desire to pursue him. And this was the issue of the battle at Mont
cassel.

The Prince having retired in this manner as we have related it, the French
King pursued the Siege of the Citadel of Cambray with all imaginable vigor,
and it fell out very unfortunately for the besieged, that a Bomb set fire on
one of their Magazines, where the Grenades and other warlike Provisions lay,
and utterly consumed it. However the besieged continued to defend themselves
bravely, and recompensed their loss in some manner by the death of the Marquess
de Renel, one of the French King's Lieutenant Generals, who was slain by a
Cannon-shot from the Castle. But at last the French having made several
breaches, and the Governor of the Citadel being wounded, they were
constrained to yield to the great number, and continual attacks of the Enemy,
and to surrender the Castle, which was done on very honorable conditions.

To return to the Duke of Orleans, although victorious, he was so afraid, lest the
Prince should once more attempt to throw relief into St, Omers, that he durst
not quit the field where the battle was fought, but kept himself upon his guard
for eight days successively. But when he received the News that his Highness
had passed the Canal of Ghent with all his Forces, he returned before the Town,
which he besieged with his whole Army, and after a gallant resistance, which
cost him several of his best Officers, they were forced, against their will, to
surrender upon good terms.

After the taking of these places, the French heat began to be somewhat abated,
and those that were so forward to attack others, were now content to act on the
defensive all the rest of the Summer, and durst never put it to the hazard of a
battle, although it was often presented to them. So that after several tedious
marches and counter-marches on both sides, and the Confederates ineffectual
laying Siege to Charleroy, which for several weighty considerations they
thought expedient to raise, the Prince returned to the Hague, being accompanied
by the Earl of Ossory, Don Carlos, the Duke of Albemarle, and several other
Persons of Quality. After he had given the States General an account of the
last Campaign, with the reasons that obliged him to raise the Siege of
Charleroy, and not to attack the Enemy, who were not only superior to him in
number, but posted to the greatest advantage: Their High and Mightinesses
thanked him for his conduct and indefatigable pains, humbly beseeching him
still to continue his zeal for the public Interest.

A little after his return to the Hague, several of the English Nobility
arrived at the Prince's Court who in an Assembly of the States General gave
them to understand, that his Uncle the King of Great Britain, earnestly Sir W.
Temple in his Memoirs represents this matter otherwise, for there we are told
that K. Chapter the 2d. was so far from courting the Prince to come to visit him,
that he was apprehensive of his arrival.
desired him to make a Voyage into England, in hopes that his presence there
would not a little contribute to the Peace then in agitation, which would be of
such mighty advantage to the Republic. Thus his Highness took his leave of the
States, and of all theColledges on the 17th of October, and being accompanied
by the Earl of Ossory, Monsieur d' Odyk, the Count de Nassau, and several other
persons of condition, he embarked at Hellevoetsluys, in one of his Majesty's
Yatchs, and arrived at Harwich on the 19th about ten in the morning, where the
Duke of Albemarle, and the Master of the Ceremonies attended him in the King's
Coaches, and conducted him the same evening to the King and his Royal Highness,
at Ipswich, who received him with all the testimonies of a particular kindness
and affection. On the 23d he arrived with the two Royal Brothers at Whitehall,
and was lodged in the Duke of York's apartment, who retired to St. James's.

What was at first nothing but a bare surmize, was soon after confirmed by the
King himself: For on the first of November, his Majesty acquainted the Council
with his design to marry the Prince of Orange to his Royal Highness's eldest
Daughter, declaring that he hoped this Alliance would facilitate the
accomplishment of a General Peace, which his Majesty was resolved to advance as
far as the Interest of his Kingdoms did engage him. After this the whole
Council went in a body to compliment the Princess, and afterward the Prince;
the rest of the Nobility did the same after their example.

The Prince of Orange acquainted the States with it by an Express, giving them
to understand, that after he had maturely weighed the reasons which might
incline him to marry, he thought he could not make a better choice than the
Princess Mary; that he had already demanded her in Marriage of the King, and
his Royal Highness her Father, who immediately gave their consent: that he
judged it advisable to inform them of it, expecting their approbation of the
Match with all speed, that he might the sooner repair to them for the service
of his Country.

Hereupon the States General were assembled, and seriously considering the
reasons of State upon which this Marriage was founded, with the great
advantages it might produce; as for instance, a confirmation of that strict
Union that was between the King of Great Britain, and the States of the United
Provinces; the establishment of the ancient House of Orange, and the conclusion
of the Peace, so earnestly desired: I say, after they had seriously considered
all this, but especially the happy choice his Highness had made of a Princess,
who besides her natural sweetness, possessed all the virtues that a Husband
could desire, testified their approbation by a public Edict, in terms full of
joy and satisfaction, declaring moreover the mighty esteem they had of so
glorious an Alliance, and their sincere resolution to cultivate the ancient
Friendship and good Correspondence which had always been, and was between his
Britanic Majesty and them.

This answer arriving at London on the 14th of November, which was his
Highness's Birthday, the Marriage was celebrated at eleven at night, but with
so little noise, that the People knew nothing of it till the next morning, when
they gave all public testimonies of their joy by Ringing of Bells, and Bone
fires. But amidst all this rejoicing and feasting, the Prince knowing how
necessary his presence was in Holland, made all possible expedition to arrive
thither. He parted from London on the 29th of November with his Princess, and
landed at Terheyde, from whence he went to Hounslaerdyk, where they tarried
some time, till they made their public Entry into the Hague, which was a few
days after performed with extraordinary Magnificence. But I pass all these
ceremonies over in silence, in order to come to matters of greater importance.

Toward the beginning of the year 1678, tho it was the midst of Winter, the
French King made such mighty preparations of War, that all Europe was alarmed
at them, but particularly Holland and the Consederates. This made the King of
Great Britain send the Earl of Feversham to his Most Christian Majesty with a
project of Peace, by which Charleroy, Aeth, Oudenard, Courtray, Tournay, Conde,
Valenciennes, St. Guillain, and some other Towns were to be surrendered to the
Spaniards, and the King of France to keep all the Franche-Comte in his
possession, but he would not hearken to it; and as for the King of England he
was as unwilling to abate any thing in his propositions. Which obliged his
Britannic Majesty to sent orders to my Lord Hyde his Ambassador at Nimeguen, to
make a strict alliance with the States General; which being concluded, he
dispatched My Lord Montague into France to press the King to accept his terms,
and gave out Commissions at the same time for raising an Army; but the French
King rejected these conditions of Peace, and made great provisions for the war
on all sides but especially in his new acquisitions in the Low Countries. Upon
which the King of England recalled the Troops he had in the service of France,
which besides their other ill treatment were sent home without their pay.

The King of Great Britain held firm to his resolution, and summoning a
Parliament, communicated to them the late alliance he had made with Holland,
for the public benefit and repose of Christendom, protesting he was resolved to
force the French King to a Peace, and therefore desired them to furnish him
with a sum of Money necessary for such a design. The Lower House thanked his
Majesty for the great care he took of the Protestant Religion, in marrying his
Niece to a Protestant Prince, beseeching him not to consent to any conditions
of Peace with France, unless they were better than those at the Pyrenean
Treaty. To which the King having consented, the Commons after a long
deliberation resolved to equip a Fleet of Fourscore and ten Men of War, and to
raise an Army of 29870 Land Men, and nominated Commissioners to compute the
expense.

Whilst these things lay under debate, the French King who was sensible what
designs the Consederates were forming against him, resolved to render them all
ineffectual, by being before hand with them. For this effect he left Paris on
the 7th of February, and marching by the side of Mets, entered Flanders, no one
being able to determine where the storm would fail. All the World was of
opinion that the design was upon Mons, or Namur, or some other place of like
importance; and Ghent which never expected to be attacked, had so weakened
itsGarrison by drawing out their men, and distributing them in other places,
that the French King, who knew this very well, sat down before it on the 1st
of March with an Army of Threescore orFourscore Thousand men. It was impossible
for a City of so large a compass, which had not above four or five Hundred
Soldiers in Garrison, besides the Inhabitants, to defend themselves long
against a vainglorious Prince, who valued the taking of a Half Moon more than
the loss of a Thousand men; and who by his assaults and batteries had extremely
weakened it. So Ghent was forced to surrender nine days after it was besieged,
from thence the Enemy came before Ipres, but that City being much stronger than
Ghent, and besides furnished with a better Garrison, the Besiegers met so warm
an opposition there, and lost so many Officers and Soldiers before they took
it, that the King put the greatest part of his Army immediately into Garrison,
and returned to Paris: whether he thought his Army sufficiently harrass'd by
these two Sieges, or whether he thought he had humbled his Enemies enough to
incline them now to accept his own proposals of a Peace, or lastly whether he
was afraid of the English, who had sent considerable Forces into Flanders.

For about this time the D. of Monmouth was arrived at Bruges with three
thousand Horse and Foot, which the K. of Great Britain had sent to reinforce
the Prince of Orange's Army; and the Parliament was so earnestly bent to pursue
the War against France, that they petitioned the King to declare open War
against it, promising to stand by him with their lives and fortunes, and to
furnish him from time to time with sufficient sums to carry on so generous an
undertaking.

In the mean time all the world was astonished to ^ear that the French King had
entirely abandoned Messina and all Sicily. The more able Politicians imagined
that now there were no hopes of a Peace, since this Prince had abandoned his
Conquests in Italy, as he had lately done those in Holland, for no other end
but that he might the better compass his designs upon Spain and the Empire. But
others said, it was an infallible sign he was not so strong as he pretended to
be, and that what he had done, was rather out of mere necessity, than for any
other end. However it was, the Parliament of England were of belief that France
was resolved to continue the War in Germany and the Low Countries; and
therefore to stop his Career granted his Majesty a Poll-bill, and by the same
Act prohibited the Importation of all French commodities. King Charles, who was
desirous to enter into a League with the Empire, Spain, and the United
Provinces, would oblige them to make the same prohibition in relation to French
goods, in their own respective Dominions. But while the Hollanders were
demurring upon the last point, believing that such a prohibition would ruin
their trade, an unexpected accident fell out that changed the whole face of
affairs.

The King of France, after his return to Paris seeing his Britannic Majesty was
resolved to support the Interests of his Nephew the Prince of Orange,
particularly since his Voyage into England, and his Marriage with his Niece,
formed of himself a project of Peace, which he sent to his Ambassador at
Nimeguen, there to be distributed amongst the other Ambassadors and Mediators
by those of England. The chief of these propositions were, That the King of
Sweden and the Duke of Gottorp should be entirely satisfied. That the Prince
and Bishop of Stasburg should be restored to all his Demains, Goods, Honors
and Prerogatives; and that his Brother Prince William of Furstemberg, should be
set at liberty. That as for the Emperor, he should alter nothing in the public
Declarations that were made at the Treaty of Westphalia; only he offered either
to keep Philipsburg and give up Friburg, or else to keep Friburg, and give up
Philipsburg. That as for Spain, he would restore Charleroy, Aeth, Oudenard,
Courtray, Ghent, and St. Guillain with their dependances, but in recompense
demanded all the Franche Comte, Valenciennes, Bouchain, Conde, Cambray, Air,
and St. Omers, with all their dependances. In a word all the Places he was in
possession off, except those above mentioned. Besides he consented to surrender
Charlemont, or Dinant, to the Catholic King, provided the Bishop of Liege and
the Emperor agreed to it.

That as for what concerned the States General, besides the satisfaction he
gave them by what he yielded up to Spain, he would restore Maestricht to them,
and continue the same treaty of Commerce they enjoyed before: And as for the
Interests of the Duke of Lorrain, he was willing to re-establish him, according
to the Pirenean Treaty, or to surrender all his Territories to him except the
City of Nancy, but that by way of recompense he would give him Toul, reserving
nevertheless to himself a passage from his Frontiers into Alsatia, and the
Roads that would be necessary to him, from France to Nancy, and from Nancy to
Mets, Brisac, and the Franche-Comte.

That the Confines between Spain and the Low Countries, to begin from the Sea,
should be the Meuse, Nieuport, Dixmuyde, Courtrdy, Oudenard, Aeth, Mons,
Charleroy, and Namur, and that these Confines should be secured by these
Places, since they had cost him some Millions to fortify, and by quitting them
he deprived himself of the advantage of marching up to the Gates of Brussels
whenever he pleased.

These Conditions were liked by some, but disapproved by others. The States
General for instance had no reason to reject them, but the Ministers of the
Allies, in a conference at the Hague, absolutely rejected them as unjust and
unreasonable. After several warm disputes upon this occasion the Spaniards
began at last to comply, and that the more because they saw both England and
Holland consented to the proposals of France. Besides this, their Affairs grew
every day worse and worse, by the considerable loss of Fort Leeuw, which was
much about this time unfortunately surprised by the French. But what served
wholly to determine them, was the return of the French King, who besides an
Army he had near Brussels, had two more not far off, one upon the Rhine, and
the other between the Meuse and the Sambre, which threatened nothing less than
the entire loss of the Spanish Netherlands, in case the Hollanders made a Peace
without them, and continued Neuters after it, during the course of this war; to
which the King of France earnestly persuaded them.

The Spaniards therefore being constrained to yield to the necessity of their
Affairs, declared they were ready to accept these Conditions of Peace. Upon
which the States General were very urgent with the other Allies to give their
consent; and upon the delay of the Ministers who amused themselves with making
Memorials and Replies, dispatched express Orders to their Ambassadors at
Nimeguen to conclude the Treaty out of hand. But they were extremely surprised
when the Plenipotentiares of France refused to sign it, for they demanded that
entire satisfaction should be given to the King of Sweden, protesting that in
case of refusal, the King their master would conclude nothing. This started new
difficulties, and gave occasion to the States General to make fresh complaints
of the procedure of the King of France, after they had so frankly submitted to
the Conditions which he himself had proposed. That King's answer was, that he
should come to St. Quintin, where he would carry six days for the Commissioners
whom they should send to adjust this difference. But the States thinking they
had done enough on their part, resolved in the presence of the Prince of Orange
to send no body till the Treaty was signed.

The News of this difference, and of the resolution of the Hollanders to
continue the war, unless the King of France would somewhat abate the interests
of Sweden, being arrived into England, the Parliament who before had voted to
disband the Army, which the King had raised both by Sea and Land, were now
resolved to keep it on foot. His Majesty sent part of the Army over to
Flanders, and made a League offensive and defensive with the United Provinces;
wherein a very short time was limited for the French King to sign the Treaty,
or declare his further pretensions. This resolute conduct of the King of Great
Britain put an end to this troublesome affair, so the Treaty of Peace between
France and Holland was signed on the 11th of August, at midnight. It Is certain
the French King had done better not to have refined so much in his Politics,
for it had like to have cost him the entire loss of the D. of Luxemburg's Army.

Mons had been a long time blocked up by the French, and was now in a manner
reduced to the last extremities, when the Prince of Orange receiving advice
that the Confederates had joined the Army of Spain and Holland, which was near
the Canal of Brussels, he parted by night from the Hague on the 26 of July.
Immediately after his arrival he called a Council of War, with the Generals of
the Allies, where it was resolved that they should decamp and pursue the Duke
of Luxemburg, who marched by Mons with a design to hinder any relief from being
put into the Town.

Thus resolved, the Prince parted with the whole Army at the beginning of
August, and no sooner had he left Brussels, but General Spaen joined him with a
reinforcement of six thousand men of the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Bishop
of Munster. The French who had rested some days at Soignes, hearing of the
Prince of Orange's March, suddenly decamped, and the Confederate Army encamped
in the very same place where the Enemy had been the day before. His Highness
marching from thence, on the side of Rocles, advanced with his left Wing as far
as the Abbey of St. Denis, where the Duke of Luxemburg had his quarter. And as
this post was in a manner inaccessible, by reason of the Woods, the Briars and
Precipices it was encompassed with, the Duke so little dreamt of being
attacked, that he was at dinner when they brought him word, that the Prince of
Orange was coming to surprise him, and so he was forced to retire in some
disorder. The Prince had Castrau before his right Wing, which the Duke had
gained in great precipitation, and it was happy for him that this place was as
hard to be got to, as the other he quitted. In the mean time his Highness, whom
these difficulties did not discourage, had no sooner drawn out his Army to
battle, but he was resolved to beat the Enemy out of his new post, and sending
for his Artillery ordered it to play upon the French, who were posted a little
higher on one side of a Cloister near St. Denis, which the Duke of Luxemburg
thought he might defend well enough with his Cannon. But it was impossible for
them to sustain the shock of the Confederate Dragoons, who beat them from this
Post, and made themselves Masters of the Cloister, while General Collier,
advanced on the side of the Abbey, and seconded by General Delwick, broke
through the narrow ways, and mounting these horrible precipices with an
invincible courage, routed the Enemiy who for some time made a vigorous
resistance in their lines. In the midst of this engagement the Prince
accompanied by the Duke of Monmouth, who fought by his side all the day, and
encouraged with his good success, cried out, follow me, follow me, to encourage
those Regimens that were to second the first. Both sides were very liberal of
their Powder and Ball, and all the Regiments of the left Wing seconded one
another till night with the same vigor and resolution. Count Horn on his side
approached nearer with his Cannon, and ordered it to play on the French
Battalions in the Valley, where he caused a terrible slaughter.

From thence his Highness advanced with speed to Castrau, which was attacked by
the Spaniards on the side of the right Wing, where the Prince's Regiment of
Guards led the Van, under the command of Count Solmes, who being seconded by
the Duke of Holstein's Regiment, and by the English, forced the Enemies at last
to quit the place The Regiment of Foot Guards continued in action with the
French for the space of five hours, and pursued them a quarter of a League
through fields and precipices. It Is certainly a thing hardly to be believed,
that men should be capable of making such brave efforts in places so extremely
disadvantageous, and several persons who have viewed and examined them since,
say there are few places in the world naturally so strong.

The Earl of Ossory did wonders with his English at a small distance from the
Foot Guards, where the French lost abundance of Men. But the Prince in the heat
of the Action advanced so far that he was in great danger of being lost, had
not Monsieur Onwerkerk come seasonably to his relief, and killed an adventurous
Captain that was just going to let fly a Pistol at him. The Cavalry did nothing
all this while by reason of the uneven situation of the place, so that all the
execution lay upon the Infantry and Dragoons. Night put an end to the dispute,
by the favor of which the Duke of Luxemburg made his retreat without noise,
and retired toward Mons and covered himself with a Wood on one side, and a
River on the other, leaving to his Highness as marks of Victory, the Field
where the Battle was fought, the greatest part of the wounded, abundance of
Tents and Baggage, with a world of Powder, and other Warlike Ammunition.

The States General receiving the News of so great a Success, sent
Commissioners to the Prince to congratulate him for the victory he had gained
with so much Glory and Reputation, and for the signal Actions by him performed
in this last Battle to the great hazard of his life. And to testify what a
value they set upon his preservation, they presented Monsieur Onwerkerk who had
so generously opposed himself to the danger that threatened his Highness, with a
Sword, whose handle was of massy gold, a pair of Pistols set with gold, and a
whole Horse Furniture of the same metal.

The Prince of Orange having thus obliged the Duke of Luxemburg to retire, had
without question pushed his point, and thrown relief into the Town, but as he
was consulting how to effect it, word was brought him that the King of France,
and the States General had accommodated all differences. The success of this
Battle hastened the conclusion of the Treaty between Spain and France, which
was signed on the 17th of September, to the great praise of the King of
England; who having joined the terror of his Arms to the authority of his
Mediation, had for his recompense the satisfaction to see the peace and general
welfare of Europe given as a Portion with his Neice, while the two great
Alliances between France and Holland, and between Spain and France, were the
and happy effects of the conjugal Alliance between his Highness and the
Princess Mary of England.

The war being thus ended between France and the United Provinces, his Highness
had time now to breath himself after the fatigues and hurries of the last
Campaigns: for after the Ratification of the Peace, and the Restitution of
Mastricht to the States, the King of France no more disturbed the Low Countries
with the terror of his Arms, so that when his Highness had reformed all those
innovations that had been introduced by the French when they were Masters of
the Country, the people began to enjoy the repose and tranquillity they had so
long desired.

But matters were not so soon adjusted between the Kings of France and Spain.
By the Treaty concluded between the two Crowns, it was agreed that
Commissioners should meet at Cambray to regulate any disputes that might happen
about the limits: This was in the Year 1679. But after several tedious contests
occasioned by the excessive pretentions of the French, who demanded whole
Provinces in the nature of dependances, to be delivered into their hands, the
war was like to have kindled afresh, till at last by the unwearied Mediation of
the States General a Treaty was signed at the Hague on the 29th of June 1684,
after which his most Christian Majesty having accommodated all differences with
the Emperor, by some other Articles of the same Nature, a Truce of twenty
years was agreed upon: which being ratified, tho not without some delays on the
side of the Spaniards, all those devastations and ravages that for the course
of several years had ruined the finest Country in Europe, began to cease.

In the midst of all these negotiations, which the States seldom or never
treated of, but in the presence of the Prince of Orange, whom they still
consulted in the most difficult affairs, his Highness showed an extraordinary
generosity; for when every one was minding his particular Interests, he
neglected his own, and preferred the peace and welfare of his Country, to that
reparation he might justly expect for the great losses he sustained in his own
Demains. For while the King of France burnt and ravaged the Low Countries, in
order to force the Spaniards to accept his offers, a great part of the Prince's
patrimony in Brabant underwent the common calamities. The same thing happened
when Luxemburg and the Franche-Comte came to change their Masters; Prince
d'Isenguyn, supported by the authority of France, exposed to Sale by sound of
Trumpet all the Lands, Furniture and Goods of his Highness, as having been
adjudged to him by a formal Decree of the Parliament of that Country. The
Provinces of Gueldres, Zealand and Utrecht, made great complaints in his
Highnesses name, but were not able to get satisfaction done him. Nor suffered
he less injustice in the Principality of Orange, where the Walls of his Capital
City were demolished, the University disfranchized, the Inhabitants barbarously
plundered, forced to send the young Students home to their Parents, and
forbidden to educate any of the Reformed Religion for the future; all which was
directly contrary to the Faith of the late Treaty. But when the States
represented the great injustice of this procedure, the Court of France returned
them no other answer save only this, viz. That they had good reasons for what
they did.

As soon as the Truce was confirmed, the States were of opinion they might now
disband their supernumerary forces, and the Deputies of Amsterdam would without
any further delay reform the recruits they had made the year before; but all
the members coming to this conclusion, that nothing ought to be done without
the advice of the Prince of Orange, his Highness, upon the mention of this
proposal, assured them that no one more earnestly desired the ease of the
people than himself; but however he would never consent, till their affairs
both at home and abroad were in a better posture of security, to leave the
Country naked and defenseless. The States were soon persuaded to follow this
advice, and accordingly resolved to keep their Troops as long as the necessity
of their affairs demanded it.

And now from the conclusion of the Peace till the year 1688, when his Highness
made his wonderful Expedition into England, we have nothing remarkable in this
Prince's History. What was the success of that prodigious Descent, and by what
means the ensuing Revolution was carried on, which has occasioned so mighty an
alteration in this Western part of the World, as it is sufficiently known to
every English Reader, So a just narration of all the surprising incidents
requires a person of more leisure and greater abilities than my self.

FINIS.

