An Account of the TRIALS OF Captain J. Golden. Thomas Jones. John Gold.
Lawrance Maliene. Patrick Whitley. John Slaughter. Constable. D'Heaity. Richard
Shewers. Darby Collins. John Ryon. Dennis Cockram. John Walsh.

At the Court of Admiralty held in the Marshalsea in Southwark, before the
Right Honorable the Judges: on monday the 25th. of Feb. 1693/4. Of which 9
were found Guilty, and received Sentence of Death: 3 for High Treason, and 6
for Piracies and Roberys on the Seas, under the color of the late King James's
Commission.
Licensed Feb. 27th. 1693/4.

A Coutrt of Admiralty, by Virtue of a Commission from Their Majesty's being
held on Monday the 26th of this instant February, at the Marshalses in
Southwark, before the Right Honorable the Judges; the Proceedings were as they
related to the Prisoners, herein mentioned in this manner,

Thomas Jones was Indicted for High Treason, for that he being a Natural born
Subject of Their Majesty's, contrary to his Duty and Allegiance, being on Board
a Vessel, Commissioned by the late K. James, Assaulted by open Force and
Violence, one of Their Majesty's Men of War; and the Evidence being plain
against him, that he was taken with others in the Attempt, and he making but a
slender defense in his behalf, excusing it only that he knew not the danger of
such an Attempt, and did it through Ignorance, as supposing the Commission he
acted under sufficient to warrant his Illegal Proceedings; the Jury being
directed by the Court as to matter of Fact, he was found Guilty of High Treason.

John Golden, or Ooldin, John Gold, Lawrence Maliene, and another Person, were
Indicted for High Treason, as the former for Engaging, and hauling the James
Galley, one the Their Majesty's Frigates, or men of War, carrying their Flag.

In the Sun-Praivateer belonginging to France, Commissioned by the latk King
James; the King's Witnesses swore positively to John Golden, who was styled the
Captain of the Sun-Privateer, beforementioned; as likewise to John Gold the
former of which endeavored to excuse himself, as pretending to be a Frenchman,
or at least carried out of Ireland into Britany in France so young, that he
knew not his Parentage in any other Nation, but that not sufficiently
appearing, he delivered a long Paper which Read in Court, in which were cited
some Transactions of former times, which (...) he apprehended related to his
Circum-cumstances by way of Excuse; but he was in that overruled by the Court,
who told him, it was not material to his purpose, and those that advised him to
it, were not his Friends, or to the like purporse; then he prayed he might have
a special Verdict, but the Court thought not fit to allow it.

John Gold pleaded little for himself, but in alleging his Ignorance in not
being apprehensive of the danger he undertook when he went on Board the
Privateer, supposing the Commission they had to be Authentic. Against the
other two Persons indicted with them, the Evidence not being possitive, they
were acquitted, but the two former were brought in guilty of High Treason, as
laid in the Indictment.

Patrick Whitly, John Sangster, and Constine' De Heartly were indicted for
Piracy and Robbery on the Seas, and upon Evidence it appeared that they and
others were found on Board an English Vessel, retaken by one of Their Majesty's
Men of War, on the Western-Coasts. The Evidence for the King was possitive
against them, That they were found on Board the Ship they had taken; and their
Examinations being produced, wherein they had confessed the matter of Fact, tho
excusing it in Court thrhugh ignorance: upon the Juries going out, they were
found guilty of the Piracy, Robbery and Force used upon the English Vessel,
Super Mare Altum; it evidently appearing. Moreover the Persons were Their
Majesty's Natural Born Subjects, yet acting against them, and to the prejudlce
of their Liege People, py Robberies and Depredations contrary to the Laws of
Nature and Nations.

Richard Shevers, Darby Collins, John Ryon, Denis Cockram, and John Walsh were
as the foregoing, urged for Piracy and Robbery, and impaired thereto as they
fancied, by virtue of a Commission granted by the Late King James: Upon
Evidence it appeared that the three first were taken on Board an English Vessel
they had seized, and were carrying into France, upon it is being Retaken by
their Majesty's Ship the Prince of Orange, so that making but slender Excuses,
and their Informations taken, making their former Excuses Evident, they were
found Guilty; but the Evidence not being full against the two Latter, they were
Acquitted.

Job Higingbottom was Tried for the Murder of one Moriss alias Marison, upon
the Evidence it appeared, that he being Master of a Vessel, it was stranded
near the Isle of Orkney, belonging to Scotland; and that the Deceased, and
others that were Servants on Board his Vessel, carrying away the Boat, and
getting on Shore, he called him to return with the Boat, but he refusing so to
do, and the Ship still beating on the Shallows ^n likelihood to be lost, as
afterward it was, he fired after him with a Musket and at the second time hit
him on the back part of the Head, of which Wound he died: He alleged in his
own Defense, that he did it only to fright him into a Retur^ with the Boat,
des^gning to fire over or wide of him; but the Violent Motion of the Ship, made
him unfortunately Err in his Intentions, and it appearing to be done in a
Distinct Kingdom, as also not upon the Main Ocean, the Jury found him not
Guilty o^ the Indictment.

These being the M^t^rial P^^c^^dings of the Day, the Prisoners that were found
Guilty, being brought to the Bar, the Court pro^^^ded to ^i^e S^nt^nce upon
Thoma^ Jones, John Golden, and John G^ld, to ^e drawn, hanged, and quart^r^d,
a^ in Cases of High Treason the Law directs.

Patrick Whitley, John Sangster, John Ryon Darby Collins, and Richard Sheuer^
Received S^^tence to be hanged only as Pirates, etc.

Printed for J. Clare^ at the Globe ^n London Bridge.


